DRIVERS OF SHARE PRICE
MOVEMENTS WHEN
EARNINGS ARE NEGATIVE

A STUDY ON SAAS COMPANIES

HADIR HANNA

MABAST BABAN

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2020
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative: A Study on SaaS
Companies
Abstract:
This paper examines the drivers of share price movements for Software-as-a-Service
(SaaS) companies for the period 2014-2019 by including financial fundamentals and
valuation multiples in a regression analysis. The primary purpose of this paper is to
provide valuable findings for practitioners to base their investment decisions upon when
investing in SaaS companies. We run ten regressions, divided into three OLS regression
models, three fixed effects regression models and four additional OLS regression
models with different datasets to test the robustness of our findings. The dependent
variable is share price and the independent variables are the following: sales, EBITDA
margin, earnings per share, free cash flow, EV/Sales, P/BV, an annual time dummy
variable, a firm size dummy variable and a firm-specific dummy variable. The findings
show that sales and the EV/Sales ratio are significantly correlated with the share price
movements. Indicating that both financial fundamentals and the investor sentiment has
driven the strong performance of the dataset during the five-year period. Whereas the
latter could be driven by either higher expectations on future cash flows or a lower
discount rate when discounting future cash flows.
Keywords:
   Software-as-a-Service, Share Price, Valuation Multiples, EPS, Investor Sentiment
Authors:
   Hadir Hanna (24216)
   Mabast Baban (24228)
Tutor:
   Marieke Bos, Deputy Director and Researcher, Swedish House of Finance
Examiner:
   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Hadir Hanna and Mabast Baban, 2020

                                   1
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

1. Introduction
The purpose of this paper is to identify what drives the share price behaviour of
Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) companies, either financial fundamentals or changes in
valuation multiples. The efficient market hypothesis (EMH) states that the stock market
is efficient in terms of incorporating all publicly available information in stock prices
(Fama, 1970) and it is therefore impossible to earn an abnormal return by trading on
based on publicly available information (Brown, 1978). However, the SaaS companies
included in this dataset have had a total return of 577% the last five years, compared to
65% for the broad index S&P 500. Our interest in this sub-sector derives from the
increased relevance and investor interest of SaaS businesses (McCarthy, et al., 2017)
along with the extraordinary valuation multiples. To conduct this analysis, we perform a
multiple regression analysis, including selected financial key performance indicators
and two valuation multiples as independent variables and the share price as the
dependent variable. 51 B2B focused SaaS companies from the American stock market
are included in the dataset and quarterly data between 2014 and 2019 has been
collected.
SaaS is a delivery model that provides access to software and its functions remotely
(Nerino, 2007). SaaS companies maintain a number of factors, such as 1) recurring
payments, 2) high customer retention rates and 3) consistent product updates. Large
subscription-based companies that benefit of the cloud computing system include the
streaming services Netflix and Spotify where the cloud enables consumer access to a
large amount of content. The SaaS companies analysed in this paper are all, in contrast
to Netflix and Spotify, B2B focused, in order to keep a homogenous dataset to facilitate
easier comparison. A large difference between B2B and B2C SaaS business models is
that the former’s growth partially derives from customer upgrading their existing
subscription plan whereas the latter’s customers usually pay a fixed fee throughout the
customer lifecycle. The different behaviours of consumers and businesses, when acting
as customers, is also the reason why B2B SaaS companies possess a higher rate of
recurring revenues and customer retention. Simply put, the growth dynamics are
different between the two.
Earnings per share (EPS) is generally considered one of the most important factors to
determine share price and firm value (Stern, 1970; Liu, et al., 2007). However, the SaaS
business model is structured in a way where there are heavy costs, mainly research &
development (R&D) and sales & marketing (S&M), upfront in order to enhance long-
term growth and performance (Chakravarty & Grewal, 2011). Therefore, many SaaS
companies have a negative EPS in the current state (most are in an early stage of
growth) and it is thus a weak indicator of share price behaviour (Liu, et al., 2007).
Revenue and, especially, free cash flow growth is more than twice as important for the
valuation of SaaS companies as profitability (Cohen & Neubert, 2018). Also, looking at
the enterprise-value-to-sales (EV/Sales) ratio, which is 9.8x for our analysed SaaS
companies compared to 2.3x for the S&P 500, versus the EBITDA margin, which is
6.6% for our SaaS companies and 19.7% for the S&P 500 (both metrics as of 31 Dec
2019), one can guess that this sub-sector of technology companies is driven by other
metrics than the common ones in the US stock market, namely the S&P 500 in this
paper.

                                   2
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

The model that SaaS companies use is not a new idea. During the dot-com bubble in the
late 1990s, there were several companies that offered software as application service
providers (ASP). The goal of these providers was to eliminate the need to load software
on the local workstations. However, broadband Internet access and computer
technology were not at a point that made such technology viable. Besides having a more
solid technology to leverage on, today’s SaaS companies are taking a more focused
approach, providing single-issue solutions rather than providing total solutions as in the
late 1990s (Nerino, 2007). Moreover, there are some key differences in the public
market environment that cause distinctive disparities between the two. Firstly, the
valuations were vastly more extreme during the dot-com bubble. The price-to-earnings
(P/E) ratio for the S&P 500 information technology index was above 50x in March
2000, while the same index is trading at 21x as of May 2020 (FactSet, 2020). Also, the
SaaS companies constitute a much smaller share of the broad index compared to the
technology companies during the dot-com bubble (Capital Group, 2017). Secondly, a
coined term during the bubble was “Get Big Fast”. Being profitable was much less
prioritised than revenue growth and share prices soared far more than fundamental
indicators (Thompson, 2019). Even though only a few of the SaaS companies in the
dataset are profitable, most of them possess extraordinarily high margins, at least
regarding gross profit, with an average gross margin of 70%. Finally, there are major
differences between the business models of the SaaS companies and the peaking
companies during the bubble. The internet was on the rise in the early 2000s and most
companies were consumer-oriented (Wheale & Amin, 2003), which theoretically have
weaker lock-in effects than B2B companies.
Ratio analysis is one of the instruments used for measuring the financial performance of
companies. EPS is a carefully examined metric that is often used as a barometer to
measure a company's profitability per unit of shareholder ownership (Cohen & Neubert,
2018). Due to the limited number of SaaS companies with a positive EPS, we also
include sales, earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA)
and free cash flow (FCF) in the regression analysis. Moreover, we include the EV/Sales
and price-to-book (P/BV) ratios to analyse investors’ willingness to pay for one unit of
ownership of sales and equity. The dataset is divided into two groups where companies
with an enterprise value (EV) equal to or larger than USD 5 billion are categorized as
Large Companies whereas small and medium enterprises (SME’s) have an enterprise
value less than USD 5 billion.
The regression results show that in the pooled analysis sales and EV/Sales are the only
independent variables that are significantly correlated with the share price. The
coefficients for the metrics are at 0.326 and 0.423, respectively, with 99% confidence.
For Large Companies, sales and EV/Sales are correlated with 99% confidence and
P/BV with 90% confidence, with coefficients at 0.350, 0.262 and 0.146, respectively.
For SME’s, sales, EBITDA margin and EV/Sales are correlated at 99% confidence and
FCF is correlated at 95% confidence. The coefficients are at 0.432, 0.226, 0.534 and
0.132, respectively. Interestingly, EPS is not correlated with share price in neither the
pooled nor the divided analysis. Looking at the regression with the firm-specific fixed
effect the results illustrate similar patterns. However, despite smaller changes in the
coefficients, the EBITDA margin is not significantly correlated with share price for
SME’s, instead the P/BV is correlated at 99% confidence, with a coefficient of -0.075.

                                   3
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

The literature on drivers of share price movements is extensive. The following papers in
this section have inspired us and our analysis touch upon the similarities and differences
between the findings, meaning that this paper is not a replication of a previous study.
The reason is mainly that the empirical studies on SaaS companies are limited. As the
business model of SaaS companies is very different from many others’, with negative
earnings despite extraordinary high gross margins and a high rate of recurring revenues,
for instance, this paper adds value to the field of share-price-driver studies. Also, these
companies are on the rise and the share price performance demonstrates a huge investor
interest (McCarthy, et al., 2017). Thus, this paper can be of use for investors that want
to understand the share price behaviour of a growing cluster of the stock market.
Moreover, Alteryx and Autodesk, two companies included in the dataset, have
recognized total addressable markets of USD 73 billion (Alteryx, Inc., 2020) and 49
billion (Autodesk Inc., 2019), compared to revenues of USD 418 million and 2,600
million, respectively. These are just two examples that illustrate the long runway for
potential growth that lies ahead of the SaaS companies. Thereby, while SaaS companies
have grown aggressively over the last several years, it is still clear that there is plenty of
room for future growth.
Before 1981, much of the finance literature viewed the present value of dividends to be
the principal determinant of the level of share prices. However, LeRoy and Porter
(1981) and Shiller (1981) found that, under the assumption of a constant discount factor,
share prices were too volatile to be consistent with movements in future dividends. This
conclusion, known as the excess volatility hypothesis, argues that share prices exhibit
too much volatility to be justified by fundamental variables (Balke & Wohar, 2006).
Accordingly, our results show a strong correlation between EV/Sales and share price
but there is a significant correlation between fundamental variables and share price as
well. Notably, the sample size for testing the correlation between dividends and share
price is too small to provide value.
Fama and French (1993, 2015) showed that the return of a stock is based on its Beta to
the market portfolio, its size, its value, its profitability and its investments needs. Thus,
a higher Beta and being a smaller company is positively correlated with share price
return and accordingly, the SaaS companies have an average five-year Beta of 1.15 and
an average market cap of USD 12 billion [USD 9 billion if excluding Salesforce.com
Inc. (Salesforce) from the dataset], which is only slightly above the USD 8.2 billion
market capitalization threshold of being included in the S&P 500. However, the model
asserts that companies with a high book-to-market (B/M) ratio, robust profitability and
conservative investments in assets should outperform. For 2019, the SaaS companies
had an average net income margin of -7% (S&P 500: 11%) and an average growth in
total assets of 45% (S&P 500: 9.7%). At last, the B/M ratio was 0.05x for the SaaS
companies (0.28x) as of 31 December 2019. The model is thus rejected on three out of
five components, given the outperformance of SaaS companies the last five years
compared to the S&P 500.
There is a general view that EPS is the main fundamental driver of share prices. Liu, et
al. (2007) concluded that earnings data dominate all other value drivers (sales,
EBITDA, book value and operating cash flow). However, when the earnings are
negative the data illustrates a much weaker such correlation (Liu, et al., 2007). Among
the companies analysed in our dataset, only 12 out of 51 had a positive EPS in 2019

                                   4
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

and, in line with previous findings, it is also the least correlated financial metric in the
analysis.
However, the price of a company’s stock reflects and incorporates investors’ beliefs
regarding the future cash flows the company will generate (Campbell, et al., 2010;
McCarthy, et al., 2017) and a significant portion of stock price movement occurs
because investors revise their expectations of future cash flows (Chen, et al., 2013).
Moreover, Steven and Ruback (1995), as well as Damodaran (2005), have shown that a
discounted cash flow (DCF) model is an appropriate method for company valuation.
Accordingly, the findings in this paper illustrate that investors have a positive sentiment
towards the SaaS companies’ future cash flows despite current negative earnings.

                                   5
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

2. Theoretical Framework

2.1 Software-as-a-Service
Software-as-a-Service is a newly emerging business model in the software industry.
Subscription SaaS service will allow organizations to save their IT investment on
infrastructure, networking, hardware, software, and personnel costs. SaaS providers
play the role of outsourcing vendors who offer the contracting service to their clients by
charging a monthly or annual fee. After that, SaaS providers will handle all needed
services, including application software’s maintenance, customization, and updating
(Chou & Chou, 2008). The cloud is the backbone that provides life to the SaaS
companies’ businesses. The cloud application services market (the applicable market for
SaaS companies) is expected to register a CAGR of 15.8% until 2022 (WisdomTree,
2019).
Over the last decade, cloud SaaS businesses have eclipsed traditional software
companies as the new industry standard for deploying and updating software. Cloud-
based SaaS companies provide software applications and services via a network
connection from a remote location, whereas traditional software is delivered and
supported on-premise. This key difference in distribution leads to several distinct
fundamental advantages for cloud vs traditional software (WisdomTree, 2019). In terms
of product characteristics, cloud software enables speed, ease and low cost of
implementation. It is installed via a network connection and it does not require the
higher cost of setup and installation of traditional software. Customers can easily also
add product enhancements over the cloud without an additional sales cycle. Therefore,
the same provider can grow as the customer grows over time. This in combination with
the fact that cloud software becomes embedded in client workflow the switching costs
are high and client retention is low. Moreover, SaaS companies employ a subscription-
based revenue model with smaller and more frequent transactions, while traditional
software businesses rely on a single large, upfront transaction. The SaaS model can
result in a more predictable, annuity-like revenue stream for cloud software providers
(WisdomTree, 2019).
2.2 Fama and French Models
2.2.1 Fama and French Three-Factor Model
Fama and French (1993) revisited some of the evident shortcomings of the CAPM
model by expanding it into a three-factor asset pricing model. Besides the market return
factor included in the CAPM, the new model incorporated a size factor based on the
market capitalization of firms and a value factor defined as the equity book-to-market
(B/M) ratio. The underlying reasoning for the two added variables is that they are
proxies for common risk factors in returns and that they are related to economic
fundamentals. The study showed a negative relationship between size and average
excess returns as well as a positive relationship between the B/M ratio and average
excess returns. The resulting model is described as:
          𝑅𝑖𝑡 − 𝑅𝑓𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽𝑖𝑀∗(𝑅𝑀𝑡 −𝑅𝑓𝑡) + 𝑠𝑖∗𝑆𝑀𝐵𝑡 + h𝑖∗𝐻𝑀𝐿𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡 (1)
where 𝑅𝑖𝑡 is the return on security or portfolio “i” for period t, 𝑅𝑓𝑡 is the risk-free rate,
𝑅𝑀𝑡 is the return on the value-weighted market portfolio, 𝑆𝑀𝐵𝑡 is the difference

                                   6
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

between the returns on diversified portfolios of small and large cap stocks, 𝐻𝑀𝐿𝑡 is the
difference between the returns on diversified portfolios of high B/M stocks (value
stocks) and low B/M stocks (growth stocks), and 𝜀𝑖𝑡 is a zero-mean error term. The
Fama-French Three-Factor model achieved a 90% explanation rate of variation in
returns, which was higher than the CAPM’s explanatory power of 70%. Furthermore,
Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) discussed the existence of a momentum effect, Ang,
Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006) documented a negative relationship between
idiosyncratic volatility and average returns suggesting that the three-factor model cannot
price portfolios correctly. Lastly, Amihud (2002) and Pastor and Stambaugh (2003)
found that liquidity risk should be a priced risk factor.
2.2.2 Fama and French Five-Factor Model
Fama and French (2015) found another way to improve their three-factor model, as a
response to cited literature above. In the recent study, they present the five-factor model
that supplements their former model with operating profitability and investment factors.
Their decision to add these two factors is motivated by the dividend discount model,
which says that the market value of a stock is the discounted value of expected
dividends. They came up with three statements about expected stock returns. Firstly, a
higher B/M ratio implies a higher expected return – an observation already captured by
the value factor in the Fama and French (1993) three-factor model. Secondly, higher
expected earnings suggest a higher expected return – the idea behind adding the
operating profitability factor. And thirdly, higher expected growth in assets implies a
lower expected return – motivation for adding the investment factor.
As it is evident that the three-factor model is not able to explain all variance in returns,
much of it might come from profitability and investment. Fama and French (2015) use
NYSE stocks which are sorted into different sets of LHS portfolios. They prove that the
five-factor model produces lower intercepts and can explain a higher degree of the
variation in returns, than the three-factor model. To test the validity of the asset pricing
models, GRS tests developed by Gibbons, Ross and Shanken (1989) are conducted.
Fama and French acknowledge in their study that the five-factor model is rejected using
the GRS-test, proving that it is still not a complete model for predicting returns but
rather a simplification of reality. Moreover, adding the two additional variables makes
the value factor, measured as the B/M ratio, a redundant factor. In 2015, they also
expanded their research by performing their study on international markets and found
that their model holds in these markets as well. The model is constructed as:
 𝑅𝑖𝑡 − 𝑅𝑓𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽𝑖𝑀∗(𝑅𝑀𝑡 −𝑅𝑓𝑡) + 𝑠𝑖∗𝑆𝑀𝐵𝑡 + h𝑖∗𝐻𝑀𝐿𝑡 + 𝑟𝑖∗𝑅𝑀𝑊𝑡 + 𝑐𝑖∗𝐶𝑀𝐴𝑡 +
                                                 𝜀𝑖𝑡 (2)
where 𝑅𝑀𝑊𝑡 is the difference between the returns on diversified portfolios with high
(robust) operating profitability and low (weak) operating profitability, and 𝐶𝑀𝐴𝑡 is the
difference between the returns on diversified portfolios with low growth in total assets
(conservative) and high growth in total assets (aggressive).
2.3 Efficient Market Hypothesis
The theory of market efficiency first introduced by Fama (1970) is an economic theory
which stipulates that the prices of assets will incorporate information to the degree that
they reflect the security’s actual intrinsic value. It further stipulates that investors are

                                   7
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

rational, can understand information correctly and act upon said information. There are
no arbitrage opportunities available in the market according to this theory (Brown,
1978), except for limited time periods when investor irrationality might give rise to
them. However, those instances of price discrepancy are quickly corrected by rational
investors bidding for the securities until they converge to intrinsic value once again.
There are three levels of efficiency, the first of which is weak-form efficiency. It implies
that current prices of assets will incorporate all historical information, essentially
rendering the data of past prices performance of a security useless to investors since it is
already incorporated in the current price. The second level is semi-strong-form
efficiency which is an extension of the weak-form efficiency. It states that asset prices
also reflect all publicly available information such as the information contained in
regulatory filings. Lastly, there is the strong-form efficiency which suggests asset prices
incorporate all information, i.e. even information known only to company insiders
(Maverick, 2020).
2.4 S&P 500
The S&P 500 is a stock market index that tracks the stocks of 500 large U.S. companies.
S&P stands for Standard and Poor, the names of the two founding financial companies.
Investors use it as the benchmark of the overall market, to which all other investments
are compared. As of March 13, 2020, the S&P 500 has an average 10-year annual return
of 7.99%.
As of February 2020, the total market capitalization of the S&P 500 is USD 24.4
trillion, and it captures 80% of the American stock market. To qualify for the index, a
company must be in the United States, have an unadjusted market capitalization of at
least USD 8.2 billion. At least 50% of the corporation's stock must be available to the
public. Its share price must be at least USD 1 per share. It must file a 10-K annual
report. At least, 50% of its fixed assets and revenues must be in the United States.
Finally, it must have at least four consecutive quarters of positive earnings.
As of March 13, 2020, the S&P 500 sector breakdown includes: Information
Technology: 24.4%, Health Care: 14%, Financials: 12.2%, Communication Services:
10.7%, Consumer, Discretionary: 9.9%, Industrials: 8.9%, Consumer Staples: 7.2%,
Energy: 3.6%, Utilities: 3.5%, Real Estate: 3.1% and Materials: 2.5% (S&P Global Inc.,
2017).
2.5 Hypotheses
We hypothesize that the future profitability potential, and thus cash flows, is a main
driver for the positive investor sentiment for this sub-sector. This stems from the fact
that the price of a company’s stock reflects and incorporates investors’ beliefs regarding
the company’s future cash flows (McCarthy, et al., 2017). However, as current
profitability measures are burdened by high R&D and S&M costs, we believe such
metrics will have a weak correlation with stock movements. Thus, since the SaaS
companies are in a growth phase (29.3% revenue growth for 2019, compared to 4.85%
for the S&P 500), we believe that sales and FCF are the strongest financial indicators of
a SaaS company’s development (Cohen & Neubert, 2018) and that EPS will have no
significant impact on the share price behaviour (Liu, et al., 2007). However, since larger
companies generally are more mature and thus closer to a steady-state, we believe that

                                   8
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

profitability measures, i.e. EPS and EBITDA margin, will have a stronger impact on the
share price movements, compared to SME’s.
Hypothesis 1: Sales and FCF are the financial metrics that have the highest correlation
with the share price movements of SaaS companies
Hypothesis 2: EPS has not a significant correlation with share price movements of SaaS
companies
Hypothesis 3: Profitability measures have a higher correlation with the share price
movements for large SaaS companies, compared to smaller SaaS companies
Moreover, since financial fundamentals are not as volatile as share price movements
(Balke & Wohar, 2006) and multiple valuation is industry standard among practitioners
(Plenborg & Piementel, 2016) we believe that in line with more SaaS companies
proving their true potential, i.e. growing into a steadier state, the investor sentiment has
improved. Thus, we believe that EV/Sales has a strong correlation with the share price
movements, that has been very positive the last years, meaning that investors are willing
to pay more for each unit of sales in SaaS companies.
Hypothesis 4: EV/Sales has a significant correlation with the share price movements of
SaaS companies

                                   9
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

3. Data and Methodology

3.1 Data
To conduct the research, we primarily use data from the S&P Capital IQ database
accessed through the Wharton Research Data Service (WRDS). The Capital IQ database
contains a wide range of financial metrics from all instances of a company’s filings
from press releases, initial and all subsequent filings. The Capital IQ database Covers
88,000 public companies with 45,000 active public companies representing 99% of the
world’s market capitalization. Detailed estimates covering over 19,000 active
companies from over 670 active contributors with over 40 data measures including EPS,
Revenue, EBITDA and more. We also validated the quality of the data from Capital IQ
by checking the financials for a random set of companies on their published interim
reports. Moreover, FactSet’s database, an open data and software solution providing
financial data for more than 126,000 users worldwide, is used in order to retrieve
financial data on the S&P 500 index.
The exported dataset contains more than 25,000 observations for 66 companies, dating
from 31 December 2019 back to 31 March 2014, on a quarterly basis. The chosen
companies are derived from GP Bullhound’s SaaS company index. GP Bullhound is an
international investment bank with a great focus on the technology sector and with ten
offices worldwide. To increase the possibility of finding statistically significant
variables with a certain level of validity, we filter our dataset to exclude companies that
have been listed on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) or Nasdaq less than one
year (i.e. IPO in 2019). We also exclude companies with a market capitalization less
than USD 1 billion in an effort to avoid external factors on share price movements, such
as issues of stock liquidity. The observed companies are listed on either NYSE or
NASDAQ. All companies, except Salesforce and ServiceNow Inc. (ServiceNow), have
a market capitalization (as of March 17th) between USD 1-50 billion. Salesforce has in
contrast, a market capitalization of around USD 144 billion and ServiceNow also
exceeds the range at a market capitalization of around USD 53 billion.
The quarterly observations include data points on market capitalization, share price,
sales, gross profit, earnings before interest, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA),
net income, earnings per share (EPS), free cash flow (FCF), deferred revenue, enterprise
value-to-sales (EV/Sales) ratio, EV/EBITDA, price-to-book (P/BV) ratio and customer
count. However, in our analysis, we include only share price, sales, EBITDA margin,
EPS, FCF, EV/sales and P/BV. Share price and EPS is measured in terms of US dollars,
sales and FCF in USD millions, EBITDA margin in percentages, EV/Sales and P/BV as
factors. Market capitalization and net income were used to check if share repurchases or
issuance of shares have had an impact on share price and EPS, respectively, and thus the
result, which seems not to be the case.
The companies included in the dataset are clearly more focused on growth rather than
profitability in their early business life cycles. Therefore, we believe that gross profit
would be the most appropriate profitability metric since it is not burdened by the
companies’ heavy growth initiatives that include large R&D and S&M costs. Deferred
revenue is an item that can be found on a company’s balance sheet and is considered a
strong indicator for future performance since it can act as an estimate for future
revenues. This is particularly true for a business that focuses on recurring revenues, and

                                  10
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

as investors very much consider the future performance of companies when investing,
we believe it would have a significant correlation with the share price movements.
However, both gross profit and deferred revenue are strongly correlated with sales.
Thus, those metrics are excluded to avoid issues regarding multicollinearity, which
would negatively impact the robustness of our models.
Furthermore, we believe that the customer count could have a material impact on
valuation and thus share price movements. The increased popularity of subscription-
based businesses has brought with it an increase in the public disclosure of data on (but
not limited to) customer churn, customer/subscriber acquisition costs, average revenue
per user (ARPU), and customer lifetime value (CLV) (McCarthy, et al., 2017).
However, only a small fraction of the companies reported homogenous customer counts
in their interim reports and hence, this metric is excluded. EV/EBITDA is also excluded
due to too few “meaningful” multiples, i.e. not negative, in the dataset. Subsequently,
for the same reason, we do not include the P/E multiple.
To begin our study of trying to understand stock price movements as a function of
financial metrics, a dataset covering 51 American companies is examined. As
previously mentioned, we exclude a) recently listed companies and b) companies with
market capitalizations of less than USD 1 billion. Furthermore, we exclude any
quarterly observation, for any company, that does not provide numbers for all of the
metrics. For example, if the EV/Sales multiple for ServiceNow in the first quarter of
2015 is not provided, we do not use data for ServiceNow from the first quarter of 2015
in our analysis. Naturally, we will not be able to run regressions with numbers from
every quarter between 2014-2019. The dataset that we end up with after this elimination
of observations consists of 720 observations for each variable examined. Thus, we
eliminate 504 observations from a total of 1,224 observations.
3.2 Methodology
3.2.1 Precautionary Measures
In all our regressions, we use robust standard errors to avoid skewness in our results.
We also test for any issues of multicollinearity by calculating Variance Inflation Factors
of our independent variables, as can be seen in table 8 in the Appendix. We use a
threshold of 10 and if we see factors greater than 10, it is a sign of issues of
multicollinearity and we may need to change the models to mitigate this. Fortunately,
we see that no variable has a factor over 10 and we can therefore conclude that our
models do not suffer from multicollinearity. For each regression, we present
standardized beta coefficients. Since our independent variables are measured in
different units (dollars, percentages and multiples) we must adjust for this in order to
improve comparability between the independent variables.
3.2.2 Dependent and Independent Variables
Our dependent variable for all regressions is share price, which is retrieved directly
from Capital IQ. For the regressions, we use “lagging” share price data since we believe
it will capture stock price movements in a more accurate and harmonised way, since
share prices can move significantly following earning releases. The reasoning is that we
will trace the share performance based on known fundamentals instead of estimates and
speculations. As an example, share prices from the second quarter of 2014 will be

                                  11
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

matched with financial metrics (sales, EBITDA margin, EPS, etcetera) from the first
quarter of 2014.
In order to analyse share price movements, we use some independent variables,
summarized in table 1.

When choosing our independent variables, we must consider whether each of the
variables are reasonable to include and whether there will be a problem of high
correlation with another variable or not. We believe that chosen financial metrics are
reasonable to include, based on existing literature on valuation of companies and the
SaaS business model.
The chosen financial metrics for our models are sales, EBITDA margin, EPS, FCF,
EV/Sales and P/BV. The dataset excludes initially chosen independent variables due to
multicollinearity and non-meaningful values. However, we believe that sales, EBITDA
margin and FCF are among the important variables for companies with negative
earnings (Liu, et al., 2007; Cohen & Neubert, 2018). EV/Sales and P/BV are on a
trailing twelve months basis and illustrate investors’ willingness to pay for one unit of
ownership of two different variables, since share prices are more volatile than
fundamentals (Balke & Wohar, 2006). Once again, trailing numbers are used in order to
measure reported numbers and not estimates. EPS is included for the sake of the general
view that it is an essential driver of share price movements (Liu, et al., 2007; Stern,
1970).
We incorporate time fixed effects by including annual time dummy variables for each
respective year. By doing this, we aim to account for external factors impacting share
price movements such as macroeconomics shocks (e.g. economic recessions).
For the firm size dummy variable “Class”, we categorise Large Companies with an EV
equal to or greater than USD 5 billion. Consequently, SME’s have EV less than USD 5

                                  12
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

billion. This way, we hope to potentially see if there are any difference in how these
variables impact stock price movements across companies with different maturities or
sizes. In total, there are 26 Large Companies and 25 SME’s, providing us with an even
split in terms of companies per group. These are seemingly small groups of companies
and we must bear this in mind when drawing conclusions. Using a small number of
companies in the study reduces the statistical power of our analysis. We categorize the
                                                                     th
companies based on their EV as of March 17 , 2020. The reason for this is to look at
how the Large Companies’ share prices and corresponding variables have grown and
whether there is a difference between the drivers of these companies and those that have
not grown into this group yet, i.e. SME’s. We do not control for companies’ historical
size and we must be aware that some of the companies that we classify as Large
Companies today, possibly had an EV less than USD 5 billion during a certain time
period in our dataset. Of course, this will reduce the statistical power in our models
where we divide the dataset into these groups as the categorization probably does not
hold true for the entire time period.
The firm-specific dummy variable “Firm” is incorporated in part of our analysis. By
adding firm specific fixed effects, we control unobserved heterogeneity (firm
characteristics) and therefore decrease the risk of suffering from omitted variable bias in
our study. This assumes that these unobserved heterogeneities are constant over time.
One drawback of firm-specific fixed effects is that they can reduce the statistical power
of the models. This is because firm-specific effects exclude cross-sectional variance
between firms (Eckbo, 2008).
3.2.3 OLS Regression Models and Analysis
In total, we will estimate ten different regression models. We use ordinary least-squares
regressions (OLS) to estimate the relationship of our independent variables and the
share price. Our main model (Model 1) that we test is the following:
SP𝑡+1 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠𝑡 + 𝛽2𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑇𝐷𝐴𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝛽3𝐸𝑃𝑆𝑡 + 𝛽4𝐹𝐶𝐹𝑡 + 𝛽5𝐸𝑉𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠𝑡 +
                         𝛽6𝑃𝐵𝑉𝑡 + 𝛽7𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑡 + 𝛽8𝐶𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠 + 𝜀 (3)

Where 𝜀 is the error term with a mean at zero and t indicate the relevant period. We
show that SP has subscript t+1 since we use lagging share prices.

Our main model tests the relationship between our independent variables and share
price movements, by pooling the dataset. Additionally, we estimate two separate models
for each respective class of company (Large Companies vs SME’s) by using STATA’s
“if” command when running the regressions. Model 2 and 3:

SP𝑡+1 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠𝑡 + 𝛽2𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑇𝐷𝐴𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝛽3𝐸𝑃𝑆𝑡 + 𝛽4𝐹𝐶𝐹𝑡 + 𝛽5𝐸𝑉𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠𝑡 +
                               𝛽6𝑃𝐵𝑉𝑡 + 𝛽7𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑡 + 𝜀 (4)

Model 2 and 3 are almost identical to the main model, but the difference here is that we
test Large Companies (Model 2) and SME’s (Model 3) separately. Therefore, we will
not include the firm size dummy variable in these models.

As we want to test the robustness of our results, we also estimate three more models
where we add firm-specific fixed effects. Model 4:

                                  13
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

SP𝑡+1 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠𝑡 + 𝛽2𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑇𝐷𝐴𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝛽3𝐸𝑃𝑆𝑡 + 𝛽4𝐹𝐶𝐹𝑡 + 𝛽5𝐸𝑉𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠𝑡 +
                  𝛽6𝑃𝐵𝑉𝑡 + 𝛽7𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑡 + 𝛽8𝐶𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠 + 𝛽9𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 + 𝜀 (5)

As a result, Model 4, 5 and 6 will only compare share price movements and
corresponding independent variables within each firm rather than comparing different
firm’s share price movements and independent variables with each other.

Similar to Model 2 and 3, we drop the firm size dummy variables for Model 5 and 6:

SP𝑡+1 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠𝑡 + 𝛽2𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑇𝐷𝐴𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝛽3𝐸𝑃𝑆𝑡 + 𝛽4𝐹𝐶𝐹𝑡 + 𝛽5𝐸𝑉𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠𝑡 +
                        𝛽6𝑃𝐵𝑉𝑡 + 𝛽7𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑡 + 𝛽8𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 + 𝜀 (6)
Furthermore, we will estimate four additional models. All models are similar to our
main model (Model 1), but in each model we adjust the dataset to test the robustness of
our results. The aim is to see whether the results of our main model is dependent on
certain thresholds. We estimate Model 7, 8, 9 and 10:
SP𝑡+1 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠𝑡 + 𝛽2𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑇𝐷𝐴𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑡 + 𝛽3𝐸𝑃𝑆𝑡 + 𝛽4𝐹𝐶𝐹𝑡 + 𝛽5𝐸𝑉𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠𝑡 +
                         𝛽6𝑃𝐵𝑉𝑡 + 𝛽7𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑡 + 𝛽8𝐶𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠 + 𝜀 (7)
In Model 7, we exclude Salesforce from our list of companies in our analysis. This is
done to see if the biggest company in our dataset largely impact the outcome and hence
skew the results in any type of way. Salesforce has an EV of around USD 144 billion,
compared to the second-largest company in our dataset, which is ServiceNow at an EV
of USD 53 billion. The difference in size is large and hence interesting to see if it has
any impact on the results.
In Model 8, 9 and 10, we will run regressions for all companies with three different
time periods in order to see if the results of our main model are sensitive to the chosen
time period of 2014-2019. In Model 8 the chosen time period is 2014-2016, for Model 9
it is 2015-2018, and in Model 10 it is 2017-2019.

                                  14
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

4. Results
4.1 Sample Data Statistics
In table 2 we present the descriptive statistics for All Companies, i.e. Model 1 and 4.
We see that we have 720 data points for each of the variables. Moreover, we see that the
mean share price is around USD 54, with average sales of USD 234 million. We also
see, as expected, that the average company has negative EBITDA margin, at -4.4% and
EPS of USD -0.14. The average company has around USD 50 million in FCF and
EV/Sales and P/BV multiples of 8x and 20x. In the correlation matrix, we see that there
is a significant correlation between share price and all independent variables, except
EPS and the P/BV multiple, at the one per cent level. EPS correlates significantly at the
five per cent level while P/BV does not correlate significantly at any of the presented
levels. What we can also see is that sales and EV/Sales have the highest correlations,
with sales at 0.393 and EV/Sales at 0.550.

In table 3 we see descriptive statistics for the Large Companies in our pooled dataset.
For this group, we have 369 data points for each variable. Large Companies have
average share prices of around USD 73 and sales of USD 378 million. EBITDA
margins at 0.0% and EPS of USD -0.08. Large Companies has an average FCF of USD
87 million and EV/Sales and P/BV multiples of 10x and 17x, respectively. Again, most
independent variables correlate significantly at the one per cent level. However, in
contrast to previous findings, EBITDA margin and EPS do not correlate significantly
with share price while P/BV do. Unlike the pooled dataset, EV/Sales (0.430) and P/BV
(0.358) correlates the highest with share prices for a Large Company.

                                  15
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

Looking at the class of SME’s, we have 351 data points for share price, as can be seen
in table 4. This is a bit under the number of observations for Large Companies and the
explanation for this can be divided into two parts: firstly, Large Companies have
generally been listed for a longer period of time compared to SME’s. Secondly, the
group for Large Companies include one more company. Both factors lead to a smaller
sample size for our analysis. SME’s have an average share price of USD 35, which is
~50% less than the average share price for the Large Companies. The mean value of
sales is also substantially less compared to for Large Companies, amounting to USD 82
million. EBITDA margins for SME’s are worse than for Large Companies, on average -
9.0%. Average EPS is USD -0.20, and SME’s generates on average USD 11 million in
FCF. EV/Sales multiple is at 6x and P/BV at 24x. Like the pooled dataset, all
independent variables, except for P/BV, correlate significantly at the one per cent level
with share price. EV/Sales correlates the most (0.509), closely followed by FCF (0.477)
and sales (0.461).

4.2 OLS Regression Results
The first part of our OLS regression analysis is conducted with the pooled dataset, with
the regression results of Model 1-3 presented in table 5.

                                  16
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

For Model 1, the total sample size is 720 observations. Three out of six independent
variables are statistically significant in the model at the one per cent level; sales and
EV/Sales and the firm size dummy variable. We see that the first two variables have
positive and significant standardized coefficients of 0.326 and 0.423, indicating that
both variables have the most significant impact on share price variance in our main
model. The firm size dummy variable is negative at -0.131, indicating that on average,
all else equal, an SME will have share price of USD 0.13 lower than a Large Company.
For Model 2, the total sample size is 369 observations. Two out of six independent
variables are statistically significant in the model at the one per cent level; sales and
EV/Sales. P/BV is significant at the ten per cent level. We see that the first two
variables have positive coefficients of 0.350 and 0.252, indicating that sales have a
bigger impact on Large Companies compared to the average company for All
Companies and that EV/Sales has a less of an impact on share price movement
compared to the average company. Unlike in Model 1, P/BV is significant and seem to
have a material impact on share prices in Model 2.
For Model 3, the total sample size is 351 observations. Three out of six independent
variables are statistically significant in the model at the one per cent level; Sales,
EV/Sales and EBITDA margin. All variables have positive coefficients of 0.432, 0.226
and 0.534, respectively, indicating that both sales and EV/Sales have a greater impact
on the share prices of SME’s compared to the average company for All Companies and
Large Companies. Unlike in Model 1 and 2, EBITDA margin is significant and seem to
have a material impact on share prices in Model 2. Furthermore, FCF is significant at
the five per cent level and have a positive coefficient of 0.132.
We can conclude that sales and EV/Sales are statistically significant for all three models
in the pooled dataset, with impacts of varying magnitude on share price movements.

                                  17
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

The second part of the OLS regression analysis is conducted with firm-specific fixed
effects, with the regression results of Model 4-6 presented in table 6.
For Model 4, the total sample size is 720 observations. Two out of six independent
variables are statistically significant in the model at the one per cent level; sales and
EV/Sales. We see that the two variables have positive and significant standardized
coefficients of 0.283 and 0.425, indicating that both variables have the largest impact on
share price variance in this model. The firm size dummy variable is not significant and
is negative at -0.106. The lack of significance is likely an effect of the reduced statistical
power of firm fixed effects.
For Model 5, the total sample size is 369 observations. Two out of six independent
variables are statistically significant in the model at the one per cent level; sales and
EV/Sales. P/BV and FCF are significant at the ten per cent level. We see that the first
two variables have positive coefficients of 0.259 and 0.409, indicating that EV/Sales
once again have a larger impact on share price movements compared to sales.
Interestingly, both FCF and P/BV have negative coefficients of -0.062 and -0.145,
respectively, which is not in line with the findings for the pooled dataset. However, we
bear in mind that the results for the regressions with firm fixed effects will have a lower
statistical power as previously discussed.
For Model 6, the total sample size is 351 observations. Three out of six independent
variables are statistically significant in the model at the one per cent level; Sales,
EV/Sales and P/BV. The first two variables have positive coefficients of 0.313 and
0.426, respectively, indicating that both sales and EV/Sales have a greater impact on the
share prices of SME’s compared to the average company for All Companies and Large

                                  18
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

Companies. This is very much in line with the results for Model 1-3. Unlike in Model 4
but similar to Model 5, P/BV is significant and negative in Model 6 at -0.075.

Our results are in line with the findings of Liu et al. (2007) with regards to the weak
correlation between EPS and share price behaviour when there are negative earnings.
We see that EPS has no significant correlation with share price in any of our models,
making it reasonable to assume that EPS does not have a material impact on and do not
correlate significantly with the share prices of the SaaS companies in our dataset. We do
see in table 2 and table 4 that EPS correlates significantly with share price, though not
relatively high, but this does not suffice as evidence that EPS do have a material impact
on share price behaviour as we do not see any significant relationship for any of the
regression models.

For all regression models, we find that there is a significant correlation between some
fundamental variables and share price, confirming the findings of Balke & Wohar
(2006). In total, EV/Sales is the strongest indicator of share price movements but
however, the notion that stock prices exhibit too much volatility to be justified by
fundamental variables goes against these findings.

                                  19
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

4.3 Additional Tests of Robustness
The third part of our OLS regression analysis is conducted by further testing our main
model’s robustness in four new models, with the regression results for Model 7, 8, 9 and
10 presented in table 7.
In Model 7, the total sample size is 696 observations. Two out of six independent
variables are statistically significant in the model at the one per cent level; sales and
EV/Sales. We see that the two variables have positive and significant standardized
coefficients of 0.381 and 0.402, indicating that both variables have the biggest impact
on share price variance in this model. Reassuringly, we see the same two financial
metrics as significant in this model. This finding adds to the robustness of our results in
Model 1. However, we see that the firm size dummy variable is not significant at any of
the levels shown. This is not in line with our main model, and we should, therefore, be
aware of the impact that Salesforce has on our dataset in the model and not overstate the
statistical power of our results.
In Model 8, the total sample size is 212 observations. Three out of six independent
variables are statistically significant in the model at the one per cent level; Sales,
EV/Sales and EBITDA margin. All variables have positive coefficients of 0.432, 0.621
and 0.415. We also see that EPS and P/BV are statistically significant at the ten per cent
level, with coefficients at -0.207 and 0.064. Clearly, the results differ from our main
model as we have new statistically significant variables (EPS and P/BV). We also see
that the firm size dummy variable is not significant, while it is in our main model. This
could be explained by the fact that in this specific time period, a lot of SME’s may not
have been listed yet and hence, we do not have an appropriate amount of data to achieve
high statistical power. As mentioned, the total sample size is 212 observations for this
model, in comparison to 720 total observations in our main model. This is a large
difference and could explain the difference in the results.
In Model 9, the total sample size is 402 observations. Two out of six independent
variables are statistically significant in the model at the one per cent level; sales and
EV/Sales. Both variables have positive coefficients of 0.425 and 0.429, respectively.
Furthermore, EBITDA margin is significant at the five per cent level and have a
positive coefficient of 0.206. Again, the results of this model differ from the main
model, but not the same extent as Model 8. We continue to see a non-significant firm
size dummy variable. The sample size is still quite small in comparison to the main
model, which must be taken into consideration regarding the findings of Model 9.
In Model 10, the total sample size is 508 observations. Two out of six independent
variables are statistically significant in the model at the one per cent level; sales and
EV/Sales. We see that the two variables have positive and significant standardized
coefficients of 0.382 and 0.485, indicating that both variables have the largest impact on
share price variance in this model. In this model we see similar results as in Model 1,
with sales and EV/sales as the only two significant financial variables. In contrast, we
do not see a significant firm size dummy variable here.

                                  20
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

4.4 Conclusion of Results
To conclude, we find that: 1) Sales shows a significant correlation with the share price
of SaaS companies both in the pooled and the divided analysis and both with and
without the firm-specific fixed effect. Partly confirming our hypothesis and the findings
of Liu, et al. (2007) and Cohen & Neubert (2018) but contrasts to the argument that
share prices exhibit too much volatility to be justified by fundamental variables (Balke
& Wohar, 2006). However, FCF shows no significant correlation with share price in
this study but is not as weak as EPS. Partly confirming the findings of Liu, et al. (2007)
and partly in contrast to our hypothesis and the findings of Cohen & Neubert (2018). 2)
Interestingly, EPS shows no significant correlation with share price throughout the
entire study, in line with previous literature (Liu et al., 2007; Cohen & Neubert, 2018)
and our hypothesis. 3) Profitability metrics seem to have a small material impact on
share price behaviour. These variables show no significant correlation throughout the
whole study except for SME’s, in contrast to the findings of Stern (1970) and our
hypothesis but partly confirms the findings of Liu et al. (2007). 4) EV/Sales shows a
significant correlation throughout the study and is in almost all cases more correlated
with share price than what sales is. Being the strongest driver of share price in this study
is in line with the argument that share prices exhibit too much volatility to be justified
by fundamental variables (Balke & Wohar, 2006) and that share price movements can
depend on changes in investor sentiment (Campbell, et al., 2010). Lastly, Fama and
French’s three-factor and five-factor models were rejected early.

                                  21
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

5. Implications & Conclusions
The findings show that sales and EV/Sales are the strongest drivers of share price
movements for SaaS companies, with the latter showing a slightly higher coefficient in
most cases. Our interpretation is that the strong performance of SaaS companies in the
last five years is largely due to investors’ willingness to pay more for one unit of sales.
We believe this is rooted in an improved investor sentiment for this sub-sector, which
can either depend on investors estimating higher expected cash flows or by a lower
discount rate of cash flows (Campbell, et al., 2010; Chen, et al., 2013) when performing
a DCF valuation (Kaplan & Ruback, 1995; Damodaran, 2005). The average EV/Sales
multiple for the companies in the dataset has increased from 3.8x in December 2014 to
9.8x in December 2019. A high-level interpretation of those numbers suggests that if all
other factors were held constant, the share performance of these companies would have
been 156% over the course of five years, solely due to multiple expansion. Thus, a large
portion of the strong performance is driven by fundamentals, since the constituents of
valuation of a firm are cash flow and discount rate (Campbell, et al., 2010; Chen, et al.,
2013). However, a higher value of one unit of ownership in sales finds support in the
discussion of SaaS companies’ business models, with a strong value proposition for
customers, high flexibility in the cost base and a high rate of recurring revenues.
Translating to a potential strong cash flow generation in the future. EBITDA margin
shows no significant correlation with share price in any model except for SME’s and
EPS shows no significant correlation in any model, indicating that investors should be
inclined to prioritise sales growth over profitability measures in investment decisions
regarding SaaS companies. To conclude, hypothesis 1 is partly supported by the
findings in this paper, while hypothesis 2 and 4 are strongly confirmed. Hypothesis 3 is,
however, rejected. The findings of this study are in line with papers discussing the share
price movements as dependent on changes in investor sentiment and thus either cash
flow expectations or discount rate changes (Campbell, et al., 2010; Chen, et al., 2013).
However, in line with the findings of Liu, et al. (2007) and Cohen & Neubert (2018)
and in contrast to the excess volatility hypothesis (LeRoy & Porter, 1981; Shiller, 1981;
Balke & Wohar, 2006), a large portion of the share price movements of SaaS companies
is driven by sales.
Investigating share price in our analysis has its limitations by nature. Since it is a
market-based price it relies on the efficient market hypothesis, first introduced by Fama
(1970). Inefficiencies in the market would distort movements in share prices and
potentially raise doubt on any results obtained. In an ideal study, other key variables
such as size of the addressable target market, churn rate, customer retention rate and
capital efficiency would be included in the models as they are especially important for
SaaS companies (McCarthy, et al., 2017). Furthermore, a large amount of intrinsic
corporate value lies within intangible or qualitative measures of the firm. Examples of
this include stability of the earnings power, owner-specific business relationships,
business traffic attributable to search engines and their algorithms, level of competition
within the business niche, and type of customers targeted by the company (Cohen &
Neubert, 2018). Such measures would contribute to the explanation of the strong
performance of the SaaS companies since the financial statements do not tell the whole
truth. Additionally, it would be valuable to conduct interviews with practitioners to
understand what investors value when investing in SaaS companies. The ideal analysis
would, therefore, include more qualitative research of the share price behaviour.

                                  22
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

However, due to the qualitative nature and difficulty to extract those metrics we choose
to focus on financial measures and bear in mind that our analysis will not be as
complete as we would have wished it to be. We chose to focus on B2B SaaS companies,
but the analysis could also include B2C SaaS companies, in order to find potential
differences in share price drivers between the two and increase the number of
companies in our study and subsequently the sample size. As mentioned previously, the
statistical power in our findings are burdened the small number of companies in our
dataset. Additionally, for a future study, it would be appropriate to use a longer time
period and potentially more frequent observations (monthly, weekly) in an effort to
capture share price movements more accurately after earnings releases. As our study
falls short on these issues mentioned, it reduces the statistical power and our ability to
detect true significant results. However, our findings are based on the models and
methodologies we have discussed in this paper.

                                  23
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

References

Alteryx, Inc., 2020. Alteryx Investor Presentation Q4 2019.

Amihud, Y., 2002. Illiquidity and Stock Returns: Cross-Section and Time-Series
Effects. Journal of Financial Markets 5, pp. 31-56.

Ang, A., Hodrick, R., Xing, Y. & Zhang, X., 2009. High Idiosyncratic Volatility and
Low Returns: International and Further U.S. Evidence. Journal of Financial Economics
91, pp. 1-23.

Autodesk Inc., 2019. Autodesk 2019 Investor Day Presentation.

Balke, N. S. & Wohar, M. E., 2006. What Drives Stock Prices? Identifying the
Determinants of Stock Price Movements. Southern Economic Journal 73, pp. 55-78.

Brown, S. L., 1978. Earnings Changes, Stock Prices, and Market Efficiency. The
Journal of Finance, 33(1), pp. 17-28.

Campbell, J. Y., Polk, C. & Vuolteenaho, T., 2010. Growth or Glamour? Fundementals
and Systematic Risk in Stock Returns. The Review of Financial Studies, 23(1), pp. 305-
344.

Capital Group, 2017. https://www.capitalgroup.com. [Online]
Available at: https://www.capitalgroup.com/advisor/ca/en/insights/content/articles/tech-
boom-no-dot-com-bubble.html
[Accessed 05 May 2020].

Chakravarty, A. & Grewal, R., 2011. The Stock Market in the Driver's Seat!
Implications for R&D and Marketing. Management Science, 57(9), pp. 1594-1609.

Chen, L., Da, Z. & Zhao, X., 2013. What Drives Stock Price Movements?. The Review
of Financial Studies, 26(4), pp. 841-876.

Chou, D. D. & Chou, A. C., 2008. Software as a Service (SaaS) as an outsourcing
model: An economic analysis. Houston, Texas, Southwest Decision Science Institute
Conference.

Cohen, B. & Neubert, M., 2018. VALUATION OF A SaaS COMPANY: A CASE STUDY
ON SALESFORCE.COM. Prague, Vysoká škola ekonomická v Praze.

Damodaran, A., 2005. Valuation Approaches and Metrics: A Survey of the Theory and
Evidence. Foundations and Trends in Finance, 1(8), pp. 693-784.

Eckbo, E. B., 2008. Handbook of Empirical Corporate Finance. Volume 2 ed. Hanover,
New Hampshire: Tuck School of Business Dartmouth College.

FactSet (2020).

                                  24
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

Fama, E., 1970. Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work.
Journal of Finance 25, pp. 383-417.

Fama, E. F. & French, K. R., 1992. The cross-section of expected stock returns. Journal
of Finance 47, pp. 427-465.

Fama, E. F. & French, K. R., 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
bonds. Journal of Financial Economics 33, pp. 3-56.

Fama, E. F. & French, K. R., 2012. Size, value and momentum in International stock
returns. Journal of Financial Economics 105, pp. 457-472.

Fama, E. F. & French, K. R., 2015. A five-factor asset pricing model. Journal of
Financial Economics 116, pp. 1-22.

Gibbons, M. R., Steven, R. A. & Shanken, J., 1989. A test of the efficiency of a given
portfolio. Econometrica 57, pp. 1121-1152.

GP Bullhound, 2019. Sector Update Software, GP Bullhound.

Ikenberry, D., Lakonishok, J. & Vermaelen, T., 1995. Market underreaction to open
market share repurchases. Journal of Financial Economics 39, pp. 181-208.

Islam, M. R. et al., 2014. How Earning Per Share (EPS) Affects on Share Price and
Firm Value. European Journal of Business and Management 6.

Jegadeesh, N. & Titman, S., 1993. Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers:
Implications for Stock Market Efficiency. Journal of Finance 48, pp. 93-130.

Kaplan, S. N. & Ruback, R. S., 1995. The Valuation of Cash Flow Forecasts: An
Empirical Analysis. The Journal of Finance, 50(4), pp. 1059-1093.

LeRoy, S. & Porter, R. D., 1981. The Present-Value Relation: Tests Based on Implied
Variance Bounds. Econometrica 49, pp. 555-574.

Liu, J., Nissim, D. & Thomas, J., 2007. Is Cash Flow King in Valuations?. Financial
Analysts Journal 63, pp. 56-68.

Maverick, J. B., 2020. investopedia.com. [Online]
Available at: https://www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/032615/what-are-differences-
between-weak-strong-and-semistrong-versions-efficient-market-hypothesis.asp
[Accessed 5 April 2020].

McCarthy, D. M., Fader, P. S. & Hardie, B. G., 2017. Valuing Subscription-Based
Businesses Using Publicly Disclosed Customer Data. Journal of Marketing, Volume 81,
pp. 17-35.

Nerino, P. J., 2007. SOFTWARE AS A SERVICE. Emerging Tools and Technology,
24(4), pp. 28-31.

                                  25
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

Pastor, L. & Stambaugh, R., 2003. Liquidity Risk and Expected Returns. Journal of
Political Economy 111, pp. 642-685.

Plenborg, T. & Piementel, R. C., 2016. Best Practices in Applying Multiples for
Valuation Purposes. The Journal of Private Equity, 19(3), pp. 55-64.

Ritter, J. & Loughran, T., 1995. The New Issues Puzzle. Journal of Finance 50, pp. 23-
51.

S&P Global Inc., 2017. spglobal.com. [Online]
Available at: https://www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/documents/s-p-capital-
iq-platform-brochure.pdf
[Accessed 4 April 2020].

Shiller, R. J., 1981. Do Stock Prices Move too Much to be Justified by Subsequent
Changes in Dividends. American Economic Review 71, pp. 421-436.

Stern, J. M., 1970. The Case Against Maximizing Earnings Per Share. Financial
Analysts Journal, 26(5), pp. 107-112.

The Balance, 2020. thebalance.com. [Online]
Available at: https://www.thebalance.com/what-is-the-sandp-500-3305888
[Accessed 4 April 2020].

Thompson, D., 2019. The Not-Com Bubble Is Popping: The unicorn massacre
unfolding today is exactly the opposite of what happened in 2000. The Atlantic, 18
October.

Wheale, P. R. & Amin, L. H., 2003. Bursting the dot.com "Bubble': A Case Study in
Investor Behaviour. Technology Analysis & Strategic Management, Volume 15:1, pp.
117-136.

WisdomTree, 2019. WisdomTree Cloud Computing UCITS ETF, WisdomTree.

                                  26
Hanna and Baban (2020): Drivers of Share Price Movements When Earnings are Negative

Appendix

The variance inflated factors of the variables in Model 1, 4 & 7 are shown in table 8.
None of the factors exceed the threshold of factor 10 for multicollinearity.

Table 9 presents all the annual time variables produced in Model 1, 4 and 7.

                                  27