THE INVARIANCE HYPOTHESIS
AND NEWS

Applying the microstructure invariance hypothesis
on the arrival rate of news

BAWER ARSLAN
KAJ TALLUNGS

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2020
The Invariance Hypothesis and News: Applying the Microstructure Invariance
Hypothesis on the Arrival Rate of News

Abstract:

    Following the methodology of Kyle et al. (2012) we investigate how the arrival
    rate of news articles mentioning individual stocks varies with the level of
   trading activity of the same securities. Defining trading activity W as the product
    of dollar volume and volatility, we use a sample of 243 stocks belonging to the
    NYSE and contrast their trading activity along with the corresponding securities’
    arrival rate of news articles for the same period, using news data from Factiva.
    Following Kyle et al. (2012), we hypothesize that the news arrival process occurs
   in “business time” which unfolds at a rate proportional to W to the power of
    two-thirds, as predicted by the market microstructure invariance hypothesis. We
    conclude with a dismissal of our hypothesis, as we in our regression models
   calculate an exponent for W considerably lower than that of two-thirds.

Keywords:

    Microstructure invariance, News arrival, Trading activity, Business time, Factiva

Authors:

    Bawer Arslan (23891)

    Kaj Tallungs (23839)

Tutors:

    Olga Obizhaeva, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

    Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis

Bachelor Program in Business & Economics

Stockholm School of Economics

© Bawer Arslan and Kaj Tallungs, 2020

                                                                       1
   1. Introduction

In the information age, people are witnessing an ever-increasing connectivity and
access to information. This in turn raises the question of the level of
synchronization between trading activity and the arrival rate of information. The
relationship between the two is tested by Kyle et al. (2012) who gauged the relation
between the arrival rate of news and trading activity for individual stocks. The
relationship was tested through a set of different hypotheses, but most notably
among their findings and most relevant for our paper was that the arrival rate of
news articles into the market was found to occur at a pace nearly the same as that of
the stock trading process predicted the microstructure invariance framework, put
forth by Kyle and Obizhaeva (2016). The authors introduced the novel idea of
microstructure invariance, which entails the study of the trading process for stocks
and specifically the relationship between trading activity and business time.
Business time is defined as the relative market velocity of stocks, and is described in
detail later in the paper. Kyle et al. (2012) in turn expanded the scope of the
microstructure invariance hypothesis by extending it from solely dealing with
trading activity, to also applying the hypothesis on the process of information flow
and news articles.

In this paper, we investigate how the arrival rate of news articles for a given stock
varies with the same security’s trading activity. Our research question is motivated
by the findings of Kyle et. al (2012) where, as mentioned, it is found that the arrival
rate of news articles into the market occurs at a pace near the same as that of the
trading process for stocks in the microstructure invariance framework. If trading
activity is defined as W , the arrival rate of news for the dataset of Kyle et al. (2012)
                           0.68
was found to be W    , whilst the stock trading process is predicted by the
                                                                                                       2/3
invariance hypothesis to be occurring in business time at a rate of W   . Drawing on
the close proximity of these figures, which seemingly confirms the hypothesis of
Kyle et. al (2012) that information flow into the market is governed by business
time, we are motivated to verify and assess the validity of the paper’s results using a
different dataset of stocks and news articles under a more recent timeframe, but
retaining and following the authors’ methodology. In other words, we will test
whether business time regulates the arrival rate of news articles into the
marketplace for individual stocks.

With stock data gathered from CRSP for a sample of stocks belonging to the NYSE,
and news articles compiled from Factiva for the corresponding stock sample, the
specific research question is: How does the arrival rate of news articles for a given
stock in the NYSE vary with the same security’s trading activity? The time horizon
of the dataset consists of 20 months for a sample of 243 firms.

                                                                       2
To enable empirically demonstrable hypotheses for eventual invariance in the
information process, we make in the spirit of Kyle et al. (2012) two hypotheses
regarding information flow and news articles, assuming that they arrive
proportionally to the pace of business time. That is, for every one percentage
increase in trading activity W , the arrival rate of information and news articles by
extension is increased by two-thirds of one percent. If μ denotes the arrival rate of
                               γ
news articles, then μ ~ W   where γ = 2/3 per the microstructure invariance
hypothesis.

Following these empirical assumptions, we perform our tests using three different
distribution models for our dependent variable, the arrival rate of news. We utilize a
log-linear regression to measure the relationship of our dependent variable with
trading activity followed by using count-data regressions with a Poisson model and
a negative binomial model respectively. In the Poisson model, our dependent
                                                                                γ
variable exhibits a constant arrival rate equivalent to W  with the same variance.
The negative binomial model on the other hand allows the Poisson arrival rate to
vary randomly, and unlike the Poisson model allows for a variance greater than the
dependent variable’s mean. In all three cases, we assume market velocity γ = 2/3 .

For our sample spanning 20 months throughout 2018-2020, and using our stock data
from CRSP, we tested the hypothesis of the arrival rate of news equalling the pace of
market velocity γ = 2/3 . The tests performed utilize a log-linear, a Poisson and a
negative binomial modelling of our dependant variable the arrival rate of news,
where γ along with others estimates are predicted in the regression analyses. We
conclude however that our hypothesis is rejected since we calculate a value for the
arrival rate of news significantly lower than γ = 2/3 . Closest to our hypothesis was
the Poisson regression, which estimated the arrival rate of news approximately
being 0.54, which is still deemed significantly lower than that of γ = 2/3 .

                                                                       3
  2. Background

2.1 An introduction to microstructure invariance

Market microstructure invariance is a framework developed by Kyle and Obizhaeva
(2016) culminating in the assertion of two main empirical hypotheses: The invariant
distribution of both risk transfer and transaction costs for any stock across markets.
These empirical hypotheses, along with the mathematical framework supporting
these hypotheses are based on three transformations and definitions of the authors.

   1) The first undertaking in the invariance framework is that normal stock trades
       are converted into bets. A bet is thought to be an original idea which in turn
       spurs one or several trades rooted in the same original idea, with the
       intention of creating idiosyncratic gain. For this reason, trading volume will
       be larger than bet volume, which is distilled from the total volume of trades.
       In this paper, trading activity is used instead of betting activity, as the latter
       is much more difficult to observe and consequently much more difficult to
       quantify.

   2) Secondly, standard calendar is in this framework converted into business
       time, which is defined as standard calendar time between bets. Business time
       is therefore equal to the arrival rate of bets and can be named market velocity
       under this framework. Stocks which are traded often experience a higher level
       of market velocity, and vice versa.

   3) The third and last definition underpinning microstructure invariance is that
       of risk, which measures the market impact of betting viewed in business time.

The framework of market microstructure invariance is such that the trading of
stocks is considered a trading game in which the actors are long- and short-term
players. Long-term traders trade stock with the intention of implementing a bet.
This sets them apart from short-term players, such as market makers and high
frequency traders who have no intention of doing so. In the market, there are
countless trading games taking place concurrently. The idea behind microstructure
invariance is that these trading games of bets are the same in their microstructure
characteristics across all stocks when viewing them in business time, as opposed to
calendar time. Business time, also called market velocity, constitutes an integral
part of this paper as its relationship to information flow is studied. An important
feature of business time is that it passes at a faster rate for active stocks than it does
for inactive stocks, and vise versa, which highlights its relative, stock-specific
nature.

                                                                       4
The findings of the authors Kyle et al. (2016) are in part that business time
proportionally varies with the betting activity of a stock to the power of two-thirds,
    2/3
W   . The overall findings of Kyle et al. (2016) enable the prediction of a range of
microstructure characteristics, such as price formations and transaction costs.
Microstructure invariance deals in particular with the constant distribution of risk
transfers (carried by bets) and their transaction costs. Yet again, an important
distinction is that due to the difficulty of observing betting activity, this paper uses
trading activity in its stead. Additionally, contrasting it with the arrival rate of news,
we mimic public information flow and can thereby gauge a relationship between
ideas and trades.

2.2 The mathematics of microstructure invariance

To clarify further the relationship between trading activity and the arrival rate of
news which is studied in this paper, the mathematical framework behind
microstructure invariance as it pertains to the relationship between business time
and betting activity is demonstrated in short here. We follow the calculations of
Kyle et al. (2016) where relevant for our paper, meaning aspects of the paper are
omitted for either being outside the scope of this paper, or for the sake of brevity.
For a more thorough mathematical explanation regarding the relationship between
business time and betting activity, the reader is referenced to our Appendix. For a
full inspection of the mathematics behind microstructure invariance, the reader is
referenced to Kyle et al. (2016).

The mathematical framework is derived from three definitions which are mentioned
earlier, namely the conversion of trades into bets, calendar time into business time
and an alternative definition of risk in this framework. In essence, the authors arrive
at betting activity W B , which is the product of a bet’s dollar volume and dollar
volatility, being defined as:

                                                                                    3/2        |      |
Eq1 W B = γ   * E I| B |

        Where γ is market velocity for a given stock and E I|    |  the expected risk
                                                                               | B |
         transfer of a bet. Since the distribution of risk transfer E I|    |  is hypothesised
                                                                                     | B |
       to be invariant across stocks when measured in business time, it means
       betting activity and market velocity have a proportional relationship. Market
                                                                                          2/3               1/3
      velocity γ is in turn decomposed into two factors, W   B and W   B , and
       recalling the constant nature of risk transfer when viewed in business time,
       solving for γ yields:

                                                      2/3          −2/3
Eq2 γ = W      E I|   |
                                               B    *   | B |

                                                                       5
       Market velocity γ for a stock is therefore proportional to its betting activity
                                                         2/3
      to the power of two-thirds, W B  . This means that a one percent increase in
       the speed of business time yields a two-thirds of one percent increase in
       betting activity. The intuition in our paper is that information flow in the
       form of news mimics the arrival rate of bets, and is thought to have the same
       relationship to trading activity as market velocity does to betting activity.

2.3 Literature review

2.3.1 Market microstructure in general

Market microstructure invariance belongs to the wider field of market
microstructure which deals with the research of financial markets. Specifically, the
subject matter of microstructure research are market structures, processes and
characteristics, examples of which are fair price discovery, bid-ask spread
determinants and transactions costs. Following the strong development of
algorithmic and electronic trading in recent decades, there has been considerable
growth in the research area of market microstructure (Kissel 2013).

In a paper by Mitchell and Mulherin (1994), the authors examine the effects of
public information on market activity with a dataset of daily news from Dow Jones &
Company. Public information entails a number of news announcements and market
activity includes trading volume and market returns. Mitchell and Mulherin (1994)
conclude in their paper that there exists a direct but weak relationship between
news items and market activity, and highlight the complexity in connecting market
activity to observable information.

Berry and Howe (1994) studied the flow of public information into financial markets
on an intraday basis using news data from Reuters’ news service. The authors found
the arrival rate of public information to be nonconstant, along with a positive
relationship between public information flow and trading volume. Public
information flow’s relationship to price volatility was however deemed insignificant.

The impact of macroeconomic news on the prices of government bonds was studied
by Green (2005), who finds that economic announcements have a large impact on
informational trading, and that the impact of public information announcements
raise the level of information asymmetry in the government bond market.

Tetlock, Saar-Tsechansky and Macskassy (2008) examined if firm earnings and stock
returns could be forecasted by examining the language of firm-specific news. The
authors made a set of findings, the primary one being that low firm earnings can be
forecast by negative words in financial news. Additionally, negative news is

                                                                       6
incorporated into stock prices with a delay. All in all, the authors found that news
stories incorporate information which is otherwise difficult to distill.

The subject of time plays a large role in the microstructure invariance hypothesis, in
which it is held that stocks with a faster market velocity necessitate that more
shares be traded per bet than that of slower velocity stocks. Foucault et al. (2016)
studied the effect of news and the speed at which informed versus uninformed
players acted on this incoming information flow. The authors concluded that the
faster speculator accounted for a larger fraction of trading volume and is more
correlated with short-run price volatility.

2.3.2 Market microstructure invariance in particular

Researchers in the area of market microstructure as a whole have been using
different theoretical foundations as a starting point for explaining trading
behaviour, for example utilising game theory or adverse selection (Kyle et al. 2012).
Market microstructure invariance adds to the existing literature by bridging the
existent gap between theoretical models of market microstructure and their
corresponding empirical tests. In doing so, market microstructure invariance
contributes significantly to the field of market microstructure by augmenting the
research area’s empirical applications. By modifying these common and overlapping
theoretical models, the microstructure invariance hypothesis seeks to deliver
accurate and testable estimates of a variety of market characteristics, such as the
size of bets and their arrival rate, bid-ask spread costs and their correlation with the
level of trading activity, with the results holding across all stocks, markets and
across time.

The mathematical framework supporting the market microstructure invariance
hypothesis is thoroughly presented in Kyle et. al (2016), and demonstrated earlier in
this paper. Most relevant for our paper, business time is found to be occurring at a
            2/3
rate of W   , assuming W is trading activity for a given stock viewed in its dollar
volume and volatility. Additionally, the authors mathematically derive the
invariance of both risk transfer and transaction costs from a set of definitions and
equations, effectively arriving at the mathematical structure underpinning the
invariance framework.

In a paper by Kyle and Obizhaeva (2016), concurrent to that of Kyle et al. (2016),the
market microstructure invariance hypothesis is empirically tested on a data set of
400.000+ portfolio transitions for the US equity market, with the change in
portfolios thought to be an adequate proxy for bets as novel ideas manifested in new

                                                                       7
trades. The authors’ findings were in line with the predictions of the microstructure
invariance framework.

                                                                       8
  3. Hypotheses

Owing to the intuitive connection between information flow and trading activity, we
formulate two hypotheses following the methodology of Kyle et al. (2012) which
assume the information flow process follows the spirit of microstructure invariance.
This is done to extend the microstructure invariance framework’s generalizations of
the trading process to that of an information process. Specifically, we hypothesize
an information flow and news article invariance for all assets over time.

   1) Firstly, we hypothesize of an information flow invariance in which public and
       private information is assumed to arrive at a pace proportional to the rate of
       business time γ = 2/3 in line with the predictions of market microstructure
      invariance. For example, if trading activity W sees a one-percent increase,
       the pace of information flow will increase with two-thirds of one percent.
   2) The second hypothesis of news article invariance, assumes that the expected
       arrival rate of news articles is proportional to the arrival rate of public
       information, which as outlined in the first hypothesis, is thought to equal
        γ = 2/3 . To further illuminate the relationship between hypothesis #1 and
       #2, one can view the arrival rate of news as a proxy for the arrival rate of
       public information.

In summary, we hypothesize the arrival rate of news articles follows a distribution
linked to the clock of business time γ = 2/3 , and will be the relationship that is
tested in this paper.

                                                                       9
   4. Research Design

Research design will be such that the trading activity W i, t for each stock i and
month t is calculated using the CRSP dataset for stock returns. In line with the
methodology of Kyle et al. (2012), trading activity W i, t is derived from the product
of average daily dollar volume and volatility of stock i . Trading activity W i, t for a
stock is in turn contrasted with the corresponding security’s amount of news articles
 μi, t for the same time-period to estimate the relationship between the two. This
estimation is primarily done with regression analysis using a negative binomial
distribution for the arrival rate of news, which Kyle et al. (2012) found to be the best
fit for the data used in their paper after comparing it to a log-linear model and
Poisson distribution. Although we presume that the negative binomial distribution
is best fitted for our data as well, we will much like Kyle et al. (2012) also compare it
to the other two mentioned distributions. The motivation for these distributions lies
in the nature of our news articles data set, as μi, t is a count variable assuming
non-negative discrete values, rendering more common continuous distributions
ineffective.

4.1 Test for the relationship between trading activity invariance and news
data

The tests will be done by constructing the relationship between the arrival rate of
news and trading activity through a set of equations for our data set. We know that
business time runs faster for more traded stocks and runs slower for less traded
stocks. The more active stock will exhibit a higher arrival rate of news articles μ per
month, and the inactive stock a lower arrival rate of news μ* per month. If business
time runs H times faster for the more actively traded stock, it posits that:

Eq3 μ = μ*  H
                                       *

As earlier mentioned, business time is equivalent to the arrival rate of bets and is
therefore more related to betting activity than it is trading activity. The difficulty in
distilling independent bets from trading data however makes us instead use trading
activity W as a measure of risk transfer.

Eq4 W = P * V * σ

If business time H is sped up, there will a two-fold and non-linear effect on its
relationship to trading activity, which consists of a volume and volatility
component. Firstly, trading volume will see a change proportional to the rise in
business time H speed as betting volume increases. Secondly, although return
variance sees an equivalent change to that of business time H and trading volume,

                                                                      10
return volatility as the square root of return variance instead sees a change
                           1/2
proportional to H  . In total, the non-linear relationship between trading activity
and business time H will therefore be:

                                                   *     3/2
Eq5 W = W  * H

With the expressions for the arrival rate of news and trading activities written, and
their respective relationships to the clock of business time, we can observe the
relationship between the arrival rate of news μ and trading activity W as:

                                          *    W  2/3
Eq6 μ = μ * ( W * )

The relationship expressed in words means that for every one percent increase in
trading activity, there is an expected two-thirds of one percent increase in our
variable for the arrival rate of news. This is the relationship which is tested in this
paper.

                                                                      11
   5. Data

As this paper seeks to investigate the relationship between the expected arrival rate
of news μ and trading activity W for a sample of stocks, we use a data set of
stock-specific news articles, which in turn is compared to the same securitiy’s
trading activity in the form of observed trading dollar volume and volatility.

5.1 News data

The data set of news is retrieved from Factiva which is a global news-related
database and search engine belonging to Dow Jones & Company. The information
which Factiva provides is related to one’s search item, which in our case is that of a
specific stock ticker. Upon search, Factiva gathers and displays the content in news,
journals, magazines, transcripts among other formats related to one’s query. Factive
provides descriptions of news articles and items entailing their news title, date and
timestamp along with either the article in its entirety or a summary of its contents.
The news items in the Factiva database are not necessarily relevant to traders. The
exact process through which Factiva links tickers to a news item is unknown to us.
When looking at the data, any mentionings of the company name in any of the vast
newswires covered by Factiva seems to generate the searchable ticker. In our data
there have been obvious cases where the articles were systematically unrelated to
the stock ticker we searched for. The most extreme example of this was Ethan Allen
Interiors Inc. with the ticker ETH. It was an extreme outlier in our data, and upon
inspection nearly all news items related to the crypto-currency Ethereum, often
abbreviated as ETH.

Moreover, Factiva covers news sources from many countries and different
languages, but the coverage is much smaller in languages other than English. This
limits us to choose a sample of stocks from an exchange that is mostly related to
news in the English language. Furthermore, the type of news data we are able to
extract from Factiva is of a monthly frequency, and we could only do so by manual
downloads for every individual search query due to not having access to Factiva’s
API. Due to the vast labor involved in manually extracting news data in such a way,
we had to limit our study to a sample of a few hundred stocks of the NYSE. On top of
only generating data for monthly frequencies, the timeframe for the news stretches
back two years at the most. At the time of data collection, we were able to gain data
from May 2018. To match this with our CRSP dataset which ends December 31st
2019, we are limited to 20 months for our time horizon.

Both the sort of news covered by Factiva and the method in which the news item is
tagged with a ticker may be of notable difference from the NewsScope dataset used
in Kyle et. al (2012) which provides more relevant information to draw judgement
from at face value regarding the relationship between trading activity and

                                                                      12
information flow, such as view count and a sentiment indicator for the tone of the
article.

5.1.1 Descriptive statistics for news data
The descriptive statistics of our dataset of news is tabulated in Table 4, presented in
the appendix. We observe a total amount of observations equalling 4680, with the
mean arrival rate of news for our sample of news articles being approximately 115
articles per month. The standard deviation of 260 news articles, demonstrating the
occurrence of overdispersion in our dataset. The lowest value observed is zero, with
the highest observed value being 3324.

5.2 Return data and sample construction

In order to generate a sample of NYSE stock we searched CRSP for all stocks at the
end of our time period. This list of tickers includes common stock, ETF:s as well as
other instruments. We limited this study to “ordinary common shares” (code 11)
listed at NYSE. This resulted in 1248 securities.

These securities were then matched with their daily trading volume and end of day
price for the full period, from which monthly dollar volume was calculated for each
security. In order to gain more exposure in our sample to the larger stocks which
matter more. We ranked the securities by average dollar volume over the full period,
and randomly chose an equal amount of securities from each percentile group. With
volume breaking points at the 10th, 20th, 30th, 40th, 50th, 60th, 80th, 90th and
95th, so that we get double exposure to the top 10%.

We calculated daily return r at day t using the end of day price P .

                                                          P t
Eq7 rt = ln (   )
                                                            P t−1

To get average volatility σ for the month, using the number of the days in the
month.

                                                       2
Eq8 σ =   Σ(r t /N )
                √

Using this together with the average dollar volume for each month we could
calculate trading activity W as the product of average daily dollar volume and
volatility.

5.2.1 Descriptive statistics for stock data

Our descriptive statistics are in turn derived from CRSP wherein we select data for
our constructed sample of stocks, which consists of 243 firms in the NYSE, weighted

                                                                      13
with regard to their respective percentile of average dollar trading volume over the
full period. The trading activity W as a product of average daily dollar volume and
volatility, we observe 4860 observations for W , with a mean of $1224316 and
standard deviation of $3253490 .

                                                                      14
   6. Model Applications

Kyle et al. (2012) compared the results of a log-linear, a Poisson and a negative
binomial model to one another, concluding that the negative binomial distribution
was the best fitting model for the dependent variable. Other than drawing wisdom
from their observations in comparing these distributions, we also find support in our
data which speaks in favour of a negative binomial distribution over poisson as we
experience overdispersion of our mean. This implies that a condition of the Poisson
distribution, which assumes firms with the same level of trading activity also have
equal means and variances. Nonetheless, we will test all three models and conclude
afterwards which constitutes the best fit for our data.

6.1 Log-linear model

The log-linear model is applied by regressing the logarithm of the number of news
items for a stock on the logarithm of trading activity W for the same security. Kyle
et al. (2012) had too many observations where the amount of news articles was zero
for the month, making the log-linear insufficient as it would mean taking the
logarithm of zero. Instead, they aggregated their data into averages for different
levels of trading activity. We on the other hand have not experienced this issue. The
mean of our data is much greater and we only have 16 observations of zero.
Therefore a log transformation can be made without much loss of data which
enables us to disregard the procedure of rendering eventual zeros in the dataset
non-existent. The regression expression looks as follows:

                                                                         W i, t
Eq9 l n N i, t = η + γ * ln ( W * ) + εi, t

Where N t, i denotes the distribution of the news articles. The equation introduces a
benchmark stock which functions as a scaling constant, with trading activity
   *             6
W  = ( 40) * ( 10 ) * (0.02) where price being $40 per share, one million shares traded
per day and a daily volatility of 2%. This benchmark stock is intentionally the same
as Kyle et al. (2012). The benchmark stocks average number news articles per
month μ * , is defined as η = l n(μ *) . Developing the expression to solve for the
arrival rate of news per month N i, t gives us:

                                                                                         W i, t
                                           η + γ *ln ( W * )
Eq10 N i, t = e ⋅ Zt, i

Where Z t, i denotes a random variable whose mean equals one. If the random
random variable has a variance equalling zero, Z t, i assumes a constant nature
equalling one. Furthermore, the new expression means that the benchmark stock’s
average arrival rate of news per month is calculated from eη . As we are testing the

                                                                      15
invariance hypothesis of market microstructure, market velocity γ assumes a value
of two-thirds.

6.2 Poisson model
A Poisson distribution suits the modelling for count data well, which our dependent
variable μi, t constitutes. The Poisson model assumes however that there is no
overdispersion of the mean for our dependent variable which runs contrary to our
data, and could consequently pose an issue, rendering the negative binomial model
as more fitting. If the total distribution of the amount of news articles is denoted
N t, i for stock i at month t , the Poisson model yields the following probability mass
function

                                                                            −μ W              N i, t
                                                               e ( i, t)  μ W
                                                                            * ( i, t)
Eq11 f (N  i, t | W i, t) = N !
                                                                                                                i, t

In turn, the expected number of news items μi, t is calculated as a function of trading
activity W i, t :

                                               W
Eq12 μ (W ) = eη + γ *ln ( W * )
                                                          t.i

As with the log-linear model, the term eη entails the benchmark stock’s average

number of news articles per month, with W * constituting its trading activity. As
mentioned, the Poisson model assumes that the variations of our dependent
variable μ (W t.i) takes place within the Poisson distribution, rendering other
explanatory variables for its variance irrelevant.

6.3 Negative binomial model

Although based on a Poisson arrival rate for its dependent variable, a negative
binomial modelling allows the news items arrival rate to vary randomly unlike the
Poisson model. The great variance found in the data set is modeled as a Gamma
distribution with a variance of α .

                                              W
                                                η + γ *ln ( W * )
Eq13 μ( W t.i ) = e          * Gt,i(α)

The Gamma variable G is modelled to have a mean equal to one, and a variance
equal to α . Additionally, the constant term eη denotes the average number of news
items reported per month for our benchmark stock, with market velocity γ = 2/3 in
accordance with the prediction of the invariance framework. Using this modelling
framework, the arrival rate of news in a month can be observed to vary for three
different reasons. Firstly, our dependent variable, modelled as a Poisson arrival rate,

                                                                      16
varies in part due to different levels of trading activity for different stocks. Secondly,
the inclusion of the Gamma distribution captures variation else unaccounted for by
the Poisson distribution. Thirdly, assuming a certain Poisson arrival rate, there is
also random variation in the number of actual Poisson events which occur.

                                                                      17
   7. Results

The results of our model applications are discussed here, beginning with the
log-linear results and afterwards proceeding with the Poisson and negative binomial
models respectively.

7.1 Log-linear model

The results from our log-linear model are presented below in Table 1. We report a
relational value between trading activity and the arrival rate of news as
approximately γ = 0.39 . Additionally, its standard deviation is calculated as
σ = 0.07 . As we hypothesised of the trading process unfolding at γ = 2/3 which the
invariance hypothesis predicts, we consequently dismiss the hypothesis as holding
for our dataset of news gathered from Factiva and our sample of stock belonging to
the NYSE. The dismissal comes in part from intuitive sense as the figures are
relatively wide apart, and additionally as is stated in Table 1 the hypothesis is
statistically rejected at a p-value of zero. For our intercept, we find that it
approximately equals η = 4.22 with a standard deviation of roughly σ = 0.17 . The
                                           2
coefficient of determination equals R  = 0.3952 .

                                  Table 1

    We observe below the results from our log-linear model with OLS estimates. These
      estimates are from the following regression:
                                                                          W i, t
                                l n N i, t = η + γ * ln ( W * ) + εi, t
      Where N i, t denotes the average number of news items for stock i per month t from
      our sample. Each observation corresponds to a specific value for both stock i and
      month t . The variable W i, t specifies the trading activity for a specific stock at a
                                   *
     certain month, and W  the trading activity for our benchmark stock. It functions as a
      scaling constant containing the benchmark stock’s share price at $40, with one
      million shares traded per day and a daily volatility of 2% equalling, assuming a total

                                                                      18
                   *          6
     value of W  = 40  * 10 * 0.02 . Standard error values are found in parenthesis.

7.2 Count-Data Models

7.2.1 Poisson model
Starting with the Poisson model, we can observe in Table 2 that the relation
between our dependent variable and trading activity for our sample of stocks is
estimated at approximately γ = 0.54 with a standard deviation of σ = 0.008 which
is considerably low. The value of the slope with the Poisson model consequently
puts us closer to the predictions of the invariance framework, but the distance
remains nonetheless quite significant from γ = 2/3 . This is not surprising
considering that the Poisson model is a count-variable model, unlike the log-linear
model, and that we are dealing with count data in this paper. The intercept for our
regression is valued at η = 4.85 with a corresponding standard deviation of
σ = 0.0014 . Moreover, as stated in Table 2, the p-value for our hypothesis when
running a Poisson regression confirms the dismissal of our hypothesis that γ = 2/3
                 2 2
. The P seudo R score for the test is P seudo R = 0.4239 .

7.2.2 Negative binomial model
Moving on to the negative binomial model, we report a slope of γ = 0.54 and a
standard deviation of σ = 0.008 which, much like the standard deviation of the
Poisson model, is low. Our intercept is estimated to be approximately η = 4.78 with
a standard deviation of roughly σ = 0.016 . As the negative binomial model
introduces a Gamma variable with the mean α , we observe this value as being
α = 1.0764 with a standard deviation of approximately σ = 0.0198 . A condition of
the Poisson model is that α = 0 , which is not fulfilled by our data as we observe
overdispersion of our variance for our dependent variable, which confirms the
motivation for choosing a negative binomial model since it allows for
overdispersion. Despite this however we experience a significantly lower value for
           2
P seudo R = 0.0469 , which gives reason to doubt the value’s implications at face
                                                                                    2
value as it seems abnormally low in comparison with the P seudo R of the Poisson
model.

                                  Table 2

                                                                      19
We observe below the estimates of our count regression models with the results of the
Poisson model on the left side, and the results of the negative binomial model on the
right side.

The Poisson regression models the arrival rate of news μi, t for stock i and
month t as:

                                                 W
                                                  η + γ *ln ( W * )
                                      μi, t = e

And for the negative binomial model, the regression models the arrival rate of
news μi, t for stock i and month t as:

                                            W
                                          η + γ *ln ( W * )
                                 μ = e          * Gt,i(α)

Where Gt,i is a Gamma variable with a mean equalling one and a variance equal to
α . Each observation corresponds to a specific value for both stock i and month t .
The variable W i, t specifies the trading activity for a specific stock at a certain month
                                                                                  *
as a product of average daily dollar volume and dollar volatility. W  the trading
activity for our benchmark stock. It functions as a scaling constant containing the
benchmark stock’s share price at $40, with one million shares traded per day and a
                                                               *          6
daily volatility of 2% equalling, assuming a total value of W  = 40  * 10 * 0.02 .
Standard error values are found in parenthesis.

                                                                 20
7.3 Comparing and discussing results

The results provide some mixed interpretations. An important distinction is that
when computing our log-linear model, we forgo the exact methodology of Kyle et al.
(2012), as the authors compile and aggregate their data to avoid taking the
logarithm zero stemming from many stocks not having any news report about them
for some time periods. This issue is nearly irrelevant to us, as we have few instances
overall where the arrival rate of news equals zero for any given firm in our sample.
With this in mind, we construct a model which slightly differs from that of Kyle et
al. (2012), and in turn most likely contributes to a different result. The log-linear
model yields a value of 0.39 for the arrival rate of news, which differs highly from
γ = 2/3. Although the log-linear model might not be optimal in treating count
variables, it delivers a result relatively similar to those of our count-data models.
Additionally, the R-squared value yielded by the log-linear model equals
  2
R = 0.3952.

Furthermore, perhaps the most peculiar finding belongs to that of our Poisson
regression. Although the dataset exhibits overdispersion, which stands in contrast
to a condition of the Poisson model, the Poisson regression provides us with a
                                          2
Pseudo R-squared value of P seudo R = 0.4239 . Worthy of mention is that this
metric differs from that of the R-squared value in the log-linear model, and could
make the estimates unfit for comparison. Otherwise, the Poisson regression
estimates a value for the arrival rate of news approximately equal to 0.54, and is the
value closest to our hypothesis of it equalling γ = 2/3 . However, the value remains
significantly lower than our hypothesis of it equalling two-thirds.

In the negative binomial regression, overdispersion is taken into account and the
negative binomial model includes a Gamma variable accounting for unexplained
variance α . In our regression analysis, we find that α = 1.0764 , which serves as a
motivator to dismiss the Poisson model, which assumes α = 0 . Despite this fact, we
generate results with the negative binomial model that are further away from our
initial hypothesis γ = 2/3 in addition to a significantly lower Pseudo R-squared
value. The negative binomial regression estimated the arrival rate of news at a value
                                                                     2
of 0.3419 and Pseudo R-squared as approximately P seudo R = 0.047 . The reason for
the large contrast between the values generated by the Poisson and negative
binomial regressions respectively proves a source of uncertainty when interpreting
their meaning. Most reasonably one would assume the large differences have arisen
from a form of miscalculation in the statistical procedures of these values, assuming
the dataset is not the issue. We have difficulty otherwise explaining why a Poisson
model performs better as an explanatory model than a negative binomial model
when dealing with a count variable exhibiting overdispersion, and in our case a
rather large overdispersion.

                                                                      21
Moreover, we find it noteworthy to discuss the importance of our article data and
contrast it with the news data of Kyle et al. (2012). Undoubtedly, varying types of
news data can provide different explanatory values which affect the end-result in
determining eventual relationships between variables. This paper uses news data
gathered from Factiva, and constitutes article data rather different from that of the
data used in Kyle et al. (2012), who used data from Thomson-Reuters provided by
NewsScope. Whilst Factiva serves as a form of news article database, with rather
rudimentary filtering options, NewsScope appears much more geared towards
drawing judgement of the compiled news’ potential effect on the reader and trading
activity. NewsScope provides a range of descriptive factors for the news items it
provides, for example how substantive the news item might be for the company in
question, the tone of the article and how many views the item has had. In this sense,
it appears that NewsScope is a more refined news source and by extension better
fitted as a data source for the development of meaningful statistical relationships
than Factiva.

The exponent γ being assuming a lower value in our estimates than it in Kyle et al.
(2012) means in our case that a relative change in W gives a smaller relative change
in the arrival rate of articles, compared to our benchmark stock. This could perhaps
be explained by the news data in Factiva being less related to betting speed than
what the Thompson-Reuters dataset is, especially as Factiva is a broad news
aggregation database. It posits that the kind of news which Factive provides could
have less of an economic relevance than Thompson-Reuters, yielding a lower
gamma value.

Additionally, the hypothesis for a link between the arrival rate of news and betting
frequency is that each bet has a set cost assigned to the entity making the bet,
alongside each article having a set cost for its production. On average this betting
cost, or the production cost of the article, should be regained through the economic
value of bringing this information to the market. If news articles addressing a
specific security get tagged for a reason other than its relevance to the security’s
valuation, it would negatively impact our assumption that each article on average
should have the same economic value, which could make the news data less valuable
as an explanatory variable.

We therefore believe that it is likely that different compositions, in what type of
newswires are aggregated, should impact the gamma value of the data. In Kyle et al.
(2012) the gamma value varied slightly over time, and made a small jump due to
what was speculated by Kyle et al. (2012) to be a change in composition.

                                                                      22
   8. Conclusion
Using news data related to a sample of stocks from Factiva, we examine how
information flow, proxied by the arrival of news, relates to a stock’s trading activity
for our sample of 243 stocks across 20 months. Running empirical tests we model
our arrival rate of news using three different models; a log-linear, a Poisson and a
negative binomial model. We hypothesize that information flow and by extension
the arrival rate of news will mimic the pace of business time as specified by the
microstructure invariance hypothesis. Specifically, the hypothesis is that for every
one percent increase in trading activity, the arrival rate of news will speed by
two-thirds of one percent. Having regression analyses for the three specified
models, we conclude there is no empirical support for our hypothesis in this paper
as we generate values significantly below that of market microstructure invariance’s
prediction. With only one kind of news data, news articles, and using only one news
source, Factiva, we highlight the fact that different news sources might yield a
different result from that of ours, along with other sources of information either
from, or of relevance to, financial markets.

                                                                      23
   9. References

Published papers

Berry, T. D., & Howe, K. M., 1994, Public information arrival, The Journal of
Finance, 49(4), 1331-1346.

Foucault, T., Hombert, J., & Roşu, I., 2016, News trading and speed, The Journal of
Finance 71(1), 335-382.

Green, T. C., 2004, Economic news and the impact of trading on bond prices, The
Journal of Finance 59(3), 1201-1233.

Kyle, A. S., Obizhaeva, A. A., & Kritzman, M., 2016, A Practitioner’s guide to market
microstructure invariance, The Journal of Portfolio Management, 43(1), 43-53.

Kyle, A. S., & Obizhaeva, A. A., 2016, Market microstructure invariance: Empirical
hypotheses, Econometrica 84(4), 1345-1404.

Kyle, Albert S., et al., 2012, News articles and the invariance hypothesis, AFA 2012
Chicago Meetings Paper.

Mitchell, M. L., & Mulherin, J. H., 1994, The impact of public information on the
stock market, The Journal of Finance 49(3), 923-950.

Tetlock, P. C., Saar-Tsechansky, M., & Macskassy, S., 2008, More than words:
Quantifying language to measure firms' fundamentals, The Journal of Finance 63(3),
1437-1467.

Monographs

Kissell, Robert L., 2013, The science of algorithmic trading and portfolio
management, page 47, (Academic Press).

                                                                      24
   10. Appendix

10.1 The mathematics of business time

Before expressing the relationship between betting activity and market velocity, we
must first outline some prerequisite expressions following the calculations of Kyle
et. al (2016). Betting activity is the product of a bet’s dollar volume and dollar
volatility. This means we begin with calculating betting volume V B followed by
betting volatility σ B . Beginning with betting volume, which is defined as:

Eq14 V B = γ * E Q| |

       Where γ is market velocity for a given stock, also dubbed business time or
        the arrival rate of a bet, and E Q| | is the expected number of shares of a stock
       traded by an investor in one bet.

       Next up is betting volatility σ B which is derived from stock return volatility
       σ R adjusted for a volatility multiplier Ψ . Betting volatility is expressed by:

Eq15 σ B = Ψ * σ R

       Following the definitions of betting volume and volatility, one can express
       the function for risk transfer I B carried by a bet, as:

Eq16 I  = P  Q         −1/2
                                     B     *   * σ B * γ

      Where P equals the price of a share of stock at bet implementation time and
     Q equals the amount of shares traded in a bet. For microstructure invariance
       to hold, these values must be scaled by business time, which is done with the
      negative root of velocity for the stock. Assuming P and σ B are held
       constant, the equation necessitates that a higher velocity γ for a stock will
       imply a larger number of shares traded per bet, Q . This condition explains
       why it is that business time passes at a faster right for highly traded stocks,
       and vice versa.

       Equations 14 to 16 have thus far set the stage for expressing betting activity
      W B as a product of dollar volume and dollar volatility of bets. Betting
      activity W B is defined as:

Eq17 W B = P * V B * σ B

       Then, we rewrite equation 16 which defines risk transfer I B to solve for Q .

                                                                      25
[Eq16] I  = P  Q  σ    γ−1/2 is rearranged to...
                                      B     *   *   B *

                                                   −1           −1
                                                                                                   1/2                   |      |
Eq18 E |Q | = σ B   * γ   * P   * E I| B |

        Having this expression for E Q| | allows use a different expression for
                                                      −1           −1
                                                                                                        1/2                   |      |
       equation 13: V B = γ * E Q| | = ( γ) * (σ  B   * γ   * P   * E I| B |)  , which is in
      turn imposed into the expression for W B in equation 17. Following a set of
       simplifications, one arrives at…

                                                                                    3/2        |      |
Eq19 W B = γ   * E I| B |

       The velocity factor γ3/2 in equation 17 can be decomposed into two different

                                                 2/3               1/3
      components; these are W   B and W   B . Recall the hypothesis of risk
       transfer I B being invariant across stocks, which effectively means betting
       activity only varies with the market velocity of a security, and not the bet’s
       risk transfer.

       The variation in market velocity is thus proportional to…

                                                      2/3          −2/3
Eq20 γ = W      E I|   |
                                               B    *   | B |

       This means that velocity γ for a stock is proportional to its betting activity to
                                                                       2/3 |      |
       the power of two-thirds, W B    , since the distribution of risk transfer E I| B | is
       invariant across stocks when measured in business time. In layman’s terms,
       this means that a one percent increase in market velocity causes a two-thirds
       of one percent increase in betting activity.

                                                                      26
10.2 Descriptive statistics
Below in Table 3 and Table 4 respectively, we present the descriptive statistics for
our news articles and trading activity W . Trading activity W is defined as the
product of average daily dollar volume and volatility, and contains data points for
our sample of 243 stocks spanning for 20 months.

                               Table 3: News articles

       Below we observe in the first column our variable articles, which denotes
       the arrival rate of news on a monthly basis for our sample of stocks
      spanning 20 months throughout 2018-20. The second column describes the
       total amount of observations, with the third column presenting the mean
       arrival rate of news per month for our dataset. The fourth column recounts
       the standard deviation for our dataset, with the fifth and sixth columns
       presenting the lowest and highest respective values for our variable.

                                  Table 3

                                  Table 4: Trading activity

       Below we observe in the first column our variable articles, which denotes
       the arrival rate of news on a monthly basis for our sample of stocks
      spanning 20 months throughout 2018-20. The second column describes the
       total amount of observations, with the third column presenting the mean
       arrival rate of news per month for our dataset. The fourth column recounts
       the standard deviation for our dataset, with the fifth and sixth columns
       presenting the lowest and highest respective values for our variable.

                                  Table 4

                                                                      27