GOING PUBLIC AND STEPPING UP

DO COMPANIES BECOME MORE PRODUCTIVE AFTER
LISTING ON THE STOCK EXCHANGE?

FOLKE FRYKHAMMAR

GUSTAV SANDELIN

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2021
Going Public and Stepping Up: Do companies become more productive after
listing on the stock exchange?

Abstract:

   This thesis examines whether Swedish companies become more productive, i.e.,
   achieve higher total factor productivity (TFP), after going public. Additionally, it
   extends previous findings about stock price informativeness to a Swedish context and
   tests whether it has any ex ante going public implications on productivity. A panel
   dataset is constructed with financials for Swedish companies listed on Nasdaq
   Stockholm at any point between 1997 – 2018, including years when public and
   private. Using the Ackerberg method, TFP is predicted and stock price
   informativeness is estimated as stock price non-synchronicity (PSI). The results are
   that going public has no significant effect on TFP, but that firms experience a drop in
   the IPO-year and a subsequent rebound two years after. Furthermore, PSI is a leading
   indicator on TFP for public firms, but it has no ex ante explanatory value on which
   companies benefit from going public. Lastly, PSI and financial distress alleviate,
   while the amount of capital injected and the trend in TFP prior to IPO exacerbate the
   IPO-year drop in TFP.

Keywords:

   Productivity, Initial Public Offering, Stock Price Informativeness, Total Factor
   Productivity

Authors:

   Folke Frykhammar (24481)
   Gustav Sandelin (24527)

Tutors:

   Dong Yan, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance
   Karl Wärneryd, Associate Professor, Department of Economics

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Folke Frykhammar and Gustav Sandelin, 2021

                                   1
1 INTRODUCTION

Whether going public influences the company’s operations, decisions, and investments, in
essence how well it utilizes its’ capital and staff, is unambiguous. However, researchers
from multiple strands of literature have contradictory predictions about the real eco-
nomic effects from listing on the stock exchange. Financial economists are puzzled be-
cause, on one hand managers can extract valuable information form stock prices (Bennett
et al., 2020; Bond et al., 2012) and public ownership can improve corporate governance
(Pagano et al., 1998; Tirole, 2001), but on the other hand public equity markets can lead
to short-termism and suboptimal behaviour (Ezzamel et al., 2008; Kraus & Str¨omsten,
2012). This thesis aims to further our understanding about the real economic impact of
an initital public offering (IPO), by evaluating whether Swedish companies become more
productive when listing on the Stockholm stock exchange. Swedish stock exchanges have
received no attention in the productivity literature, which focus on the United States’
(Chemmanur et al., 2010). Findings in the United States are necessarily not applicable
to Sweden because the institutional environment is different and the public stock market
is institutionally less important in Sweden (Hall & Soskice, 2001).

Our research objectives are to first inductively test whether going public has any gen-
eral implication on firm productivity. Second, we evaluate whether the leading theory of
stock price informativeness can explain productivity implications of going public. Third,
we study how productivity evolves in the years leading up to and following an initial
public offering in general and in relation to stock price informativeness. Fourth, we
deductively test which factors influence the productivity outcomes in the IPO-year. We
construct a panel dataset using financials for companies that are listed on the Stock-
holm stock exchange between 1997 and 2018, both before and after initially offering its’
stocks to the public markets. This is possible because company financials are consid-
ered public information for both private and public companies in Sweden, allowing us
to use panel data empirical methods. As our proxy for productivity, we predict total
factor productivity (TFP) as the residual after estimating a production function with
company financials (Ackerberg et al., 2015) and proxy stock price informativeness with
stock price non-synchronicity (PSI) (Morck et al., 2000; Roll, 1988).

Our results are the following. We find that it is not possible to ascertain the net effect of
going public on productivity in general, even though we demonstrate a drop in TFP in the
IPO-year and a significant rebound two years after IPO. Stock price informativeness is
found to be a significant leading indicator on productivity among listed firms but cannot,

                                      2
however, be used as a determinant for which firms that benefit from going public. In
the IPO-year, we find that a large issue of equity and a positive productivity trend prior
to the IPO exacerbate, while stock price informativeness and financial distress alleviate
the first year drop in productivity.

Productivity is paramount to economic outcomes. Zooming out, productivity dominates
capital inputs in explaining cross-country differences in per capita income (Prescott,
1998). Zooming in on firms, the bottom 10% of the productivity distribution produce half
of the top 10%, with the same input (Syverson, 2004). Because the focus of this paper
is to evaluate the real economic effects of going public, this essay will utilize TFP as a
measure of productivity. While TFP is usually applied to countries in the macroeconomic
subject, adaptions have been made to apply it to business (Ackerberg et al., 2015). There
are two motives for our choice of productivity measure; firstly, companies can and do
manipulate multiples to achieve higher valuations of their company, secondly, as the
empiric material covers both private and public companies, measures based on market
valuation are not applicable (Barth et al., 2005). Also, TFP has been used in multiple
papers focusing on real economic productivity (Palia & Lichtenberg, 1999).

In a perfect capital market, assets are priced based on the market’s predictions. It incor-
porates systematic macro factors, as well as industry and firm-specific information, and
how these are related, into prices. While management in a firm has better information
about internal operations, the market has superior information about the external envi-
ronment and most likely how it affects the company. The price development of a firm’s
stock and related derivatives, conditional on industry and market returns, is therefore
rich with information that can be extracted by and valuable to management. This theo-
retical concept, called stock price informativeness, is the leading theory about why firms
that are not reliant on equity capital markets for capital choose to remain or list on the
stock exchange (Bond et al., 2012). Stock price informativeness is further enhanced by
other organisations operating around the public stock markets like business intelligence
firms, credit rating agencies and banks, giving rise to positive externalities. The channels
through which informative decisions impact productivity is not primarily investments
in fixed assets, but instead investments in efficient management of operations, prod-
uct/service market actions and strategic decisions (Bennett et al., 2020). The measure
for stock price informativeness used in this thesis is PSI (Morck et al., 2000).

Multiple lines of research theorize about the negative impact on productivity from go-
ing public. The management accounting literature emphasize errors of commission and

                                      3
omission that pressure from equity markets give rise to. These issues reduce firm value
as the managers are encouraged to commission projects that are uneconomic in the long
term to satisfy demands from the equity markets or might omit to make investments into
projects that are economic (Anthony et al, 2014). Furthermore, Swedish companies de-
vote a lot of company resources to capital markets relations, especially top management
resources (Kraus & Lind, 2010). The enormous attention devoted to capital markets
is perplexing, because companies prefer to use retained earnings above debt or issuing
equity according to the pecking order theory (Myers & Majluf, 1984). This causes ad-
verse selection, which can bias results. Listing on the stock exchange, companies must
comply with regulation stipulating the terms of trading its’ shares on the public mar-
ket, to reduce information asymmetry between public owners and management. They
must disclose extensive information, beyond the scope of financial statements, about its’
operations, research & development and strategy. This is publicly available information
that competitors can use to compete in the market (Pagano et al., 1998).

From another point of view, the disclosure and loss of confidentially is a cost but has
indirect beneficial consequences as an enabler of stock price informativeness. Further-
more, turning to public equity markets, firms’ managers come under increasing salience,
attention, and scrutiny from the general public and public investors. Selling equity on
the public stock market entails giving up control rights to public investors, which allows
new public owners to take action to ensure that company resources are used productively
and decrease moral hazard costs. Companies with sound corporate governance can also
more likely access debt financing thanks to lowered risk of moral hazard, lowering the
company’s cost of capital. Altogether, going public can therefore increase productivity
through improved corporate governance (Tirole, 2001).

This thesis contributes to the literature by firstly, showing that there is no significant
productivity implication from going public. Secondly, we generalize previous findings by
showing that stock price informativeness is positively related to productivity for Swedish
listed companies. Thirdly, however, we show that stock price informativeness is not a
main determinant of whether a company will benefit from going public or not. Lastly,
we determine that the drop in productivity in the IPO-year is affected by stock price
infomativeness, financial distress, raised capital in the IPO and the prior productivity
trend. In the next section, section 2, we present previous research and develop our
hypotheses. In section 3 we go through our methodology and methods and in section
4 describe the data and how it is collected. In section 5, we present and analyse our
results, while we in section 6 discuss and conclude.

                                      4
2 LITERATURE REVIEW & HYPOTHESES

2.1 Litterature review

Along with cheap funding, information extracted from asset prices are the main real
economic value propositions of stock markets. Managers discover valuable information
from observing stock prices in relation to their decisions, are encouraged by stock prices
as their compensation is usually tied to it and can use the stock price as a guide when
uncertainty is high (Bond et al., 2012). The level of information that a company is
able to extract from the market have increased over the years (Bai et al., 2016). It has
been shown that there is a positive relation between stock price informativeness and
productivity (Bennett et al., 2020). Information from the market is most important for
companies in need of equity funding (Baker et al., 2003). This aligns with the pecking
order theory saying, firstly, that equity is the financing of last resort and secondly,
that an over-valuation due to information asymmetry can catalyse a share issuance,
therethrough signalling low productivity (Myers & Majluf, 1984).

Going public is a leap step for companies that pursues it, and both being privately or
publicly held has its pros and cons, e.g., funding through public markets is cheaper but
associated with large initial fees and ongoing requirements of being more transparent
(Arnoud et al., 2006). Nevertheless, the larger a company is, the more likely it is to
go public thanks to relatively smaller costs associated with it (Pagano et al., 1998) and
more valuable information is cheaper to acquire (Subrahmanyam & Titman, 1999). A
study of American companies finds that productivity increases leading up to the IPO but
declines afterwards (Chemmanur et al., 2010). The reason is that firms have a difficult
time utilizing its’ new scale of capital (and consequently labour) as effectively as its’ old
scale (Clementi 2002) and that less attractive investments in general is financed with
public equity (Spiegel & Tookes, 2008). Further, IPO-stocks consistently underperform
in the long run as compared to the incumbent equity markets (Loughran & Ritter 1995).
Qualitative studies have pointed on the short-term focus of the markets leading to in-
efficient decisions, especially when compensations are tied to stock price performance
(Kraus & Str¨omsten, 2012).

This paper aims to contribute to the area by combining the methods in comparing
productivity along firms with initial public offerings, to quantitively point out if the gains
brought by the equity markets offsets the losses. Further, to explore if the variations
in stock price informativeness can explain variations in productivity even in a market
smaller than the United States’.

                                      5
2.2 Theoretical motivation for our tests

As explained in the sections above, literature about firm productivity and going public
is ambiguous in its’ theories and predictions. While various strands of research make
claims about the magnitude and direction of the productivity implications from going
public, it is difficult to assess the net effect. The net effect is also highly dependent on
the institutional environment in which the sample firms operate, for example concerning
corporate governance and the importance of public stock markets. In this section, we
will discuss our hypotheses for our various tests.

For our first test, testing whether firms become more productive after going public, we
predict that the effect on productivity will be negative. There are a few reasons for
this; firstly, going public should lead to errors of commission and omission which have
a negative effect on productivity. Secondly, managers, the pivotal actors in the firm,
must devote a lot of their attention and resources to the capital markets when going
public, perhaps neglecting internal operations. Thirdly, some theories say that firms will
pursue attractive investments with a mix of private/internal and debt funding, leaving
less attractive investments for public equity markets. There are however a few effects
that can impact productivity in a positive direction, for example improving corporate
governance in firms that are poorly run. Furthermore, stock price informativeness should
help boost productivity. But there are reasons to believe that this effect is not as promi-
nent for Swedish public equity markets as compared to prior research focusing on the
United States. We therefore believe that stock price informativeness will have a positive
association with productivity, but that the magnitude of the effect will be lower than
in previous studies conducted in the United States. In addition, we believe companies
with a high stock price informativeness should benefit more from going public.

There are reasons to hypothesise that the effect of going public is not instantaneous.
In the short term, companies might struggle to accommodate its’ new capital produc-
tively and therefore productivity should decrease in the short term. In the long term,
the positive effects of being listed should kick in, because the impact of improved cor-
porate governance and stock price informativeness should materialise. Also, companies
will adapt to its’ new scale. To conclude, we predict that TFP will fall in the IPO-
year, and then rebound and increase to a level above the private levels. Because stock
price informativeness is the most prominent theory, and thus the leading explanation to
how companies benefit from public stock markets, we believe the effects of stock price
informativeness and going public should coincide.

                                      6
3 METHODOLOGY AND METHODS

This thesis is a quantitative empirical study. We will use data from Swedish companies
and stock markets to induce a relationship between productivity and being listed on
the stock exchange. An inductive approach is appropriate as hypotheses are hard to
formulate due to the contradictory theories from different lines of research. After that we
will turn to deductive methods to test whether theories like stock market informativeness,
are applicable to our data sample. In the final quantitative part, we will deductively test
whether theories can explain IPO-year productivity performance. However, it could also
be considered inductive because we try to interpret whether there are any relationships.
Altogether, our methodology could be described as abductive.

In the following section we will describe how we have predicted TFP and estimated
PSI, and the intuition and concepts behind it. After that we will shortly describe the
empirical methods used to infer causal economic effects, namely fixed effects panel data
regressions and ordinary least square regressions.

3.1 Firm productivity

Total factor productivity (TFP) is defined as the residual from estimating the Cobb-
Douglass production function (Solow 1957). While usually applied to macroeconomic
analysis, econometricians have adapted it to be applicable to firms and accounting data.
On the firm-level however, the capital and labour supply are not taken for granted, but
dependent on the productivity of the firm, making the estimated coefficients biased.
Approaches to deal with this bias include the OP-method (Steven Olley & Pakes, 1996)
and LP-method (Petrin et al., 2004). Both approaches are two staged ordinary least
squares estimations and utilize an investment function or an input demand function
respectively to invert out the coefficients of the Cobb-Douglass production function.
Based on both these methods with several improvements regarding input dependability
is the Ackerberg method (Ackerberg et al., 2015), which is used in this paper. Contrary
to the OP- and LP-methods, the Ackerberg method predicts an additional dependent
variable in the first stage instead of predicting labour input, which is the issue causing
bias in the previous methods. Below we explain the intuition behind the prediction of
TFP, beginning with a Cobb-Douglass production function.

                                            α    β
                           Y = A ∗ K ∗ L                          (1)

                                      7
where Y is output, K is capital and L is labour. A is the variety across firms, i.e.,
productivity.

The natural logarithm is taken on both sides. Lower letters denote the natural loga-
rithm.
                            y = a + k ∗ α + l ∗ β (2)

To further explain productivity, a, it is separated as follows

                                 a = β0 +  (3)

where β0 is the intercept adjusting for productivity in the production function and 
is the unexplained error-term. This is based on the assumptions that there are set
productivity differences (β0) between firms, even though there might be further shocks
() beyond the company’s control affecting output.

Rewriting (2) and (3), renaming α and β, yields

                           y = βk ∗ k + βl ∗ l + β0 +  (4)

Further, estimates for the coefficients in the production function in equation (4) is cal-
culated based on specific firm data each year, i.e.,

                         yi,t = βk ∗ ki,t + βl ∗ li,t + β0 + i,t (5)

After the coefficients are estimated through a regression, the predicted firm specific TFP
can be calculated through

                           αi,t = yi,t − βˆk ∗ ki,t − βˆl ∗ li,t (6)

where the firm specifics are calculated as follows. Output (Yi,t) is total revenue. Capital
(Ki,t) is measured as total assets, and labour (Li,t) is the total number of employ-
ees.

To invert out productivity, and to avoid high correlation between productivity and the
other independent variables, material cost is used as a proxy for productivity, in line
with the Ackerberg method. Material cost is calculated as total operating expenses

                                      8
minus labour expenses where total operating expenses is revenue less earnings before
interest, tax, depreciation and amortization. Labour expenses is taken directly from the
accounts if the income statement presented by nature. If presented by function, the
average cost per employee for that industry and year is multiplied with the number of
employees. All numbers are deflated by the inflation and inserted in the formula as their
natural logarithm. The production function is estimated using four moment conditions
and bootstrapping with 100 repetitions, which can be performed in STATA using the
formula prodest, and the residuals are total factor productivity.

3.2 Stock Price Informativeness

To quantitively extract the amount of information one can get from the stock market,
two methods are widely used. Stock price non-synchronicity (PSI) utilizes a model
in which individual firm stock price performance is the dependent variable explained
by the independent variables of industry and market returns and the non-explained
   2
(R ) is the firm-specific variation, which in a perfect market is completely due to firm-
specific information (Durnev et al., 2004). Probability of informed trading (PIN) utilizes
microstructure data to estimate the probability of information-based trading. The less
variation in stock returns explained by industry and market returns and larger likelihood
of information-based trading, the more informative is the stock price (Easley et al.,
1996).

To measure the informativeness of the firm’s stock in this thesis, PSI is used, which is
           2
based on R from asset pricing regressions, since firm, industry and market returns easily
could be found for our market and time period. In addition, previous studies have shown
that both PSI and PIN are both well-functioning (Bennett et al., 2020). The idea behind
this method is to decompose the stock return into systematic and firm-specific return,
where the systematic return is split up between market return and industry-specific
return, to see whether the market values the firm’s stock significantly different from its
industry and market. Implicitly, the more it varies from the industry and market, the
more firm-specific information the investors have, leading to a higher informativeness
in the firm’s stock. The regression model to estimate the coefficients for market and
industry return is presented in equation 7.

                      rj,t = βj,0 + βj,m ∗ rm,t + βj,i ∗ ri,t + j,i,t (7)

where firm is denoted j, industry i, time t, total market m and return r. The return

                                      9
is calculated based on daily returns. When calculating the return for the market and
industry, the focal observation is excluded and the returns for the remaining firms in the
market or industry are weighted based on market capitalization. The database presents
market capitalization only monthly, and therefore we have calculated the number of
shares outstanding in the beginning of each month and multiplied that with the price
over the same month, to obtain market capitalization on a daily basis. A regression for
each firm and year is made, and PSI for that year is calculated using the unexplained
            2
variation R from each regression as presented in equation 8.

                            (      )
                                                          2
                                     1 − Rj,t
                              P SIj,t = ln      2                                (8)
                                         Rj,t

3.3 Empirical Methods

Fixed effect regressions are performed on panel data, which has two dimensions; a cross-
sectional (group) and a longitudinal (time). The group should be the level of aggregation
that is treated, which in our case is the individual company. The method only utilizes
the variation within groups, that is in our case companies, and not the variation between
companies. Variation between companies is removed using a dummy variable for each
company, to compensate for differences in company characteristics that effect productiv-
ity. One can also include year fixed effects to control for differences across time, which is
especially important to include if one observes substantial variations across time. Con-
trolling for year fixed effects is made through including a dummy variable for every year
which absorbs the variation between years, that is common among all companies in the
sample. Fixed effects regression is a preferred method if you want to determine causal
relationships but are not interested in general group characteristics, but only certain
variables of interest, because one must not worry about correlation with the error term,
because a lot of the correlation is explicitly handled through the fixed effects. While
this thesis mostly utilizes the fixed effects regression framework, we apply a regular or-
dinary least square regression in one instance. We turn to this method because in that
regression model we only consider one observation per firm, which means that the data
is no longer a panel. Due to the nonexistence of within variation, we cannot use firm
fixed effects to control for variation between firms. Instead we must explicitly introduce
control variables that eliminate differences across firms.

When performing fixed effects regressions, one should use cluster robust standard errors
which adjust the standard errors considering the between group variation. Else the

                                     10
standard errors reported will be too small as the variation within the groups is very
small. These are valid if the number of groups is large relative to the amount of time
periods, which is the case for us. When performing ordinary least square regressions, we
use robust standard errors to avoid bias due to heterogeneity in the error term.

4 DATA AND SAMPLE

4.1 Collection of Data

Company financials and firm characteristics for all Swedish firms during the years 1997
– 2018 was collected through the database Serrano. Serrano consists of several subsets of
data with different sources, including the Swedish Tax Agency, Bisnode and the Swedish
Companies Registration Office. Group accounting has been used when applicable, and
industry is based on the Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS). Inflation rate
was gathered from Statistics Sweden.

Stock prices were collected through the database FinBas for the same period, for com-
panies listed on Nasdaq Stockholm, including the main market and First North. For
the companies that were listed with several series of stock, a weighted average based
on market capitalization was calculated when computing the return. The occurrence
of a company in the Finbas database has been used to construct a dummy variable of
being listed or not. Finbas does not report organisation number, but only ticker/ISIN-
number. Instead, organisation- and ISIN-number, as well as ticker, were collected
through Swedish financial statement database Amadeus, to be able to match FinBas
with Serrano. Amadeus does only cover the years between 2010 – 2019. For companies
not listed in that period, missing organisation numbers were manually collected through
the website of the Swedish Tax Agency.

4.2 Data Sample

Swedish registered firms, at any point public on the Nasdaq Stockholm between 1997
and 2018, make up the sample. We used the Swedish organisation number to identify
the companies and follow them over time, since several companies switched names and
stock exchange identification (ISIN-number and/or ticker) during the period. Investment
companies and asset management companies were excluded in the analysis because the
chosen production function is not applicable to those types of business models. Because
Serrano reports financial statements for the group and parent company for the same year
if applicable, we have excluded the parent company financial statement. After finalising

                                     11
our dataset, predicting TFP and estimating PSI, the total number of firms included
were 870 and total year-firm observations numbered 10666, excluding any observation for
which the production function estimation yielded an error. There are 7044 observations
for which the company and year combination is public.

Going public and becoming listed is defined as listing on the main market or First North,
while switching between them does not invoke going public. Some firms were listed
already in 1997. While these companies can be used for some parts of the quantitative
analysis, such as comparing average productivity between years, they will not have
any explanatory value for analysing productivity differences from going public. The
number of companies going public in our sample is 653, and the distribution per year
is presented in figure 1. A conclusion we can draw is that our analysis will be skewed
by characteristics related to the years 1998 – 1999 as well as 2015 – 2017, because the
number of companies going public is concentrated to those year. Another thing to note is
that the concentration is to years when the economy and the stock market was booming.
This invokes a need to include time fixed effects.

               80


               60


               40


             Number of firms listing20


               0
                    2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
                                                     Year

Figure 1: Firms listing per year
The graph above depicts the number of companies going public between 1998 and 2018. The y-axis plots
the number of firms and the x-axis the year.

                                     12
In table 1 summary statistics from our dataset, including the input variables for the
TFP-prediction, are presented.

Table 1: Summary statistics, input variables
The table below presents summary statistics for our input variables in the TFP-prediction, stock price
non-synchronicity. From the left, it presents the mean, standard deviation, minimum value, the median
and the maximum value.

                 VARIABLES mean sd min p50 max

                   materials 18.69 2.584 8.614 18.69 26.09
                   labour 4.736 2.495 -6.884 4.607 11.56
                   total assets 19.63 2.564 8.493 19.54 27.67
                   revenue 19.07 2.977 6.701 19.37 26.45

5 RESULTS

5.1 TFP prediction and PSI estimation

Before we can conduct our main regressions, TFP is predicted and PSI is estimated.
First the production function was estimated using total assets as a state variable, labour
as the free variable and material as a proxy to invert out productivity in accordance
with the Ackerberg method, presented in section 3.1.

The results from the regression are presented in table 2.

All estimated coefficients were statistically significant at the 1% level or lower, indicating
that our estimates have statistical power and should yield a predicted TFP which could
be considered as a true proxy for productivity.

                                     13
Table 2: TFP-Estimation
The table below presents the result of the production function estimation, which assumes a Cobb-
Douglass specification. The production function is estimated using total assets as capital, employee
count as labor input and material input as the EBITDA with the labor cost added back. All independent
variables are specified as the natural logarithm. The function is estimated with a correction for firms
that leave the sample, attrition, and is estimated with 100 bootstrap repetitions. The data includes our
full sample of firms. Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. Variable definitions are in
Appendix A. ***, **, * corresponds to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                               VARIABLES revenue

                                    total assets 0.420***
                                                       (0.0127)
                                   materials 0.120***
                                                       (0.0363)
                                   labour 0.630***
                                                       (0.0187)

                                   Observations 10,995

TFP is predicted as the residual, that is for each observation subtracting the inputs
multiplied with the estimated coefficients from the revenue, as done in equation 6. Table
3 summarizes key statistics for our dependent variable TFP.

Table 3: Summary statistics, TFP
The table below presents summary statistics for the variable of TFP, total factor productivity, which
is the proxy for firm productivity. TFP is predicted as the residual, that is the difference between an
observation’s actual net revenue and the predicted net revenue using the estimated coefficients in the
Cobb-Douglass production function. From the left, it presents the mean, standard deviation, minimum
value, the median and the maximum value.

                   VARIABLES mean sd min p50 max

                     TFP 3.058 1.008 -6.237 3.173 8.961

Figure 2 graphs average TFP in the sample per year, and it varies substantially across
years. There is a clear peak in 2005 and valleys in 2001 and 2017, furthermore shedding
light on the need to control for time fixed effects. If relating this to figure 1 showing
number of listings per year, one can see that there is a tendency for a falling TFP in the
sample in the years after high frequencies of listings, like in 2001, 2008 and 2017.

                                     14
                      3



                         2.95


                          2.9



                   Average TFP2.85


                          2.8



                         2.75
                 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
                                                           Year

Figure 2: Average TFP per year
The graph above depicts the average total factor productivity for every year between 1997 and 2018.
The y-axis plots the average TFP and the x-axis the year.

Graphing total factor productivity (TFP) in relation to the numbers of years between
each observation and the respective company’s IPO date, done in figure 3, a large decline
right after the IPO and a subsequent rebound of TFP in the years after the IPO is seen.
This pattern will be further investigated in the next sections.

                      3


                          2.9


                          2.8

                Average TFP

                          2.7


                          2.6
                     −5 0 5 10 15
                                                                Years Listed

Figure 3: Average TFP per years listed
The graph above depicts the average total factor productivity for the number of years every company
has been listed. It visualizes the data for companies going public between 1998 – 2018. The y-axis plots
the average TFP and the x-axis the number of years from the IPO-year.

                                     15
Secondly, PSI was estimated using company returns and market capitalization weighted
industry and market returns, as described in section 3.2. Summary statistics for the
final measure is presented in table 4.

Table 4: Summary statistics, PSI
The table below presents summary statistics for the variable of PSI, stock price non-synchronicity. From
the left, it presents the mean, standard deviation, minimum value, the median and the maximum value.

                   VARIABLES mean sd min p50 max

                     PSI 3.014 1.757 -1.912 2.864 16.48

Figure 4 shows the average PSI in relation to the number of years a company has been
listed on the stock market. We can see that PSI for the average company peaks after
five years with a subsequent drop afterwards. A possible explanation for this could be
that investor and owner attention is more intensive for companies while newly listed.
This tendency invokes interest for further investigation but will not be considered in this
thesis.

                          3.8


                          3.6


                          3.4


                          3.2
                 Average PSI


                      3


                          2.8
                  0 5 10 15
                                                                Years_listed

Figure 4: Average PSI per years listed
The graph above depicts the average value of PSI, stock price informativeness, for the number of years
every company has been listed. It visualizes the data for companies going public between 1998 – 2018.
The y-axis plots the average PSI and the x-axis the number of years from the IPO-year.

                                     16
5.2 Regressions & Analysis

5.2.1 Going Public & Being Listed

We will begin by testing whether going public has any implication on productivity. The
basic model which we estimate relates TFP and being listed or not, through the dummy
variable listed, which takes on a value of 1 if the company is listed for a specific year and
0 if it is not. In this model, μi are the time invariant company fixed effects, τt are year
fixed effects and it is the error term, as presented below.

                    T F P = β0 + βlisted ∗ listedi,t + μi + τt + i,t

The results from the regression are presented in table 5.

Table 5: Regressing TFP on going public
The table below presents the result of the fixed effects regression of total factor productivity, which is the
measure chosen for productivity, on the dummy variable listed which takes on a value of 1 if the company
is listed and 0 if it is not. This regression uses our full sample of companies between 1997 – 2018. All
specifications include firm fixed effects, and the second specification adds year fixed effects. Firm level
cluster robust standard errors are presented below its’ respective coefficient estimates in parentheses.
Variable definitions are in Appendix A. ***, **, * corresponds to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively.

                      VARIABLES TFP TFP

                             listed 0.0139 -0.00589
                                               (0.0336) (0.0329)
                            Constant 3.048*** 2.912***
                                               (0.0224) (0.0495)

                            Observations 10,992 10,992
                            R-squared 0.000 0.018
                           Number of firms 881 881
                           FE Firms Yes Yes
                           FE Year Yes

Regressing TFP on the dummy variable listed the results are clear, both with and with-
out time fixed effects. The coefficient on listed is not statistically different from zero,
and we can therefore not conclude that going public has any effect on productivity. Even
though the null hypothesis, that listing has no effect could not be rejected, it is a re-
sult nevertheless, which is that going public has no effect on productivity if we compare
the company when public versus private. Ex ante, the average company cannot know
whether going public will have any effect on its’ productivity, and even less knowing

                                     17
whether the impact is positive or negative, even though the firm considers its’ charac-
teristics. This is a result of the large standard error which we observe, indicating that
the effect is heterogenous but substantial among firms.

While we cannot infer any statistical effect of going public, there can still be substantial
variation between years prior, during and after listing on the stock exchange. As noted in
the introduction, the channels through which being listed on the stock exchange increase
productivity, are not instantaneous or unambiguous. Regressing TFP on a set of dummy
variables specifying the time between the IPO-year and the current observation, we can
discover how productivity changes prior and following an IPO. The listed variable has
been replaced by a set of dummy variables δi,t indicating the difference between the
year of the observation and the company’s IPO-year. For example, for a company going
public in 2004 the two (three) years prior dummy variables will assume the value of 1 in
2002 (2001), and otherwise 0. The following regression excludes companies which were
already listed in 1997. The following regression model is estimated.

                       T F P = β0 + βδ ∗ δi,t + μi + τt + i,t

The results from the regression are presented in table 6, on the next page.

The coefficient on the dummy variable representing 2 years after IPO, δIP O+2, is statis-
tically significant on the 1% level or lower if controlling for time fixed effects. Statistical
insignificance does not invalidate economic interpretation but one must just be careful
about drawing conclusions about causal relationships. Controlling for time fixed effects,
all else equal, productivity decreases leading up to the IPO. In the IPO-year productiv-
ity seems to fall. In the years after the IPO, TFP rebounds to a higher level, at least
two years after IPO. That the effect of going public is significant two years after the
IPO-year indicates that the benefits might occur a few years after the IPO. Stock price
informativeness theory predict that the benefits are not instantaneous but take a few
years to materialize. To further analyse the benefit, we will analyse whether stock price
informativeness is a leading variable indicating future increases to total factor produc-
tivity. We will also pursue an analysis about what factors drive IPO-year productivity
performance.

                                     18
Table 6: Regressing TFP on going public, focusing on the years suurounding the IPO
The table below presents the result of the fixed effects regression of total factor productivity, which is
the measure chosen for productivity, on a set of dummy variables δi,t which take on a value of 1 if the
company has been listed for a certain number of years ranging from 3 years prior to 3 years after, and
0 if it has not. This regression excludes companies already listed in 1997, but otherwise it uses the
whole sample. All specifications include firm fixed effects, and the second specification adds year fixed
effects. Firm level cluster robust standard errors are presented below its’ respective coefficient estimates
in parentheses. Variable definitions are in Appendix A. ***, **, * corresponds to statistical significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                    VARIABLES TFP TFP

                          δIP O−3 0.0473 0.0672
                                             (0.0537) (0.0549)
                          δIP O−2 0.0369 0.0525
                                             (0.0590) (0.0610)
                          δIP O−1 0.0255 0.0391
                                             (0.0554) (0.0545)
                           δIP O -0.0650 -0.0302
                                             (0.0564) (0.0555)
                          δIP O+1 -0.0209 0.0150
                                             (0.0566) (0.0534)
                          δIP O+2 0.0819* 0.126***
                                             (0.0495) (0.0457)
                          δIP O+3 0.0338 0.0451
                                             (0.0551) (0.0488)
                         Constant 2.789*** 2.671***

                          Observations 4,025 4,025
                          R-squared 0.004 0.015
                         Number of firms 653 653
                        FE Firm Yes Yes
                        FE Year Yes

                                     19
5.2.2 Stock Price Informativeness

Stock price informativeness is a major mechanism through which public stock markets
affect productivity, but the benefit is not instantaneous, i.e., stock price informativeness
is a leading variable for productivity. The leading characteristics of stock price infor-
mativeness can be tested by running a regression with lagging PSI variables from three
years back up until the current year’s PSI. We run regressions for every explanatory
variable separate and one for the average PSI during the last three years, excluding the
current year’s PSI. The following regression model is estimated.

         T F P = β0 + βP SI ∗ P SIi,t + βP SIt−1 ∗ P SIi,t−1 + βP SIt−2 ∗ P SIi,t−2

                        +βP SIt−3 ∗ P SIi,t−3 + μi + τt + i,t

The results from the regression are presented in table 7, on the next page.

Stock price informativeness has a statistically significant effect on the 5% level or lower
on productivity, controlling for year effects, for every variable separately. Regressed
together the variables of two year and one-year lag are statistically significant on the
5% level or lower, while the three-year lag and current year PSI are not. The economic
effect is the largest for the two-year lag variable. Clearly PSI is leading on productivity,
with a significant effect one and two years later. Ceteris paribus, one percentage point
change in PSI is associated with an increase in TFP of approximately 0.0186 and 0.0145
percentage points, one and two years later respectively. The average PSI is statistically
significant on the 1% level or lower and one percentage point change in average PSI is
associated with an increase in TFP of 0.056 percentage points. This is higher than in
studies conducted in the United States (Bennett et al., 2020). This indicates that our
hypothesis that the magnitude would be lower in Sweden than in the United States was
wrong.

These results are only applicable to the subsample of public companies, and not usable
when analysing the productivity implication from going public. One thing to note how-
ever, is that the beneficial effect of going public peaks after two years, which coincides
with the largest in magnitude lagging PSI variable. Whether or not this is chance or due
to a causal relationship is hard to determine because stock price informativeness and
going public are multilinear, and therefore cannot be tested by specifying an interaction
term.

                                     20
Table 7: Regressing TFP on PSI
The table below presents the result of the fixed effects regression of total factor productivity on a set of
lagging PSI-variables, ranging from zero to three-year lags, as well as a regression with solely the average
PSI for the three previous years. This regression includes only listed companies that have a value for each
of the lagging variables in the specification. All specifications include firm and year fixed effects. Firm
level cluster robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. Variable definitions are in Appendix
A. ***, **, * corresponds to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

    VARIABLES TFP TFP TFP TFP TFP TFP

     PSI 0.0220*** 0.00210
                       (0.00799) (0.00714)
     PSIt–1 0.0229*** 0.0163**
                                  (0.00829) (0.00774)
     PSIt–2 0.0251*** 0.0258***
                                              (0.00744) (0.00681)
     PSIt–3 0.0152* 0.0135*
                                                         (0.00776) (0.00697)
     PSIavg 0.0561***
                                                                                        (0.0122)
     Constant 2.619*** 2.680*** 2.738*** 2.810*** 2.642*** 2.669***
                       (0.0469) (0.0457) (0.0501) (0.0624) (0.0696) (0.0701)

     Observations 6,899 6,246 5,634 5,099 4,661 4,815
     R-squared 0.027 0.028 0.027 0.024 0.033 0.033
     Number of firms 817 755 665 592 555 577
     FE Firm Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
     FE Year Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes

Based on our previous results, there are reasons to believe that going public influences
productivity through the channel of stock price informativeness. As mentioned, stock
price informativeness and being listed are perfectly linear and hence, we cannot include
them in the same regression without violating the multicollinearity assumption. We will
instead divide the companies in the sample in quartiles based on the average value of PSI
for the first three years of being listed. While not explicitly testing the effect of stock price
informativeness on productivity, we implicitly control by investigating whether there are
clear differences in the effect of going public among the firms with high respectively
low PSI. We are running a fixed effects regression, like the basic regression presented
in the beginning of section 5.2.1, including time fixed effects, for every quartile group
separately.

The results from the regressions are presented in table 8, on the next page.

                                     21
Table 8: Regressing TFP on bing listed, divided into quartiles based on PSI
The table below presents the result of the fixed effects regression of total factor productivity, which is the
measure chosen for productivity, on the dummy variable listed which takes on a value of 1 if the company
is listed and 0 if it is not. The sample has been divided into quartiles based on the average PSI values
during the first three-year after being listed on a firm level. The first specification includes companies
in the bottom 25% of PSI, while the fourth includes the top 25% of PSI. All specifications include firm
and year fixed effects. Firm level cluster robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. Variable
definitions are in Appendix A. ***, **, * corresponds to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels, respectively.

              VARIABLES Bottom 25% 25%-50% 50%-75% top 25%

                listed -0.0463 0.0390 -0.107* -0.0110
                                   (0.0686) (0.0593) (0.0599) (0.0972)
               Constant 2.725*** 2.761*** 2.770*** 2.573***
                                    (0.0909) (0.0881) (0.151) (0.112)

                Observations 3,102 2,739 2,405 1,963
                R-squared 0.030 0.056 0.022 0.012
               Number of firms 203 202 202 202
               FE Firm Yes Yes Yes Yes
               FE Year Yes Yes Yes Yes

None of the results are statistically significant at any significance level, just like the
results running the regression for the full sample. This implies that among listed com-
panies stock price informativeness has explanatory value on productivity, but it is not a
determinant of the effect on productivity from going public, at least when implicitly con-
trolling for it. Therefore, if the company would know how informative its’ stock will be,
it cannot draw ex ante conclusions about how going public will impact its’ productivity.
However, the company can expect a higher productivity than an identical company with
a less informative stock, ex post listing.

5.2.3 The IPO-year

In figure 3, one can see a steep drop in productivity in the IPO-year. In table 6,
tendencies of the same productivity behaviour can be seen, even though it is not statically
significant. This also aligns with previous theories and it is therefore interesting to
investigate which parameters affect the magnitude of this short-lived decrease.

As previously mentioned, there are several theories that may explain this decrease: it
may be an effect of the capital injection coming from an IPO, whereafter the company
struggles to utilize its’ new capital productively. Alternatively, the company could have,

                                     22
prior to the IPO, stretched its productivity temporary to be an attractive investment
option when listing. Furthermore, we want to test whether financial distress and stock
price informativeness may affect IPO-year productivity change. Our hypotheses are
the following: Companies in financial distress prior to the IPO have a lot to gain from
going public. The reason is that firms under financial distress, among other things,
may suffer from debt overhang, fire-sale of productive assets or cannot afford to keep
productive employees. Going public, and therefore securing an additional source of
capital, can alleviate these problems. In addition, financial distress can be a symptom
of poor corporate governance and going public engages new owners. Altogether, these
theories predict that companies in financial distress should benefit from going public
already in the IPO-year. We use times interest earned as a proxy for financial distress,
since it is a simple but general metric to relate a company’s operational profitability to
their financial obligations. Worth noting, the higher value of times interest earned, the
lower is the financial distress. Lastly, we will test whether stock price informativeness
has a positive impact on productivity already in the IPO-year, to further investigate how
instantaneous the effects of stock price informativeness are. Our prediction is that there
might be an immediate effect from stock price informativeness that relates to attention
and corporate governance, i.e., companies devoted more attention by the market might
be keener on performing well and given less slack.

Since there is only one observation for each company when looking at the IPO-year we
cannot run panel data regressions and include fixed effects for individual companies.
Therefore, we control for firm characteristics through industry and size, proxied by total
assets. For this test, we conduct the following regression.

       ∆T F Pi = β0 + βraised capital ∗ raised capitali + βT F P trend ∗ T F P trendi

                    +βT IE ∗ T IEi + βP SI ∗ P SIi + μi + τt + i

Where ∆T F P is the change in productivity from the year prior the IPO to the IPO-year,
raised capital is the raised capital in the IPO, compared to the total assets of the com-
pany prior the IPO, TFP trend is the average yearly percentual change in productivity
the two years before the IPO and TIE is the times interest earned for the company the
year before IPO, PSI is the stock price non-synchronicity during first year, τ is time
fixed effects and μ is a control variable representing industry and size.

The results from the regressions are presented in table 9, on the next page.

                                     23
Table 9: Regressing change in TFP in the IPO-year on raised capital, TFP-trend, TIE and PSI
The table below presents the result of the ordinary least squares regression of total factor productivity
absolute change in the IPO-year from the previous year, on raised capital which is the amount of capital
raised over total assets in the previous year, TFP trend which is the compounded growth rate of TFP in
the two years prior to the IPO-year, TIE which is times interest earned and PSI. The sample includes a
single observation of every firm going public between 1998 and 2018. All specifications include year and
industry fixed effects and the control variable size. Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses.
Variable definitions are in Appendix A. ***, **, * corresponds to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively.

        VARIABLES ∆TFP ∆TFP ∆TFP ∆TFP ∆TFP

           raised capital -0.0111** -0.00861***
                          (0.00439) (0.00304)
          TFP trend -1.050*** -0.900**
                                       (0.339) (0.395)
          TIE -1.13e-05*** -8.27e-06***
                                                  (1.64e-06) (1.36e-06)
          PSI 0.0212 0.0925***
                                                               (0.0419) (0.0339)
          Constant -0.675 -0.0870 -0.772* -0.837* -1.203**
                           (0.466) (0.533) (0.421) (0.480) (0.588)

          Observations 426 248 399 365 195
          R-squared 0.073 0.251 0.103 0.069 0.294
          FE Year Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
          FE Industry Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
          Size control Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes

All explanatory variables are statistically significant on the 5% level or lower when con-
sidered in isolation, except for PSI that is not. However, when including all variables PSI
becomes statistically significant. Given the statistical strength of the regression results,
we can draw some conclusions about the theories motivating our choice of explanatory
variables. Firstly, raised capital has a negative effect on the change in TFP, i.e., the
more capital the company raises in comparison to its’ total assets, the deeper the pro-
ductivity drop is, ceteris paribus. This supports prior theory about companies’ inability
to utilize its’ newly injected capital productively. Secondly, the productivity trend in the
years leading up to the IPO has a negative effect on change in TFP, which implies that
companies that improve their productivity in the years prior to the IPO-year experience
a larger drop in productivity during the IPO-year. This lends support to the theory
that companies stretch their productivity, in order to send a signal to potential public
investors about its’ productivity abilities.

                                     24
We can also see that financial distress prior to the IPO has a positive effect on change
in TFP, which aligns with our prediction. The more financially distressed, the more
positive is the immediate effect of going public, ceteris paribus. Finally, results show
that stock price informativeness has a positive effect on the TFP change in the IPO-year.
In this regression setup, only considering the year prior and actual IPO-year, stock price
informativeness can contribute to a positive immediate effect on productivity, aligning
with predictions. However, because stock price informativeness is not entirely exogenous
and the regression model do not allow correlation with firm fixed effects, our estimate
could be heavily biased by factors in the error term for which stock price informativeness
becomes a proxy. Examples of these may be corporate governance or attention effects.
Essentially, this applies to all explanatory variables. In the next sections, we will discuss
shortcomings with our regressions and methodology, and bring up interesting areas for
further research, before drawing final conclusions.

6 DISCUSSION & CONCLUSIONS

6.1 Discussion

This thesis’ setting is Sweden, and it studies a sample of Swedish registered companies.
An implication of that is that prominent public companies that many consider Swedish
like ABB, Astra Zeneca and Autoliv have been excluded from the analysis after incorpo-
rated abroad, since they from that point on are not included in the data source. Another
implication is that Swedish companies, exclusively listed abroad, like Spotify, are not
included in the analysis because they are not considered listed in Sweden. Furthermore,
any Swedish registered company previously listed abroad and secondarily listing in Swe-
den, would be considered going public the year they list in Sweden. However, we have
not found any companies that can skew the analysis in this way. A deeper analysis could
consider how the exclusion of these large companies affect the results.

Another source of potential influence is the time dimension. Companies are listed over
different time periods, and therefore they might be subject to different public market
environments. Furthermore, in the sample companies are public for varies lengths of
time. Consequently, the dummy variable that reflects whether the company is listed or
not, captures different lengths of time, and is therefore subject to the large heterogenous
time effects of being public. Other issues are that low performing public companies are
targets for private equity firms or takeovers, and therefore exit the sample, leaving an
unproportionally amount of high performing companies in the public subsample. These

                                     25
are all problems that can bias our regression analysis but are reduced by including time
and company fixed effects.

Self-selection bias is a general concern in social sciences, and especially when considering
public and private companies. After all, going public or remaining private are not
exogenous events, but endogenous choices, based on maximizing utility of owners or
profits for the firm. The underlying reason for going public (e.g., the owners want to
cash in on their investment or the firm need the public stock market for financing) and
what implications that has on firm performance may be an interesting area for further
research. Because we only study companies that go public, we are explicit about the self-
selection bias, therefore we cannot draw conclusions about being public versus private
in general, but only the effects of going public.

A point in which this thesis diverge from the most closely related previous research is in
our choice of state variable in the production function estimation. We use total assets
rather than fixed material assets. This is mostly due to the necessity of including compa-
nies’ various industries other than manufacturing, where immaterial assets or inventory
could be of upmost importance for the capacity to generate revenue. A study of only
manufacturing companies in Sweden is difficult because of the small sample size, making
any analysis difficult to execute. In the best of world’s, the analysis would only include
a single industry or companies that have homogenous balance sheet structure.

There is one problem with total factor productivity estimations using company financial
statements when looking at IPO-year. The significant costs related to going public are
according to the Swedish Tax Agency general indirect costs and therefore impact the
EBITDA. This means that the costs of going public are included in the material costs
and ceteris paribus, related to lower productivity. The consequence is that the costs of
going public impact productivity negatively, and these are most likely incurred in the
IPO-year.

In addition to the results not being applicable when comparing private firms versus public
firms, there are other limitations to the generality of our findings. The role, importance
and relative size of public equity markets vary across countries, in many cases depending
on the institutions of the respective country. Therefore, the impact of going public could
be different in countries with vastly different institutions than Sweden. The size of the
stock market can also generate positive externalities, that amplify the effect of stock
price informativeness. A country with a vastly smaller market capitalization might not
experience the same net effect. Prior research has found similar findings about stock

                                     26
price informativeness and productivity in the Unite States, which has a larger market
capitalization and rather different institutions than Sweden, so our findings support
that there is a certain amount of generality. Cross country studies of this nature are,
to the best of our knowledge, non-existent and would be a difficult, yet interesting
pursuit.

6.2 Conclusions

Theory is ambiguous in its’ predictions about the net effect on productivity from going
public and so are our results. On the aggregate level we cannot decipher any statisti-
cally significant effect from going public. The measure captures the full life cycle of every
company in our sample, from being private, to going public and any potential delisting.
The effect of going public is however not homogenous every year, but varies substan-
tially prior, during and after an initial public offering, as we have demonstrated. For
example, two years after being listed, companies demonstrate a statistically significant
improvement in their productivity.

This coincides with the lagging characteristics of stock price informativeness, where the
most prominent effect on productivity appeared two years after any year being public.
Furthermore, stock price informativeness has a positive effect on productivity in general,
both instantaneously and lagging, and the magnitude is larger than previous research
looking at manufacturing firms in the United States. Stock price informativeness is a
leading indicator for higher productivity among public companies’ ex post going public,
but ex ante, a company whose stock would assume a high value of informativeness, cannot
be determined to benefit more from going public. That is, stock price informativeness is
not a determinant of whether companies benefit from going public or not but has only
explanatory value for the public subsample.

Companies experience a drop in productivity in the year of its’ initial public offering.
This phenomenon is clearly visible in a graph but cannot be determined to be statistically
significant in our regression. The standard error, however, is high which means that there
is heterogeneity in productivity performance in the first year. The magnitude of this
drop is influenced negatively by how much capital the company raises and productivity
trend prior to the IPO. Financial distress and stock price informativeness, contrarily,
influence productivity positively in the IPO-year.

                                     27
Productivity is paramount to explain cross-country differences in income per capita
and firms with higher productivity perform better. Our original question of whether
companies become more productive, and by extension whether countries become richer,
as more companies go public, remains somewhat unanswered. Even though stock price
informativeness increases productivity among listed firms, it does not ascertain if going
public boost productivity of firms and by extension countries. But while we cannot
determine any effect in any direction, perhaps indicating that going public does not affect
productivity, we have nuanced our understanding of productivity and how it relates to
public stock markets.

                                     28
Appendix A Variable definition

 Variable Definition

 FE Industry A set of dummy variables based on Industry, to catch fluctuations based on macro
                          effects for specific industries. Appears as 1 if a firm’s industry = representing industry,
                        e.g., the dummy representing Energy sector gets a 1 if Industry = 10, otherwise 0.
 FE Year A set of dummy variables based on year, to catch fluctuations based on macro effects.
                         Appears as 1 if year = representing year, e.g., the dummy representing 2015 gets a 1 if
                        year = 2015, otherwise 0.
 Industry The industry in which the company are categorized within, based on GICS and found
                         in Serrano.
 labour The natural logaritm of number of employees
 Labour expenses Gathered from financial statement if presented by nature, otherwise calculated as av-
                       erage labour expenses for the industry (based on GICS) and year, times number of
                       employees.
 listed A dummy variable, presented as 1 if the company is listed any time during a year and
                            0 if not.
 materials The natural logaritm of operating expenses less labour expenses, depreciation and amor-
                          tization
 Operating expenses Earnings before interest and tax (EBIT) less net revenue
 PSI Stock Price Non-Synchronicity for each specific year and firm, following Bennett et al.
                         (2020).
  ri Industry return, a market-capitalization weigthed average return for industries based
                         on GICS. All calculations are excluding the focal firm.
 rj Firm return, which is calculated as valuet/valuet − 1 based on dividend adjusted values
                        in FinBas.
 rm Market return, a market-capitalization weigthed average return including all firms ex-
                          cept the focal firm.
 raised capital The natural logaritm of (total share capitalt − total share capitalt−1)/total assetst−1
 revenue The natural logaritm of net revenue
 sigma A set of dummy variables based on years listed, e.g., the dummy representing
                  years listed = −3 gets a 1 if 3 years prior the IPO and otherwise 0.
 TFP The predicted total factor productivity for a firm and year, following method by Acker-
                          berg et al. (2015).
 TFP trend The trend of percentual TFP change the two prior years, calculated as
                                          0.5
                      (T F Pt/T F Pt−2)   − 1
 TIE Times interest earned, calculated as EBIE/interest expenses
 total share capital The sum of share capital and share premium fund
 total assets The natural logaritm of total assets
 years listed Number of years the company has been listed at the stock exchange. Hence, the IPO-
                        year is 0 and the prior years appear as negative numbers.

                                     29
References

[1] Ackerberg, D. A., Caves, K., & Frazer, G. (2015). Identification Properties of Recent
   Production Function Estimators Econometrica, 83(6), 2411-2451.

[2] Anthony et al. (2014). Management Control Systems (European Edition ed.)

[3] Arnoud, W. A. B., Gopalan, R., & Thakor, A. V. (2006). The Entrepreneur’s Choice
   between Private and Public Ownership. The Journal of Finance (New York), 61(2),
   1540-6261.

[4] Bai, J., Philippon, T., & Savov, A. (2016). Have financial markets become more
   informative? Journal of Financial Economics, 122(3), 625-654.

[5] Baker, M., Stein, J. C., & Wurgler, J. (2003). When Does the Market Matter? Stock
   Prices and the Investment of Equity-Dependent Firms. The Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, 118(3), 969-1005.

[6] Barth, E., Gulbrandsen, T., & Schoø, P. (2005). Family ownership and productivity:
   The role of owner-management. Journal of Corporate Finance, 11(1-2), 107-127.

[7] Bennett, B., Stulz, R., & Wang, Z. (2020). Does the stock market make firms more
   productive? Journal of Financial Economics, 136(2), 281-306.

[8] Bond, P., Edmans, A., & Goldstein, I. (2012). The real effects of financial markets.
    Annual Review of Financial Economics, 4, 339-360.

[9] Chemmanur, T. J., He, S., & Nandy, D. K. (2010). The going-public decision and
   the product market. Review of Financial Studies, 23(5), 1855-1908.

[10] Clementi, G. L. (2002). IPO’s and the Growth of Firms. Working Paper, New York
    University.

[11] Durnev, A., Morck, R., & Yeung, B. (2004). Value-Enhancing Capital Budget-
    ing and Firm-Specific Stock Return Variation. The Journal of Finance (New York),
    59(1), 65-105.

[12] Easley, D., Kiefer, N. M., Maureen O’Hara, & Paperman, J. B. (1996). Liquidity,
    Information, and Infrequently Traded Stocks. The Journal of Finance (New York),
    51(4), 1405-1436.

                                     30
[13] Ezzamel, M., Willmott, H., & Worthington, F. (2008). Manufacturing shareholder
   value: The role of accounting in organizational transformation. Accounting, Organi-
    zations and Society, 33(2), 107-140.

[14] Hall, P. A., & Soskice, D. W. (2001). Varieties of capitalism: the institutional
   foundations of comparative advantage., Oxford University Press.

[15] Kraus, K., & Lind, J. (2010). The impact of the corporate balanced scorecard on
   corporate control — A research note. Management Accounting Research, 21(4), 265-
    277.

[16] Kraus, K., & Str¨omsten, T. (2012). Going public: The role of accounting and
    shareholder value in making sense of an IPO. Management Accounting Research,
    23(3), 186-201.

[17] Loughran, T., & Ritter, J. (2004). Why Has IPO Underpricing Changed over Time?
   Financial Management, 33(3), 5-37.

[18] Morck, R., Yeung, B., & Yu, W. (2000). The information content of stock markets:
   why do emerging markets have synchronous stock price movements? Journal of
   Financial Economics, 58(1), 215-260.

[19] Myers, S. C., & Majluf, N. S. (1984). Corporate financing and investment deci-
   sions when firms have information that investors do not have. Journal of Financial
   Economics, 13(2), 187-221.

[20] Pagano, M., Panetta, F., & Zingales, L. (1998). Why Do Companies Go Public?
   An Empirical Analysis. The Journal of Finance (New York), 53(1), 27-64.

[21] Palia, D., & Lichtenberg, F. (1999). Managerial ownership and firm performance:
    A re-examination using productivity measurement. Journal of Corporate Finance,
    5(4), 323-339.

[22] Petrin, A., Poi, B. P., & Levinsohn, J. (2004). Production Function Estimation in
   Stata using Inputs to Control for Unobservables. The Stata Journal, 4(2), 113-123.

[23] Prescott, E. C. (1998). Lawrence R. Klein Lecture 1997: Needed: A Theory of Total
   Factor Productivity. International Economic Review (Philadelphia), 39(3), 525-552.

[24] Roll, R. (1988). R2. The Journal of Finance (New York), 43(3), 541-566.

[25] Spiegel, M. I., & Tookes, H. (2008). Dynamic Competition, Innovation and Strategic
   Financing. Working Paper, Yale University.

                                     31
[26] Steven Olley, G., & Pakes, A. (1996). The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecom-
   munications Equipment Industry. Econometrica, 64(6), 1263-1297.

[27] Subrahmanyam, A., & Titman, S. (1999). The Going-Public Decision and the Devel-
   opment of Financial Markets. The Journal of Finance (New York), 54(3), 1045-1082.

[28] Syverson, C. (2004). Product Substitutability and Productivity Dispersion. The
    Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(2), 534-550.

[29] Tirole, J. (2001). Corporate Governance. Econometrica, 69(1), 1-35.

                                     32