THE EXISTENCE OF SKILLED
FUND MANAGERS

A STUDY  ON  ACTIVELY MANAGED  MUTUAL  FUNDS IN THE
US MARKET

GUSTAF EKLÖW

JOEL WIGSÉN

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of  Economics

2021
The existence of skilled fund managers:  A study on actively managed mutual funds
in the US market
Abstract:
This paper uses a dataset of 19  689 domestic actively managed mutual funds in the US
market during 1980-2020 to find the proportions of skilled-  and unskilled funds. The
method is  based on the false discovery approach applied in a financial setting.  We
conclude that 58% of our sample are zero-alpha funds, 42% unskilled, and 0% skilled.
We also show that, during 1980-2020, the number of skilled funds has decreased to zero,
whereas  unskilled  funds  have  increased.  Our  results  can  be  explained  by  the
characteristics of actively managed funds such as high costs and  the  attempt to pick
stocks. Additionally, our results show that the decrease  in skilled funds coincides  with an
increase in the number of funds, suggesting a higher level of market efficiency.

Keywords:  Mutual Fund Performance, Skill, Active Management, Alpha
Authors:
   Gustaf  Eklöw  (24344)
   Joel  Wigsén  (24380)
Tutors:
   Olga  Obizhaeva,  Assistant  Professor, Department of  Finance
Examiner:
   Adrien  d’Avernas,  Assistant Professor, Department of  Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in  Business and  Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
©  Gustaf Eklöw  and  Joel  Wigsén,  2021

                                   1
Introduction
Mutual funds are tradeable products within the financial industry  where individuals can
grow their wealth.  A mutual fund pools  investors’ money and invests in financial
securities.  When entering the market, investors seek mutual  funds that can give the
highest returns.  There  are two sides regarding  what type of investment strategy provides
the best  returns,  passive versus active. The main difference is that actively managed
mutual funds have the objective to outperform the market.  In contrast, passive funds only
strive to reflect its benchmark index. This discrepancy explains  the difference in the fee
structure. Since active mutual funds aim to outperform the market, they charge a higher
fee  than  passive mutual funds  (Miller 2007).
     In 2019, the estimated number of mutual funds  worldwide  were 123  000, with a
total of $54,9 trillion assets  under management  (Statista 2019  & Investment Company
Institute 2020).  Researchers have investigated  this market in different geographical
locations  to identify if there exist fund managers that  possess the skills to pick stocks  that
outperform the market  net of fees.  Most of  the research has  concluded  that a small
proportion of mutual fund managers outperform  (Wermers 2000,  Barras et al. 2010,
Kosowski et al. 2006  and  Cuthbertson et al. 2012), while other papers have concluded
that there is no evidence of persistent stock-picking skills (Fama & French 2010). The
research in this area has mainly  focused on the performance of funds. However, only  a
few have investigated and brought up  the  discussion  of whether  the overperformance is
due to luck or skill  (Barras et al. 2010). The absence of distinguishing between luck or
skill has resulted in the following research question:

         Are actively managed mutual  funds that present significant alphas skilled or
                                      lucky?

      Our research question is answered by first replicating and then extending the
research of Barras et al. (2010). The authors use a new approach within financial research
to  control for false discoveries in a multiple fund setting. They separate funds into
unskilled, skilled, and zero-alpha  funds by  only  estimating the proportion of zero-alpha
funds through p-values of each fund’s estimated alpha.  This method enables  the
estimation of  the proportions of the three skill groups  and  their location in the left-  and
right tail of the cross-sectional  t-distribution.  The methodology is simple and has proven
to be robust and accurate  (Andrikogiannopoulou  &  Papakonstantinou  2020).
     We  follow the methodology in Barras et al. (2010) and limit our data to the US
market, including all actively managed mutual funds  investing in domestic equity. We
have chosen to pursue our research on the US market since it is the largest fund industry
in shares of assets held  (Statista 2019).  Therefore, our research covers a broad spectrum
of the total fund universe.
      Further, we include all domestic actively managed mutual funds in our primary
sample from 1980 to 2020 to determine the proportions of zero-alpha, skilled, unskilled,
lucky,  and unlucky funds.  This  sample  is also used to identify the development of zero-
alpha, skilled and unskilled funds over time by dividing the period into non-overlapping
five-year periods. Another sample that we also use in our research is Growth and Growth
&  Income funds during 2010-2020, which  are  the same fund styles that are used in the

                                   2
paper of Barras et al. (2010).  We believe our research is valuable for US investors as it
examines if actively managed mutual funds could  be a preferable investment strategy.
We also consider that our research should be beneficial for investors and researchers
worldwide since the findings will be of general interest.
      Our empirical findings are the  following:  In our main sample of  19  689 funds,  our
results reveal that  42%  are unskilled,  0%  are  skilled,  and  58%  are  zero-alpha. Of the
significant proportion of funds, our results show  that  most funds in the left tail are
unskilled  given the different significance  levels.  There  are no  skilled funds  in the right
tail  at any significance  level, and the significant proportion of funds observed in the
sample does not exceed the estimated proportion of lucky funds. Hence, in a group setting,
all significant funds in the right tail are lucky.  The  study of the  development of our
primary sample over time shows  a significant increase of unskilled funds and a decrease
in skilled funds.  Regarding the proportion of zero-alpha funds,  it  is relatively consistent
over time. The study of Growth and Growth & Income funds is similar to our main sample
regarding  the significant proportions of funds. Most  of  the  funds in the left tail are
unskilled  at all given significance levels. In the right tail, there is no proportion of skilled
funds; all significant  funds are lucky in this group setting.  The proportion of zero-alpha
funds in this study  is  38%, unskilled 62% and skilled 0%.
      Several factors contribute  to our results. The first  factor  is market efficiency.  The
results  show the increase in  the  number of  mutual funds during 1980-2020, suggesting
that the  competition for finding positive alphas has increased.  This phenomenon of a
growing fund industry could also be a sign of market efficiency (G’arleanu and H.
Pedersen 2018).  Also, the technology development  could be a factor  making it more
challenging for  a  manager to seek positive alphas  since information is processed more
rapidly (Hendershott 2010). Furthermore, the second  factor  driving the results  is  costs.
Actively managed mutual funds have high expense ratios, making it more difficult for the
fund manager to pick stocks well enough to cover their costs. In addition, these funds also
have non-reported costs that could be nearly six times higher than the published expense
ratios (M.  Miller 2007). The  third  factor  explaining our results  could be  market timing.
When being in and out of the market,  the risks of missing out on the best days  increase,
driving down the  funds' returns  significantly  (J.P Morgan  2021).
      The remainder of the paper is as follows:  The first section will  present related
literature to our area of research. The second section will discuss our empirical
background, including the methodology and data. Section three contain the empirical
analysis, where we present and discuss the results of our study, while section four
concludes.

                                   3
Related literature
Methodology  and results  in the literature
The performance of mutual funds is well tested and documented using different methods,
however, reaching similar results.  The most common method  was to use alpha as the
performance measure,  obtained from the risk-adjusted returns based on either the three-
or the four-factor model (Fama & French 1993 and Carhart 1997), and  then  count the
number of funds with significant alphas in different portfolio constructions (Carhart
1997). The results indicated that  significant  outperformance  does not persist over an
extended  period of  time due to transaction costs and expense ratios.  Further,  research
regarding the long-term underperformance of actively managed funds concludes that only
1% of actively managed funds overperform  (Wermers 2000 and Fama & French 2010).
Wermer’s paper studies the expected return and decomposes it into different explaining
variables such as costs and stock-picking talent. Fama  and  French uses expected alpha
through bootstrap simulations as the performance measure. Their paper also shows that
overperformance exists in the extreme tails  before costs.  The  underperformance of
actively managed mutual funds has been concluded even earlier (Malkiel 1995). The
author showed that the underperformance holds gross of fees during the period of 1982-
1991.
     On the contrary, there is evidence in the US market that managers exhibit skills and
can pick stocks well enough to cover, or even exceed, their costs (Kosowski et al. 2006).
The authors  use  a bootstrap procedure to uncover the distribution of the cross-sectional
fund alphas, similar to the  procedure  proposed by Fama  and  French (2010);  however,
distinguishing  between luck and skill. By doing so, they were able to uncover the true
significant  funds  and  concluded  that  specifically  Growth  funds  showed  superior
performance,  which was not solely due to luck.  Moreover, another study has further tried
to distinguish between skilled and lucky funds  and found evidence that the proportion of
skilled funds is 0.6% of actively managed funds  and that 75.4%  are  zero-alpha funds
(Barras et al. 2010).  Their method is to test the performance in a multiple fund setting,
contrary to  the study by Kosowski et al. (2006),  which tested the funds separately.
Controlling for false discoveries, a method originally proposed to minimize statistical
errors (Storey 2002), proved to be a robust method and was confirmed in a reply
(Andrikogiannopoulou & Papakonstantinou 2020). In addition, a UK study used the same
method reaching similar results (Cuthbertson et al. 2012).
     Similar research has been  conducted  but during periods of crisis and uncommon
events. There is evidence that funds tend to perform better during a crisis (Kosowski
2011).  The study shows  that the funds performed  three to five percent  better during the
recessions and crises in 1962-2005. On the other hand, recent evidence during the Corona
pandemic shows that actively managed mutual funds instead tend to underperform during
crises (Pástor and Vorsatz 2020).
     Moreover, research has shown that instead of using a fund’s alpha, one can use the
dollar-value added amount (Berk and Binsbergen 2015). The authors find that an average
mutual fund adds value  in monetary terms,  which also is persistent over time.  In addition
to their value-added method, they test the funds with tradable assets as  risk adjustment.
Their results indicated that skilled mutual fund managers  exist  and, more importantly,
indicates that they add monetary value.   Lastly, the model of Berk  and Green (2004)

                                   4
implies that all active managers exhibit a zero-alpha net of costs. This finding contradicts
some of the results mentioned previously, as previous studies support that the majority of
funds have true negative alphas net of costs.
Actively  managed funds’  characteristics
A difficult aspect to consider in the  research area of the performance of mutual funds is
the potential for survivorship bias. In general, it overestimates a mutual fund  portfolio's
performance  since the predominant reason for closing a fund is underperformance
(Rohleder et al. 2011).  They also  presented a survivorship bias amounting to  0.14%  in a
fund sample during 1993-2006.  Additionally, the authors found evidence that value-
weighted portfolios of mutual funds lead to a  more negligible  bias, both statistically and
economically significant.  However, since  several databases are  free of survivorship bias
today,  the use of  a  value-weighted portfolio is not  necessary.
      Moreover, costs are another  critical  aspect to consider when examining  mutual
funds' performance  in general and active funds in particular. Due to the nature of actively
managed mutual funds,  they charge higher management fees  and generate  higher
transaction costs  and  other costs associated  with the nature of stock-picking  (Miller
2007). When determining the active share of a fund and decomposing the costs into one
passive-  and one active share, evidence shows that the true mean  active  expense ratio is
7% instead of the published expense ratio of 1,5% (Miller 2007).  In addition, the high
turnover ratio has also shown to contribute to costs and subsequently contribute to
underperformance (Champagne et al. 2018). Another characteristic of actively managed
mutual funds is that they, on average, demand immediacy and not provide immediacy
(Rinne & Suominen 2014).  Demanding immediacy is a phenomenon where funds have
to trade an asset due to e.g., a specific market event. Providing immediacy on the other
hand, is when funds do not have to trade an asset and can instead provide the asset to
those who demand it.  Demanding immediacy is associated with costs and  is  a factor that
explains  the underperformance of actively managed mutual funds. The costs explanatory
power can be illustrated with an arithmetic  argument (Sharpe 1991). If the gross return of
both passive and active funds is the same, then it must be the case that the return of active
management is less due to higher costs.
      Further, the fund industry consists of actively-  and passively managed mutual
funds,  but the industry has seen a shift towards passive investing among investors (Anadu
et al. 2020). The proportion of these two types of funds is central in the research area of
market efficiency. A recent study  concludes  that the market efficiency  is  approximated
by the search costs for investors  and  the information costs for the managers (G’arleanu
and H. Pedersen 2018). Another prediction from the model they use is that the high fees
associated with active management are due to the high search cost for the managers. Also,
the development of technology has changed the way how securities are traded and have
resulted in more efficient pricing of securities (Hendershott 2010).

                                   5
Contribution
Most of the research use well-known models such as the Capital Asset Pricing Model and
the  three-  and four-factor model.  However, recent studies have  extended the literature
with  different methods  to distinguish between luck and skill.  Our  contribution to the
previous literature is to continue testing  the  recent  models,  in this case  the false discovery
approach.  We  will test the performance of the whole  domestic  active  mutual  fund
universe  in the US market, extending the  period  up to  the  end of 2020. This will  include
the recent  crisis caused by  Covid-19.  We will  also  study the development of domestic
mutual funds in the US market between 1980-2020.  As such, this thesis is closely related
to  the  literature mentioned  above  and  seeks to  extend  and develop the  existing  research
further.

                                   6
Hypotheses
The proportion of skilled fund managers
Most  prior  research concludes that skilled fund managers exist in  a  small proportion.
Hence, we expect to find a small proportion of  skilled fund managers exhibiting  stock-
picking skills to cover their costs during 1980-2020.
      This paper investigates the hypothesis by testing two samples  with the use of the
false discovery  approach. The first sample includes all US domestic actively managed
mutual funds, and the second includes US Growth and Growth & Income funds, investing
in domestic equity.  Thus, our first hypothesis is the following:
      Hypothesis 1: There exists a small proportion  of skilled fund managers during
1980-2020.
The proportion of skilled fund managers over time
More recent papers identifies that the proportion of skilled fund managers has decreased
over time, whereas the proportion of unskilled fund managers has increased. Therefore,
we expect to find a similar trend during 1980-2020.
      We test the hypothesis by testing the sample of all US domestic actively managed
mutual funds in non-overlapping  five-year  periods with the  false discovery  approach.
Thus, our second hypothesis is the following:
      Hypothesis 2: During the time period of 1980-2020 the proportion of skilled fund
managers decrease, and the proportion of unskilled fund managers increase.

                                   7
Methodology

We will replicate the method by Barras et al. (2010),  and  the complete methodology is in
his paper. The method is new in finance theory and has recently been confirmed as robust
by  Andrikogiannopoulou  &  Papakonstantinou  (2020).  This section will describe the
method and  present  the regression framework.
     Briefly, the basis of this method is a standard procedure  of  testing  each fund's
performance independently.  However, the false discovery approach  will be added  to
measure the proportion of zero-alpha-, unskilled-  and skilled funds. The definitions of the
three skill-groups  are  as  defined by  Barras et al. (2010):
    •   Zero-alpha funds: Funds with managers  with  stock-picking skills sufficient to
       recover its costs and expenses,  (𝛼  =  0)
    •   Unskilled funds: Funds with managers  with  stock-picking skills insufficient to
       recover its costs and expenses,  (𝛼  <  0)
    •   Skilled funds: Funds with managers  with  stock-picking skills sufficient to  exceed
       its costs and expenses, (𝛼  >  0)
To calculate the frequency of each different skill group, the t-statistic of each fund's alpha
is  used to observe significant funds in the left-  and right tails of the t-distribution. The t-
statistic replaces alpha as the performance measure since it has greater statistical
properties (Kosowski et. al 2006). The t-statistic is  extracted  through a multiple
hypothesis test  from fund  i  to fund M, where  M is the  sample size. The  null hypothesis  is
that all funds are zero-alpha funds  compared  to the alternative hypothesis that funds have
either positive or negative  alpha values.

                                𝐻!: 𝛼"  =  0, 𝐻#: 𝛼"  ≠  0
                 …
                             𝐻!: 𝛼$  =  0, 𝐻#: 𝛼$  ≠  0

A  multiple hypothesis test comes with difficulties,  such as determining the  significance
level at which a fund is considered  to have a significant p-value.  For simplicity, at any
given significance level, 𝛾, the probability that zero-alpha funds exhibit bad- or good luck
is  defined as  𝛾/2.  Hence,  given the proportion of zero-alpha funds,  𝜋!, the proportion of
lucky funds, which is  significant funds that are truly zero-alpha,  is calculated as the
following  (a full description of the notations is presented in  Appendix  table  6):

                                   &                                        (1)
                                𝐸2𝐹% 4  =  𝜋!  ∗  𝛾/2

                                                           &
If the entire proportion of significant positive-alpha funds is denoted as 𝐸2𝑆% 4, then using
equation  (1),  we can derive the proportion of  truly  skilled funds  as:

                    &       &       &       &                         (2)
                  𝐸2𝑇% 4  =  𝐸2𝑆% 4 − 𝐸2𝐹% 4  =  𝐸2𝑆% 4 − 𝜋!  ∗  𝛾/2

                                   8
Since the probability of the fund being either lucky or unlucky is the same, the expression
for deriving the proportion of truly unskilled managers  is  the same as equation  (2), except
                 '
that we solve for  𝐸2𝑇% 4:

                   '       '       '       '
                  𝐸2𝑇% 4  =  𝐸2𝑆% 4 − 𝐸2𝐹% 4  =  𝐸2𝑆% 4 − 𝜋!  ∗ 𝛾/2

One of the additional objectives in the study by Barras et al. (2010)  and  ours  is  to locate
the skilled-  and unskilled funds in the tails.  This is done by testing different values for  the
significance level,  𝛾,  and examining  if the number of  skilled-  or unskilled funds rise or
fall in  𝛾. If they rise, they are  dispersed in the tails; otherwise,  the funds are most likely
concentrated  around a specific  significance level.
The only requirement to calculate the above equations is  an estimation of the  true
proportion of  zero-alpha  funds,  𝜋!.  Here, the  false  discovery  approach, FDR  (Storey
2002),  is used,  where  its inputs are two-sided p-values  associated with the alpha t-
statistics of every individual fund.  The FDR approach builds upon the information from
the  centre  of the cross-sectional distribution between the three  skill groups. It is
dominated by the funds exhibiting a zero alpha,  and  it is possible to correct  the tails  for
luck and unluck,  respectively.  Suppose  we draw t-statistics from the same distribution,
i.e. all funds are zero alpha  funds. The resulting p-values associated with the t-statistics
would be evenly distributed with  equal  proportions in the respective confidence interval.
However, when the t-statistics are drawn from different distributions, the significant
observations will overlap and show a greater proportion of small p-values (which
corresponds to significant t-statistics).  Hence, we  can correct for luck and unluck  in the
tails,  respectively,  by estimating the proportion of zero-alpha funds with the histogram
shown in figure 1. Then  subsequently determine the proportion of skilled and  unskilled
funds.
     When  estimating the  p-values,  the FDR approach allows us to calculate the
proportion of zero-alpha funds  without knowing the distribution of the skilled-  and
unskilled p-values. The procedure is based on the fact that zero-alpha funds satisfy the
null-hypothesis and must therefore have p-values uniformly distributed over the interval
(0,1). On the contrary,  the  p-values of skilled-  and unskilled funds  are  small since  their  t-
statistics  are  significantly far from zero.  Our resulting histogram is presented in figure 1.

                                   9
               Figure 1  –  Histogram of the funds’ p-values

   Figure 1 displays the  histogram of the p-values  obtained from the Carhart four-factor regression
   during the period of January 1980 to December 2020. The histogram represents a sample of 19,689
   US actively managed mutual funds. The threshold for estimating the proportion of zero-alpha
                       ∗
   funds is set to  0.6  (𝜆 =  0.6).

                                     Figure 1
        7 000

          6 000               p-values of the skilled and
                                       unskilled mutual funds

        5 000

        4 000
                                                     The area below this line is the
    Quantity                                 unknown proportion of zero-alpha
                                                   funds. This proportion is
           3 000                                               "($)            Area of the zero-alpha
                                      estimated with: !"!  #  =                funds
                                                                          &('($)
        2 000

         1 000

           0
                      0.1     0.2     0.3     0.4     0.5     0.6     0.7     0.8     0.9     1

                                                        Estimated p-values
                                        ∗
If a sufficiently high threshold,  𝜆 , is set, we know that a sizable majority of the funds
                                                                                    ∗
exceeding that threshold is zero-alpha funds. In our calculations,  we set  𝜆  to 0.6,
supported by Barras  et al.  (2010),  who  tested its sensitivity with a bootstrap procedure.
                   ∗
After setting the  𝜆  to 0.6 we can calculate the area consisting of merely zero-alpha funds
and  extend it over the entire region, the whole area below the line in figure 1. The
calculation is based on the following formula:

                                              𝑊(𝜆)
                                  𝜋:!(𝜆)  =            ,
                                      𝑀(1 − 𝜆)

                                                                       ∗
where  𝑊(𝜆), is  the number of funds having p-values  greater than  𝜆 and M is the number
of funds included in the sample.  Notably,  this methodology was used in the study  by
Barras et al. (2010) and was tested against a Monte Carlo analysis  that confirmed this
approach's robustness.
      Using  equation (1) and substituting  𝜋!  with the estimated proportion of zero-alpha
funds,  𝜋:!,  we can obtain the estimated proportion of  lucky-  and unlucky funds  through
the following  formula:

                                  10
                               >&    >'
                              𝐹% =  𝐹% =  𝜋:!  ∗ 𝛾/2

                 &        '
Also, we replace  𝐸2𝑆% 4  and  𝐸2𝑆% 4  with the observed proportion of significant funds in
the right and left  tail and  substituting the result in equation (2) in combination with
equation (1). We get the following two equations  estimating the proportion of skilled and
unskilled funds:

                          > &     ?&    >&     ?&
                         𝑇% =  𝑆% − 𝐹% =  𝑆% − 𝜋:!  ∗ 𝛾/2

                          > '     ?'    >'     ?'
                         𝑇% =  𝑆% − 𝐹% =  𝑆% − 𝜋:!  ∗ 𝛾/2

Lastly, the proportions of skilled and unskilled managers in the entire sample of funds are
                                                                                    ∗
calculated using a sufficiently high threshold of significance level,  𝛾 .  In  Barras et al.
(2010), this level is  set by a bootstrap procedure,  however  the authors concluded that
                 ∗
simply setting  𝛾  to values between 0.35-0.45 produces similar estimates.  Moreover,  the
threshold  must be high enough to capture all skilled and unskilled funds in cases where
the funds are spread out in their respective tails.  When we chose a threshold between
0.35-0.45 that captured all of the significant  funds,  we calculated the proportions using
the following equations:

                                    &    >&
                                      𝜋:# =  𝑇%∗
                                    '    >'
                                        𝜋:# =  𝑇%∗,

       &      '
where 𝜋:# and 𝜋:# denote non-zero alpha funds that are skilled and unskilled, respectively.

The regression framework
We use the four-factor model presented by Carhart (1997),  an extension to the Fama-
French three-factor model (1993)  as  the  momentum  factor  has been added.  This will be
the basis for the regression as well  as  for  calculating  the performance of the funds:

           𝑟",*  =  𝛼"  +  𝑏"  ∗  𝑟+,*  +  𝑠"  ∗  𝑟,+-,*  +  ℎ"  ∗  𝑟.+/,*  +  𝑚"  ∗  𝑟+0+,*  +  𝜀",*

where  𝑟",*  is the month  t  excess return of fund  i  over the risk-free rate, which is a proxy
of the  one-month  T-Bill rate;  𝑟+,*  is the month  t  excess return on  a  value-weighted
portfolio  on all NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ stocks;  and  𝑟,+-,*,  𝑟.+/,*  and  𝑟+0+,*  are
the month  t  excess returns  for the factors size, book-to-market and momentum.
      Each  fund's  alpha and  t-statistics are  calculated by running a multiple regression of
all the  funds  individually. According to prior research by Kosowski et al. (2006),  a  fund's
t-statistic has superior statistical properties compared to its alpha and is therefore the
parameter used to determine the performance of funds. Further, the two-sided p-value is
also obtained from the multiple regression.

                                  11
Data
Our  mutual funds  sample  and the factors in the four-factor model are  retrieved from the
Center for Research in Security Prices, CRSP,  a  Wharton  Research Data Services
product, WRDS.  We use the CRSP objective codes  for  the funds  and other sorting tools
provided with the following  criteria:
   •   The fund must be open to investors;
   •   it must be categorized as an actively managed mutual fund;
    •   and it must only invest in domestic equity.
While  the sample is  free from survivorship  bias,  only funds that have a  minimum of  60
months of return  have been included  in an attempt to obtain as  precise  alpha estimations
as possible.  Also, funds with monthly returns labeled as zero  are  treated as a missing
return since CRSP have no data on these months.  The returns from CRSP  are  net of fees;
hence, later calculations will be based on  the  net of fees returns.
      Our final sample of funds consists of 19,689 funds with at least 60 months of return
between  1980  –  2020.  This sample is complemented with a sample of  7,410  Growth  and
Growth  &  Income funds  from  2010  –  2020.  Table 1 provides the estimated annual alpha
and the factor loadings for our  primary  sample of  19,689  funds, where we constructed
equally  weighted  portfolios. The portfolios  are  rebalanced every month to ensure that
funds existing at the beginning of the month  are  included.

  Table 1  –  The performance of Equally-Weighted Portfolio of Funds

  The descriptive statistics for the Carhart four-factor model regarding the equally weighted portfolio
  of  all funds are shown in table 1. The regression is based on monthly data between January 1980
  to December 2020 which includes all actively managed funds within in the US market, investing
  in domestic equity. The portfolio is rebalanced every month to include all funds that exists in the
  beginning  of the month. Table 1 consists of the estimated annualized alpha,  𝛼', the estimated
  exposure to the market,  𝑏)", size,  𝑏)#$%, book-to-market,  𝑏)&$', and momentum factors,  𝑏)$($.
                    )
  Also, the adjusted  𝑅  of the equally weighted portfolio is shown, which includes all the funds at
  the beginning of each month. The second row of the table depicts the standard error for each factor.

                                     TABLE 1

                                                    $             $              $              $                 (
                         !"            #!        #"#$       #%#&       ##'#        %
All funds (19,689)         -1.13%         0.904       0.173        0.017       -0.003       0.98%
(Standard error)          0.000         0.007       0.010       0.010       0.006

Similar to previous studies,  we found  a negative annualized alpha in our sample. The
factor loadings  are  tilted towards the market,  and the R squared explains  98% of the
variation in the portfolio.  The results presented later  are  based on the statistical
characteristics in table 1.

                                  12
Evaluation of method  and data
Barras et al. (2010)  provide  the reader with several tests confirming the robustness  of
their method.  They use a Monte Carlo simulation to confirm that the results are in line
with the true values.  The simulation also  demonstrates  that  the method is not overly
concerned with  cross-sectional  dependencies.  This is also the case for our sample  as  the
multiple hypothesis test was conducted without any issues regarding predictability in
returns.  Moreover, problems  can arise  when the sample is too small. Therefore, we  use a
large sample  (Barras et al. 2010).
      Further, a criticism of this type of method  regarding linear regression is  that it
assumes that the returns  follow a  normal  distribution.  According to Kosowski  et al.
(2006),  this could lead to errors and therefore bootstrapping is necessary.  However,  the
method has proved to be successful, even  when  assuming normality in the distribution.
The  estimates have been proven to be statistically robust, both in the paper by Barras et
al. (2010)  and  in the reply by  Andrikogiannopoulou  &  Papakonstantinou  (2020).
Concerning  the FDR procedure used in this study, the tests can be done without any
knowledge about the distribution of p-values, which is the only input needed to calculate
the proportions.
      Moreover,  it is relevant to mention the contribution this method has in the research
of finance. It is revolutionary in the sense that it enables  to  control for luck in a multiple
fund setting. Instead of simply setting a chosen threshold for a significant alpha and count
the number of funds exceeding the threshold (Carhart 1997), the false discovery approach
can identify type I errors and more accurately determine the proportion of the truly skilled
and unskilled  funds,  respectively.  It also builds upon the  critical  finding from Kosowski
et al. (2006) that t-statistics, instead of alpha, as  a  performance measure has superior
statistical properties  and  provides  more accurate results.

                                  13
Results
This section will  present  the results of our study.  We will  present the results from  our
main sample (1980-2020 all US domestic equity funds), followed up by an additional test
of the main sample, where  we test the performance in  nine  sequential  non-overlapping
periods of five years.  Lastly, we  present  the results from the  sample that is an extension
of Barras et al. (2010), where we select the same type of funds during a more recent period
(2010-2020).

1980-2020 US domestic mutual funds
First, we start by measuring the proportion of zero-alpha funds, skilled funds and
unskilled funds during the period of 1980-2020 of all  actively  domestic equity  funds
available  on the  US  market.  With our  entire sample of 19,689  funds, we estimate that
58% (11,458)  are zero-alpha funds.  The proportion of skilled and unskilled  funds  is yet
to be presented  (see table 2).

 Table 2  –  The proportion of the three skill-groups during 1980  –  2020

The performance is measured with the Carhart four-factor model during the period of 1980-2020.
                                                        +                 ,
Table 2 shows the estimated proportions of zero-alpha,  𝜋'*, unskilled,  𝜋'* , and skilled funds,  𝜋'* , of
the whole fund sample of 19  689 funds. The estimated proportion is determined at a significance level
          ∗                                           ∗
of 0.35  (𝛾  =  0.35) and the lambda threshold is 0.6  (𝜆 =  0.6).

                                    TABLE 2
                                                                   "                 #
                     Zero-alpha (!"!)        Non-zero alpha        Unskilled (!"! )          Skilled (!"! )
   Proportion         58%             42%             42%              0%
    Quantity          11458              8231              8231                0

Furthermore, we also estimate that 42% (8,231) of our sample of funds are unskilled, and
0%  are skilled  (see table  2).  There  does not  exist fund managers  who can  outperform the
market  net of costs; instead,  the funds are zero-alpha-  or  unskilled funds.  Hence, these
results reject the first hypothesis that there exists a small proportion of skilled fund
managers.
     By looking at our sample in more detail, table 3 shows that adjusting for luck gives
a deeper understanding of our results. Table 3 gives us the proportion of significant alpha
funds in both the left-  and right tails at four significant levels (γ = 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.20).  In
more detail, in  Panel A  the significant group in the left tail is divided into unlucky and
unskilled funds.  Panel B shows  the significant group in the right tail divided into lucky-
and skilled funds.

                                  14
  Table 3  –  The location of the skilled and unskilled funds in the right
               and left tail respectively during 1980-2020

 Table 3 shows the location of the proportions during the period of January 1980 to December 2020.
 Panel A exhibits the proportions of the significant funds in the left tail of the cross-sectional t-statistic
                                         1+
 distribution. The significant proportion,  𝑆- ,  displays the observable proportion of significant funds
                            )+               ) +
 in the left tail and the unlucky,  𝐹- ,  -  and unskilled,  𝑇- , proportions are estimated. The distributions
 are counted at the following significance levels: 𝛾  = 0.05,0.10,0.15,0.2.

 Table 3 Panel B exhibits the proportions of the significant funds in the right tail of the cross-sectional
                                                       1,
 t-statistic distribution. The significant proportion,  𝑆- ,  displays the observable proportion of
                                          ),             ),
 significant funds in the right tail and the lucky,  𝐹- ,  -  and skilled,  𝑇- , proportions are estimated. The
 distributions are counted at the following significance levels: 𝛾  = 0.05,0.10,0.15,0.2.

                            TABLE 3 PANEL A
                                                                           Left tail

            Significance level (!)      0.05            0.1            0.15            0.2

                              "#"
      Significant proportion ( ! )     24.45%        32.23%        38.30%        43.02%

                          $%"
                  Unlucky ( ! )     1.45%          2.91%         4.36%         5.82%

                          &%"
                 Unskilled ( ! )     23,00%        29,32%        33,93%        37,20%

                            TABLE 3 PANEL B
                                                                     Right tail

            Significance level (!)      0.05            0.1            0.15            0.2

                                 ##
      Significant proportion ("! )     1.29%          2.12%         2.89%         3.81%

                          $%#
                    Lucky ( ! )     1.45%          2.91%         4.36%         5.82%

                             %#
                   Skilled (&! )     0.00%         0.00%         0.00%         0.00%

Our results  in table  3  Panel A  show that the proportion of significant alpha funds is high
in the left tail, with the highest level of 43,02% at γ = 0,20. Also, we see a high percentage
of truly unskilled funds far out in the tail and that the  number  funds that are unlucky  is
only a small fraction  of all the significant funds.  Further, in  table 3 Panel B, we see that
the proportion of lucky funds exceeds the observable number of significant  funds. This
means that the observable significant funds are  less  than the  model’s prediction of lucky
funds; all the significant funds in the right tail are lucky.  In other words, the amount of
type I errors is higher in the right tail  than in the left tail.

                                  15
1980-2020 Five-year periods
Our second  test  consists of the same method as earlier, only that we have split the period
of 1980-2020 into  non-overlapping  5-year periods with separate regressions for each
period.  The tests are done with funds with at least 30 months of returns  during the
examined period,  and new funds are added when they have existed for 30 months during
the particular period. The purpose of this is to identify the development of the proportions
of zero-alpha, skilled and unskilled funds over time. Figure 2 shows the development and
in Appendix table 8 the proportions for each period is shown. The results  indicate that,
over time, the proportion of skilled funds decrease  to zero, whilst the proportion of
unskilled funds increase.  These results are in line with the second hypothesis that there is
a decrease of skilled fund managers and an increase in unskilled fund managers over time.
      Also, we see how the proportion of zero-alpha funds over time has slightly
decreased  with a  significant  decline after the financial crisis in 2008-2009. The decline in
zero-alpha funds is shown in the figure to have caused a similar increase in the proportion
of unskilled funds.

 Figure 2  –  Development of the proportions of the three skill-groups
                          during  1980  -  2020

  Figure 2 displays the development of the proportions of zero-alpha funds, unskilled-, and skilled
  funds during January 1980 to December 2020. The estimation of the development is based on
  nine  non-overlapping 5-year periods using the Carhart four-factor model. Every period includes
  funds with returns at least half of the period and new funds are added when they have existed
  for 2.5 years.

                                        Figure 2
      100%
                                          Zero alpha      Unskilled      Skilled
      90%

      80%

       70%

      60%

       50%

      40%

      30%
   Proportion of funds
      20%

       10%

       0%
               80-84     85-89     90-94      95-99      00-04     05-09      10-14      15-20

                                           1980 - 2020

                                  16
Growth and Growth & Income
The third part of our  results  is  an extension of Barras et al. (2010)  sample.  We extend
their study by analyzing Growth and Growth & Income funds during a more recent period,
2010-2020.  The sample consists of  7,410  funds  and the histogram of the p-values  is in
figure 4 in Appendix and the descriptive statistics are shown in table 7 in Appendix. Table
4 summarizes our results,  and the proportion of zero-alpha funds, skilled funds,  and
unskilled funds are  38%,  0%  and  62%,  respectively.  Hence, this sample also rejects the
first hypothesis that there exist skilled fund managers.
      In addition, we also see, in table 5  Panel B,  the only funds that are  statistically
significant are lucky  at any given significance level.  Also, in  table 5 Panel  A,  most of  the
significant proportion of  funds  are truly unskilled. The highest proportion is at the
significance level  γ = 0,20, where the proportion of unskilled funds was 55,79%.  Our
results indicate that the majority of all fund  managers underperform the market  and that
during the period of 2010-2020 there are only lucky fund managers that overperform the
market.

 Table 4  –  The proportion of the three skill-groups during 2010  -  2020

The performance is measured with the Carhart four-factor model during the period of 2010-2020.
                                                         +                 ,
Table 4 shows the estimated proportions of zero-alpha,  𝜋'*, unskilled,  𝜋'* , and skilled funds,  𝜋'* , of
the Growth and Growth & Income sample of 7,410 funds. The estimated proportion is determined at
                              ∗                                           ∗
a significance level of 0.35  (𝛾  =  0.35) and the lambda threshold is 0.6  (𝜆 =  0.6).

                                    TABLE 4

                    Zero-alpha (!" )        Non-zero alpha        Unskilled (!"")          Skilled (!"#)
                                    !                                               !                      !
   Proportion         38%             62%             62%              0%
    Quantity          2808              4602              4602               0

                                  17
 Table 5  –  The location of the skilled and unskilled funds in the right
              and left tail respectively during 2010-2020

Table 5 shows the location of the proportions during the period of January 2010 to December 2020
in regard to Growth and Growth & Income funds. Panel A exhibits the proportions of the significant
                                                                                               1+
funds in the left tail of the cross-sectional t-statistic  distribution. The significant proportion,  𝑆- ,
                                                                              )+
displays the observable proportion of significant funds in the left tail and the unlucky,  𝐹- ,  -  and
         )+
unskilled,  𝑇- , proportions are estimated. The distributions are counted at the following significance
levels: 𝛾  = 0.05,0.10,0.15,0.2.

Table 5 Panel B exhibits the proportions of the significant funds in the right tail of the cross-sectional
                                                      1,
t-statistic distribution. The significant proportion,  𝑆- , displays the observable proportion of
                                         ),             ),
significant funds in the right tail and the lucky,  𝐹- ,  -  and skilled,  𝑇- , proportions are estimated. The
distributions are counted at the following significance levels:  𝛾  = 0.05,0.10,0.15,0.2.

                        TABLE 5 PANEL A
                                                               Left tail

       Significance level (!)     0.05          0.1           0.15           0.2

                           #"
 Significant proportion ("! )    38.84%       48.25%       54.54%       59.58%

                     $%"
              Unlucky ( ! )     0.95%        1.89%        2.84%        3.79%

                       %"
             Unskilled (&! )    37.90%       46.36%       51.70%       55.79%

                        TABLE 5 PANEL B
                                                          Right tail

        Significance level (!)     0.05          0.1           0.15           0.2

                           ##
 Significant proportion ("! )     0.16%        0.30%        0.54%        0.76%

                     $%#
                Lucky ( ! )     0.95%        1.89%        2.84%        3.79%

                        %#
               Skilled (&! )    0.00%       0.00%       0.00%       0.00%

                                   18
Discussion  of  results
The results  from our main sample  show that  most  funds perform like index funds,
meaning that the majority of funds are zero-alpha funds.  Since  most of the other actively
managed mutual funds  that attempt to beat the market are unskilled, investing in an index
fund with low fees is  arguably  a preferable choice for an investor. These findings are in
line with similar research conducted on the same  and different markets.  In the paper of
Barras et al. (2010), their research was conducted on an earlier period (1975-2006),
focusing on  Growth and  Growth &  Income funds in the US market. Their findings
reached the same conclusion as ours:  the vast majority of active funds do not manage to
overperform the market. In addition, Cuthbertson et al. (2012) used the same method as
Barras et al. (2010), but on the UK market. They reached similar results where most
mutual funds did not manage to exhibit stock-picking skills well enough to cover their
costs. Another study  focused on the US market in 1982-1991 and concluded that the
sample of funds had in aggregate underperformed their benchmark portfolios net of fees
(Malkiel  1995).  Fama and French’s  (2010) studied the  US market 1984-2006  and the
results show the difficulties of fund managers in producing benchmark-adjusted expected
returns well enough to cover their costs.  Thus,  prior research supports  the  results  of our
study.
      The results  from table 2  show  that the proportion of unskilled funds and zero-alpha
funds accounts for  100% of all actively managed mutual funds in the US  market.  Prior
studies  discuss  the  non-existence of  skilled fund managers  (Fama & French 2010).
However,  there  exists  evidence suggesting  the opposite  (Kosowski 2006 & Barras et al.
2010).  There are some important differences that can explain these  inconsistencies.  Our
results come from a sample of all domestic US equity funds while other studies
(Kosowski  2006, Barras et al  2010. and Fama & French  2010)  use  samples of roughly
2.000-3.500  funds.  In other words, we have included more funds and  subsequently also
different fund categories. When including a larger amount of funds, also including every
fund  category within active management, the proportion of skilled funds  diminishes in
that group setting. When we only include Growth and Growth & Income funds as Barras
et al. (2010), our results are consistent with theirs (see table 5). On the contrary, our results
contradict the results from the dollar-value added method, at least in regard to finding
skill (Berk & Binsbergen 2015). However, their finding that there are more negative alpha
funds than positive alpha funds is in line with our results. With that said, we can conclude
that the essence  of  our results  is  consistent with prior literature  –  the proportion of skilled
funds are small,  sometimes  even zero, compared to the proportion of unskilled-  and zero
alpha funds.
      Furthermore, our  results in table  4  and 5 Panel A & B  present the recent estimates
of the proportions of skilled-  and unskilled funds  up  until  2020  regarding Growth and
Growth & Income funds.  These results contradict Kosowski et al. (2006),  where the
authors concluded that managers  could  pick stocks well enough to cover their costs.  A
potential  factor contributing to the discrepancy is that our results  cover  an entirely
different time period.  Important to note is that our time period includes  the  recovery from
the financial crisis in 2008 as  well as the more recent crisis during the ongoing  Corona
pandemic.   Kosowski   (2011)   examines   the   hypothesis   that   recessions   drive
underperformance of funds and concludes that 3%-5% of the funds perform better during
a crisis.  On the other hand, a more recent study on the corona pandemic during 2020

                                  19
showed that actively managed mutual funds tend to underperform  (Pástor  and  Vorsatz
2020).  Our  results,  however, imply  that  the inclusion of periods of crises  coincides  with
underperformance.  Therefore, the absence of skilled fund managers during 2010-2020
could be  due to  the inclusion of a crisis  in combination with a shorter investigated period
of time.  Figure 2 presents the  development of the proportions during 1980-2020  and
displays  the argument that crises  drive  down  fund  performance.
      As shown in figure 2, the recent trend in the proportion of skilled funds is declining
and close, or equal, to zero.  Further,  the decline of skilled funds is replaced by an increase
in  the proportion of unskilled funds, while the proportion of zero alpha funds is fairly
consistent.  One  explanation for the decline in skilled fund managers  is due to funds
closing down.  Most of these funds are closing down because of underperformance
(Rohleder et al. 2011).  Another explanation could be the increase  in  competition in the
mutual fund industry during the last decade.  In our research and  in that of  Barras et al.
(2010), the competition for finding positive alphas has increased over time. By comparing
the  size of  the  mutual fund sample at the beginning of our period to the end; the number
of mutual funds has increased significantly  (see figure 3).  This phenomenon of a growing
fund industry could be a sign of market efficiency.  When the asset management industry
grows, it does so due to lower information costs for the  managers,  implying an efficient
market  (Gˆarleanu and  H.  Pedersen  2018).  Hence, a greater proportion of actively
managed funds leading to efficient markets  could make  it  challenging  for managers to
discover investment opportunities to beat the market.

                                  20
    Figure 3  –  Development of the proportions of the three skill-groups
                              during 1980  -  2020

   Figure 3 displays the development of number of funds during January 1980 to December 2020. The
   number of funds is based on nine non-overlapping 5-year periods and funds are only included if they
    have existed for at least half of the 5-year period.

                                 Figure 3

       14000

       12000

       10000

       8000

       6000
  Number of funds
       4000

       2000

          0
                80-84     85-89     90-94     95-99     00-04     05-09     10-14     15-20

                                  1980 - 2020

     The development of technology in the last decade  could  also  explain  why we see a
decrease in skilled fund managers. As computer technology  improves,  today’s systems
can act  on  new information in nanoseconds  (Hendershott 2010). This  indicates  that it  is
even  more difficult for fund managers to distinguish themselves from competitors.  These
are powerful results but are  consistent with prior research  demonstrating that  most  active
fund managers underperform the market.   We can conclude that an increase in
competition due to a growing industry and the rapid technological development has most
likely made  it  more difficult  to exhibit stock-picking skills.
     Another reason why the proportion of skilled funds are zero, could be the costs and
fees  involved.  The  high expense ratios that actively managed mutual funds charge  are, in
general, high compared to the passive segment  in  the market. Since  we  measure
performance net of fees, this is a plausible explanation for the large  proportion  of
underperformance.  Additionally,  Barras et al. (2010) argued that the significant funds in
the left tail charge even higher expense ratios, which could  also  explain our results.
However, studies have shown that the existence of skilled- and unskilled managers before
costs is not  sufficiently different from what our results suggest (Fama & French 2010).
Hence, the proportion of skilled-  and unskilled managers is consistent before-  and after

                                  21
the published expense ratio, indicating that  the expense ratio  is  probably not the only cost
contributing to our result.  The  true cost of an actively managed mutual fund is often
significantly greater than its published expense ratio, which is known to the investor (M.
Miller 2007). The author concluded that the mean active expense ratio was almost six
times  higher than  the published expense ratio.  However, estimations of the trading costs
and other additional costs is subject to large errors (Fama & French 2010). What research
has shown,  however,  is that actively managed mutual funds face higher  costs.  This is due
to the nature of actively managed mutual funds  tending  to trade more, contributing  to
higher costs and subsequently lower performance (Champagne et al. 2018).  Actively
managed mutual funds  also, on average,  demand immediacy  (Rinne & Suominen  2014)
which is, in addition to high transaction costs (Wermers 2000), a factor that contributes
to higher costs.  Therefore,  the high expense ratios can possibly explain  our results,  but it
is primarily the  non-reported costs that  make  it  challenging  for fund managers  to pick
stocks  well enough  to cover their costs.
      The paper of Sharpe (1991) also provides another possible  explanation  for  the high
proportion of underperformance and zero-alpha funds.  He proposes  a simple arithmetic
argument. If the return before costs is equal for both active and passive management,
assuming efficient markets, the  returns after costs  must be lower for the active investor.
Hence, one reason for the proportion of skilled funds being zero is because costs are high,
making it harder to exhibit positive alphas.
      Moreover, a further possible reason why there are no skilled funds on a group level
in our sample is  market timing. Active fund managers use this phenomenon to buy stocks
when the market trend is positive and sell when  it is  negative.  Thus, active  mutual fund
managers try to overperform the market by using their skills to predict market movements
in the future. Statistics from  J.P Morgan  (2021)  show that missing the best  30 days of the
S&P in  2001-2020  results in a negative annualized  return of  -1.49%. Instead, being fully
invested throughout the whole period would give an annualized return of  7.47%. Hence,
this is an example that shows  being in and out of the market continuously  is  a risky
method. This is supported by our results as there are no skilled fund managers in our fund
sample.
      Another  aspect of our results is investors' ability to identify the  fund managers that
can  outperform the market. Even if skilled managers exhibit stock-picking skills to cover
their costs, these funds  are  in the fund universe of all managers, including fund managers
with insufficient ability to outperform the market. Thus, the process of being able to pick
the right mutual funds is  difficult.  In the study of Gârleanu et al. (2017), the  authors
discover that there are high research costs related to identifying skilled managers.  A
further indication and support of  research costs being high is the shift of active to passive
investing during the last decades. In the US mutual fund and ETF market, passive funds
accounted for approximately 41% of AUM in 2020, compared to 3% in 1995 and 14% in
2005 (Anadu et al., 2020). These statistics support the paper of Gârleanu et al (2017) since
more capital has been allocated to passive funds, suggesting that search costs are high.

                                  22
Conclusion
This paper aims to research  whether the significant proportion of funds in the US market
during 1980-2020 is skilled or lucky by using the method of Barras et al (2010). Our study
rejects  the first  hypothesis that skilled fund managers exist in a small proportion.  Further,
the results of our study are consistent with our second hypothesis that there is a decline
in skilled fund managers, and an increase in unskilled fund managers over time. Hence,
the second hypothesis is not rejected.
      The results conclude  that there does not exist any active managers that exhibit
stock-picking skills well enough to cover their costs. Our interpretation of these results is
that there  are no  skilled fund managers on a group level; however, there is a possibility
that skilled fund managers exist on an individual level.  The  reason why there are no
skilled fund managers on a group level is because of the method’s approach of estimating
the proportions. Since the proportion of significant negative alpha funds and zero-alpha
funds is significantly greater than the proportion of significant positive alpha funds, the
model estimates that all the significant positive alpha funds are due to luck. Hence, there
may exist skilled funds individually  but of all domestic actively managed funds in the
US, the proportion of skilled fund managers are indistinguishable from zero.
     The possible explanations  for  our results are market efficiency, costs and market
timing.  These  variables  influence  the  results  by  making  it  more  challenging  to
overperform the market. Since passive investing does not try to beat the market and has
low fees  in relation to active investing,  it is arguably a preferable strategy for an investor.
     By measuring the proportion of skill in a multiple fund setting, active fund
managers in the US market are not good enough in comparison to the fees they charge.

                                  23
References

Anadu, Kenechukwu., Kruttli, Mathias., McCabe, Patrick., and Osambela, Emilio, 2020,
The Shift from Active to Passive Investing: Risks to Financial  Stability?,  Financial
Analysts Journal,  76:4,  23-39
Andrikogiannopoulou, Angie., and Papakonstantinou, Filippos, 2019, Reassessing False
Discoveries in Mutual Fund Performance: Skill, Luck, or Lack of Power?, The Journal
of finance (New York)  74.5: 2667–2688
Barras, Laurent., Scaillet, Oliver.,  Wermers, Russ, 2010,  False Discoveries in Mutual
Fund Performance: Measuring Luck in Estimated Alphas.  The Journal of finance (New
York) 65.1: 179–216
Berk, Jonathan B.,  and van Binsbergen, Jules H.,  2015,  Measuring Skill in the Mutual
Fund Industry,  Journal of financial economics  118.1: 1–20.
Berk, Jonathan B.,  and  Green,  Richard  C., 2004,  Mutual Fund Flows and Performance
in Rational Markets,  The Journal of political economy  112.6: 1269–1295
Carhart,  Mark M.,  1997,  On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance,  The Journal of
finance (New York)  52.1: 57–82.
Champagne, Claudia.,  Karoui,  Aymen., and  Patel,  Saurin.,  2018,  Portfolio Turnover
Activity and Mutual Fund Performance,  Managerial finance  44.3: 326–356.
Cuthbertson, Keith.,  Nitzsche,  Dirk., and  O’Sullivan,  Niall.,  2012,  False Discoveries in
UK Mutual Fund Performance,  European financial  management:  the journal of the
European Financial Management Association  18.: 444–463.
Fama, Eugene F., and  French,  Kenneth R, 1993,  Common Risk Factors in the  Returns
on Stocks and Bonds,  Journal of financial economics  33.1: 3–56
Fama, Eugene F., and French, Kenneth R, 2010,  Luck Versus Skill in the Cross-Section
of Mutual Fund Returns,  The Journal of finance (New York)  65.5: 1915–1947
G’arleanu,  Nicolae., and  Pedersen, Lasse H.,  2018,  Efficiently Inefficient Markets for
Assets and Asset Management,  The Journal of finance (New York)  73.4: 1663–1712
Hendershott, Terrence, 2010, Automated Trading,  Encyclopedia of Quantitative Finance
Investment Company Institute, 2020,  60th edition Investment Company Fact Book
J.P Morgan Asset Management,  2021, Guide to Retirement 2021 Edition

Kosowski,  Robert., Timmerman, Allan., Wermers, Russ., and White, Hall., 2006,  Can
Mutual Fund ‘Stars’ Really Pick Stocks? New Evidence from a Bootstrap Analysis,  The
Journal of finance (New York)  61.6: 2551–2595
Kosowski, Robert.,  2011. Do Mutual Funds Perform When It Matters Most to
Investors? US Mutual Fund Performance and Risk in Recessions and Expansions,
Quarterly Journal of Finance (QJF), World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd., vol.
1(03), pages 607-664.

                                  24
Malkiel, Burton G.,  1995,  Returns from Investing in Equity Mutual Funds 1971 to
1991,  The Journal of finance (New York)  50.2: 549–572.
Miller, Ross M.,  2007,  Measuring the True  Cost of Active Management by Mutual
Funds. Journal of Investment Management, Vol. 5, No. 1, First Quarter  2007
Pástor,  Ľuboš., Vorsatz,  M.  Blair., and  Pontiff,  Jeffrey, 2020,  Mutual Fund Performance
and Flows during the COVID-19 Crisis,  The Review of Asset  Pricing Studies, vol
10(4), pages 791-833
Rinne,  Kalle., and  Suominen,  Matti, 2014.  Mutual Funds’ Returns from Providing
Liquidity and Costs of Immediacy,  LSF Research Working Paper Series  14-01,
Luxembourg School of Finance, University of Luxembourg.
Rohleder, Martin.,  Scholz,  Hendrik., and  Wilkens,  Marco.,  2011,  Survivorship Bias and
Mutual Fund Performance: Relevance, Significance, and Methodical Differences,
Review of Finance  15.2 (2011): 441–474.
Sharpe,  William F., 1991,  The Arithmetic of Active Management,  Financial analysts
journal  47.1: 7–9
Statista, 2019,  Number of mutual funds worldwide 2009-2019
Storey,  John D., 2002,  A Direct Approach to False Discovery Rates,  Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society. Series B, Statistical methodology  64.3: 479–498.
Wermers,  Russ., 2000,  Mutual Fund Performance: An Empirical Decomposition into
Stock-Picking Talent, Style, Transactions Costs, and Expenses,  The Journal of finance
(New York) 55.4: 1655–1695

                                  25
Appendix

                              Table  6

             Table 1 provides clarification of the notations in the formulas used in the
           method.

          Notation                     Explanation

            𝜋!,  𝜋:!                           True proportion-  and estimated
                                                proportion of zero-alpha funds,
                                             respectively
             &      '                 Expected proportion of
            𝐸2𝑆% 4,  𝐸2𝑆% 4
                                                   significant funds in the right-
                                                 and left tail, respectively
              &      '                   Expected proportion of skilled-
            𝐸2𝑇% 4,  𝐸2𝑇% 4
                                          and  unskilled funds,
                                             respectively
             &      '                 Expected proportion of lucky,
            𝐸2𝐹% 4,  𝐸2𝐹% 4
                                           and unlucky  funds, respectively
           ?&  ?'                        Observed  estimated  proportion
             𝑆% ,  𝑆%
                                                   of significant funds in the right-
                                                  and left tail, respectively
           > &  >'                       Estimated proportion of skilled-
             𝑇% ,  𝑇%
                                             and unskilled funds,
                                             respectively
           >&  >'                       Estimated proportion of lucky-
             𝐹% ,  𝐹%
                                           and unlucky funds, respectively
           &  '
            𝜋:# ,  𝜋:#                             Estimated proportion of skilled-
                                             and unskilled funds in a given
                                       group

                                  26
   Figure  4  –  Histogram of the Growth and Growth & Income funds’
                              p-values

   Figure 1 displays the histogram of the p-values, obtained from the Carhart four-factor
   regression during the period of January 2010 to December 2020. The histogram
   represents a sample of 7410 US actively managed mutual funds, in the category Growth
   and Growth & Income. The threshold for estimating the proportion of zero-alpha funds is
                ∗
   set to 0.4 (𝜆 =  0.4).

                                      Figure 1Figure 4
       4000

       3500
                                  p-values of the skilled and
                                  unskilled mutual funds
       3000

       2500

       2000
                                             The area below this line is the
                                          unknown proportion of zero-alpha
Quantity                             funds. This proportion is
        1500                                                                    Area of the zero-alpha
                                                                         "($)
                                       estimated with: 𝜋"!(𝜆)  =                  funds
                                                                        &('($)
       1000

        500

          0

                 0.1      0.2     0.3     0.4     0.5     0.6     0.7     0.8     0.9      1
                                          Estimated p-values

                                    27
     Table 7  –  The performance of Equally-Weighted Portfolio of Funds

The descriptive statistics for the Carhart four-factor model regarding the equally weighted portfolio of Growth
and Growth & Income funds are shown in table 7. The regression is based on monthly data between January
2010 to December 2020. The portfolio is rebalanced every month to include all funds that exists in the begging
of the month. Table 7 consists of the estimated annualized alpha,  𝛼', the estimated exposure to the market,  𝑏)",
      )                      )                              )                           )
size,  𝑏#$%, book-to-market,  𝑏&$', and momentum factors,  𝑏$($. Also, the adjusted  𝑅  of the equally
weighted portfolio is shown, which includes all the funds at the beginning of each month. The second row of
the table depicts the standard error for each factor.

                                      TABLE 7

                                                    $             $              $              $                 (
                         !"            #!        #"#$       #%#&       ##'#        %
All funds (19,689)          -1.90%          0.888       0.025       -0.009       -0.001       0.99%
(Standard error)           0.000          0.010       0.017       0.016       0.012

                                    28
         Table 8  -  Development of the proportions during  1980-2020

The performance is measured with the Carhart four-factor model. The table shows the estimated proportions
                         +                  ,
of zero-alpha,  𝜋'*, unskilled,  𝜋'* , and skilled funds,  𝜋'* . The estimated proportion is determined at a
significance level between 0.35-0.45  and the lambda threshold is 0.6.

                           TABLE 8

                                   SUMMARY 1980-1984
                                                                    "                 #
                     Zero-alpha (!"!)        Non-zero alpha         Unskilled (!"! )          Skilled (!"! )
   Proportion          73%               27%               12%               15%
    Quantity            185                70                 31                 38

                                   SUMMARY 1985-1989
                     Zero-alpha (!" )        Non-zero alpha        Unskilled (!"")          Skilled (!"#)
                                     !                                               !                      !
   Proportion          69%               31%               11%               19%
    Quantity            405                185                65                 112

                                   SUMMARY 1990-1994
                     Zero-alpha (!" )        Non-zero alpha        Unskilled (!"")          Skilled (!"#)
                                     !                                               !                      !
   Proportion          78%              22%              20%              2%
    Quantity           1035               299                267                27

                                   SUMMARY 1990-1994
                                                                    "                 #
                     Zero-alpha (!"!)        Non-zero alpha         Unskilled (!"! )          Skilled (!"! )
   Proportion          78%              22%              20%              2%
    Quantity           1035               299                267                27

                                   SUMMARY 1995-1999
                     Zero-alpha (!" )        Non-zero alpha        Unskilled (!"")          Skilled (!"#)
                                     !                                               !                      !
   Proportion          67%              33%              33%              0%
    Quantity           2593               1284               1284                0

                                 SUMMARY 2000-2004
                     Zero-alpha (!" )        Non-zero alpha        Unskilled (!"")          Skilled (!"#)
                                     !                                               !                      !
   Proportion          82%              18%              18%               0%
    Quantity           6298               1426               1426                0

                                 SUMMARY 2005-2009
                                                                    "                 #
                     Zero-alpha (!"!)        Non-zero alpha         Unskilled (!"! )          Skilled (!"! )
   Proportion          90%              10%               9%               1%
    Quantity           8460               918               844                94

                                   29
                                SUMMARY 2010-2014
                 Zero-alpha (!" )        Non-zero alpha        Unskilled (!"")          Skilled (!"#)
                                 !                                               !                      !
Proportion          55%              45%              45%              0%
 Quantity           6055              5032              5032                0

                               SUMMARY 2015-2020
                 Zero-alpha (!" )        Non-zero alpha        Unskilled (!"")          Skilled (!"#)
                                 !                                               !                      !
Proportion          63%              37%              37%              0%
 Quantity           8285              4844              4844               0

                                30