MYTH BUSTED: STOCK
RETURN ANOMALIES
REVISITED

DISSECTING  CROSS-SECTIONAL RETURN  PREDICTABILITY
IN ACCOUNTING-BASED ANOMALIES

ALMA FRIBERG

WILLIAM HU

Bachelor  Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2021
Myth busted: Stock return anomalies revisited:  Dissecting cross-sectional return
predictability in  accounting-based  anomalies

Abstract:

Research has uncovered over 450 anomaly factors that exhibit stock return predictability.
However, after anomalies are published and studied in successive literature, the return
predictability often seems to attenuate or disappear. This raises the question of whether
return predictability existed in the past, but have been arbitraged away, or whether published
anomalies simply is an artifact of p-hacking. Using out-of-sample analysis, we study 21
eminent accounting-based stock return anomalies and show that a majority of the cross-
sectional return predictability can be attributed to p-hacking.

Keywords:

    Asset pricing, cross-sectional returns, anomalies, p-hacking, publication bias

Authors:

   Alma Friberg (24384)
   William Hu (24397)

Tutor:

   Adam Altmejd, Researcher, Swedish House of Finance & Postdoc Fellow, Department of
   Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Alma Friberg and William Hu, 2021

                                   1
                          1.  Introduction
1.1 Background and Relevance
A stock market anomaly is return predictability that is inconsistent with asset pricing models
such as the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) or the Fama and French three factor
model, implying an opportunity to earn anomalous stock returns. However, after anomalies
are published and studied in successive literature, anomalies often seem to attenuate or
disappear after their original sample. In finance research, competition for top journal
space incentivizes p-hacking among researchers, which can cause reported results to exhibit
low replicability in the future (Harvey et al., 2016). In a meta-study published in 2018, Hou
et al. (2020) compiled the bulk of the published anomalies literature in finance and
accounting by replicating 452 anomaly variables with a sample period from 1967 to 2016 and
found that most anomalies failed to generate significant results. Mclean & Pontiff
(2015) and Linnainmaa et al. (2018) performed meta-studies with separation between in-
sample and out-of-sample time periods,  and found that anomalies have significantly lower
performance outside their original sample periods. This raises the question of whether return
predictability existed in the past, but have been arbitraged away, or whether published
anomalies simply is an artifact of p-hacking. To investigate the persistence and the
mechanisms behind stock market anomalies, we replicate 21 eminent published accounting-
based anomalies in four separate sample periods: Pre-sample, In-sample, Post-sample and
also a Pre-publication period. These sub-sample periods allow us to discern the explanation
for the existence of cross-sectional return predictability in anomalies, with the aim of
determining whether published stock market anomalies has emerged due to p-
hacking. Our study finds that 16 out of 21 anomalies have significant returns in the in-
sample period, while only 2 out of 21 anomalies have significant returns in the post-sample
period. Furthermore, after analyzing the results from our other sample periods and our z-
score distribution, we conclude that a majority of the return predictability in our observed
anomalies can be attributed to p-hacking.

Null hypothesis significance testing (NHST) is used for statistical inference
in empirical finance. When an anomalous return has a p-value below the significance level of
0.05 it is usually interpreted as not being a statistical fluke. However, as shown by Gelman &
Loken (2013), p-values are biased and many results identified may actually be due to
chance. Inherently, there is a problem of multiple testing when multiple statistical tests are
performed on the same dataset. Since hundreds of anomaly factors have been tested and not
published, some significant factors are also bound to arise due to chance error. P-hacking
disregards the multiple comparisons problem by performing many statistical tests on the data
and cherry-picking significant results. Hence, academic journals contribute to p-
hacking through their focus on publishing studies with significant results. However, the
performance of anomalies identified through p-hacking are driven by sample error, and
accordingly the return predictability does not hold up in out-of-sample tests. Out-of-sample
denotes any sample period outside the original sample period. Therefore, performing out-of-

                                   2
sample tests is a means of determining whether  there is an indication of p-hacking in our
observed accounting-based anomalies.

Our study is closely related to Linnainmaa et al. (2018), who replicate 36 accounting-based
anomalies using Pre-sample, In-sample and Post-sample data.  In-sample denotes the sample
period in the original study, while Pre-sample and Post-sample denotes the sample periods
before and after the original sample period, respectively. The sample frames allow them to
discern between three competing explanations for the existence of anomalies based
on: unmodeled risk, mispricing and p-hacking. If return predictability in a published study
results solely from p-hacking, the predictability should disappear out-of-
sample. Linnainmaa et al. (2018) find that the average returns and sharpe ratios of most
anomalies decrease out-of-sample, while correlation among anomalies and volatilities
increase. However, as found by McLean & Pontiff (2015), stock market anomalies are also
less anomalous after being published, due to investors learning about mispricing from
academic publications. Accordingly, this mechanism is a competing explanation for lower
anomaly performance in the post-sample period. Therefore, we compute a pre-publication
sample period in addition to the pre-sample and post-sample period, which denotes the
period after the original sample period, but before the publication date of the study.
This enables us further distinguish between mispricing and p-hacking effects by gauging
anomaly performance in the period before the post-publication effects occurs.

The aim of a replication study is not to perfectly replicate the findings in each of the original
papers. As mentioned by Mclean & Pontiff (2015), a replication that follows every
detail would be impossible since CRSP data changes over time and papers often omit details
about precise calculations. Rather, we implement the original definitions of the
anomalies but use our own statistical testing framework, where the method or parameters in
the replication procedure might differ from the original studies, to see if the hypothesis
brought forth in the original paper holds. Our replication procedure is kept constant
throughout all anomalies (see “methodology”). This also entails that anomalies which remain
significant in our study in addition to the original study hold higher robustness, even if the
anomaly turns out to be significant only in the in-sample period.

Furthermore, Brodeur et al. (2016) use a z-score plot to investigate the level of p-hacking and
publication-bias in economics journals, where they plot the distribution of reported z-
score from over 21,000 tests in a histogram. Their results indicate that there is an unnatural
dip of reported z-scores  right before significance at the 0.05 level. This can be an
indication that tests that have shown close to significant results have been altered until they
show a significant result. We construct a z-score plot similar to that of Brodeur et
al. (2016) to investigate the z-score distribution of accounting-based anomalies. This allows
us to gauge the level of p-hacking through other means than sub-period analysis as done by
meta-studies such as Linnainmaa et al. (2018) and Mclean & Pontiff (2015) whose inferences
were made from studying pre-sample, post-sample or post-publication sample periods. The

                                   3
implications of the observed distribution is discussed by comparing with the distribution
that would theoretically emerge absent p-hacking or publication bias.

1.2 Research Question
Our research aims to determine whether accounting-based return anomalies are persistent
outside their original sample periods, and to examine the explanations for  cross-sectional
return predictability in the observed anomalies. Specifically, our study investigates
whether the existence of published accounting-based anomalies can be attributed to p-
hacking.

Therefore, our main research question is:

Is the cross-sectional return predictability in published accounting-based anomalies a result
of p-hacking?

1.3 Literature Review and Contribution
Linnainmaa et.al. (2018) conduct a meta-study on a similar set of 36 accounting-based
anomalies with pre-sample, in-sample and post-sample data. In addition to the sample
periods of Linnainmaa et al., we add a pre-publication sample period in line with
Mclean & Pontiff (2015) which allows us to further discern between competing explanations
for the emergence of the anomalies. Furthermore, Linnainmaa et al. (2018) implement
portfolio sorts with double sorted portfolios on size and the anomaly variable itself. We
instead opt for a univariate sort, similar to Hou et al. (2020), based solely on the anomaly
factor in  order to focus on the performance in isolation. Finally, our paper adds to the post-
sample period of Linnainmaa et al. (2018) since a longer post-sample period has accumulated
since the implementation of their tests.

Hou et al. (2020) conducted a similar large scale replication with 452 anomaly variables,
using univariate portfolio sort (and cross-sectional regressions). However, all anomalies were
replicated with a sample period between 1967-2016 without sub-period analysis.
Consequently, post-publication attenuation of anomaly performance could explain the
failure to clear the 1.96 hurdle in the authors’ replications. With their replication method,
Hou et.al. found that 65% of the anomalies could not clear the single test hurdle of the
absolute t-value of 1.96. Our contribution to Hou et al.’s study is therefore that we are able
to discuss the competing explanations  for the anomalies through out-of-sample analysis.

McLean & Pontiff (2015)’s meta study of 97 factors compare the predictor’s return in-
sample, post-publication  and  out-of-sample but pre-publication (which we simply call pre-
publication in our study). They find that portfolio returns are 26% lower in the period after
the original sample but before publication, which serves as an upper bound estimate of data
mining effects. In the post-publication sample, they find that returns are 58% lower, and
therefore attribute 32%(58% - 26%) to publication informed trading, i.e. that investors learn

                                   4
about mispricing from academic publications and trade accordingly. Our study includes a
pre-sample period in addition to the sample periods of McLean & Pontiff (201)5, which
allows for further analysis of anomaly performance before the original sample period.

Our paper presents an additional analysis to further distinguish p-hacking from other
competing explanations for declining anomaly performance. To gauge the publication bias
and p-hacking, we look at the distribution of test statistics, as both publication bias (file
drawer effect) and p-hacking induce certain patterns on the distribution of test-statistics and
p-values (Harvey et al., 2016). Similar to Brodeur et al.(2016), we plot the z-scores found in
the original studies to  investigate whether the distribution show indications of p-
hacking.  This allows us to determine the extent of p-hacking through other means than out-
of-sample analysis as done by Linnainmaa et al. (2018) and Mclean & Pontiff (2015).

                                   5
                            2.  Theory
This section provides the theoretical and mathematical framework of the asset pricing models
that were used in the study, as well as the theoretical explanation for cross-sectional return
anomalies. Additionally, it describes the statistical background of hypothesis tests and its
implications.

Before we summarize and replicate asset price anomalies we here present the pricing models
to which they are compared. An anomaly is simply an empirical observation where a
systematic return can be observed that cannot be explained by standard asset pricing models.
To judge whether an anomaly exist we thus first have to present the benchmark towards
which they are identified.

1.1 Asset Pricing Models
We perform regressions against CAPM and Fama-French three-factor model (FF3) when
computing the alpha of anomalies.

CAPM:
The capital asset pricing model sets out to price securities by risk and time value of money.

                            𝐸𝑅#  =  𝑅%  + 𝛽#(𝐸𝑅)  − 𝑅%)
where
                          𝐸𝑅#=  𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑  𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛  𝑜𝑓  𝑖𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡
                               𝑅%=  𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑘  − 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑒  𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒
                                 𝛽#  =  𝑏𝑒𝑡𝑎  𝑜𝑓  𝑖𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡
                       ?𝐸𝑅)  − 𝑅%@  =  𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡  𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑘  𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑢𝑚

The 𝑅𝑓,  risk- free rate, component accounts for the time value of money, while the
𝐸𝑅−𝑅𝑓, market risk, component accounts for the risk of the asset. The β Beta represents
the riskiness of the stock in relation to the market. In this way, the asset’s volatility is taken
into consideration in the pricing.

Fama and French Three Factor Model
The Fama and French Three Factor model is an extension to the Capital Asset Pricing model
that adds size and value risk factors (Fama & French, 1992).

                   𝐸𝑅#  =  𝑅%  + 𝛽()𝐸𝑅*  − 𝑅%, + 𝛽-(𝑆𝑀𝐵) + 𝛽3(𝐻𝑀𝐿)
where

                          𝐸𝑅#=  𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑  𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛  𝑜𝑓  𝑖𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡
                               𝑅%=  𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑘  − 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑒  𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒
                                 𝛽A,C,D  =  𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟  𝑐𝑜𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑡
                      ?𝐸𝑅)  − 𝑅%@  =  𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡  𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑘  𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑢𝑚

                                   6
                        𝑆𝑀𝐵  =  𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒  𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑢𝑚(𝑠𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑙  𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑢𝑠  𝑏𝑖𝑔)
                      𝐻𝑀𝐿  =  𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒  𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑢𝑚(ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ  𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑢𝑠  𝑙𝑜𝑤)

Through their research, Fama and French found that small-cap stocks and high book-to-
market value stocks tend to outperform markets. By adding these factors to the CAPM, their
three-factor model is able to explain 90% of diversification in portfolio returns, compared to
CAPM’s 70% (Fama & French, 1992). Apart from excess return on the market, which is also
a factor in the CAPM,  the three-factor model also contains the factors size of firm and book-
to-market. The SMB factor accounts for the high returns from the small-cap firms, and the
HML factor accounts for the high returns generated by stocks with a high book-to-market
value.

1.2 Explanations for Cross Sectional Return-anomalies
Three main hypotheses are often mentioned  as the cause for the existence of cross-sectional
return anomalies (Linnainmaa, 2018). The first is unmodeled risk, which states that the
anomalies come as an effect of the multidimensionality of stocks that cannot be reduced into
a simple model, thus leading to misspecification. For instance, an anomaly might compensate
for risk that CAPM or FF3 fails to account for. If return predictability exists as compensation
for risk, the predictability should be persistent over time.
The implication that comes with this hypothesis is that the sample period should be
irrelevant to the return predictability, as long as structural shifts in the risks that matter to
investors do not occur. However, the past century has seen notable changes in cross-sections
of corporate characteristics, meaning that a shift in significance of the anomaly may be a
result of the shift in the underlying risk that drives the anomaly (Linnainmaa, 2018). This
means that the choice of sample periods could matter if we have a non-diverse distribution of
original sample periods.

The second hypothesis for why anomalies occur is mispricing. Mispricing exist due to the
limits of arbitrage (Shleifer & Vishny, 1997), as well as investor irrationality
(Linnainmaa, 2018). These factors cause asset prices to deviate from the price given by an
asset pricing model. Over the past century, however, the possibility to exploit this arbitrage in
mispricing has become easier (French, 2008). This is a result of both decreasing trading costs
(Hasbrouck, 2009) and increased information availability due to digitalization and improved
computing power. Mclean & Pontiff (2015) show that if return predictability reflects
mispricing, publication will lead to investors learning about the mispricing, which will cause
return predictability to decay. However, trading frictions will prevent anomalies to disappear
completely.

The final hypothesis is p-hacking (data-snooping or data-mining), which would imply that
the anomalies are significant by chance, also known as a type 1 error. Further explanation of
hypothesis tests is presented in the following section.

                                   7
1.3  Publication Bias,  p-hacking, and hypothesis testing
Research can be considered more or less attractive based on whether or not it reports
significant results (Szucks & Ionnaides, 2017). Fanelli (2013) finds that articles that are
published with insignificant findings get fewer citations than those with significant findings.
Hence, academic journals have a stronger incentive to publish articles that report significant
findings. This is known as publication bias. P-hacking is broadly defined as the action of
manipulating data in order to report statistically significant findings. Because of academic
journals’ preference for publishing articles which display statistically significant
results, researchers find that when their research doesn’t produce sub 0.05 p-values, a
statistically significant result, it can be in their favor to strategically select or analyze in such a
way that they get lower p-values.  This can be based on decisions such as what data to
include, what measures to study, and which interactions to measure etc. (Gelman &
Loken, 2013). When using a 0.05 significance level in hypothesis testing, there is a
5% chance of finding a significant result when there is in fact not one. Although there are
many forms of p-hacking, the form of p-hacking which is a common issue in cross-sectional
literature is where published factors are actually drawn from multiple unpublished tests
without accounting for multiple testing. Harvey (2017) illustrates in an empirical example
that  given a large enough choice set, dozens of long-short strategies based on the first three
letters of stock tickers  have significant t-statistics,  which is an example of how p-hacking can
work.

                          Type I and Type II errors in NHST

                                                     Decision

                                      𝐹𝑎𝑖𝑙  𝑡𝑜  𝑟𝑒𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡  𝐻Q                 𝑅𝑒𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡  𝐻Q

         𝐻Q(𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒)                 Correct decision             Type I error (𝛼 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟)

        𝐻Q(𝑓𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒)             Type II error (𝛽 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟)            Correct decision

Figure 1 demonstrates the possible outcomes in NHST based on the decision to fail to reject or reject 𝐻6 and whether or not
𝐻6 is true.

The value α represents the probability of a false rejection of the null hypothesis, also known
as a type 1 error. Although this value is low, usually at 5%, it grows with the number of tests
performed (Bickel & Docksum 1977). Due to the absence of a requirement for researchers to
report all of their performed tests in their published work, there is no way to ensure that the
significant results that appear from a study aren't a result of the performance of simply
enough hypothesis tests.

                                   8
1.4 Multiple testing adjustments
Another method of validating anomalies which are found through excessive data-mining or
p-hacking in cross sectional research is to implement statistical adjustments that accounts for
multiple testing.  This method is an alternative validation method to out-of-sample testing
presented previously. To account for multiple testing, the statistical literature often control
for measures such as family-wise error rate (FWER) and false discovery rate (FDR). FWER is
the probability of at least one type I error. FDP measures the expected proportion of false
discoveries among all discoveries. There are many other measures or techniques which can be
seen as extensions of the two aforementioned measures (Harvey et al., 2016).

Many statistical adjustment methods have been developed to control for both FWER and
FDP. Harvey et al. (2016) use three different adjustments in their paper:
Bonferroni’s adjustment, Holm’s adjustment and Benjamini, Hochberg
and Yekutieli’s adjustment (BHY). Since these multiple testing adjustments are all dependent
upon the number of tests carried out, one needs to address the issue within cross
sectional stock returns research - that some anomaly factors that are tested but are not made
available to the public. Factors that have been tried and found insignificant are often
discarded. Based on a simulation framework, Harvey et al. (2016) estimate that 71% of all
tried factors are missing.  The authors then establish a general t-statistic cutoff of 3.0 as a
recommended cutoff for newly discovered anomaly factors. However, they mention that not
necessarily all factors should be evaluated based on this cutoff. For instance, factors which are
developed through theoretical principles should reasonably have a lower cutoff than a factor
discovered through simply empirical testing. Nevertheless, we will use the 3.0 threshold to re-
evaluate our anomalies as an additional computation to test our conclusions against.

                                   9
                    3.  Data and Methodology
3.1  Defining factor anomalies
We replicate 21 accounting-based anomalies whose factors can be further subcategorized into
growth and investment, earnings quality, profitability and valuation. Table 1 lists these
factors, along with their authors, original sample period, and the formula used to calculate
the particular factor. (See “appendix” for a description of each anomaly).

                                  Anomalies

Table 1 lists the individual anomalies that are replicated in our study. Column 1 lists each anomaly factor. Column 2 lists the
author along with the year that their article was published. Column 3 lists the sample period in which the anomaly factor
was tested in the original study. Column 4 lists the formula used in our study for each anomaly.

                                  10
3.2 Data Sources
We obtain annual accounting data from the Compustat database, which provides bias-free
coverage from 1963. Prior to 1963, there is a significantly sparser coverage for selected
successful firms, since Compustat was established in 1962 and only backfilled information
for selected firms. Therefore, we collected annual accounting data from 1963 - 2020 for all
firms listed on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ. For the same period and stock universe, we
collected stock returns data from CRSP. We also take delisting returns data from CRSP.
Monthly Fama French factors and risk-free returns were obtained from Kenneth French’s
website. We only include common stocks (share codes 10 and 11). Unless stated otherwise in
the original studies, rows with missing values (for variables used to construct the anomaly
factors) are removed.

When studying the distribution of test statistics to identify p-hacking, the method used is
similar to that of Brodeur et al. (2016), in which we aim to collect test-statistics that represent
key hypotheses. T-statistics are collected from the original studies of the articles replicated
by Linnainmaa (2018) and are solely from tables. T-statistics are collected from 22 original
studies that find accounting-based anomalies. The scores collected are solely from tables and
are recorded exactly as they are presented, i.e. we do not round up or down. Both negative
and positive t-statistics are collected but are adjusted to their absolute value. Since the sample
sizes  in these studies  are so large, we find that the conversion from t-statistics to z-scores
results in such a minimal change that is too small to make a difference in the plot, we simply
report the t-statistics as z-scores.

3.3 Sample Periods
We analyze the following sample periods encompassed by our data:

                             Sample Period Illustration

Figure 2 illustrates the sample periods used in out study on a timeline.

In-sample: the sample period used in the original study. This is computed for all anomalies.

Post-sample: the sample period occurring after the original sample period. This is computed
for all anomalies.

Pre-sample: the sample period occurring before the original sample period. This sample
period is computed for 9 anomalies with more than 7 years of pre-sample data (e.g. firms
with original sample periods starting in 1964 will not have enough pre-sample data). We

                                  11
implement this criterion to ensure that we have a sufficient sample size, since COMPUSTAT
has lower data coverage for earlier years (lower amount of firms have sufficient accounting
data).

Pre-publication  out of sample: the sample period occurring between the end of the
original sample period and the publishing of the article. This time frame usually spans
between 2-6 years. This is computed for all anomalies. In this paper, we simply call this
period “pre-publication”.

We also present a distribution of our sample periods for each anomaly. Later in this paper, we
refer to this figure when discussing sample selection sensitivity.

Figure 3. Plots the distribution of the original sample periods of each anomaly. The pre-publication sample period is not
plotted in this graph, since it consists of the first 2-6 years in the post-sample period.

3.4 Methodology
To re-evaluate return anomalies we compute anomaly variables using the same formulas as
the original studies. The definition of each anomaly is held constant throughout all sample
periods to make the results comparable.

To evaluate the predictive power of an anomaly we use a portfolio sort approach, with stocks
being sorted into annual quintiles (five portfolios) based on the anomaly variable. The
quintile portfolios are then used to construct anomaly factors through high-minus-low
approach. Thus, the return of the anomaly factor is the return of the highest quintile minus
the return of the lowest quintile. The high and low labels are chosen based on the original
study, where the stocks in the high portfolio earn higher returns than those in the low
portfolios.

                                  12
In computing the accounting-based anomalies and subsequent returns, we make the
conventional assumption that accounting data is available six months after the fiscal year end
date. We construct our stock anomalies with annual rebalancing at the end of June. In other
words, stocks are sorted into portfolios in June year t with accounting information from the
fiscal year that ended in year  t  -  1.

When forming portfolios, many studies use equal-weighted returns. However, we chose to
compute value-weighted returns. Value weighted returns reflect the wealth effect
experienced by investors (Fama, 1998). Furthermore, and more importantly, value-weighted
returns help to control for microcaps. Microcaps account for about 60% of the total number
of stocks, but only make up for 3% of the aggregate market capitalization of the NYSE-Amex-
NASDAQ universe (Fama & French, 2008). High transaction costs cause anomalies present
in microcaps to be less exploitable. Therefore, value-weighted returns is a more representative
measure than equal-weighted returns.

The value weighted average monthly returns of each anomaly factor for each sub-period (in-
sample,  post-sample, pre-sample or pre-publication) are then tested against the null-
hypothesis of zero return in a two-sided t-test. The anomaly factors are also regressed against
CAPM and Fama French 3 factors to compute Alphas and corresponding t-statistics.

                                  13
                             4.  Results
4.1 Individual Anomalies
Table 2 presents the average monthly percentage return, as well as the CAPM and Fama-
French 3-factor alphas. The average return, alphas and corresponding t-statistics is reported
for the in-, post-, and pre-publication samples, as well as the pre-  sample where applicable.

        Average Returns, CAPM Alpha and FF3 Alpha for Individual Anomalies

                                  14
Table 2 displays average monthly returns, CAPM Alpha and FF3 Alpha, and their respective t-statistics for
individual anomalies. Asterisks after the t-statistics indicate the p-values: * = P < 0.05, ** = P<
0.01, *** = P<0.001.

In-sample, we find that 16 out of 21 anomaly factors earn returns that are statistically
significant at the 5% level. 18 anomaly factors also have significant CAPM alphas, and 16

                                  15
have significant three-factor model alphas. For some anomalies, such as Change in asset
turnover or ROE, the difference in significance between returns and either CAPM alphas or
three-factor model alphas are large compared to other anomalies. This has to do with how an
anomaly covaries with the market and the FF3 factors. Linnainmaa (2018) explains that an
anomaly that covaries negatively with the market and FF3 factors might exhibit low returns
but considerably higher alphas, for instance.

In the post-sample period, only 2 out of 21 anomalies have significant returns at the 5% level.
5 anomalies have significant CAPM alphas, and 5 also have significant three-factor model
alphas. Thus, we see a markedly weaker performance of anomalies in the post-sample period.

We compute pre-sample returns and alphas for 9 anomalies with more than 10 years of
available pre-sample data, and also pre-publication returns and alphas for all anomalies. We
find that 5 out of 9  anomalies have significant returns pre-sample. Furthermore, 5 and 7 have
significant CAPM and three-factor model alphas in the pre-sample period respectively. In the
pre-publication sample, only 2 out of 21 anomalies have significant returns, 3 have
significant CAPM alphas, and 6 have significant three-factor model alphas. However,
especially for the pre-sample and pre-publication periods, the statistical power for any one
anomaly is limited due to the smaller sample size. Therefore, it is also preferable to look at the
aggregate of all anomalies and compute averages, as in the section below (see “4.2 Average
Anomalies”).

Table 3 summarizes our results for individual anomalies:

Table 3. The table shows the count of significant average returns, CAPM Alphas and FF3 Alphas by sample
period.  For In-sample, Post-sample and Pre-publication we computed t-statistics for all 21 anomalies. Pre-
sample t-statistics are computed for 9 anomalies.

4.2 Average Anomalies
In this section we show results for the average of all observed anomalies. Average return,
CAPM Alpha and FF3 Alpha averages are computed for each sample period.

                                  16
Figure 4 plots the average return, CAPM Alpha and FF3 Alpha by sample period.

Figure 5 plots the t-statistics of average return, CAPM Alpha and FF3 Alpha by sample period.

Figure 4 shows that the average anomaly factor earns a monthly return of 0.51% during the
in-sample period. In the post-sample period, the return decreases to 0.15% per month, while
the pre-sample period indicates a slightly higher return of 0.32%. In the pre-publication
sample we also see a significant depletion of returns, with 0.24% in monthly return. The
anomalies also show a similar relationship in CAPM Alpha, with an in-sample CAPM Alpha
of  0.70 and notably lower alphas in out-of-sample periods, with a post-sample alpha of 0.14.
For FF3 Alpha, the pre-sample period exhibits a slightly higher alpha than the in-sample
period.

In addition to the alpha, volatility should be taken into consideration when determining the
attractiveness of an anomaly as an investment. Although our out-of-sample anomaly factor
returns are lower, a decrease in volatility could counteract this. Sharpe ratio takes volatility
into consideration through dividing an anomaly factor’s average return by its volatility
(standard deviation of returns). Figure 6 shows average sharpe ratios by sample period.

                                  17
Figure 6. Average sharpe ratio by sample period. We have annualized the monthly sharpe ratios by multiplying
with √12

We see that the average  sharpe  ratio is clearly higher in-sample than out-of-sample, which
further strengthens our findings that out-of-sample anomaly factor performance is lower
than in-sample. The figure also indicates a declining trend between pre-sample, pre-
publication and post-sample periods.

                                  18
It is also interesting to look at  t-statistics grouped by anomaly category to investigate
whether certain anomaly categories perform better.

   Table 4. Average return, CAPM Alpha and FF3 Alpha t-statistics by anomaly category and sample period.

Table 4 shows us that different anomaly categories perform better with regards to
alphas or average returns. Profitability anomalies have lower performance than other
categories with regards to average return, but still exhibit competitive CAPM Alpha and FF3
Alpha in most sample periods. Also, valuation anomalies have significantly lower FF3 Alpha
compared to other anomalies in all periods except pre-sample. Later in this study, we will
provide plausible explanations for these results.

                                  19
                            6.  Discussion
6.1 Competing explanations for the emergence of anomalies
Unmodeled risk
If the cross-sectional return predictability in anomalies is an  effect of unmodeled risk, risk
that is not accounted for by risk models such as CAPM or the three-factor model, then we
expect the effect to be similar across time periods. That is, if return predictability exists as
compensation for risk, the predictability should be persistent over time, as with the factors of
CAPM or FF3 for instance. However, as mentioned previously, there is still the possibility
that structural shifts in the risks that matter to investors cause the anomalies to perform
differently across time periods.

Consider the case where all anomalies have the same in-sample periods (also pre-  and post-
sample), then changing markets conditions or investor behavior during a specific time period
could possibly explain changes in return predictability throughout our sample periods. For
instance, macroeconomic events or other events could create a structural break which
coincides with the shift between In- and Post- sample periods, which causes anomaly
performance to decline Post-sample. However, this would be mitigated by a diverse
distribution of original sample periods (or In-sample periods), since a time specific change
will not only be present in one type of sample period. In our sample period distribution
graph, we see that although several anomalies have original sample periods starting in the
1960s, there are also many anomalies which start at significantly later time frames.
Additionally, anomalies with longer sample periods are less sensitive to structural shifts
occurring during that period. Therefore, we judge that our conclusions are not particularly
sensitive to changes in market conditions during a specific period. Hence, the unmodeled risk
hypothesis is a weak explanation for the non-persistent anomaly performance throughout
our sample periods.

Mispricing
Under the mispricing hypothesis, the publication of an anomaly paper should cause
sophisticated investors to learn about the mispricing and trade against it. Therefore, the
cross-sectional return predictability should disappear or decay after publication. Accordingly,
this is consistent with lower anomaly performance in the post-sample period. However, this
does not explain the attenuation of anomaly returns between the in-sample period and pre-
publication period which is a sample period before the publication date. Hence, mispricing
alone cannot explain the decay of anomaly performance in the post-sample period. On the
other hand, one should take into consideration that the release of research as working papers
could contribute to informed trading before the publication date, which we will discuss
later.

Similar to Mclean & Pontiff we estimate an upper bound for the mispricing effect. In this
case, the performance decline between pre-publication and post-sample is attributed to
mispricing effects. As presented in our average anomaly results, we find that anomaly returns

                                  20
are 52.3% lower in the pre-publication sample compared to in-sample, in relative terms. Also,
anomaly returns are 70.8% lower in the post-sample relative to the in-sample period. An
upper bound estimate of the mispricing effect is therefore a 18.48% decline of in-sample
returns (70.8% - 52.3%).

A part of the mispricing hypothesis also involves declining limits to arbitrage, implying that
restrictions that prevent investors from exploiting mispricing opportunities are decreasing,
which causes mispricing to be less prevalent over time. Therefore this theory is consistent
with declining performance throughout the sample periods in chronological order: pre-
sample, in-sample, pre-publication and post-sample. Evidently, our results implies that
mispricing cannot explain our pre-sample performance which is lower than the in-sample
performance. However, we do see a declining performance between the pre-sample, pre-
publication and post-sample with regards to average returns, CAPM alpha but also Sharpe-
ratio. This trend of declining performance is consistent with declining limits to arbitrage.

Mclean & Pontiff(2015) discusses the possibility that publication of academic research has
no effect  on return predictability, but that the decline in performance between the pre-
publication and post-sample is explained by time trends such as declining limits to arbitrage.
For instance, declining anomaly returns post-sample may simply be explained by lower
trading costs and increase in hedge funds in later time periods. In order to investigate the
possibility that their results reflect time effects and not a publication effect, the authors
conduct regressions with a time variable. However, they find that the post-publication
coefficient is still statistically significant, implying that publication of academic research does
have a significant effect on the decay of anomaly returns.

P-hacking
P-hacking suggests that significant anomalies emerge by chance due to testing of multiple
anomalies. The process of p-hacking involves testing numerous hypotheses using the same
data set. Under the p-hacking hypothesis, the in-sample performance of anomalies are unique
to that period and become insignificant out-of-sample. Therefore, our findings are consistent
with p-hacking, where in-sample performance is markedly higher than out-of-sample
performance.

As previously computed for mispricing, we can discuss an upper bound estimate of the p-
hacking effect. The lower performance during the pre-publication period occurs before the
publication date, so publication-informed trading (exploitation of mispricing) cannot
explain the performance decrease between the pre-publication and the in-sample period.
However, as previously mentioned, declining limits to arbitrage can explain lower anomaly
returns throughout the sample periods in chronological order. Therefore, declining limits to
arbitrage could play a part in the attenuation of anomaly performance between the in-sample
and pre-publication periods. Nevertheless, it is unlikely for the entire decline of 52.3% to be
explained by declining limits to arbitrage. Therefore, assuming that declining limits to

                                  21
arbitrage have a minor effect on the decay of anomaly returns, a 52.3% depletion of in-sample
returns is still an upper bound estimate of p-hacking effects. Note that this is an upper bound
estimate, since research is often released as working papers sophisticated traders might be
aware of the mispricing before publication, as mentioned by Mclean & Pontiff (2015). Some
traders are likely to learn about the predictor before publication and cause the decay in the
pre-publication period to be larger than the actual decay from p-hacking.

To further investigate the extend of p-hacking in the original articles that Linnainmaa (2018)
replicate (from which we select our anomalies that we replicate), we also collect and plot the
z-scores that 22 of those articles present in their tables, similar to the process of Brodeur et al.
(2016) (as described under “data sources”).

Figure 7 displays the distribution of z-scores presented in the articles replicated by Linnainmaa (2018). For full reference list see
“Appendix”. Bin-widths of 0.1 and a black line as a marker for a z-score of 1.96 (significance at the 0.05 level) as well as z-score of 2.2
(maximum).

The distribution of the z-scores is presented in as a histogram in figure 4. We see a presence of
a maximum at roughly 2.2, which represents a p-value of under 0.05. Another observation is
the denser distribution on the right hand side of the z = 1.96 level than the left hand side.
There is somewhat of a steep drop off of the density line on the left hand side, as opposed to a
nearly flat line up until z = 3 . After that we see a natural decrease in tests before leveling off.

From our plotted distribution, we see that the density line shares some similar characteristics
to those exhibited by the plots displayed by Brodeur et al. (2016). They report a distribution
with a camel-back shaped hump, with a maximum slightly above 2, but also a local minimum
at z = 1.5 (p-value of 0.12). By the nature of tests, the distribution would decrease for higher
z-values. This fact brings interest to our maximum at 2.2, which is similar to the maximum
reported by Brodeur et al (2016); however, this could also be a result of selective reporting of
the significant tests. We fail to see the clear camel-back shaped hump, where there is a dip in
the distribution right before the level 1.96, that Brodeur et al. find and attribute to p-

                                  22
hacking. However, we find a slight indentation at around the same location as Brodeur et
al.(2016) find their local minimum. This discrepancy between their dip and our
indentation could be explained in the much fewer number of articles, and therewith tests,
that we used in our distribution (our 22 compared to their 642). All in all, it is hard to make
the claim that the original articles were subject to p-hacking only through the inferences from
our histogram. However, pieced together with the results in our replication study, it gives
ground to believe that this could be the case.

6.2 Multiple-testing adjustment as an alternative to out-of-sample validation
Harvey et al. suggests the usage of a test statistic cutoff of 3.00 instead of the conventional
1.96 cutoff for a two-sided test at 5% significance. An unadjusted t statistic of 3.00 on a two-
sided hypothesis test would roughly equate a p-value of 0.002. This can be compared to the
0.005 p-value proposed by Benjamin et al. (2017), as a better threshold for statistical
significance. Anomalies which clear the 3.00 hurdle are regarded as significant despite the
presence of multiple testing in anomalies literature, and this statistically motivated cutoff also
serves as a mitigation against  this form of p-hacking. Thus, to verify the robustness of an
anomaly against  p-hacking, implementing a multiple-testing t-statistics cutoff is an
alternative to out-of-sample testing.

We find that only 6 out of 21 anomalies have in-sample average returns t-statistics that clear
the 3.00 hurdle. However, to investigate multiple-testing adjustments as an alternative to out-
of-sample validation we are also interested in whether the anomalies that are significant at
3.00 are the same anomalies that proved to be significant out-of-sample. Theoretically,
clearing Harvey et al.  (2016)’s multiple-testing cutoff should imply that an anomaly is
regarded as significant despite the presence of data-snooping, and therefore that anomaly
should not only be an in-sample phenomenon. To examine whether out-of-sample
significance coincides with clearing the 3.0 hurdle in-sample, we present a comparison in
Table 5. The table compares the results of out-of-sample validation and implementing a
multiple testing t-statistic cutoff. One column specifies whether an anomaly is significant in-
sample at the 3.00 cutoff, and the other column specify whether the same anomaly is
significant in any of the out-of-sample periods (pre-sample, pre-publication, post-sample) at
the conventional cutoff of 1.96.

                                  23
                     Out-of-sample significance vs.  statistical adjustments

Table 5. “In-sample t-value > 3” shows which anomalies clear the 3.00 test statistic cutoff for average returns, where “Yes”
indicates that an anomaly has average return t-statistic of more than 3.00. “Out-of-sample significance” denotes significance
in any of the out-of-sample periods (Pre-sample, Pre-publication and Post-sample) and “Yes” indicates that an anomaly has a
t-statistic above the conventional 1.96 level in any of the three out-of-sample periods. In “Intersection”, anomalies for which
both out-of-sample and multiple-testing cutoff yield the same conclusion are marked with “X”.

We find that only 13 out of 21 anomalies coincide with respect to the two different
validation methods. Therefore, a considerable amount of anomalies are “robust” with regards
to one approach but not the other. Concludingly, the multiple testing adjustment is not a
substitute for out-of-sample tests. Additionally, more conclusions can be derived from out-
of-sample tests due to the time-period analysis, which cannot be conducted through
multiple-testing adjustments.

6.3 Analyzing anomaly performance
 In our results, we pointed out that different anomaly types have different characteristics
with regards to average returns and alphas. Here, we provide plausible explanations for the
observed results. Profitable firms tend to be larger, less volatile and more liquid, which also
implies that profitability anomalies which go long on these firms will have returns of lower
magnitude while being more stable. This is an explanation for the low average return, but still
significant CAPM and FF3 alpha of profitability anomalies. Valuation based anomalies seem
to produce lower FF3 alpha than other anomalies overall. This can be explained by the fact
that value risk premium is accounted for by the three factor model. Thus, the return
predictability in valuation based anomalies are already explained by the book-to-market
factor in FF3. This also explains why the book-to-market anomaly itself has negative alpha
throughout all sample periods. Furthermore, some anomalies seem to be more persistent than
others, which can be attributed to limits to arbitrage such as trading frictions.
Anomalies with lower arbitrage costs will suffer from larger performance decay. Chu et al
(2020) show that anomalies such as gross profitability, asset growth, investments to assets,
return on assets, net operating assets and accruals are largely driven by mispricing due to
limits to arbitrage.

                                  24
                     7.  Concluding remarks
7.1 Conclusion
 Our out-of-sample tests, z-score distribution and also tests based on multiple testing
adjustments all point to that part of the existing anomalies literature can be attributed to p-
hacking. Compared to Mclean & Pontiff (2015), we have a higher upper bound estimate for
p-hacking effects, and a smaller effect from publication informed trading. Also, we find that
only 6 of 21 anomalies clear the multiple testing t-statistic cutoff of 3.0 suggested by Harvey
et al. Thus, we conclude that a majority of published accounting-based anomalies
are probably false discoveries. Our study supports the idea that p-hacking and publication
bias in the field of cross-section of stock returns is a major issue. Papers that support the idea
that p-hacking and publication bias is dominant include Harvey et al. (2016) and Hou et
al. (2017), and Linnainmaa & Roberts (2018), while papers like Mclean &
Pontiff (2015) find that this is a relatively minor issue.
It is worth addressing that we do not assign the entire anomaly “factor zoo” to p-
hacking either. To shed light on the limitations of p-hacking as an explanation, Chen
(2019) conduct a thought experiment and argues that it would take 15 million years to find
the 316 factors in the Harvey, Liu & Zhu (2016) through purely p-hacking. To conclude, we
attribute part of the cross-sectional return predictability  in accounting-based stock anomalies
to p-hacking.

7.2 Directions for Future Research
It is valuable to study a larger set of anomalies to enhance the statistical power of the
conclusions drawn from this study. Also, further investigation of the differences in
computation methods between the original studies and our study would be interesting to
pinpoint why some anomalies fail to replicate. It would be valuable to study anomalies
through other analyses that investigate p-hacking or publication bias. An example of this
would be using the method brought forth by Andrews & Kasy(2019) which estimates
publication bias through meta-studies.

                                  25
                        References
Andrews, I., & Kasy, M. (2019). Identification of and correction for publication
bias. American Economic Review, 109(8), 2766-94.

Benjamin, D. J., Berger, J. O., Johannesson, M., Nosek, B. A., Wagenmakers, E. J., Berk, R.,
... & Johnson, V. E. (2018). Redefine statistical significance. Nature human behaviour, 2(1),
6-10.

Brodeur, A., Lé, M., Sangnier, M., & Zylberberg, Y. (2016). Star wars: The empirics strike
back. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8(1), 1-32.

Chen, A. Y. (2019). The limits of p-hacking: A thought experiment.

Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (1992).  The cross-section of expected stock returns  (pp. 349-391).
University of Chicago Press.

Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (2008). Dissecting anomalies. The Journal of Finance, 63(4),
1653-1678.

Fanelli, D. (2013). Why growing retractions are (mostly) a good sign. PLoS Med, 10(12),
e1001563.

French, K. R. (2008). Presidential address: The cost of active investing. The Journal of
Finance, 63(4), 1537-1573.

Gelman, A., & Loken, E. (2013). The garden of forking paths: Why multiple comparisons
can be a problem, even when there is no “fishing expedition” or “p-hacking” and the research
hypothesis was posited ahead of time.  Department of Statistics, Columbia University,  348.

Harvey, C. R. (2017). Presidential address: The scientific outlook in financial
economics. The Journal of Finance, 72(4), 1399-1440.

Campbell R. Harvey, Yan Liu, Heqing Zhu, … and the Cross-Section of Expected
Returns, The Review of Financial Studies, Volume 29, Issue 1, January 2016, Pages 5–68

Hasbrouck, J. (2009). Trading costs and returns for US equities: Estimating effective costs
from daily data. The Journal of Finance, 64(3), 1445-1477.

Kewei Hou, Chen Xue, Lu Zhang, Replicating Anomalies, The Review of Financial Studies,
Volume 33, Issue 5, May 2020, Pages 2019–2133

                                  26
Linnainmaa, J. T., & Roberts, M. R. (2018). The history of the cross-section of stock
returns. The Review of Financial Studies, 31(7), 2606-2649.

McLean, R. D., & Pontiff, J. (2016). Does academic research destroy stock return
predictability?. The Journal of Finance, 71(1), 5-32.

Szucs, D., & Ioannidis, J. (2017). When null hypothesis significance testing is unsuitable for
research: a reassessment. Frontiers in human neuroscience, 11, 390.

Shleifer, A., & Vishny, R. W. (1997). The limits of arbitrage. The Journal of finance, 52(1),
35-55.

                                  27
                     Appendix

Anomalies
This section of the appendix will define the anomalies brought forth in section 3.2. The
order of the anomalies corresponds to that in table 1. We also list the study that first used the
variable to explain the cross-section of stock returns and the year the study was published.

Growth and Investment
Abnormal capital investment is defined as capital expenditures scaled by revenues, scaled
by the average of this ratio over the previous three years
Titman et al. (2004) measure the predictive power of abnormal capital investment using
return data from July 1973 through June 1996.

Asset growth is defined as the percentage change in total assets
Cooper et al. (2008) examine the predictive power of asset growth using return data from
July 1968 to June 2003.

Growth in inventory is defined as the change in inventory divided by the average total
assets
Thomas and Zhang (2002) use growth in inventory to predict stock returns using return data
from 1970 to 1997.

Growth in sales minus inventory is the difference between sales growth and inventory
growth. Sales growth is the increase in sales over its average value over the previous two years,
all scaled by the average value over the previous two years; inventory growth is the increase in
inventory over its average value over the previous two years, all scaled by the average value
over the previous two years
Abarbanell and Bushee (1998) use growth in sales minus inventory to predict returns from
1974 through 1993.

Investment growth rate is the percentage change in capital expenditures
Xing (2008) uses investment growth rate to construct an investment factor using return data
from 1964 to 2003.

Investment-to-assets ratio is defined as the change in the net value of plant, property, and
equipment plus the change in inventory, all scaled by lagged total assets
Lyandres et al. (2008) use the investment-to-assets ratio to predict returns from January 1970
through December 2005

Investment-to-capital ratio is defined as the ratio of capital expenditures to the lagged net
value of plant, property, and equipmen

                                  28
Xing (2008)  uses the investment-to-capital ratio to predict stock returns using return data
from 1964 to 2003.

Sustainable growth is defined as the percentage change in the book value of equity
Lockwood and Prombutr (2010) use return data from July 1964 through June 2007 to
measure the predictive power of sustainable growth.

Earnings Quality
Accruals is the noncash component of earnings divided by the average total assets
Sloan (1996) uses data from 1962 to 1991 to examine the predictive power of accruals.

Net operating assets represent the cumulative difference between operating income and
free cash flow, scaled by lagged total assets
Hirshleifer et al. (2004) form trading strategies based on net operating assets using data from
July 1964 through December 2002.

Net working capital changes is another measure of accruals
Soliman (2008) uses net working capital changes to predict stock returns using return data
from 1984 to 2002

Profitability
Change in asset turnover is defined as the annual change in asset turnover, where asset
turnover is revenue divided by total assets
Soliman (2008) uses the change in asset turnover to predict returns between 1984 and 2002

Gross profitability is defined as the revenue minus cost of goods sold, all divided by total
assets
Novy-Marx (2013) examines the predictive power of gross profitability using return data
from July 1963 through December 2010

Operating profitability is defined as the revenue minus cost of goods sold, SG&A, and
interest, all divided by book value of equity
Fama and French (2015) construct a profitability factor based on operating profitability
using return data from July 1963 through December 2013

Profit  margin is defined as the earnings before interest and taxes, divided by sale
Soliman (2008) uses profit margin to predict returns using return data from 1984 to 2002.

Return on assets is defined as the earnings before extraordinary items, divided by total
assets
Haugen and Baker (1996) use return on assets to predict returns between 1979 and 1993

                                  29
Return on equity is defined as the earnings before extraordinary items, divided by the book
value of equity
Haugen and Baker (1996) use return on equity to predict returns between 1979 and 1993

Valuation
Book-to-market ratio is defined as the book value of equity divided by the December
market value of equity
Fama and French (1992) use book-to-market ratio to predict returns using return data from
July 1963 through December 1990

Cash flow-to-price ratio is defined as the income before extraordinary items plus
depreciation, all scaled by the December market value of equity
Lakonishok et al. (1994) use the cash flow-to-price ratio in tests that use return data from
May 1968 through April 1990

Enterprise multiple is a value measure used by practitioners
Loughran and Wellman (2011) compare the predictive power of enterprise multiple to that
of book-to-market using return data from July 1963 through December 2009

Sales-to-price ratio is defined as total sales divided by December market value of equity
Barbee et al. (1996)  compare the predictive power of sales-to-price to those of book-to-
market and debt-to-equity ratio using return data from 1979 through 1991

Z-score histogram
In this section we will list the articles from which we collected the data to create our
histogram plot.

Abarbanell, J. S., & Bushee, B. J. (1998). Abnormal returns to a fundamental analysis
strategy. Accounting Review, 19-45.

Bhandari, L. C. (1988). Debt/equity ratio and expected common stock returns: Empirical
evidence. The journal of finance, 43(2), 507-528.

Bradshaw, M. T., Richardson, S. A., & Sloan, R. G. (2006). The relation between corporate
financing activities, analysts’ forecasts and stock returns. Journal of accounting and
economics,  42(1-2), 53-85.

Campbell, J. Y., Hilscher, J., & Szilagyi, J. (2008). In search of distress risk. The Journal of
Finance, 63(6), 2899-2939.

Cooper, M. J., Gulen, H., & Schill, M. J. (2008). Asset growth and the cross‐section of stock
returns. the Journal of Finance, 63(4), 1609-1651.

                                  30
Daniel, K., & Titman, S. (2006). Market reactions to tangible and intangible
information. The Journal of Finance, 61(4), 1605-1643.

Dichev, I. D. (1998). Is the risk of bankruptcy a systematic risk?. the Journal of
Finance, 53(3), 1131-1147.

Haugen, R. A., & Baker, N. L. (1996). Commonality in the determinants of expected stock
returns. Journal of financial economics, 41(3), 401-439.

Hirshleifer, D., Hou, K., Teoh, S. H., & Zhang, Y. (2004). Do investors overvalue firms with
bloated balance sheets?. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 38, 297-331.

Hou, K., & Robinson, D. T. (2006). Industry concentration and average stock returns. The
Journal of Finance, 61(4), 1927-1956.

Lakonishok, J., Shleifer, A., & Vishny, R. W. (1994). Contrarian investment, extrapolation,
and risk. The journal of finance, 49(5), 1541-1578.

Lockwood, L., & Prombutr, W. (2010). Sustainable growth and stock returns. Journal of
Financial Research, 33(4), 519-538.

Loughran, T., & Wellman, J. W. (2011). New evidence on the relation between the
enterprise multiple and average stock returns. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis, 1629-1650.

Lyandres, E., Sun, L., & Zhang, L. (2008). The new issues puzzle: Testing the investment-
based explanation. The Review of Financial Studies, 21(6), 2825-2855.

Piotroski, J. D. (2000). Value investing: The use of historical financial statement information
to separate winners from losers.  Journal of Accounting Research, 1-41.

Pontiff, J., & Woodgate, A. (2008). Share issuance and cross‐sectional returns.  The Journal of
Finance, 63(2), 921-945.

Sloan, R. G. (1996). Do stock prices fully reflect information in accruals and cash flows
about future earnings?. Accounting review, 289-315.

Soliman, M. T. (2008). The use of DuPont analysis by market participants. The Accounting
Review, 83(3), 823-853.

                                  31
Spiess, D. K., & Affleck-Graves, J. (1999). The long-run performance of stock returns
following debt offerings. Journal of Financial Economics, 54(1), 45-73.

Titman, S., Wei, K. J., & Xie, F. (2004). Capital investments and stock returns.  Journal of
financial and Quantitative Analysis, 39(4), 677-700.

Xing, Y. (2008). Interpreting the value effect through the Q-theory: An empirical
investigation. The Review of Financial Studies, 21(4), 1767-1795.

Figures
This section  provides supplementary figures.

                       Figure 8: Average Return t-statistics by sample period

Figure 8 plots the t-statistics of average monthly returns by sample period and anomaly.

                                  32
               Figure 9: Capital asset pricing model alpha t-statistics by sample period

Figure 9 plots the t-statistics of CAPM Alpha by sample period and anomaly.

            Figure 10: Fama-French three factor model alpha t-statistics by sample period

Figure 10 plots the t-statistics of FF3 Alpha by sample period and anomaly.

                                  33