FINANCIAL  SPONSORS’
IMPACT ON IPO
UNDERPRICING

A COMPARISON BETWEEN VENTURE CAPITAL AND PRIVATE
EQUITY  INVESTORS

EBBA KJELLBERG

JULIA MALINOWSKI

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2021
Financial sponsors’  impact on IPO underpricing: A comparison between venture
capital and private equity investors

Abstract:
   This study examines the difference in underpricing between venture capital-  and
   private equity  backed initial public offerings (IPOs). With a sample of 361 IPOs listed
   on the Nasdaq Nordic main market and Nasdaq Nordic First North Growth  Market
   between January 2011 and December 2020, we show that several firm characteristics
   and IPO characteristics  differ between  venture capital backed and  private equity
   backed issuers. Then, we conclude that the type of sponsor  backing the IPO  does not
   impact the underpricing per se.  Instead, we  show  that  it is several  firm-  and IPO-
   characteristics  that  affects  underpricing,  and  that  these  variables differ  between  the
   two subgroups. These results have been derived from OLS regressions  and t-tests,  as
   well as  a  robustness tests controlling for firm characteristics  impact on the difference
    in underpricing between the two subgroups.

Keywords:

   Initial Public Offering, Venture Capital, Private Equity,  Underpricing

Authors:

   Ebba Kjellberg (24487)

   Julia Malinowski (24447)

Tutors:

   Dong Yan,  Associate Professor, Department of  Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien  d´Avernas,  Assistant  Professor, Department of  Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in  Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Julia Malinowski and Ebba Kjellberg, 2021

                                   1
1.0 Introduction
When  asking  about the world's largest hub for start-ups, many people think of Silicon
Valley, CA. Claiming this title with all its rights, Sweden has become closer to pole
position as the country breeds prosperous startups on a rolling basis. In fact, the entire
Nordic region is  just  as groundbreaking, ranking top 20 on the  Global  Innovative  Index
in 2020 (Dutta, Lanvin and Wunsch-Vincent, 2020).  As a result  from  the  market
flourishing with new businesses in need of funding, financial sponsors have increased
their presence with the aim to invest, guide and capitalize. Initial public offerings have
also become more common over the last decade, as it is one potential way for financial
sponsors to exit their investments  (Pitchbook, 2020, and PWC,  2020).
       Previous literature has responded to this surge in financial  sponsor activity  by
investigating the relationship between underpricing and having a venture capital firm
backing the IPO (Barry et al., 1990, Lee and Wahal, 2004). There are only a limited
number of papers exploring underpricing and its inherent effect of having a private equity
firm backing the IPO (Levis, 2011, Bergström et al., 2006). With the aim to extend
previous  research,  we  investigate  the  research  question;  is  there  a  difference  in
underpricing between  venture capital-  and  private equity  backed IPOs?  Furthermore, we
integrate  traits  of both the issuing firm and the financial sponsors  in  the  analysis  as a way
of  compartmentalize the underpricing puzzle.
      Using a sample consisting of 361 IPOs performed on the Nasdaq Nordic  main
market  and  Nasdaq  Nordic  First North Growth  Market, we  investigate  differences in
issuer firm characteristics between the two subgroups by performing a t-test. Showing a
significant difference in mean between the firm characteristics age, revenue, EBITDA
margin, leverage  and market capitalization, we conclude that  venture capital-  and private
equity-firms  invest in different types of companies, in terms of these variables.
       Thereafter, we apply the same method on IPO characteristics. Based on the results,
we  confirm that venture capital  (VC)  firms  and private equity  (PE)  firms differ in terms
of age, number of IPOs performed, pre-ownership holdings, number of VC-/PE-firms
backing, number of board representatives and number of years the lead VC-/PE-firm has
served the board.
       Next, we  examine  if there is a difference in underpricing between VC-  and PE-
backed IPOs,  using a t-test.  Our findings show  that the type of  financial  sponsor does not
impact  underpricing, neither when adjusting for value weighted-  or  equally weighted
returns.  After conducting a robustness test by  controlling for firm characteristic  variables
that significantly differ between the two subgroups, we  see  that PE-firms  reduce
underpricing when isolating the effect of the size of market capitalization.  However, only
one out of three tests when controlling for the size of the issuing firm indicate a difference
in  underpricing  between the two subgroups. Therefore,  a  univocal  conclusion of  the
difference in underpricing between VC-  and PE-backed IPOs cannot  be made.
       We also  perform an OLS regression to test whether the same firm characteristics
in the VC- and PE-subgroups impact underpricing. The result shows that revenue, number
of  employees  and market capitalization significantly increase underpricing  in the PE-
sample whereas only market capitalization increase underpricing in the VC-sample.
Consequently, we conclude that there are more firm characteristics in the PE-sample that
have a negative impact on underpricing, with market capitalization being the only variable
that  impact underpricing levels in both  subgroups.
      Lastly, we conduct another OLS regression to test whether the same IPO
characteristics of the VC-  and PE-firms impact underpricing.  The result shows  that  the

                                   2
age  of the VC-firm and the number of PE-firms backing have a positive effect on
underpricing.  Hence, we  conclude that different IPO characteristics  affect underpricing
in VC-backed and PE-backed IPOs.
        The closest research conducted in this area is the paper by Barry et al. (1990) who
examine  how venture capital backing affects  underpricing  and  the quality of its
monitoring.  This study  extends  their work in several ways.  Firstly, we give a more recent
view on how sponsor-backing impacts  underpricing  by  looking at IPOs between 2011-
2020.  Also,  our results are based on  IPOs performed on  Nordic exchanges, instead of
American Exchanges, which will give evidence of its similarities or differences  when it
comes to sponsors and underpricing.  Lastly, we extend the scope of the  research  in two
ways. Firstly,  by including,  not only venture capitalists, but also private equity firms.
Secondly,  Barry  et  al.  (1990)  focus  on  how  monitoring  by  the  sponsor  affects
underpricing,  though  this  paper  also  adds  the  dimension  of  the  issuing  firm’s
characteristic  and its impact on underpricing.
        The structure of this paper is as follows. Section 2  gives a background to the topic
and presents the  studied  hypotheses.  Our dataset is presented in section 3,  where we  also
outline  the method of data gathering,  criteria  used and  data sources.  Section 4 presents
the methodology  and analysis tools.  Evidence on  how venture capitalists and private
equity firms differ  in terms of investments and monitoring, as well as its impact on
underpricing,  is  presented in section 5. Lastly, conclusions are  drawn  in section 6.

2.0 Background
This section presents the previous literature that examines IPO underpricing, followed by
theories  trying to  explain  the  underpricing puzzle. Section 2.1 presents  past research and
theories on the topic.  Section 2.2 describes  issuer firm characteristics and section 2.3
presents  IPO characteristics. Both sections  define  the meaning of the terms and present
previous research  in the area. Next,  section  2.4 develops the five hypotheses and lastly,
section  2.5 presents the extensions make.

2.1 Previous literature
The academic literature is constantly documenting IPO underpricing and presents various
explanations  as  to why  it  occurs. Underpricing becomes evident when the first day return
is  above  zero,  which  stems  from  investors  perceiving  the  subscription  price  as
undervalued and therefore buys the stock in the aftermarket, driving up the price (Carter
and Manaster, 1990, Miller and Reilly, 1987). After the increased proportion of private
equity (PE) and venture capital (VC), underpricing research extended  its scope to
sponsored contra non-sponsored IPOs (Levis, 2011). Most papers focus on underpricing
and the impact of having a venture capital firm backing the IPO. The aggregated research
conducted on this type of backing presents ambiguous results. Some papers present less
underpricing compared to non-backed (NB) IPOs, such as Barry et al (1990), and some
present higher underpricing compared to non-backed firms, such as Lee and Wahal
(2004). Possible explanations  for  the deviating results may be the use of  different time
intervals and exchanges when collecting the data sample.  There is a very limited number
of studies that  devote their research to PE-backed IPOs  (Levis, 2011, Bergström et al.
2006).  These studies show that PE-backed IPOs exhibit lower levels of underpricing
compared to non-backed IPOs.
       There are multiple theoretical explanations connected to previous research, such
as information asymmetry, market mis-valuation, asset-risk premia  and  the rules of

                                   3
supply and demand (Ritter and Welch, 2012).  The two theories that help explain the
different levels of underpricing between non-backed IPOs and backed  IPOs are winner's
curse and signaling, which both build on asymmetric information. Ritter and Welch
(2002) describe asymmetric information as the buyer (investor) having less information
about the quality of the good  (company)  sold than the seller (issuer).

2.1.1 Winner's curse
Information asymmetry can also exist between investors, resulting in informed investors
and uninformed investors. This is  a reasonable assumption since if investors were to be
equally informed, knowing the true value of the issuing firm, no underpriced IPOs would
exist (Ritter and Welch, 2002). When there is asymmetric information between investors,
pricing  the IPO  overly  high would not attract subscriptions due to the fear of a winner’s
curse. The winner’s curse model was first formulated by Rock (1986) and the theory states
that only informed investors will subscribe to successful (underpriced) IPOs, leaving only
a fraction  of successful IPOs and full allocation of unsuccessful (overpriced) IPOs to
uninformed investors. On average, uninformed investors will realize negative returns,
which ultimately result in them leaving the new issue market. If informed investors have
limited wealth, even successful IPOs would not get full subscriptions, thus  fail  to go to
the market. To avoid this financial friction, IPOs need to be underpriced,  on average,
earning uninformed investors with normal returns.  Thus, this theory helps explain why
underpricing occurs.

2.1.2 Signaling
Barry et al.  (1990) show that venture capital firms enable monitoring of the issuing firm
and therefore possess  inside information. Thus, having a venture capital firm backing an
IPO signals  the accuracy of the valuation of the issuing firm to the uninformed investors.
Some characteristics show higher monitoring quality, such as the age of the venture
capital firm,  number of IPOs the lead venture capital firm has participated in  and the
equity stake owned. The ability to monitor the firm lowers uninformed investors’
uncertainty, therefore reducing underpricing. To our knowledge, there is no similar
research on the monitoring effects of private equity backed IPOs.

2.2 Issuer firm characteristics
Firm characteristics are  defined as the levels of financial metrics that the issuing firm
posits. Examples of metrics  are  revenue, asset turnover and market capitalization.  These
firm characteristics help to explain which type of target venture capital-  and private
equity-firms  typically invest in.
        Barry et al.  (1990) state that venture capital  firms  mainly invest in younger and
smaller  companies  with high growth. As the target firm  generally  is in  the  growth stage,
they have  lower  levels of revenue, market value and total assets. Furthermore, a venture
capital firm finance their  acquisitions  with capital generated from their funds, thus using
low levels of debt. As a result, the cash flows of the target firm can be low or non-existing.
Venture capital firms’  strategy consists of acquiring companies, improving performance,
followed by an exit taking the form of an IPO,  or selling their stake to another financial
or strategic buyer.
       In contrast to venture capital firms, private equity firms focus on older, bigger and
more  mature  companies.  The firms are characterized by larger levels of revenue, market
value and total assets. Moreover, the private equity firms use a significant amount of debt

                                   4
as a part of their financing strategy, increasing the debt-to-equity ratio of the target firm.
Therefore, targets need to have strong cash flows, enabling paying down debt, and
realizing returns for the investor when exiting. The purpose of the buyouts  is to  increase
operational performance and restructure the ownership in a few years, where the private
equity firm sells a significant stake of their shares to another financial or strategic buyer,
or exits through an IPO (Deangelo and Deangelo, 1987).
Furthermore, Levis (2011) found several differences in operational performance between
PE-, VC-  and non-backed IPOs.  PE-backed IPOs are about 4-7  times  larger in terms of
several operational metrics than their counterparts. For example, market capitalization,
net sales, asset turnover and total assets are metrics that differ substantially. He also
concluded  that PE-backed firms often have solid earnings when taken public, compared
to VC-backed  firms that  have about one-fifth of the EBITDA  margin  relative  to  their  PE-
backed  counterpart.

2.3 IPO characteristics
We  define  IPO  characteristics  as  specific  traits  of  the  financial  sponsor  and  its
involvement in the IPO. Examples of metrics  can be  the  age of  the  sponsor, ownership
stake and  the  number of sponsors backing the IPO.
       Venture capitalists are active investors  with a  long-term involvement in the
company (Barry et al, 1990). They often specialize in  one  industry  and engage  by having
representatives on the issuing firm’s board. This participation  enhances  their ability to
implement  the  operational strategy on the target,  by  influencing  key decisions about
employees, production, customers and suppliers (Warne, 1988). Furthermore, venture
capital investments often take place in syndicates, with more than one venture capital firm
taking an ownership stake (Mogilevsky and Murgulov, 2012). Due to the involvement of
multiple venture capitalists, their respective equity position is typically concentrated
(Barry et al., 1990). Brav and Gompers (1997) state that venture capital firms are young
and perform many IPOs  to  establish themselves in the  industry.
       Private equity firms also act as active investors through board participation and
posit their equity stake over a long time. In contrast to venture capital firms, private equity
firms aim to have a controlling stake, reducing the number of private equity firms backing
the IPO (Barry et al., 1990). Since private equity firms are,  on average,  older than venture
capital firms, they have conducted more IPOs on prior portfolio companies (Mogilevsky
and Murgulov, 2012).
       Levis  (2011) also concludes differences in IPO characteristics between venture
capital firms and private equity firms. The article shows that private equity firms have a
shorter holding period and own a larger equity stake both pre-  and post-  IPO, compared
to venture capital firms.

2.4 Hypothesis development
As presented above, venture capital firms typically invest in younger, smaller firms with
higher growth compared to private equity firms.  Likewise, previous research has drawn
several conclusions about how operational performance differs between VC-  and PE-
backed IPOs (Levis, 2011).  This has led us to our first hypothesis:

    1.   There is a difference in issuer firm characteristics between VC-  and PE-backed
      IPOs

                                   5
    Even though some characteristics of the two types of financial sponsors are similar,
such as their board participation and active involvement in the issuing firm, there are more
differences than similarities. As discussed in section 2.3, venture capital firms generally
take minority stakes and invest in syndicates compared to private equity firms,  which
normally   take   controlling   stakes,   limiting   the   participation   of   other   sponsors.
Furthermore, private equity firms are on average older and have  conducted  more IPOs.
Levis (2011) presents that there are differences in IPO characteristics between venture
capital firms and private equity firms, such as ownership stake pre-  and post-IPO as well
as the length of ownership.  Venture capital  investors have a longer holding period while
private equity  investors have a larger ownership stake.

    2.   There is a difference in IPO characteristics between VC-  and PE-backed IPOs

    Barry et al. (1990)  find that venture capital backed IPOs exhibit lower levels of
underpricing compared to non-backed IPOs, which is  due to  the  certification  effect of
having a sponsor, resulting in lower information asymmetry. Moreover, similar to venture
capital firms, private equity firms are very dependent on maintaining a spotless reputation
in order to attract future capital to their funds. Since private equity firms are larger and
possess higher profiles than venture capital firms  (Levis, 2011), their certification role is
hypothesised as having a stronger signaling effect. Therefore, we believe that private
equity  firms  reduce information asymmetry and underpricing to a  greater  extent than
venture capital  firms.

    3.   PE-backed IPOs have less underpricing than VC-backed IPOs

    Several firm characteristics are found to reduce underpricing. For example, firm age
has a positive impact on the underpricing and the uncertainty about the value of the firm
(Ritter, 1984, Mogilevsky and Murgolov,  2012). Older firms have longer track records
of financial data and have,  for a longer  period of  time,  been screened by financial
intermediaries. In general, older firms reduce uncertainty about the firm value ex-ante
the IPO and therefore reduce underpricing  (Su and Fleisher,  1999, Loughran and Ritter,
2004,  Chahine  and Filatotchev,  2008). Further, firm characteristics differ between the
VC-  and PE-backed IPOs, as presented in section 2.2. Since the underpricing also
differs (Levis, 2011), there is a possible relationship between the firm characteristic and
underpricing and that the latter can partly be due to differences in the former.
Therefore,  nothing indicates that the firm characteristic should affect underpricing
differently. The fourth hypothesis is  as follows:
    4.   The same firm characteristics explain underpricing in VC-  and PE-backed IPOs
    Barry et al.  (1990)  find  that several IPO characteristics reduce underpricing. For
example, they present that the backing of venture capital firms reduces underpricing when
they are older, has performed more IPOs, owns more equity in the issuer and has invested
in syndicates.  These IPO characteristics act as quality monitors  and lower uninformed
investor uncertainty.  Since there  is  no evidence of the opposite,  we  believe  that  IPO
characteristics  reduce underpricing in the same way between VC-  and PE-backed IPOs,
even  though  the variables  can  undertake  different average levels  depending on  the  type
of  sponsor  backing. For example, a venture capital firm with a more concentrated equity

                                   6
stake  relative  to  a private equity firm still reduces  underpricing  in the same way since  the
ownership allows monitoring, though less extensive.

    5.   The same IPO  characteristics reduce underpricing in VC-  and PE-backed IPOs

2.5 Extension
The existing research  that explores  the underpricing puzzle is very limited outside of the
United States. The existing literature on the European market mainly focuses  on the
London Stock Exchange and Paris Stock Exchange, such as Levis (2011) and Bergström
et al.  (2006).  In order to fill this gap in the existing literature, we  chose  to study the
underpricing of VC-backed and PE-backed IPOs during 2011-2020, featured on the
Nasdaq Nordic main market as well as the Nasdaq Nordic First North Market.
        The Nordic region is of importance, not only due to the limited previous research,
but  also due to the surge of IPOs that has taken place in  the  region during the last couple
of years. This has in turn led to  increased activity  of  financial sponsors (Pitchbook, 2020,
PWC, 2018), making the investigation of Nordic IPOs even more interesting.
      No research contrasts the potential underpricing of  VC-backed and  PE-backed
IPOs  with the  intention  to explain the underpricing puzzle by different characteristics of
the  issuing firm,  as well as characteristics of the  financial sponsor.  Therefore, we  explore
how different metrics of firm characteristics and IPO characteristics may  differ and how
it  impacts  underpricing in the two subgroups. Our  extension is related to the article by
Barry et al., which explores IPO characteristics and underperformance of VC-backed
IPOs. Also, Levis (2011) explores the differences in firm characteristics and underpricing
between VC-, PE-  and non-backed IPOs, but  excludes the analysis of how the metrics
impact underpricing. Since none of these  studies focus on  contrasting  underpricing
between  VC-  and PE-backed IPOs  as well as  controlling  for  both firm-  and IPO
characteristics, we believe it is a  meaningful  extension  to make.

3.0 Data
This section presents the delimitations and methods of data gathering. Section 3.1 defines
the  criteria  applied when  selecting  IPOs  to the sample. Section 3.2 presents how the data
was gathered, adjusted and complemented.  Section 3.3 explores how venture capitalists
and private equity firms are  categorized and divided into two subgroups. Lastly, an
overview of the final dataset is presented and briefly described.

3.1 Sample delimitation
The sample consists of IPOs listed at the Nasdaq Nordic main  market  exchanges  and
Nasdaq  Nordic  First North  Growth  Market. These exchanges cover the Nordic countries
Sweden, Denmark, Finland and Iceland. Smaller exchanges such as Spotlight  (former
Aktietorget)  are excluded from the sample since they are less regulated, attract  fewer
investors and are on average smaller (Nasdaq Nordic official website, 2021).  In  order to
gather a large enough sample of  sponsored-backed IPOs, we include  the non-primary
exchange First North Growth  Market.
       The sample includes IPOs registered from 1st of January 2011 until 31st of
December 2020. This time interval is  applied  to get results and  insights  that reflect the
impact of  sponsors  on underpricing during  more recent years, which complements
previous studies conducted. The periods of the financial crisis and IT bubble are excluded
to prevent the results  from being skewed by extraordinary market conditions.

                                   7
3.2 Sample collection
The original sample  that represents  our chosen exchanges and time interval is extracted
from   Capital   IQ.   In   order   to   exclude   exchange   transfers,   dual   listings,
acquisitions/restructuring and observations that  do  not fulfill our exchange and time
criteria, we manually benchmark our samples  against Nasdaq Nordics’ official listing
archives and  adjust  thereafter.  The isolation of first  seasoned offerings  is  done  to prevent
the results from being skewed  as a result from including issuers  that  has been listed
previously, decreasing investor uncertainty and  the need to underprice.  To  test our
hypothesis, we gather a total of 29 variables  from Capital IQ,  listing  prospectus, annual
reports and company webpages, presented in Appendix Table 1.

3.3 Venture capital and private equity  classification
The sample  is  classified into three  subgroups; venture capital backed, private equity
backed and non-backed  IPOs. Earlier studies  are not unified  in what  criteria and
methodologies  to  use when  segmenting VC-  and PE-backed companies. Levis (2011)
focus  on shareholding, where PE-backed IPOs have a majority stake, while VC-backed
issuers  obtain  a minority  stake. Other papers  make  their segmentation  based  on  the
classification of Securities Database Company  Platinum  (Mogilevsky and Murgulov,
2012).  One  common feature of most papers is the use of a subjective criteria when
classifying VC-  and PE-firms, since  there is  no  acknowledged  method of distinguishing
the two types  of sponsors.

    We use the following criteria to classify an IPO as venture  capital backed:

    1.   The owner must be classified as a venture capital firm by the Swedish Private
       Equity and Venture Capital Associations  (SVCA)
    2.   If the owner is not Nordic and therefore not included in the SVCA list, a subjective
       decision has been concluded based on firm information
    3.   The owner must be one of the main shareholders at the time of IPO, with a lower
       equity stake limit of 5%

    We use the following criteria to classify an IPO as private equity backed:

    1.   The owner must be classified as a private  equity firm by the SVCA
    2.   If the owner is not Nordic and therefore not included in the SVCA list, a subjective
       decision has been concluded based on firm information
    3.   The owner must be one of the main shareholders at the time of IPO, with a lower
       equity stake  limit of 5%

    We use the following criteria to classify an IPO as non-backed:

    1.   Neither of the owners controlling a minimum equity stake of 5% are classified as
       a private equity firm or venture capital firm by the SVCA
    2.   If the owner is not Nordic a subjective decision has been concluded based on firm
       information

                                   8
3.4 Data description
The original sample is extracted from Capital IQ and includes 756 samples. After cleaning
the raw dataset from missing variables, such as issue price, and discrepancies between
the  Capital IQ  list  and Nasdaq’s  official listing archive, our sample consists  of 375
observations.  Then, we manually adjusted for outliers  to  make our tests  more robust. As
seen in Appendix  Figure 1, 2 and 3, most observations  adjusted first day return  ranged
from  -100% to  100%, which is the interval chosen for our final dataset.
        Table 1 gives an overview of the final sample, consisting of 361 observations. Our
method  to classify  different types of financial sponsors results  in 59 VC-backed IPOs, 76
PE-backed IPOs and 226 non-backed IPOs.

 Table 1
 Frequency  distribution and capital raised by initial public offerings over the period 2011-2020
                                             % Distribution of     Total capital raised (SEKm)
            Number of IPOs
                                                  total IPOs
                                                              VC-      PE-
         VC-     PE-     Non-             VC-      PE-
 Year                              Total                         backed    backed    Total
        backed   backed   backed            backed   backed
                                                            IPOs     IPOs
 2011      2       1       7      10      20%      10%       532      555      2,545
 2012      0       0       2      2       0%      0%        0%      0%       69
 2013      1       4       8      13       8%      31%        21      7,740     9,656
 2014     11       8       19      38      29%      21%       1,450     27,376    41,079
 2015      8       16       38      62      13%      26%       1,113     37,662    59,733
 2016     10      11       30      51      20%      22%       1,941     40,417    52,916
 2017     12      12       46      70      17%      17%       4,717     13,934    32,031
 2018      3       12      30      45       7%      27%       214      9,379     25,072
 2019      6       5       19      30      20%      17%       828      852      7,580
 2020      6       7       27      40      15%      18%       1,003     13,933    25,653
 Total     59      76      226     361      16%     21%      11,819    151,848   256,333
 Note. The full sample consists of 361 IPOs, of which 59 are VC-backed, 76 are PE-backed and 226 are Non-backed. The data was
 compiled from Capital IQ and Nasdaq Nordic official listings archives of IPOs conducted on their main market exchanges and First
 North Growth Market between the years 2011-2020.  Dual listings, exchange transfers and secondary offerings are excluded.  The
 venture capital backed IPOs are all new issues with a venture capitalist (as classified in SVCA) backing the offering and that has
 more than 5% equity stake pre-offer. The private equity backed IPOs are all new issues with a private equity investor (as classified
 in SVCA) backing the offering and that has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer. Total capital raised is  the total number of shares
 offered to the market multiplied by the offer price and is stated in millions of Swedish crowns.

        In total, all IPOs during the time interval raised SEK 256,333 million. PE-firms
raised SEK 151,848 million (59% of total), which is a substantially  higher amount than
the comparable VC-firms that raised SEK 11,819 million (5% of total). Almost 40% of
all IPOs are backed by  some type of financial sponsor, where VC-backed and PE-backed
IPOs constitute  16% and 21%, respectively.
       When the IPO activity peaked between 2014  and 2018, VC-  and PE-firms kept
approximately the same distribution in terms of activity.  The capital raised during this
period represents  82% of all sponsor-backed capital raised  during 2011-2020. The main
contribution comes from PE-firm activity, which increased massively during these years
and raised  85% out of total PE-backed capital. This surge in  IPOs  is in line with the
activity increase spotted by previous research on the  Nordic markets during these years
(Segerström, 2018).
       Furthermore, as seen in Appendix Table 2, Sweden is the country that outperforms
in IPO activity, accounting for 72% of all IPOs.  Furthermore, Sweden also has the largest

                                   9
amount of backed IPOs, constituting 84% of the Nordic VC-backed IPOs and 73% of the
Nordic PE-backed IPOs during 2011-2020.

4.0 Methodology
This  section presents  the methods  we use  to  test  our hypotheses. Firstly, section 4.1
presents  how  a  t-test  is used  to  investigate  the  first  two hypotheses.  Section 4.2  defines
underpricing  and presents  how  an analysis  for  differences  in underpricing between VC-
and PE-backed IPOs  is performed. The  Pearson correlation test  used to control for
multicollinearity  is presented  in section 4.3. Lastly, the regression models  that help
evaluate the  remaining hypotheses  are presented  in section 4.4, followed by a description
of the variables used.

4.1 T-test on  the  difference in  firm-  and IPO characteristics
To control for potential differences in firm- and IPO characteristics between VC- and PE-
backed IPOs, we perform a t-test. The method is in line with previous research performed
by Barry et al.  (1990). The t-test controls for  significant differences in means between the
two subgroups. Since there is no hypothesised direction of the difference in mean between
our subgroups, a two-tailed test is applied.  Based on the results in Appendix  Table 3, the
assumption of unequal  variance is taken.

4.2 Underpricing
Following the definition by Barry et al. (1990),  underpricing  is the same as the first day
return and  is defined as the percentage change  between the  offering  price  and the closing
price  on  the first trading day.  Though, an addition to this definition is made,  by adjusting
the  first day return  with the market return  on the day of the IPO.  The  index  representing
our  market  return  is OMX Stockholm All Shares, since  it  is the  index  that  best represents
the return of our chosen exchanges.  Making this adjustment catches the true underpricing
of the IPO, excluding the impact of  the  overall market condition prevailing at the time of
the  IPO.

                                                                            𝑃!,#$%
                            (1) 𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡 𝑑𝑎𝑦 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛  =        − 1
                                                                                       𝑃!,'(()*

        In equation 1,  𝑃!,#$%  is defined as the closing price of security  i  at  t=0, which is
the first trading day. Furthermore,  𝑃!,'(()*  is defined as the offer price of security  i.

                              (2) 𝐴𝑑𝑗𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑑  𝑓𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡  𝑑𝑎𝑦 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛  =  𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔
                  =  𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡  𝑑𝑎𝑦  𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛!,#$%  − 𝑂𝑀𝑋  𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑚  𝐴𝑙𝑙  𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑠  𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛#$%

         In equation 2,  𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡  𝑑𝑎𝑦  𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛!,#$%  is defined as the first day return of security
i,  and  𝑂𝑀𝑋  𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑚  𝐴𝑙𝑙  𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑠  𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛#$%  is defined as the index return of OMX
Stockholm All shares at  t=0,  which is the first trading day of security  i.

4.2.1 T-test on underpricing
Another  t-test  is  performed in order to study the difference in adjusted first day return
between VC-  and PE-backed IPOs, which is commonly used in academics (Barry et al.,
1990, Mogilevsky and Murgulov, 2012).  Since the third  hypothesis is formulated as PE-

                                  10
backed IPOs being less underpriced than VC-backed IPOs, a one-tailed t-test is used.
Furthermore, unequal variance is assumed,  which is supported by the results in Appendix
Table 3.

4.3 Correlation test
Following Barry et al. (1990), a measurement of the correlation between the independent
variables  is  done  to  avoid multicollinearity in the regression test later performed.  Two
individual correlation tests  are  conducted  in each of the VC-  and PE-subgroup,  the first
being on the firm characteristic variables and the second on IPO characteristic variables,
as  defined in  Appendix Table 4.
       There are several ways of measuring correlation, with Pearson’s correlation
coefficient  being the most common method  (Barry et al., 1990),  therefore being  the  test
we  apply. The Pearson’s r measure linear correlation between two observations and  is
defined as:

                                        𝑐𝑜𝑣(𝑋, 𝑌)   𝐸[(𝑋  − 𝜇+)(𝑌  − 𝜇,)]
                         (3) 𝜌+,,  =           =
                                              𝜎+𝜎,               𝜎+𝜎,

       In equation 3, Cov is the covariance of the random variables X and Y. The random
variables X and Y have  the standard deviation defined as  𝜎+  and  𝜎,, respectively. The
correlation formula can further be explained in the terms of means and expectations,
where E is defined as the expectation, X and Y are defined as two random variables with
mean  𝜇+  and  𝜇,.

4.4 Ordinary least squares regression
The ordinary least squares (OLS) regression model is the  method  mostly  used  in IPO
performance research (Barry et al., 1990, Mogilevsky and Murgulov, 2012). To make our
findings comparable with previous research, we apply  the same method.  The OLS
regression is a linear regression model that estimates the relationship between one or more
independent variables and a dependent variable. The method estimates the relationship
by minimizing the sum of the squares in the difference between the observed and
predicted values of the dependent variable,  configured as a straight line. Since we use
more than one independent variable, a multivariate regression model will be conducted.
       Two regression tests  are  used  in each  sponsor subgroup  to test hypotheses  4  and
5. The first model uses firm characteristic variables  (defined in Appendix Table 4)  as
independent variables and  adjusted first day return  as the dependent variable. This model
tests  if underpricing  is  explained by  the same  issuer  firm characteristics  in the two
subgroups.  Further, the second model uses  IPO characteristic variables  (defined in
Appendix Table 4) as independent variables and adjusted first day return as the dependent
variable. This model instead  tests  if underpricing can be explained by differences in IPO
characteristics  in the two subgroups.

          (4)  𝐴𝑑𝑗𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑑  𝑓𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡  𝑑𝑎𝑦  𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛-!*./01*12#)*!3#!23
                         =  𝛼!  +  𝛽4(𝐴𝐺𝐸) +  𝛽5(𝑅𝐸𝑉) +  𝛽6(𝑀𝐶) +  𝛽7(𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑇𝐷𝐴) +  𝛽8(𝐴𝑇)
                         +  𝛽9(𝐸𝑀𝑃𝐿) +  𝛽:(DE) +  𝛽;(𝑅𝐺) +  𝛽<(𝐻𝐼) +  𝛽4%(𝑃𝑅𝑂) + 𝜖!

         (5) 𝐴𝑑𝑗𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑑  𝑓𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡  𝑑𝑎𝑦  𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛=>?/01*12#)*!3#!23
                        =  𝛼!  +  𝛽4(𝑂𝑊𝑁) +  𝛽5(𝑁𝐹𝑆) +  𝛽6(𝐸𝑄) +  𝛽7(𝐵𝑅𝐷) +  𝛽8(𝑌𝑂𝐵𝑅𝐷)
                         +  𝛽9(𝐼𝑃𝑂𝑠) +  𝛽:(𝐴𝐺𝐸𝐹𝑆) +  𝛽;(𝐻𝐼) +  𝛽<(𝑃𝑅𝑂) + 𝜖!

                                  11
        Adjusted first day return  (underpricing)  is the dependent variable,  𝛼!  is the
intercept,  𝛽!  is the coefficient of respective independent variables and ε corrects for error
discrepancies. The construction of the variables can be seen in Appendix  Table 5 and
Table 6,  and the definitions of the variables  are  explained in the  subsequent  section.

4.4.1 Issuer firm characteristic variables
The firm characteristic independent variables are chosen as they reflect  the  important
traits  of  age, size and performance. These three groups of metrics are important when
valuing the issuer prior to the IPO and can therefore have an impact on underpricing.
Previous research conducted by Levis (2011) uses the same variables as our model, except
for  ‘Log age of issuer’  as well as  the control variables  ‘Hot issue’ and ‘Proceeds’.  The
article presents multiple differences in issuer firm characteristics between VC-backed and
PE-backed IPOs and concludes  higher levels of underpricing for the former group.
However, the issuer’s  firm characteristics impact on underpricing  are  not investigated,
neither is the difference in the impact  when having a PE-  or a VC-firm backing the IPO,
which is an extension we  make.
       Metrics that take the value below or above the interval 0-1  are subjected to  the
natural logarithm 1+ ´metric´. This is done to make the model more precise, without being
impacted by extremely small or large observations.  The exact construction of each
variable  is  found in Appendix Table 5.
       Below, we present our variables in the order of the categories  age (one metric),
size (three  metrics), performance (four  metrics) and control variables (two  metrics).  No
previous research  has, to our knowledge, evaluated  these variables against underpricing.
We have therefore  based  our  selection  criteria  on papers that have  presented deviating
levels of  the  specific  metric  between  VC-backed  and PE-backed firms.  This  divergence
is of interest since it can be a potential  explanation  for  the differences in underpricing
documented between VC-backed and PE-backed IPOs (Levis, 2011).  Though,  the
hypothesized effect  on underpricing is  constructed solely by us and  are carefully
evaluated based on  theories.
      Log age of issuer (AGE): Previous research  show  a negative relationship
between the age of the  issuer  and underpricing (Ritter,  1984, Mogilevsky and Murgolov,
2012). Due to increased information availability of older firms, this metric is hypothesised
to lower information asymmetry and  therefore  have a positive effect on underpricing.
      Log revenue (REV):  Levis (2011) presents that  VC-backed  firms have lower
levels of revenue than  PE-backed firms  and is therefore  a  metric  we find  of interest.
Revenue is hypothesised to lower underpricing, since  a company with larger revenue
streams is considered to reduce uncertainty  as  the business idea is met with demand.
      Log  market  cap  (MC):  VC-backed  IPOs  have  generally  smaller  market
capitalization compared to PE-backed IPOs (Levis, 2011). An  issuer with larger market
capitalization indicates it being a larger firm with higher value, therefore being the subject
of more public  information, hence reducing investor uncertainty. Therefore, we project
this metric  to  reduce underpricing.
      Log employees (EMPL): Levis (2011) presents that an issuer backed by a private
equity firm has more employees than an issuer backed by a venture capital firm. This
metric is hypothesised to have a positive effect on underpricing since more employees
indicate the belief  that  future cash flows  are  large and stable enough to pay salaries.
       EBITDA margin (EBITDA):  A PE-backed IPO has a higher EBITDA margin
compared to a VC-backed IPO, according to Levis (2011). A higher margin indicates

                                  12
higher profitability and performance, which is hypothesised to lower the level of
information asymmetry and also underpricing.
       Asset turnover (AT): Levis (2011) shows that VC-backed IPOs have lower asset
turnover compared to PE-backed IPOs. This metric is expected to have a positive impact
on underpricing since higher asset turnover indicates higher performance prior to the IPO
and therefore reduces information asymmetry.
      Revenue growth (RG):  In contrast to private equity firms, venture capital firms
typically invest in younger companies with high growth (Barry et al., 1990). Higher
growth indicates the firm's ability to expand  as well as  increase its size and performance,
reducing uncertainty about the future. Thus, we hypothesise that this metric has a positive
impact on underpricing.
       Debt-to-Equity  (DE):  Normally, an issuer backed by a venture capital firm has
lower leverage compared to an issuer backed by a private equity firm (Levis, 2011). We
expect this metric to vary greatly between industries,  but  is  still  an indication of
performance,  since  older, more profitable firms have generated more income,  which
increases  their equity. Also, firms with a history of higher cash flows have been able to
pay down debt  to a larger extent,  decreasing  leverage. Since debt creditors are prioritized
in bankruptcy, a higher leverage ratio increases investor uncertainty. All in all, we
hypothesis that a higher leverage ratio increases underpricing.
       Hot issue (HI): Ritter (1984) documents higher initial returns when the market is
featured by a hot period, meaning that a larger number of firms tend to go public. Based
on data from PwC’s two reports (European private equity IPO report and IPO watch
Europe 2020), the hot market in the Nordics takes place between  the years 2014-2018.
To control for the hot issue market condition, “hot issue” is included as a control variable,
which enforces the robustness of the model.
      Log proceeds (PRO): Both Ritter (1984) and Chalk and Peavy (1990) document
that smaller offerings are more uncertain and result in higher first day returns. However,
Barry et al. (1990) presents the opposite result, namely that larger offerings are associated
with higher first day returns. In line with Barry et al., we hypothesise that larger IPOs,  in
terms of proceeds,  are  associated with more underpricing. This is  also  based on the
winner's curse  theory  and the fact that higher levels of capital raised require more
uninformed investors due to informed investors’  limited wealth, resulting in underpricing
to  attract  the uninformed parties.

4.4.2 IPO characteristic variables
Barry et al.  (1990), Habib and Ljungqvist  (2001)  and Levis (2011) present  that  IPO
characteristics act as quality monitors for outside investors, resulting in less information
asymmetry and underpricing. Therefore, we focus on the same variables as these papers
to draw conclusions and compare the results  we retain.
      As for the firm characteristics,  metrics that take the value below or above the
interval 0-1  are  subjected  to  the natural logarithm  1+ ´metric´.  The exact construction of
the variables  is  presented in Appendix  Table 6.
      Log  length of ownership  (OWN): A longer holding period indicates that the
financial sponsor has gained more information and performed more extensive influence
on the issuer’s operations, hence acting as a  higher  quality monitor (Levis, 2011).
Therefore, we project that a longer period of ownership decreases underpricing.
       Log number of  financial sponsors  backing  (NFS): Barry et al.  (1990), show
that this metric reduces the first day return. Having a larger number of financial sponsors

                                  13
indicates  the strength of the issuer’s business idea. It  also increases  the intensity of
monitoring and therefore reduces uninformed investors’  uncertainty.  Thus, the more
sponsors backing  an IPO  is projected to reduce underpricing.
       Total ownership pre-IPO  (EQ):  Firstly, the more pre-IPO ownership the
combined number of  sponsors  holds, the more effort is put in  to reducing  underpricing to
avoid leaving money on the table (Habib and Ljungqvist, 2001).  Likewise, Barry et al.
(1990) find that pre-IPO holding is associated with less underpricing. With  both  results
in mind, this metric is hypothesised  to reduce  underpricing.
       Log number of board members (BRD): In line with the findings made by Barry
et al.  (1990), more board seats occupied by a financial sponsor indicate more formal
control and the possibility to influence the  issuer. Therefore, we project that this metric
has  a  positive effect on underpricing.
      Log number of years on board  (YOBRD): The opportunity to observe and
influence the company becomes more prominent the longer the sponsor has served the
board, hence  acting as a  higher  quality  monitor,  reducing  underpricing. This is in line
with Barry et al.  (1990), which presents  that the longer the lead venture capital firm has
served the board,  the smaller the initial return. Hence, we hypothesize that this metric
reduces  underpricing.
       Log number of IPOs  (IPOs):  The more IPOs a financial sponsor has been
involved in, the better it  signals the ability to successfully monitor and influence the
target. It  can  also  be  viewed  as evidence of  the  past performance of the sponsor’s ability
to bring a company to  market, reducing investor uncertainty (Barry et al., 1990).
Therefore, this metric is projected to have a positive effect on underpricing.
       Log age of  financial sponsor (AGEFS):  Older financial sponsors have more
experience in guiding their investments and  creating sustainable profitability  (Barry et
al.,  1990). Hence,  the  age of the VC-  or PE-firm is hypothesized to reduce underpricing.
        HI (hot issue): See section 4.4.1
       PRO (log proceeds):  See section 4.4.1

5.0 Results
This section presents our  results  and the ultimate rejection or acceptance of  the
hypotheses. Section 5.1 explores the first hypothesis:  There is a difference in issuer firm
characteristics between VC-  and PE-backed IPOs.  Section 5.2 investigates the second
hypothesis:  There is a difference in IPO characteristics between VC-  and PE-backed
IPOs.  Section 5.3 presents the results to the third hypothesis:  PE-backed  IPOs have less
underpricing than VC-backed IPOs.  Section 5.4  investigates  the fourth hypothesis:  The
same firm characteristics explain underpricing in VC-  and PE-backed IPOs.  Lastly,
section 5.5 describes the results from our fifth hypothesis:  The same IPO characteristics
reduce underpricing in VC-  and PE-backed IPOs.

5.1 Firm characteristics
Firstly, we  investigate  if financial sponsors specialize in specific industries, and whether
the investment strategies differ between venture capital and private equity firms.

                                  14
 Table 2
 Frequency distribution of IPOs by industry between the years 2011 and 2020
                        % of all VC-backed     % of all PE-backed    % of all non-backed
 Industry
                           IPOs                IPOs                IPOs
 Healthcare                 37%               17%               22%
 Engineering                3%               8%               3%
 Technology                10%               4%               11%
 Goods                    31%               18%               15%
 Banking                   2%               7%               6%
 Real Estate                  0%                8%                14%
 Food                     0%                4%                4%
 Entertainment               3%               7%               7%
 Business services             3%               13%               9%
 Retail                    5%               8%               3%
 Marketing                  2%                0%                2%
 Distributor                  2%                4%                2%
 Aerospace and defense          2%               1%               1%
 Education                  0%                1%                1%
 Total                      100%               100%               100%
 Note. The full sample consists of 361 IPOs, of which 59 are VC-backed, 76 are PE-backed and 226 are Non-backed. The data was
 compiled from Capital IQ and Nasdaq Nordic official listings archives of IPOs conducted on their main market exchanges and First
 North Growth Market between the years 2011-2020.  Dual listings, exchange transfers and secondary offerings are excluded.  The
 venture capital backed IPOs are all new issues with a venture capitalist (as classified in SVCA) backing the offering and that has
 more than 5% equity stake pre-offer. The private equity backed IPOs are all new  issues with a private equity investor (as classified
 in SVCA) backing the offering and that has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer. Non-backed IPOs are all IPOs not included in the
 two other subgroups. Industry classification is based on the categorization made by Capital IQ. Our sample consists of 14 industry
 groups.

        As seen in Table 2, venture capital firms tend to focus on two sectors, namely the
healthcare sector (37%) and the goods sector (31%). Private equity firms on the other
hand invest in a broader range of industries,  but are slightly biased towards the same
sectors as venture capital firms. This indicates that VC-firms are at a higher degree
specialized than PE-firms and can thus become  experts in a few industry groups rather
than generalists in many, which is in line with previous research by Warne (1988). PE-
firms show a more similar pattern as the non-backed IPOs, thus taking a more equal
distribution of the industries  and  choose a  more  general position.
       Next, an analysis based on firm characteristics is performed.  Table  3  illustrates
issuer firm characteristics  in  our three subgroups, VC-, PE-  and non-backed IPOs. The
characteristics are categorized by age, size and performance, and aims to clarify if venture
capital-  and private equity firms tend to invest in a generic type of target.
       There is a clear difference in all  issuers’  firm characteristics between the venture
capital backed IPOs and the private equity backed IPOs. In line with previous literature
(Levis, 2011), VC-backed  issuers  show the smallest mean in all characteristics that
indicate the size of the firm,  being revenue, market capitalization and employees,  while
PE-backed  issuers  show substantially higher numbers. The mean in revenue differs with
SEK 6,021 million, the mean in market capitalization differs with SEK 3,469 million and
the mean in  the  number of employees differs with 8,120 between VC-  and PE-backed
issuers. The non-backed  issuers  have  a mean of revenue, market capitalization and  the
number of employees below PE-backed IPOs but above VC-backed IPOs. This indicates
that PE and VC investors are drawn towards two different ends of the scope when it comes
to the size of the  issuing  firm.

                                  15
 Table 3
 Firm characteristics for venture  capital-, private equity-  and non-backed IPOs  between the years  2011-
 2020
 Variable                   Mean       Median     1st quartile   3rd quartile   Sample size
                                      Panel A: VC-backed IPOs
 Age                       14          10          7          16          59
 Revenue                    135          10           1           98          59
 Market capitalization           661         271         115         617          59
 EBITDA margin             -2607%       -42%        -139%        2%          59
 Asset turnover                 0.7          0.3          0.1          1.1           59
 Number of employees           62          17           7           46          59
 Leverage                     1.1          0.3          0.1          1.4           59
 Revenue growth             603%        29%         0%         82%         59
                                      Panel B: PE-backed IPOs
                                       a
 Age                       35          22          9          36          76
                                       b
 Revenue                   6156        1346         374         5208         76
                                        a
 Market capitalization          4130         2514         585         4812         76
                                         c
 EBITDA margin            -25%        8%         4%        16%         76
 Asset turnover                 0.9          0.9          0.4          1.3           76
 Number of employees          8182         648         106         1763         76
                                       c
 Leverage                     4.2           1.4          0.5          2.8           76
 Revenue growth             125%        17%         4%         38%         76
                                     Panel C: Non-backed IPOs
 Age                       24          11          6          22          226
 Revenue                   1030         63           6          352         226
 Market capitalization          1331         326         119         1314         226
 EBITDA margin             -164%        6%         -25%        16%         226
 Asset turnover                 0.9          0.5          0.1          1.5          226
 Number of employees          402          40          11          169         226
 Leverage                     5.7          0.9          0.3          1.9          226
 Revenue growth             121%        15%         0%         61%        226
 Note. The full sample consists of 361 IPOs, of which 59 are VC-backed, 76 are PE-backed and 226 are non-backed. The data was
 compiled from Capital IQ and Nasdaq Nordic official listings archives of IPOs conducted on their main market exchanges and First
 North Growth Market between the years 2011-2020.  Dual listings, exchange transfers and secondary offerings are excluded.  The
 venture capital backed IPOs are all new issues with a venture capitalist (as classified in SVCA) backing the offering and that has
 more than 5% equity stake pre-offer. The private equity backed IPOs are all new issues with a private equity investor (as classified
 in SVCA) backing the offering and that has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer.  Firm characteristic is defined as  the levels of
 financial metrics that the issuing firm posits.  Age is the number of years since the company was founded, calculated from the date
 of the IPO.  Revenue is the level of sales the issuing firm had one fiscal year prior to the IPO.  Market  capitalization  is the total
 number of shares outstanding  by the issuing firm  multiplied by the closing price of the  first trading day.  EBITDA margin is
 calculated  as the issuing firm’s EBITDA (earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization) over total sales one fiscal
 year prior to the IPO. Asset turnover is calculated as the issuing firm’s total sales over total assets one fiscal year prior  to the IPO.
 Number of employees is extracted at the day of the IPO. Leverage (debt-to-equity ratio) is the issuing firm’s debt over equity one
 fiscal year prior to the IPO. Revenue growth is the percentage growth in revenue of the issuing firm one year prior to the  IPO
 compared to the previous fiscal year.
  a
  Significant at 0.01 level
 b
  Significant at 0.05 level
  c
  Significant at 0.1 level
 The significance levels are based on a t-test of the difference in mean between the venture capital- and private equity backed
 samples.

       Furthermore, the  performance indicators  also differ  similarly  as size. PE-backed
issuers have higher EBITDA margin, asset turnover and leverage than VC-backed issuers.
Levis (2011) observes  the same results, where PE-backed companies demonstrated

                                  16
substantially better performance indicators in terms of EBITDA-margin, asset turnover
and  leverage,  than  VC-backed  companies.  However,  VC-backed  issuers  have  a
substantially higher revenue growth compared to PE-backed  issuers. This  shows  that
venture capital firms invest in younger companies with higher growth, which is  in line
with the findings  by Barry et al.  (1990). Overall, non-backed  issuers  exhibit  performance
variables in between VC-  and PE-backed IPOs, except for leverage, indicating that the
two types of financial sponsors have different investment strategies  and  value  high
performance differently.
       Furthermore,  PE-firms take their portfolio companies to the market with  an
average  age of 35, while VC-backed firms have an  average  age of 14. Even though their
holding period  might  differ, the large difference  in issuer age  indicates that PE-firms
invest in older  companies, compared to VC-firms. A  conclusion  done  by Barry et al.
(1990) is  that older firms are larger with lower growth,  compared to younger firms. This
is  likewise seen in our  results since we both find that PE-backed  companies  are larger,
older and  experience lower growth.
       By solely looking at the numbers, we can  witness several differences between the
PE-  and VC-backed issuers  when it comes to firm characteristics. However,  to confirm
this with statistical power,  a t-test  is  performed  which controls  for significant differences
between the means of  the variables in  our subgroups. The results shown in  Table 3  Panel
B  support  our first hypothesis, that there is a significant difference between the firm
characteristics of VC-  and PE-backed IPOs. All characteristics except for  asset turnover,
number of employees and revenue growth and  is significantly different at 10%.

5.2  IPO characteristics
Table 4 presents IPO characteristics of venture capital firms and private equity firms,
where Panel B is complemented with p-values from the t-test on  the  difference in mean
between the two subgroups.
       The average length of ownership does not significantly differ between VC-backed
IPOs and PE-backed IPOs, taking on an average holding period of 5.1 and 5.5 years,
respectively. These results are inconsistent with the findings by Levis (2011), which
shows that venture capital firms have a longer holding period at the date of the IPO
relative to private equity firms. Potential explanations for this discrepancy can be different
time intervals (2011-2020 vs 1992-2005) and different exchanges chosen (Nasdaq Nordic
& First North Growth market vs London Stock exchange), resulting in different samples.
       Consistent with Mogilevsky and Murgulov (2012), the results indicate that the
average aggregated amount of venture capital firms backing an IPO is significantly larger
relative PE-backed IPOs, being 2.1 and 1.5, respectively.

                                  17
 Table 4
 IPO characteristics for venture capital firms and private equity firms backing IPOs between the years
 2011-2020
 Variable                  Mean       Median     1st quartile   3rd quartile   Sample size
                                  Panel A: VC-backed IPOs
 Length of ownership           5.1           5.0           3.0           6.5           59
 Number VC-firms backing      2.1          2.0          1.0          3.0           59
 Pre-IPO ownership           40.2%        28.0%        16.0%        58.5%         59
 Number of board members      1.2          1.0          0.0          2.0           59
 Number of years lead VC-
                              2.9           3.0           0.0           5.0           59
 firm has served the board
 Number of IPOs               7.1           4.0           1.0           9.0           59
 Age of the VC firm            2.5           2.6           2.1           3.1           59
                                      Panel B: PE-backed IPOs
 Length of ownership           5.5           5.5           3.8           7.0           76
                                      a
 Number PE-firms backing       1.5           1.0          1.0          2.0           76
                                        a
 Pre-IPO ownership           65.8%        74.0%        43.5%        92.3%         76
                                      a
 Number of board members      1.8           2.0          1.0          2.0           76
 Number of years lead PE-          b
                              4.2           4.0           1.0           6.0           76
 firm has served the board
                                      c
 Number of IPOs              4.5           2.0           1.0           6.5           76
                                      a
 Age of the PE firm             2.9           3.0           2.5           3.3           76
 Note. The sample consists of 135 IPOs, of which 59 are VC-backed and 76 are PE-backed. The data was compiled from Capital IQ
 and Nasdaq  Nordic official  listings archives of IPOs conducted on their main market exchanges and First North  Growth Market
 between the years 2011-2020.  Dual listings, exchange transfers and secondary offerings are excluded.  The venture capital backed
 IPOs are all new issues with a venture capitalist (as classified in SVCA) backing the offering and that has more than 5% equity
 stake pre-offer. The private equity backed IPOs are all new issues with a private equity investor (as classified in SVCA) backing
 the offering and that has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer.  IPO characteristics are defined as specific traits of the financial
 sponsor and its involvement in the IPO. Length of ownership is the number of years the sponsor has owned equity in the issuer at
 the date of the IPO. Number of VC/PE firms backing is the number of VC/PE-sponsors with an above 5% equity stake in the issuer
 before the IPO. Pre-IPO ownership is the percentage ownership of all VC/PE sponsors before the IPO. Number of board members
 is the number of board seats that is occupied by the lead VC/PE-firm prior to the IPO. Number of years lead VC-/PE-firm has served
 the board is the number of years between the IPO date and the date the lead VC/PE sponsor took its first seat on the board. Number
 of IPOs is the number of initial public offerings the lead VC/PE-firm  has backed before the date of the observation’s IPO. Age of
 the VC/PE-firm is the number of years between the registration date of the sponsor and the date of the IPO.
  a
  Significant at 0.01 level
 b
  Significant at 0.05 level
  c
  Significant at 0.1 level
 The significance levels are based on a t-test in the difference in mean between the venture capital- and private equity backed
 sample.

       Further, there are also pronounced differences in ownership structure before the
IPO. Pre-IPO holding is much  smaller in VC-backed IPOs (40.2%) than PE-backed IPOs
(65.8%), which supports previous findings that private equity investors often take a
majority stake in their holdings (Levis, 2011).  Although the equity stakes are larger for
the PE-subgroups, both subgroups take on prominent equity  stakes. This  indicates  a
higher incentive  and ability  to participate in the governance of the firm, acting as a good
quality monitor for outside investors.
       The number of board seats occupied by the financial sponsor is an indication of
the influence the sponsor can  exploit  over the issuing firm (Barry et al., 1990). The result
we  obtain  shows  a significant difference between the two subgroups, with VC-firms
claiming 1.2 seats and PE-firms 1.8 seats. Therefore, PE-sponsors should be able to  claim
a greater influence over  their  holding companies than VC-sponsors.

                                  18
       The amount of control and influence the  VC-  or  PE-firm can  exploit  over the
issuing firm becomes even more prominent the longer the sponsor has been an active
participant in the board (Barry et al., 1990). Our test shows that venture capital firms have
on average spent 2.9 years on the board prior to the IPO, whilst private equity firms spend
on average 4.2 years. Since private equity investors occupy more board seats over a longer
period  compared to venture capital investors, the former sponsor has the ability to gain
more information and  steer the company  to a greater extent  prior to the IPO. Therefore, a
PE-backing might  reduce uninformed investor uncertainty more than  VC-backing.
       Furthermore,   our   results   indicate   that   venture   capital   sponsors   perform
significantly more  IPOs  (7.1)  compared to private equity  sponsors (4.5). This  is  in line
with the findings of  Brav and  Gompers (1997),  that venture capital firms are young and
perform many IPOs to gain a good reputation. However, it contrasts with Mogilevsky and
Murgolov (2012) which finds the opposite, and explains this by stating that private equity
firms  have  performed  more IPOs than venture capital firms due to the  former being older
than the latter.  Since  our results finds a small  age difference  of  four  months  between the
two sponsors, as seen in  Table 4,  it  might explain the discrepancy with  Mogilevsky and
Murgolov (2012)  who finds a larger age difference.
       Lastly, private equity firms are on average older than venture capital firms. As
mentioned above, the  age  difference is very small. Therefore, private equity firms do not
necessarily indicate more experienced and better able to improve operational performance
in  holding companies compared to venture capital firms, which Barry et al.,  (1990) finds.
       Summarizing these results confirm our second hypothesis, that there is a
difference in IPO characteristics between VC-  and PE-backed IPOs.

5.3 Underpricing

5.3.1 Differences in underpricing and t-test
Next, we investigate the main question of this study, namely if there is a difference in
underpricing between the VC-  and PE-backed IPOs.

 Table 5
 Adjusted first day return of venture capital-, private equity-  and non-backed IPOs  between the years
 2011-2020
 Adjusted first day return, %                  All        VC        PE       NB
 Mean (equally weighted)                       1.1%       (3.9%)       0.7%      3.0%
 Mean (value weighted, inflation adjusted)           6.9%       5.2%       6.3%      8.2%
 Median                                   2.0%       (3.0%)       1.5%      3.0%
 Sample size                                 361         59         76        226
 Note. The full sample consists of 361 IPOs, of which 59 are VC-backed, 76 are PE-backed and 226 are Non-backed. The data was
 compiled from Capital IQ and Nasdaq Nordic official listings archives of IPOs conducted on their main market exchanges and First
 North Growth Market between the years 2011-2020. Dual listings, exchange transfers and secondary offerings are excluded. VC is
 the  venture capital backed IPOs  and  are all new issues with a venture capitalist (as classified in SVCA) backing the offering and
 that  has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer.  PE is the  private equity backed IPOs  and  are all new issues with a private equity
 investor (as classified in SVCA) backing the offering and that has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer.  NB is all IPOs neither
 backed  by a private equity or a venture capital firm. Adjusted first day return is defined as the  percentage  price  change from the
 offer price to the closing price of the first trading day, adjusted for the OMX Stockholm All Share return of the day of the IPO. The
 equally weighted return is calculated as the return for each observation multiplied with the observations weight out of the subgroup’s
 total number of observations. The value weighted return is calculated as the return of each observation multiplied with its market
 capitalization weight out of the subgroups total market capitalization, adjusted for inflation.

                                  19
       As seen in  Table 5, the average return for the aggregated subgroups is low, with
an average underpricing of 1.1%, driven up by the non-backed IPOs and down by the
VC-backed IPOs. In line with Barry et al.  (1990),  VC-backed  IPOs show on average less
underpricing  than  non-backed  IPOs. However, these results contradict the findings by
Lee and Wahal (2004), which presents higher underpricing of venture capital backed IPOs
contra non-backed IPOs. One potential explanation  for  these ambiguous results  is  the
different time intervals and regions covered in  the  three papers. Similar to the findings
made by Bergström et al. (2006), private equity backed IPOs have on average lower levels
of underpricing (0.7%) relative non-backed IPOs (3.0%). Contrasting the different levels
of average underpricing between the two subgroups, namely VC-backed and PE-backed
IPOs, the former shows lower underpricing than  the latter, which contradicts previous
research (Levis, 2011, Mogilevsky and Murguluv, 2012).
        The order of the underpricing persists when controlling for inflation-adjusted
market capitalization, ending up with the value weighted adjusted first day return.
However, the levels of underpricing increase for VC-backed, PE-backed and NB-backed
IPOs to 5.2%, 6.3% and 8.2%, respectively.
       In order to confirm or reject our third hypothesis,  PE-backed IPOs have less
underpricing than VC-backed IPOs, a one-sided t-test for the difference in mean of the
equally weighted adjusted first day return and value weighted adjusted first day return
between the two subgroups  is  performed.  The same test is also performed between the
non-backed and  backed-subgroups,  enabling comparison with results confirmed in
previous research.

 Table 6
 T-test on the difference in mean of adjusted first day return between the three subgroups
 Subgroups tested                                                 P-value
                                     Panel A: Equally weighted
 VC/PE                                                        0.17
 VC/NB                                                      0.06
 PE/NB                                                        0.24
                               Panel B: Value weighted inflation adjusted
 VC/PE                                                        0.48
 VC/NB                                                      0.34
 PE/NB                                                        0.12
 Note. The full sample consists of 361 IPOs, of which 59 are VC-backed, 76 are PE-backed and 226 are Non-backed. The data was
 compiled from Capital IQ and Nasdaq Nordic official listings archives of IPOs conducted on their main market exchanges and First
 North Growth Market between the years 2011-2020. Dual listings, exchange transfers and secondary offerings are excluded. VC is
 the  venture capital backed IPOs  and  are all new issues with a venture capitalist (as classified in SVCA) backing the offering and
 that has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer.  PE is the  private equity backed IPOs  and  are all new issues with a  private equity
 investor (as classified in SVCA) backing the offering and that has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer.  NB is all IPOs neither
 backed by a private equity or a venture capital firm. Adjusted first day return is defined as the  percentage  price  change from the
 offer price to the closing price of the first trading day, adjusted for the OMX Stockholm All Share return of the day of the IPO.  The
 equally weighted return is calculated as the return for each observation multiplied with the observations weight out of the subgroup’s
 total number of observations. The value weighted return is calculated as the return of each observation multiplied with its  market
 capitalization  weight out of the subgroups total market capitalization, adjusted for inflation.  The numbers in the table are the p-
 values of the t-test conducted on the difference in mean between the three subgroups.  If the p-value is below 0.05 (5%), the null
 hypothesis that the difference in group means is zero is rejected.

       Presented in  Table 6, there is no significant difference in underpricing between
venture capital backed and private equity backed IPO on a 10% level or lower.
Consequently,  we  reject the third hypothesis. Likewise, the result indicates no
significant difference between the PE-backed IPOs and non-backed IPOs.  However,  it

                                  20
predicts a significant difference  between the VC-backed IPOs and non-backed IPOs. To
contrast this with previous research, Levis (2011)  finds  marked differences between
both PE/NB and VC/NB, which makes one out of two of our results in line with  this
paper. However, Barry et al. (1990) find  that  there is no significant difference in
underpricing between venture capital-  and non-backed IPOs, which is the opposite of
our results.  One potential explanation  for  the  discrepancy  can be the different time and
exchange limitations made by the papers.

5.3.2 Difference in underpricing and OLS regression analysis
Since the results  in section 5.1  show a significant difference in the mean of revenue,
market capitalization, age, EBITDA-margin  and  leverage  between the VC-  and PE-
subgroup, these variables may impact the underpricing levels and subsequently the results
in  Table 5.  It can be that the  t-test  show no difference in underpricing between the two
subgroups due to the difference in these  firm characteristic  variables, and not due to the
backing per se.  To  increase the robustness  of the t-test and control for issuer firm
characteristics,  an  OLS  regression  is  performed.  The  regression  shows  whether
underpricing differs between VC-backed IPOs and PE-backed IPOs after controlling for
firm characteristic variables.  To  avoid the “dummy  trap”, only two of the dummy
variables are added to the regression model, namely VC-backed and PE-backed.

Table 7
OLS regression of adjusted  initial returns
                                                     EBITDA   DE              2
   Intercept    VC      PE     REV     MC     AGE                   N      R

1.                                       b
     -0.028     -0.046    -0.052    0.013                                          361     0.020
2.          a                     c                   a
    -0.206     -0.056    -0.074              0.039                                361     0.052
3.    0.022     -0.063    -0.020                     0.0001                    361     0.007
4.    0.025     -0.064    -0.019                              -0.000            361     0.007
                                                                                       c
5.    0.030     -0.068    -0.020                                      -0.001    361     0.006
Note.  The full sample consists of 361 IPOs,  of which  59  are  VC-backed,  76  are  PE-backed  and 226 are Non-backed.  The data was
compiled from Capital IQ and Nasdaq Nordic official listings archives of IPOs conducted on their main market exchanges and First
North Growth Market between the years 2011-2020. Dual listings, exchange transfers and secondary offerings are excluded.  VC is
the venture capital backed IPOs and are all new issues with a venture capitalist (as classified in SVCA) backing the offering and that
has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer.  PE is the  private equity backed IPOs  and  are all new issues with a private equity investor
(as classified in SVCA) backing the offering and that has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer. Adjusted first day  return is  the
dependent variable, defined as the percentage price change from the offer price to the closing price of the first trading day, adjusted
for the OMX Stockholm All Share return of the day of the IPO. VC is a dummy variable given the value 1 if the IPO is backed by a
venture capital firm, and zero otherwise. PE is a dummy variable given the value 1 if the IPO is backed by a private equity firm, and
zero otherwise. The remaining firm characteristics act as independent control variables. REV is the natural logarithm of 1+ revenue
of the issuing firm one year prior to the IPO. MC is the natural logarithm of 1+ the issuing firm’s market capitalization at the day of
the IPO. Market capitalization is calculated as number of shares outstanding multiplied with the closing price of the first trading day.
AGE is the natural logarithm of 1+ the number of years since the issuing firm was registered, calculated from the day of the  IPO.
EBITDA is the issuing firms EBITDA margin in decimal form, calculated as EBITDA (earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and
amortization) over total sales one fiscal year prior to the IPO. DE is the issuing firm’s debt-to-equity ratio in decimal form, calculated
as the issuing firm’s debt over equity one fiscal year prior to the IPO.
a
 Significant at 0.01 level
b
 Significant at 0.05 level
c
 Significant at 0.1 level

       As seen in  Table 7, the first test shows that the variable  REV  has a significant
impact on underpricing on a 5% level, while the dummy variables show no significant
impact.  The same results are interpreted by the fifth test, where DE has a significant
impact on a 10% level, with no significant impact of the dummy variables. Neither the
control variables  nor dummy variables have an impact on underpricing in the third and
fourth test.  All  these  results  strengthen the rejection of hypothesis  three since  it reaffirms

                                  21
that the type of backing does not impact underpricing.  However, the same conclusions
cannot be made for the second  regression  test,  since  PE-firms have a greater impact on
reducing underpricing when MC is larger.
       Since no other variables of size provide the same result, a  univocal  conclusion
that  private equity firms are better at reducing underpricing when the issuer is large
cannot be made. Taking all results into account, we conclude that there is no obvious
difference in underpricing between VC-  and PE-backed IPOs  and therefore stick with
the rejection of our third hypothesis.

5.4 Firm characteristics’  impact on underpricing
Even though the results indicate no  clear  significant difference in underpricing between
VC-  and PE-backed IPOs, there is a difference in the issuer firm characteristics  of the
firms that the two types of financial sponsors typically invest in. Therefore, we examine
if firm characteristics have an explanatory effect on underpricing, and whether the same
variables have explanatory power  in  the two subgroups. This is tested  through a
multivariate OLS regression, where the adjusted first day return (underpricing) is the
dependent variable and firm characteristics variables are  the  independent.  The test is
divided into two sections,  with  the first being the tests conducted on the venture capital
subgroup, and the  second  on the private equity subgroup.

5.4.1 Firm characteristics in the venture capital subgroup
First, a  Pearson correlation test on the independent variables is conducted for the VC-
subgroup to avoid multicollinearity in the regression test.

 Table 8
 Correlation matrix of firm characteristics for venture capital  backed IPOs between 2011 and 2020
         AGE    REV    MC   EBITDA    AT    EMPL    DE     RG     HI    PRO
 AGE       1
                   c
 REV      0.413     1
 MC       0.111    0.369     1
 EBITDA   0.122    0.219    -0.062      1
                  b         a
 AT       0.474   0.797   0.195    0.155      1
                            a                               a
 EMPL     0.293   0.699   0.402     0.195    0.617     1
                            c                                       b
 DE        -0.129   -0.045   -0.001     0.046     -0.003   -0.189     1
 RG        0.081    0.136    0.174     0.038     0.031    -0.021   -0.053     1
 HI        0.034    0.126    0.037     0.309     0.183    0.02    0.108    0.091     1
                                      a
 PRO       0.029    0.297    0.875    0.060     0.158    0.401    0.045    0.123    0.069     1
 Note.  Firm characteristic is defined as  the levels of financial metrics that the issuing firm posits.  The sample consists of  59 VC-
 backed IPOs. The data was compiled from Capital IQ and Nasdaq Nordic official listings archives of IPOs conducted on their main
 market exchanges and First North Growth Market between the years 2011-2020. Dual listings, exchange transfers and secondary
 offerings are excluded. The venture capital backed IPOs are all new issues with a venture capitalist (as classified in SVCA) backing
 the offering and that has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer.  Age is  the natural logarithm of 1+  the number of years since the
 company was founded, calculated from the date of the IPO. REV is the natural logarithm of 1+ the issuing firm’s revenue one fiscal
 year prior to the IPO. MC is the natural logarithm calculated as 1+ the issuing firm’s market capitalization, which is the number of
 shares outstanding multiplied with the closing price of the IPO date. EBITDA is the issuing firms EBITDA margin in decimal form,
 calculated as EBITDA (earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization) over total sales one fiscal year prior to the IPO.
 AT is the issuing firm’s asset turnover in decimal form, calculated as total sales over total assets one fiscal year prior to the IPO.
 EMPL is the natural logarithm 1+ the issuing firm’s number of employees on the day of the IPO. DE is the issuing firm’s debt-to-
 equity ratio in decimal form, calculated as the issuing firm’s debt over equity one fiscal year prior to the IPO. RG is the issuing
 firm’s percentage growth in revenue one year prior to the IPO compared to the previous fiscal year, presented in decimal form. HI
 represents the hot issue period in the Nordics and act as a control variable given the value 1 if the IPO was between the years 2014-
 2018, and zero otherwise. PRO is the natural logarithm of 1+ the issuing firm’s proceeds, calculated as the number of shares offered
 in the IPO multiplied with the offering price.
  a
  Significant at 0.01 level
 b
  Significant at 0.05 level
  c
  Significant at 0.1 level

                                  22
       The results are presented in Table 8 and demonstrate that AGE, REV, AT, DE and
EMPL  all  correlate with other independent variables. This is intuitive since older firms
most likely have more employees and bigger revenue streams. Also, they have had more
time to improve operational efficiency, hence increasing asset turnover. Lastly,  as a firm
becomes   older,   they   have   accumulated   more   debt,   enabled   through   higher
creditworthiness from  the  history of strong cash flows.
       Since some of the independent variables correlate with each other, an individual
regression test  is  performed on each independent variable against underpricing.  Since the
control variable PRO correlates  with MC, it is excluded.

 Table 9
 OLS regression of first day returns of venture capital backed IPOs against firm characteristic variables
                                                                                                                              2
   Intercept    HI    AGE   REV   MC   EBITDA   AT   EMPL   DE    RG   N    R
 1.   -0.002    -0.026   -0.007                                                    59   0.002
 2.   -0.031    -0.030          0.005                                            59   0.003
 3.         c                                b                                    59   0.069
     -0.381    -0.033                 0.064
 4.   -0.025    -0.021                        -0.0001                              59   0.002
 5.   -0.002    -0.011                                -0.039                       59   0.015
 6.   -0.007    -0.026                                       -0.004                59   0.002
 7.   -0.020    -0.027                                             0.001         59   0.002
 8.   -0.020    -0.032                                                    0.001   59   0.011
 Note.  Firm characteristic is defined as  the levels of financial metrics that the issuing firm posits.  The sample consists of  59 VC-
 backed IPOs. The data was compiled from Capital IQ and Nasdaq Nordic official listings archives of IPOs conducted on their main
 market exchanges and First North Growth Market between the years 2011-2020. Dual listings, exchange transfers and secondary
 offerings are excluded. The venture capital backed IPOs are all new issues with a venture capitalist (as classified in SVCA) backing
 the offering and that has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer. Adjusted first day  return is  the dependent variable,  defined as the
 percentage price change from the offer price to the closing price of the first trading day, adjusted for the OMX Stockholm All Share
 return of the day of the IPO.  HI represents the hot issue period in the Nordics and act as a control variable given the value 1 if the
 IPO was between the years 2014-2018, and zero otherwise. The remaining firm characteristics act as independent variables. Age is
 the natural logarithm of 1+  the number of years since the company was founded, calculated from the date of the IPO. REV is the
 natural logarithm of 1+ the issuing firm’s revenue one fiscal year prior to the IPO. MC is the natural logarithm calculated as 1+ the
 issuing firm’s market capitalization, which is the number of shares outstanding multiplied with the closing price of the IPO  date.
 EBITDA is the issuing firms EBITDA margin in decimal form, calculated as EBITDA (earnings before interest, tax, depreciation
 and amortization) over total sales one fiscal year prior to the IPO. AT is the issuing firm’s asset turnover in decimal form, calculated
 as total sales over total assets one fiscal year prior to the IPO. EMPL is the natural logarithm 1+ the issuing firm’s number of
 employees on the day of the IPO. DE is the issuing firm’s debt-to-equity ratio in decimal form, calculated as the issuing firm’s debt
 over equity one fiscal year prior to the IPO. RG is the issuing firm’s percentage growth in revenue one year prior to the IPO
 compared to the previous fiscal year, presented in decimal form.
  a
  Significant at 0.01 level
 b
  Significant at 0.05 level
  c
  Significant at 0.1 level

       The OLS regression  results  are  shown in  Table 9. The control  variable, HI,  shows
conflicting results compared to previous research (Ritter, 1984), as it does not indicate
higher  underpricing  when  the  market  is  featured  by  hot  issues,  but  rather  the
opposite.  One explanation can be that previous research have focused on the U.S. market,
which might react differently to a surge in market activity than the Nordic market does.
      Looking at the signs of the independent variables, it is seen that  AGE, EBITDA,
AT  and  EMPL  reduce underpricing. These signs are in line with what we hypothesized
in section 4.4.1. However,  all  the remaining variables increase underpricing.  This
contradicts some of our hypothesized direction, where we expected REV, MC and RG to
reduce rather than increase  underpricing.  However, the test only concludes  that market
capitalization increases underpricing on a significant level  of  5%,  leaving all other
independent variables insignificant.

                                  23
5.4.2 Firm characteristics in the private equity subgroup
As in the VC sample, a Pearson correlation test between the independent variables has
been performed to avoid potential multicollinearity in the regression test.

 Table 10
 Correlation matrix of firm characteristics for private equity backed IPOs between 2011 and 2020
          AGE    REV    MC    EBITDA    AT    EMPL   DE     RG     HI    PRO
 AGE        1
                   b
 REV      0.526     1
                    c         a
 MC       0.344   0.683     1
 EBITDA    0.183    0.404    0.134      1
 AT        -0.036    0.343    0.042     0.204       1
                    b         a         a
 EMPL      0.523   0.795   0.608    0.219     0.208     1
 D/E        0.004    0.148    0.007     0.043     0.246    0.141     1
                                                 b           c
 RG         0.033    -0.038    0.017    -0.311    -0.198   -0.008   -0.009     1
 HI         0.147    0.231    0.108     -0.03      0.06    0.368    0.097    0.07      1
                    b         a         a                               a
 PRO       0.499   0.767   0.868     0.156     0.003    0.712   0.073   0.0001   0.207    1
 Note.  Firm characteristic is defined as  the levels of financial metrics that the issuing firm posits. The  sample consists of  76 PE-
 backed IPOs. The data was compiled from Capital IQ and Nasdaq Nordic official listings archives of IPOs conducted on their main
 market exchanges and First North Growth Market between the years 2011-2020. Dual listings, exchange transfers and secondary
 offerings are excluded. The private equity backed IPOs are all new issues with a venture capitalist (as classified in SVCA) backing
 the  offering and that has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer.  Age is  the natural logarithm of 1+  the number of years since the
 company was founded, calculated from the date of the IPO. REV is the natural logarithm of 1+ the issuing firm’s revenue one fiscal
 year prior to the IPO. MC is the natural logarithm calculated as 1+ the issuing firm’s market capitalization, which is the number of
 shares outstanding multiplied with the closing price of the IPO date. EBITDA is the issuing firms EBITDA margin in decimal form,
 calculated as EBITDA (earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization) over total sales one fiscal year prior to the IPO.
 AT is the issuing firm’s asset turnover in decimal form, calculated as total sales over total assets one fiscal year prior to the IPO.
 EMPL is the natural logarithm 1+ the issuing firm’s number of employees on the day of the IPO. DE is the issuing firm’s debt-to-
 equity ratio in decimal form, calculated as the issuing firm’s debt over equity one fiscal year prior to the  IPO. RG is the issuing
 firm’s percentage growth in revenue one year prior to the IPO compared to the previous fiscal year, presented in decimal form. HI
 represents the hot issue period in the Nordics and act as a control variable given the value 1 if the IPO was between the years 2014-
 2018, and zero otherwise. PRO is the natural logarithm of 1+ the issuing firm’s proceeds, calculated as the number of shares offered
 in the IPO multiplied with the offering price.
  a
  Significant at 0.01 level
 b
  Significant at 0.05 level
  c
  Significant at 0.1 level

      As shown in Table  10, the variables  AGE,  REV,  MC,  EMPL, EBITDA,  RG  and
PRO  correlate with other independent variables.  REV,  MC  and  EMPL  are all indicators
of size. If one variable increases, it is likely that the others follow the same path. For
example, older firms tend to have a higher number of employees and higher revenue than
younger firms. Furthermore, the correlation between  RG, EBITDA and  AT  are another
intuitive result since these three variables are indicators of performance. Higher revenue
growth will demonstrate  a  higher EBITDA margin and higher asset turnover, with the
assumption of remained cost and asset levels.
       Since some of the independent variables correlate, individual regression tests for
each independent variable against underpricing are performed, similar as for the venture
capital sample.  Since the control variable  PRO  correlates with 4 out of 9 independent
variables at a significant level, it is excluded from the regression tests to avoid
multicollinearity. The second control variable  HI  does not show correlation with any of
the independent variables on a significant  level and  is therefore kept in the individual
regression tests.

                                  24
 Table 11
 OLS regression of first day returns of private equity backed IPOs against firm characteristic variables
                                                                                                                               2
    Intercept   HI    AGE   REV   MC   EBITDA   AT   EMPL   DE    RG    N    R
 1.    -0.079    0.091   0.005                                                    76   0.029
            b                         b
 2.   -0.187   0.061         0.022                                                  76   0.087
            b                                 b
 3.   -0.316   0.077                0.036                                           76   0.094
 4.    -0.064    0.094                        0.007                               76   0.033
 5.    -0.062    0.093                                -0.003                       76   0.029
            b                                                            b
 6.   -0.176   0.039                                      0.025                  76   0.090
 7.    -0.065    0.093                                             -0.000          76   0.029
 8.    -0.066    0.090                                                   0.003   76   0.035
 Note.  Firm characteristic is defined as  the levels of financial metrics that the issuing firm posits. The sample consists of 76 PE-
 backed IPOs. The data was compiled from Capital IQ and Nasdaq Nordic official listings archives of IPOs conducted on their main
 market exchanges and First North Growth Market between the years 2011-2020. Dual listings, exchange transfers and secondary
 offerings are excluded. The private equity backed IPOs are all new issues with a private equity (as classified in SVCA) backing the
 offering and that has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer. Adjusted first day  return is  the dependent variable,  defined as the
 percentage price change from the offer price to the closing price of the first trading day, adjusted for the OMX Stockholm All Share
 return of the day of the IPO.  HI represents the hot issue period in the Nordics and act as a control variable given the value 1 if the
 IPO was between the years 2014-2018, and zero otherwise.  Age is  the natural logarithm of 1+  the number of years since the
 company was founded, calculated from the date of the IPO. REV is the natural logarithm of 1+ the issuing firm’s revenue one fiscal
 year prior to the IPO. MC is the natural logarithm calculated as 1+ the issuing firm’s market capitalization, which is the number of
 shares outstanding multiplied with the closing price of the IPO date. EBITDA is the issuing firms EBITDA margin in decimal form,
 calculated as EBITDA (earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization) over total sales one fiscal year prior to the IPO.
 AT is the issuing firm’s asset turnover in decimal form, calculated as total sales over total assets one fiscal year prior to  the IPO.
 EMPL is the natural logarithm 1+ the issuing firm’s number of employees on  the day of the IPO. DE is the issuing firm’s debt-to-
 equity ratio in decimal form, calculated as the issuing firm’s debt over equity one fiscal year prior to the IPO. RG is the issuing
 firm’s percentage growth in revenue one year prior to the IPO compared to the previous fiscal year, presented in decimal form.
  a
  Significant at 0.01 level
 b
  Significant at 0.05 level
  c
  Significant at 0.1 level

       The result of the regression is shown in  Table 11.  The control variable  HI  takes a
positive sign, indicating higher underpricing when hot market conditions prevail, in line
with previous research (Ritter, 1984). Further, looking at the signs of the independent
variables,  the  regression  shows that  AGE,  REV,  MC, EBITDA,  EMPL  and  RG  increase
underpricing, conflicting our hypothesised directions  presented in section 4.4.1. Only
asset turnover and leverage decrease underpricing, where the former is in line with our
hypothesised direction,  but not the latter.
      Furthermore, EMPL, REV and MC explain underpricing in the PE-sample with a
significant level of 5%. The more employees, revenue  and higher market capitalization,
the more underpricing the IPO will exhibit.

5.4.3 Concluding comments on firm characteristics and underpricing
Surprisingly, the control variables show different signs in the two subgroups. In times of
a hot market period, VC-backed IPOs are associated with higher levels of underpricing
while PE-backed IPOs are associated with lower levels of underpricing. However, as no
control variable is significant the  test  fails to  determine the actual influence of the HI
variable.
       The results from the regression tests  indicate that one of the variables, namely
MC,  explains underpricing in both subgroups. Only in the PE-sample,  REV  and  EMPL
negatively  impact  underpricing.  Therefore,  our  fourth  hypothesis,  the  same  firm
characteristics explain underpricing in VC-  and PE-  backed IPOs,  is rejected.

                                  25
5.5 IPO characteristics’  impact on underpricing
Next, we test  whether  IPO characteristics  have  a monitoring effect and if the backing
signals certification of the issuer,  which  reduces  underpricing. By performing separate
OLS regressions on the VC-  and PE-sample, we can confirm or reject our final and fifth
hypothesis,  the  same IPO characteristics  reduce underpricing in VC-  and PE-backed
IPOs.

5.5.1 IPO characteristics in the venture capital subgroup

 Table 12
 Correlation matrix of IPO characteristics for VC-backed IPOs between 2011 and 2020
           OWN    NFS     EQ     BRD    YOBRD    IPOs    AGEFS    HI    PRO
 OWN       1
                     a
 NFS        0.904     1
                     a          a
 EQ         0.749   0.891     1
                     a          a          a
 BRD       0.721   0.783    0.838      1
                     a          a          a          a
 YOBRD     0.756    0.735    0.694    0.834       1
                     a          a          a          b           b
 IPOs        0.773    0.734    0.609    0.554     0.587       1
                     a          a          a          a           a           a
 AGEFS      0.912    0.912    0.750    0.698     0.693     0.791       1
                     c          c          c          c           c            c          c
 HI          0.037    0.033    0.053    0.053     0.039     -0.015    0.013       1
 PRO        -0.013    0.038    0.062    0.110      0.123      0.053     -0.007    0.033     1
 Note. IPO characteristics are defined as specific traits of the financial sponsor and its involvement in the IPO. The sample consist
 of  285 IPOs, of which  59  are  VC-backed  and 226 are Non-backed.  The data  was compiled from Capital IQ and  Nasdaq  Nordic
 official listings archives of IPOs conducted on their main market exchanges and First North Growth Market between the years 2011-
 2020. Dual listings, exchange transfers and secondary offerings are excluded.  The venture capital backed IPOs are all new issues
 with a venture capitalist (as classified in SVCA) backing the offering and that has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer.  OWN  is
 defined as  the  natural logarithm  of  1+  the number of years the sponsor has  owned  equity  in  the issuer  prior to the IPO.  NFS is
 defined as  the  natural logarithm of 1+  the number of sponsors with an above 5% equity stake  in  the issuer before the IPO.  EQ is
 defined as the percentage ownership of all sponsors before the IPO, in decimal form. BRD is defined as the natural logarithm of 1+
 the number of board seats that is occupied by the lead VC prior to the IPO. YOBRD is defined as the natural logarithm of 1+ the
 number of years between the IPO date and the date the lead sponsor took its first seat on the board. IPOs is the natural logarithm of
 1+ the number of initial public offerings the sponsor has  backed  before the  date of the IPO.  AGEFS is defined as  the  natural
 logarithm of 1+ the number of years between the registration date of the sponsor and the date of the IPO. HI represents the hot issue
 period in the Nordics and act as a control variable given the value 1 if the IPO was between the years 2014-2018, and zero otherwise.
 PRO is the natural logarithm of 1+ the issuing firm’s proceeds, calculated as the number of shares offered  in the IPO multiplied
 with the offering price.
  a
  Significant at 0.01 level
 b
  Significant at 0.05 level
  c
  Significant at 0.1 level

       As seen in Table 12, there is a high significant correlation between all independent
variables, except for PRO.  To avoid  multicollinearity  seven individual regression tests
are performed. Also, since one of the control variables,  HI, correlates with all our
independent variables at a 10% level, it  is  excluded.

                                  26
 Table 13
 OLS regression of first day returns of venture capital backed IPOs against IPO characteristic variables
                                                                                                                               2
    Intercept   PRO   AGEFS   BRD   YOBRD   OWN   NFS   IPOs    EQ    N    R
 1.                    c          c
      -0.070    0.021    -0.027                                                     285    0.021
 2.                    c
      -0.084    0.022             -0.047                                        285    0.014
 3.                    c
      -0.085    0.021                     0.001                               285   0.011
 4.                    c
      -0.073    0.021                               -0.029                       285    0.016
 5.                    c
      -0.075    0.021                                       -0.059                285    0.019
 6.                    c
      -0.083    0.021                                              -0.009          285    0.012
 7.                    c
      -0.080    0.022                                                      -0.101   285    0.016
 Note. IPO characteristics are defined as specific traits of the financial sponsor and its involvement in the IPO. The sample consist
 285 IPOs, of which 59 are VC-backed and 226 are non-backed IPOs. The data was compiled from Capital IQ and Nasdaq Nordic
 official listings archives of IPOs conducted on their main market exchanges and First North Growth Market between the years 2011-
 2020. Dual listings, exchange transfers and secondary offerings are excluded.  The venture capital backed IPOs are all new issues
 with a venture capitalist (as classified in SVCA) backing the offering and that has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer.  Adjusted
 first day return is the dependent variable, defined as the percentage price change from the offer price to the closing price of the first
 trading day, adjusted for the OMX Stockholm All Share return of the day of the IPO. PRO is the natural logarithm of 1+ the issuing
 firm’s proceeds, calculated as the number of shares offered in the IPO multiplied with the offering price, acting as a control variable.
 The remaining IPO characteristics act as independent variables.  AGEFS is defined as the natural logarithm of 1+  the number of
 years between the registration date of the sponsor and the date of the IPO. BRD is defined as the natural logarithm of 1+ the number
 of board seats that is occupied by the  lead VC prior to  the IPO.  YOBRD is defined as the natural logarithm of 1+ the number of
 years between the IPO date and the date the lead sponsor took its first seat on the board. OWN is defined as the natural logarithm
 of 1+ the number of years the sponsor has owned equity in the issuer prior to the IPO. NFS is defined as the natural logarithm of 1+
 the number of sponsors with an above 5% equity stake in the issuer before the IPO. EQ is defined as the percentage ownership of
 all sponsors before the IPO, in decimal forms. IPOs is the natural logarithm of 1+ the number of initial public offerings the sponsor
 has backed before the date of the IPO.
  a
  Significant at 0.01 level
 b
  Significant at 0.05 level
  c
  Significant at 0.1 level

       As shown in Table 13, the control variable PRO increases  underpricing in all
individual regressions.  This is in line with Barry et al. (1990), but deviates from the
findings made by Ritter (1984) as well as Chalk and Peavy (1990). The finding may also
be explained by the winner’s curse theory. Due to higher levels of capital raised, issuers
need to underprice the IPO to attract uninformed investors, which is needed to  fully
subscribe  the IPO,  as informed investors have limited wealth.
       All independent variables, except the  YOBRD, take the expected negative sign,
meaning that it has a positive effect on underpricing. However, the only independent
variable that shows a significant relationship with underpricing is  AGEFS. This result
indicates that the age of the VC-firm acts as a quality monitor, which is also one  of the
main results in the paper by Barry et al. (1990). Older VC firms become more experienced
in guiding activities that increase the performance of the  holding  company,  reducing
investor uncertainty and the need to underprice.

5.5.2 IPO characteristics in the private equity subgroup
As seen in  Table 14, there is a high significant correlation between  all  independent
variables, except for PRO.  To  avoid multicollinearity  seven individual regression tests
are performed, as in the venture capital  subgroup. Also, since the control variables  HI
correlates with all our independent variables at a 1% level, it  is  excluded.

                                  27
Table 14
Correlation matrix of IPO characteristics for PE-backed IPOs between 2011 and 2020
          OWN    NFS     EQ     BRD    YOBRD    IPOs    AGEFS    HI    PRO
OWN       1
                    a
NFS        0.873     1
                    a          a
EQ         0.886   0.847     1
                    a          a          a
BRD       0.871    0.778    0.878      1
                    a          a          a          a
YOBRD     0.883    0.721    0.795    0.873       1
                    a          a          a          a           a
IPOs        0.742    0.692    0.750    0.715     0.696       1
                    a          a          a          a           a           a
AGEFS      0.944    0.887    0.887    0.876     0.850     0.810       1
                    a          a          a          a           a            a           a
HI          0.055    0.082    0.093    0.087     0.026     -0.048     0.022       1
PRO        0.459    0.438    0.513    0.512     0.453     0.390     0.466     0.089     1
Note. IPO characteristics are defined as traits of the financial sponsor and its involvement in the IPO. The sample consists of 302
IPOs, of which  76  are  PE-backed  and 226 are Non-backed. The data  was compiled from Capital IQ and  Nasdaq  Nordic official
archives of IPOs conducted on  the  main market and First North Growth Market between the years 2011-2020. Dual listings,
exchange transfers and secondary offerings are excluded. The private equity backed IPOs are all new issues with a venture capitalist
(as classified in SVCA) backing the offering and that has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer.  OWN  is defined as  the  natural
logarithm  of  1+  the number of years the sponsor has  owned  equity  in  the issuer  prior to the IPO.  NFS is defined as  the  natural
logarithm of 1+ the number of sponsors with an above 5% equity stake in the issuer before the IPO. EQ is defined as the percentage
ownership of all sponsors before the IPO, in decimal form. BRD is defined as the natural logarithm of 1+ the number of board seats
that is occupied by the lead VC prior to the IPO. YOBRD is defined as the natural logarithm of 1+ the number of years between the
IPO date and the date the lead sponsor took its first seat on the board. IPOs is the natural logarithm of 1+ the number of initial public
offerings the sponsor has backed before the date of the IPO. AGEFS is defined as the natural logarithm of 1+ the number of years
between the  registration  date of the sponsor and the date of the IPO.  HI represents the hot issue period in the Nordics and act as a
control variable given the value 1 if the IPO was between the years 2014-2018, and zero otherwise. PRO is the natural logarithm of
1+ the issuing firm’s proceeds, calculated as the number of shares offered in the IPO multiplied with the offering price.
a
 Significant at 0.01 level
b
 Significant at 0.05 level
c
 Significant at 0.1 level

Table 15
OLS regression of first day returns of private equity backed IPOs against IPO characteristic variables
                                                                                                                              2
   Intercept   PRO   AGEFS   BRD   YOBRD   OWN   NFS    IPOs    EQ    N    R
                       c
1.    -0.063    0.018    -0.015                                                302   0.011
2.    -0.050     0.014            -0.005                                        302   0.007
3.    -0.049     0.014                    -0.002                                302   0.007
                       c
4.    -0.062    0.018                               -0.025                        302   0.011
                      b                                           c
5.    -0.071    0.021                                       -0.082                  302   0.019
6.    -0.049     0.014                                          -0.002         302   0.007
                       c
7.    -0.061    0.017                                                      -0.044   302   0.009
Note. IPO characteristics are defined as specific traits of the financial sponsor and its involvement in the IPO. The sample consists
of 302  IPOs, of which  76  are  PE-backed  and 226 are Non-backed.  The data  was compiled from Capital  IQ and  Nasdaq  Nordic
official listings archives of IPOs conducted on their main market exchanges and First North Growth Market between the years 2011-
2020. Dual listings, exchange transfers and secondary offerings are excluded.  The private equity backed IPOs are all new issues
with a private equity investor (as classified in SVCA) backing the offering and that has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer.
Adjusted first day return is the dependent variable, defined as the percentage price change from the offer price to the closing price
of the first trading day, adjusted for the OMX Stockholm All Share return of the day of the IPO. PRO is the natural logarithm of 1+
the issuing firm’s proceeds, calculated as the number of shares offered in the IPO multiplied with the offering price, acting as a
control variable. The remaining IPO characteristics act as independent variables. AGEFS is defined as the natural logarithm of 1+
the number of years between the registration date of the sponsor and the date of the IPO. BRD is defined as the natural logarithm
of 1+ the number of board seats that is occupied by the lead VC prior to the IPO. YOBRD is defined as the natural logarithm of 1+
the number of years  between the IPO date  and  the date the  lead  sponsor took  its first seat on the board.  OWN  is defined as  the
natural logarithm  of  1+  the number of years the sponsor has  owned  equity  in  the issuer  prior to the IPO.  NFS is defined as  the
natural logarithm of 1+  the number of sponsors with an above 5% equity stake  in  the issuer before the IPO.  EQ is defined as  the
percentage ownership of  all  sponsors before the IPO, in decimal forms.  IPOs is the natural logarithm of 1+ the number of initial
public offerings the sponsor has backed before the date of the IPO.
a
 Significant at 0.01 level
b
 Significant at 0.05 level
c
 Significant at 0.1 level

                                  28
       Table  15  presents the  seven  individual regression tests that demonstrate how IPO
characteristics may have explanatory power on underpricing. Compared to the VC-
subgroup regressions, only  four  out of  eight  individual tests in the PE-subgroup report a
significant dependence of the control variable  PRO. The coefficient has the expected
positive sign, which indicates that proceeds increase underpricing. Furthermore,  all  the
independent variables have negative signs, meaning that they reduce underpricing. This
is in line with  our expectations as well as  previous research conducted by Barry et al.
(1990), which shows that several IPO characteristics act as quality monitors and therefore
decrease underpricing. However, there is only one independent variable that exhibits
significant results, namely the variable NFS. This means that the more PE-firms that hold
an equity stake in the firm pre-IPO, the less underpricing the IPO will have.  Thus, the
more sponsors  invested  in the firm  indicate a higher probability of realizing future  return,
reducing investor uncertainty and the need to underprice.

5.5.3 Concluding comments on IPO characteristics and underpricing
The test conducted in this section leads to the conclusion of a rejection of the fifth and
final hypothesis,  the same IPO  characteristics reduce underpricing in VC-  and PE-
backed IPOs. By interpreting the regression test, we conclude that in the PE-sample, the
number of PE-firms backing the issuing firm is the most important factor, while in the
VC-sample it is instead the age of the VC-firm. Even though each sample presents
different explanatory variables, the signaling theory still holds. Having a financial
sponsor backing the IPO act as certification and provides monitoring, decreasing
information asymmetry and underpricing.  This conclusion  enhances  the  results made by
Barry et al. (1990).

6.0 Conclusion,  Limitations  and  Further Research

6.1 Conclusion
This study  results in  several conclusions. Firstly, private equity and venture capital firms
invest in different types of firms, where the former tends to invest in older, mature firms
with higher levels of revenue, market capitalization, leverage and EBITDA margin.
Secondly,   there   are   differences   between   the   two   sponsors’   characteristics   and
involvement in IPOs. The number of private equity firms backing the IPO  is  on average
fewer with the lead private equity firm having a larger equity stake pre-IPO. They  can
also  perform greater  influence  over the  target since private equity firms have on average
more representatives serving the board for a longer period of time.  Another  result is that
PE-firms have  performed fewer IPOs than VC-firms, even though the former sponsor is
on average older than the latter. One potential explanation  for  this is that VC-firms are
young and perform many IPOs to establish themselves in the  industry (Brav and
Gompers,  1997).
       Thirdly, there  is no clear difference in the ability to reduce underpricing between
the two types of financial sponsors. However, when controlling for market
capitalization, private equity firms have a positive effect on underpricing compared to
venture capital firms,  which  instead  have an insignificant impact. Since no other
variables of  the  issuer’s size  provide the same result, a  univocal  conclusion that private
equity firms are better at reducing underpricing when the issuer is large cannot be made.
Taking all results into account, we can conclude that there is no obvious  or significant
difference in underpricing between VC-  and PE-backed IPOs.

                                  29
       Fourthly, when investigating if the same firm characteristics explain
underpricing between VC-backed and PE-backed IPOs, we  conclude that higher levels
of market capitalization increase underpricing in both subgroups.  However, we find  that
higher levels of  revenue and number of employees have a negative impact on
underpricing in  the PE-subgroup, and not in the  VC-subgroup. Therefore, we confirm
that different firm characteristics explain underpricing between VC-  and PE-backed
IPOs. One potential explanation  for  this discrepancy can be that the PE-sample consists
of  some  large observations, in terms of revenue and number of employees, that are
associated with more underpricing.
       Lastly, length of ownership act as a quality monitor for VC-backed IPOs
whereas the length of representatives on the issuer’s board act as a quality monitor in
the PE-subgroup. Therefore,  we conclude that different IPO characteristics help to
explain underpricing.
       Overall, this paper presents new findings  of  the dynamics on the Nordic equity
markets compared to previous research conducted on American, British and French
exchanges (Barry et  al., 1990,  Levis,  2011,  Bergström et al.,  2006).  Even though there
is no difference in underpricing between the two types of sponsors, they have different
investment strategies and  monitors  the target which provide a certification effect  to
outside investors,  reducing underpricing.

6.2 Limitations
Firstly, there  is  no universal  method  of how to  define  venture capital and private equity
firms in the literary space. Several articles use different definitions. For example, Levis
(2011) focus on the ownership share of the sponsor while Mogilevsky and Murgulov
(2012) base their division on a database classification. This might skew the conclusions
we have made when comparing our results with previous research. Our results may have
ended up different if we had used  another  definition  of the separation of sponsors.
       Secondly, the Nordic market and time period  chosen gave a narrow selection of
IPOs to analyze and ended up with a sample size of 361 IPOs. This relatively small
sample size has several implications. One is that the statistical power decrease. Several
of our results conclude significant results,  but  with a larger sample size and more
observations, the results could have given even more implications and useful  insights.
       Thirdly,  the previous research on  private equity backing and underpricing  is
limited, as well as firm characteristic and its impact on underpricing. This creates
uncertainty  on which approach to take when researching these areas, since there is no
prejudiced way of doing it. Also, our overall research question is well documented in
previous research, but the hypotheses  in this paper  cover new ground as firm
characteristics and its impact on underpricing have not been investigated before. This
can make the hypotheses and conclusions speculative since  it lacks  comparability with
previous research.

6.3 Further research
In this study, we provide evidence of how VC/PE-firms and underpricing relate to each
other. We hope to see further research in this area since the existing academic papers
covering this topic  are  very limited. This would enhance the reliability and usefulness of
this paper for the reasons stated in section 6.2.
       Further, we  also provide  evidence of the difference in  the  investment strategy of
VC-  and PE-firms. However, further  investigation of  the  investment-  and operational

                                  30
strategies held by the sponsors would add depth to  the  area. This would create a greater
understanding of how the strategies of the sponsors translate to the holding firm that in
turn impacts  underpricing.

                                  31
7.0 References

Barry, Muscarella, Peavy, Vetsuypens, 1990, The role of venture capital in the creation
of public companies: Evidence from the going-public process.  Journal of Financial
Economics,  27(2), 447–471

Bergström, Nilsson, Wahlberg, 2006, Underpricing and Long-Run Performance Patterns
of European  Private-Equity-Backed and Non-Private-Equity-Backed IPOs.  The Journal
of Private Equity,  9(4), 16–47

Brav, Gompers, 1997,  Myth or Reality? The Long-Run Underperformance of Initial
Public Offerings: Evidence from Venture and Nonventure Capital-Backed Companies.
The Journal of Finance,  52(5), 1791–1821

Carter, Manaster, 1990, Initial Public Offerings and Underwriter Reputation. The Journal
of Finance,  45(4), 1045–1067

Chahine,   Filatotchev,   2008,   The   Effects   of   Information   Disclosure   and   Board
Independence  on IPO Discount, 46 (2), 2019-241

Chalk, Peavy, 1990, Understanding the pricing of initial public offerings,  Research in
finance,  8, 203-240
DeAngelo, DeAngelo, 1987, Management Buyouts of Publicly Traded Corporations.
Financial Analysts Journal,  43  (3), 38–49

Dutta, Lanvin and Wunsch-Vincent, 2020,  Global Innovation Index 2020-  Who will
finance innovation?,  p.22 & p.33

Habib, Ljungqvist, 2001, Underpricing and Entrepreneurial Wealth Losses in IPOs:
Theory and Evidence,  The Review of Financial Studies, 14 (2), 433–458

Lee, Wahal, 2004, Grandstanding, certification and the underpricing of venture capital
backed IPOs.  Journal of Financial Economics,  73  (2), 375–407

Levis, 2011, The Performance of Private Equity-Backed IPOs.  Financial Management,
40 (1), 253–277

Miller, Reilly,  1987, An Examination of Mispricing, Returns, and Uncertainty for Initial
Public Offerings,  Financial Management,  16  (2), 33–38

Mogilevsky, Murgulov, 2012,  Underpricing of private equity backed, venture capital
backed and non-sponsored IPOs,  Investment Management & Financial Innovations,  9(3)

Nasdaq OMX Nordic, Listings, retrieved on 2021-02-10 and 2021-02-18,
http://www.nasdaqomxnordic.com/news/listings

Nordics.vc, 2020,  FVCA report,  p.4 & p.6-7

                                  32
Pitchbook, 2020,  European Venture Report,  p.3–5

PWC, 2018,  European private equity IPO report, p.4 & p.6

PWC, 2020,  IPO watch Europe 2020,  p.10 & p.12

Ritter, 1984, The “Hot Issue” Market of 1980.  The Journal of Business  (Chicago, Ill.),  57
(2), 215–240

Ritter, Welch, 2002, A Review of IPO Activity, Pricing, and Allocations.  The Journal of
Finance,  57  (4), 1795–1828

Rock, 1986, Why new issues are underpriced,  Journal of Financial Economics, 15, 187-
212.

Segerström, 2018, Sweden’s IPO Boom,  Factset

Su and Fleisher, 1999, An empirical investigation of underpricing in Chinese IPOs,
Pacific-Basin Finance Journal, 7 (2), 173-202

Warne, 1988, Risk and industry characteristics of venture capital investments,
Unpublished manuscript  (Washington University, St. Louis, MO)

Electronic sources

Swedish Private Equity and Venture Capital Associations, Ordinarie medlemmar,
retrieved on 2021-02-15,  https://www.svca.se/ordinarie-medlemmar/

Finansinspektionen, 2020-01-17, Issuers, retrieved on 2021-03-02,
https://www.fi.se/en/markets/issuers/

Databases

Capital IQ, 2021, Equity Screening, retrieved on 2021-02-05,
https://www.capitaliq.com/ciqdotnet/screening/ScreenBuilderViper.aspx?UniqueScreen
Id=657815985&screentypeid=10

Company Prospects

Prospects for IPOs on Nasdaq Copenhagen and First North Copenhagen:
https://oasm.finanstilsynet.dk/dk/soegmeddelelseresultat.aspx?headline=&name=&Real
AnnouncerCVR=10598184&CVRnumber=&announcmentsId=&informationTypeId=14
&languageId=-1&nationality=-1&AnnouncementTypeId=&pubDateFrom=2007-11-
01%2000:00&pubDateTo=2025-12-31%2023:59&index=1&sindex=1

                                  33
Prospects for IPOs on Nasdaq  Helsinki  and First North  Helsinki:
https://www.finanssivalvonta.fi/sv/register/prospektregistret/

Prospects for IPOs on Nasdaq  Stockholm  and First North  Stockholm:
https://www.fi.se/sv/vara-register/prospektregistret/

                                  34
Appendix

 Table 1
 Variables and location of extraction
                                 Capital   Annual   Prospects   Nasdaq    Company
                                    IQ     Reports             IPO list    webpage
 Transaction Closed Date              X                       X
 Issuer                          X                       X
 On Nasdaq Nordic list                                        X
 Age of issuer                                                        X
 Revenues one year prior to IPO         X       X
 Market Capitalization at IPO            X
 EBITDA Margin one year prior to IPO     X       X
 Asset turnover one year prior to IPO      X       X
 Number of employees               X       X
 Debt-to-equity ratio one year prior to
                            X       X
 IPO
 Revenue growth one year prior to IPO     X       X
 PE-backed                                         X
 VC-backed                                       X
 Length of VC/PE ownership                          X                 X
 Lead VC/PE firm % ownership pre-
                                       X
 IPO
 Lead VC/PE firm % ownership post
                                       X
 IPO
 All VC/PE firm total % ownership pre-
                                       X
 IPO
 All VC/PE firm total % ownership post
                                       X
 IPO
 Demerger/Spin off/Dual
                                              X
 listing/Exchange transfer
 Proceeds                                        X
 First day closing price                 X
 Number of VC/PE firms backing                         X
 Total number of board members                         X
 Number VC/PE firm representatives
                                       X
 on board
 Number of years the lead VC/PE firm
                                       X
 has served the board
 Number of IPOs the lead VC/PE firm
 has backed prior to the observation’s                                          X
 IPO
 Age of lead VC/PE firm                                                X
 Diluted EPS one year prior to IPO        X
 Earnings yield                     X
 Note. This table presents all variables that constitutes our raw data sample and from which source each variable has been extracted
 from.

                                  35
Figure 1

          Scatter plot of adjusted first day return of all observations

       8000
       7000
       6000
       5000
       4000
       3000
       2000
       1000
     % Adjusted first day return0
      -1000
                                             Distribution of observations

                              PE-backed    VC-backed    Non-backed

Note.  The full sample  consists of 373  IPOs, of which  62  are VC-backed, 77  are PE-backed and 234  are Non-backed. The data  was
compiled from Capital IQ and Nasdaq Nordic official listings archives of IPOs conducted on their main market exchanges and First
North Growth Market between the years 2011-2020. Dual listings, exchange transfers and secondary offerings are excluded.  The
venture capital backed IPOs are all new issues with a venture capitalist (as classified in SVCA) backing the offering and that has more
than 5% equity stake pre-offer. The private equity backed IPOs are all  new issues with a private equity investor (as classified in
SVCA) backing the offering and that has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer.  Non-backed IPOs are neither backed by a venture
capital-  or private equity firm. The table plots all observations.  Adjusted first day  return is  defined as the  percentage  price  change
from the offer price to the closing price of  the first  trading day, adjusted for the  OMX Stockholm All Share  return of the day of the
IPO.

                                  36
Figure 2

          Scatter plot of adjusted first day return of all observations

       850

       650

       450

       250

        50
     % Adjusted first day return
       -150
                                            Distribution of observations

                              PE-backed    VC-backed    Non-backed

Note.  The full sample  consists of 373  IPOs, of which  62  are VC-backed, 77  are PE-backed and 234  are Non-backed. The data  was
compiled from Capital IQ and Nasdaq Nordic official listings archives of IPOs conducted on their main market exchanges and First
North Growth Market between the years 2011-2020. Dual listings, exchange transfers and secondary offerings are excluded.  The
venture capital backed IPOs are all new issues with a venture capitalist (as classified in SVCA) backing the offering and that has more
than 5% equity stake pre-offer. The private equity backed IPOs are all new issues with a private equity investor (as classified in
SVCA) backing the offering and that has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer.  Non-backed IPOs are neither backed by  a venture
capital-  or private equity firm. The table plots all observations with  -150% < adjusted first day return < 850%.  Adjusted first day
return is defined as the percentage price change from the offer price to the closing price of the first trading day, adjusted for the OMX
Stockholm All Share  return of the day of the IPO.

                                  37
Figure 3

          Scatter plot of adjusted first day return of all observations

       250
       200
       150
       100
        50
         0
        -50
      -100
     % Adjusted first day return
      -150
                                            Distribution of observations

                              PE-backed    VC-backed    Non-backed

Note.  The full sample  consists of 373  IPOs, of which  62  are VC-backed, 77  are PE-backed and 234  are Non-backed. The data  was
compiled from Capital IQ and Nasdaq Nordic official listings archives of IPOs conducted on their main market exchanges and First
North Growth Market between the years 2011-2020. Dual listings, exchange transfers and secondary  offerings are excluded.  The
venture capital backed IPOs are all new issues with a venture capitalist (as classified in SVCA) backing the offering and that has more
than 5% equity stake pre-offer. The private equity backed IPOs are all new issues with a private equity investor (as classified in
SVCA) backing the offering and that has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer.  Non-backed IPOs are neither backed by a venture
capital-  or private equity firm. The table plots all observations with  -150% < adjusted first day return < 250%.  Adjusted first day
return is defined as the percentage price change from the offer price to the closing price of the first trading day, adjusted for the OMX
Stockholm All Share  return of the day of the IPO.

                                  38
Table 2
Frequency distribution of IPOs by country and year, segmented by all IPOs, VC-backed IPOs, PE-
backed IPOs and Non-backed IPOs
Panel A: Frequency distribution of IPOs by          Panel B: Frequency distribution of VC-backed
country and year                                 IPOs by country and year
Year    Sweden   Denmark   Finland   Iceland    Year    Sweden   Denmark   Finland   Iceland
2011      9        1        0        0      2011      2        0        0        0
2012      3        0        0        0      2012      0        0        0        0
2013      6        2        3        2      2013      1        0        0        0
2014     30        2        5        1      2014      9        0        2        0
2015     46        3        11       2      2015      5        1        2        0
2016     38        4        5        2      2016      9        1        0        0
2017     53        6        10       0      2017     10        1        1        0
2018     23        9        9        1      2018      3        0        0        0
2019     20        3        5        1      2019      5        0        1        0
2020     26        10        3        0      2020      6        0        0        0
Total     254       40        51       9      Total     50        3        6        0

Panel C: Frequency distribution of PE-backed       Panel D: Frequency distribution of Non-backed
IPOs by country and year                          IPOs by country and year
Year    Sweden   Denmark   Finland   Iceland    Year    Sweden   Denmark   Finland   Iceland
2011      1        0        0        0      2011      6        1        0        0
2012      0        0        0        0      2012      2        0        0        0
2013      1        1        2        0      2013      4        1        1        2
2014      6        2        0        0      2014     15        0        2        1
2015     13        0        3        0      2015     28        2        6        2
2016      8        1        2        0      2016     21        2        3        2
2017      9        1        2        0      2017     34        4        7        0
2018      9        1        2        0      2018     11        8        7        1
2019      4        1        0        0      2019     11        2        4        1
2020      5        1        1        0      2020     15        9        2        0
Total     56        8        12       0      Total     147       29        32       9
Note. The full sample consists of 361 IPOs, of which 59 are VC-backed, 76 are PE-backed and 226 are Non-backed. The data was
compiled from Capital IQ and Nasdaq Nordic official listings archives of IPOs conducted on their main market exchanges and First
North Growth Market between the years 2011-2020.  Dual listings, exchange transfers and secondary offerings are excluded.  The
venture capital backed IPOs are all new issues with a venture capitalist (as classified in SVCA) backing the offering and that has
more than 5% equity stake pre-offer. The private equity backed IPOs are all new issues with a private equity investor (as classified
in SVCA) backing the offering and that has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer.  The country-classification is based on which
exchange  the issuer  has performed their initial public offering. Listings on Nasdaq Stockholm and First North Stockholm are
categorized as Swedish. Listings on Nasdaq Copenhagen and First North Copenhagen are classified as Danish. Listings on Nasdaq
Helsinki and First North Helsinki are classified as Finnish. Listings on Nasdaq Iceland and First North Iceland is classified as
Icelandic.

                                  39
Table 3
Variance on adjusted first day return calculated on the  VC-  and PE-backed IPOs and F-test for the
difference in variance between the two subgroups
                                VC                    PE

Adjusted first day return                     0.09                          0.05
                                                                                 (0.012)
Note. The full sample  consists of 361 IPOs, of which 59 are VC-backed, 76 are PE-backed and 226 are Non-backed. The data  was
compiled from Capital IQ and Nasdaq Nordic official listings archives of IPOs conducted on their main market exchanges and First
North Growth  Market between the years 2011-2020. Dual listings, exchange transfers and secondary offerings are excluded.  The
venture capital backed IPOs are all new issues with a venture capitalist (as classified in SVCA) backing the offering and that has
more than 5%  equity stake pre-offer. The private equity backed IPOs are all new issues with a private equity investor (as classified
in SVCA) backing the offering and that has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer.  Adjusted first day return is defined as the price
change from the offer price to the closing price the first day of trading, adjusted for the OMX Stockholm All Share return of the day
of the IPO. The number in the parentheses is the p-value of the F-test for the difference in variance between the two subgroups, VC-
and PE-backed IPOs. If the p-value is less than 0.05 (5%), the noll hypothesis of no difference in variance between the subgroups
is rejected.

                                  40
Table 4
Definition of firm characteristics and IPO characteristics
                                    Firm characteristics are defined as the levels of financial metrics that
                                   the issuing firm posits. Examples of metrics can be revenue, asset
Firm characteristics             turnover and market capitalization. These firm characteristics help to
                                 explain which type of generic  target firm venture capital-  and private
                                     equity-firms invests in.
                                 IPO characteristics are defined as specific traits of the financial
                                 sponsor and its involvement in the IPO. Examples of metrics can be
IPO characteristics
                               age of sponsor,  ownership stake and number of sponsors backing the
                              IPO.
Note. This table presents the definition of firm characteristics and IPO characteristics that are used in this study. The definition will
help the reader understand the separation of our test and what is included when we refer to these notions.

                                  41
Table 5
Construction of  issuer  firm characteristic variables
                                The natural logarithm of 1+ age of the firm in years  on the day of the
AGE (Age of issuer)
                          IPO
                                 The natural logarithm of 1+ revenue of the issuing firm one  fiscal
REV (Revenue)
                                   year prior to the IPO
                                   The natural logarithm of 1+ market capitalization on the day of the
MC (Market capitalization)
                          IPO
                                  EBITDA (earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and
EBITDA (EBITDA margin)
                                amortization) over total sales, one fiscal year  prior to the IPO
                                    Sales over total assets,  one fiscal year prior to the IPO,  presented in
AT (Asset turnover)
                               decimal form
                                The natural logarithm of 1+ number of employees  at the date of the
EMPL (Number of employees)
                          IPO

DE  (Debt-To-Equity)            Total debt-to-equity ratio (leverage) one fiscal year prior to the IPO

                                       The fiscal year prior to the IPO revenue increase from prior year, in
RG (Revenue growth)
                               decimal form
                               Dummy variable given the value 1 if the IPO was between the years
HI (Hot issue)
                                 2014 to 2018, and zero otherwise
PR (Proceeds)                 The natural logarithm 1+ capital raised during the IPO, including
                                   over-allotment options
Note. This table presents the constructions of the issuer firm characteristic variables. Firm characteristic is defined as the levels of
financial metrics that the issuing firm posits.  Age is the number of years since the company was founded, calculated from the date
of the IPO. Age is the number of years since the issuing firm was founded, calculated from the date of the IPO. Revenue is the level
of sales the issuing firm had one fiscal year prior to the IPO. Market capitalization is the total number of shares outstanding by the
issuing firm  multiplied by the closing price of the  first trading day.  EBITDA margin is calculated as the issuing firm’s EBITDA
(earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization) over total sales one fiscal year prior to the IPO. Asset turnover  is
calculated as the issuing firm’s total sales over total assets one fiscal year prior to the IPO. Number of employees is extracted as the
day of the IPO. Debt-to-equity ratio is the issuing firm’s debt over equity one fiscal year prior to the IPO. Revenue growth is the
percentage growth in revenue of the issuing firm one year prior to the IPO compared to the previous fiscal year. Hot issue is  a
control variable given the value 1 if the IPO was between the years 2014-2018, and zero otherwise. Proceeds is the number of shares
offered in the IPO multiplied with the offering price.

                                  42
Table 6
Construction of IPO characteristic variables
                                  The natural logarithm of 1+ number of years the lead VC-  or PE-firm
OWN (Length of ownership)
                               has owned equity in the issuing firm
NFS (Number of financial        The natural logarithm 1+ aggregated amount of VC-  or PE firms
sponsors backing)               backing the IPO
                                  The total ownership stake owned by all VC-  or PE-sponsors that are
EQ (Total ownership pre-IPO)    individually defined as larger shareholders (minimum 5% equity
                                   stake), presented in decimal form
BRD (Number of board         The natural logarithm of 1+ number of board members that are
members)                        representatives of the lead VC-  or PE-firm
YOBRD (Number of years on    The natural logarithm 1+ number of years the lead VC- or PE firm
the  board)                       has served the board
                                  The natural logarithm of 1+ number of IPOs the lead VC-  or PE-firm
IPOs (Number of IPOs)
                              has been backing previous to the date of the observation’s IPO
AGEFS (Age of financial         The natural logarithm of 1+  the number of years the VC-  or PE-firm
sponsor)                         has been a registered firm on the date of the IPO
                                 Dummy variable given the value 1 if the IPO was between the years
HI (Hot issue)
                                 2014 to 2018, and zero otherwise
                                   The natural logarithm 1+ capital raised during the IPO, including
PRO (Proceeds)
                                   over-allotment options
Note.  This table presents the constructions of the IPO characteristic variables. IPO characteristics are defined as specific traits  of
the financial sponsor and its involvement in the IPO. Length of ownership is the number of years the sponsor has owned equity in
the issuer. Number of financial sponsors backing is the number of sponsors with an above 5% equity stake in the issuer before the
IPO. Pre-IPO ownership is the percentage ownership of all sponsors before the IPO, in decimal form. Number of board members is
the number of board seats that is occupied by the lead VC- or PE-firm prior to the IPO. Number of years on the board is the number
of years between the IPO date and the date the lead sponsor took its first seat on the board. Number of IPOs is the number of initial
public offerings the sponsor has backed before the date of the observation’s IPO. Age of the financial sponsor is the number of years
between the registration date of the sponsor and the date of the IPO. Hot issue is a control variable given the value 1 if the IPO was
between the years 2014-2018, and zero otherwise. Proceeds is the number of shares offered in the IPO multiplied with the offering
price.

                                  43
Table 7
Variance on firm characteristics calculated on the VC- and PE-backed IPOs  and F-test for the difference
in variance between the two subgroups.
Variable                     VC                         PE
AGE                         303.30                        1559.97
                                                                              (0.000)
REV                        118856.12                     402920046.13
                                                                              (0.000)
MC                        887133.18                    37750634.82
                                                                              (0.000)
EBITDA                      17529.09                          3.93
                                                                              (0.000)
AT                            0.87                           0.48
                                                                              (0.007)
EMPL                       16268.55                     2823941187.33
                                                                              (0.000)
DE                           11.78                          194.86
                                                                              (0.000)
RG                          1003.42                         39.86
                                                                              (0.000)
Note. Firm characteristic is defined as the levels of financial metrics that the issuing firm posits. The full sample consists of 361 IPOs,
of which 59 are VC-backed, 76 are PE-backed and 226 are Non-backed. The data was compiled from Capital IQ and Nasdaq Nordic
official listings archives of IPOs conducted on their main market exchanges and First North Growth Market between the years 2011-
2020. Dual listings, exchange transfers and secondary offerings are excluded.  The venture capital backed IPOs are all new issues
with a venture capitalist (as classified in SVCA) backing the offering and that has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer. The private
equity backed IPOs are all new issues with a private equity investor (as classified in SVCA) backing the offering and that has more
than 5% equity stake pre-offer. AGE is the age of the issuing firm, defined as the number of years since the issuing firm was founded,
calculated from the date of the IPO.  REV is the revenue of the issuing firm, defined as the level of sales the issuing firm had one
fiscal year prior to the IPO. MC is the market capitalization of the issuing firm, defined as the total number of shares outstanding by
the issuing firm multiplied by the closing price of the first trading day. EBITDA is the EBITDA margin of the issuing firm, calculated
as the issuing firm’s EBITDA (earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization) over total sales one fiscal year prior to
the IPO. At is the asset turnover of the issuing firm, calculated as the issuing firm’s total sales over total assets one fiscal year prior
to the IPO. EMPL is the number of employees of the issuing firm and is extracted as of the day of the IPO. DE is the debt-to-equity
ratio and is the issuing firm’s debt over equity one fiscal year prior to the IPO. RG is the revenue growth of the issuing firm, which
is the percentage growth in revenue one year prior to the IPO compared to the previous fiscal year. The number in the parentheses is
the p-value of the F-test for the difference in variance between the two subgroups, VC and PE. If the p-value is less than 0.05 (5%),
the null hypothesis of no difference in variance between the subgroups is rejected.

                                  44
Table 8
Variance on  IPO  characteristics calculated on the VC-  and PE-backed IPOs  and F-test for the
difference in variance between the two subgroups
                                    VC                 PE
OWN                                  7.18                   7.96
                                                                                  (0.342)
NFS                                      1.46                     1.40
                                                                                  (0.424)
EQ                                      0.03                    0.09
                                                                                  (0.000)
BRD                                    1.45                    1.18
                                                                                  (0.201)
YOBRD                                 7.65                   11.55
                                                                                  (0.052)
IPOs                                      106.12                    29.29
                                                                                  (0.000)
AGEFS                                  193.81                  245.49
                                                                                  (0.175)
Note.  IPO characteristics are defined as specific traits of the financial sponsor and its involvement in the IPO.  The full sample
consists of 361 IPOs, of which 59 are VC-backed, 76 are PE-backed and 226 are Non-backed. The data was compiled from Capital
IQ and Nasdaq Nordic official listings archives of IPOs conducted on their main market exchanges and First North Growth Market
between the years 2011-2020. Dual listings, exchange transfers and secondary offerings are excluded.  The venture capital backed
IPOs are all new issues with a venture capitalist (as classified in SVCA) backing the offering and that has more than 5% equity
stake pre-offer. The private equity backed IPOs are all new issues with a private equity investor (as classified in SVCA) backing
the offering and that has more than 5% equity stake pre-offer.  OWN is the length of ownership  by the sponsor and is defined as
the number of years the sponsor has owned equity in the issuer prior to the IPO. NFS is the number of financial sponsors backing
the IPO and is defined as  the number of sponsors with an above 5% equity stake  in  the issuer before the IPO.  EQ is the pre-IPO
ownership  and  is  defined as  the percentage ownership of  all  sponsors before the IPO, in decimal forms.  BRD  is the number of
board members taken by the sponsor and is defined as the number of board seats that is occupied by the lead VC- or PE-firm prior
to the IPO. YOBRD is defined as the number of years between the IPO date and the date the lead sponsor took its first seat on the
board.  IPOs is the number of initial public offerings the sponsor has  backed  before the  date of the observation’s IPO.  AGEFS  is
the age of the financial sponsor and is defined as the number of years between the registration date of the sponsor and the date of
the IPO.  The number in the parentheses is the p-value of the F-test for the difference in variance between the two subgroups, VC
and PE. If the p-value is less than 0.05 (5%), the null hypothesis of no difference in variance between the subgroups is rejected.

                                  45