CSR AND FIRM
PERFORMANCE

AN ANALYSIS OF THE IMPACT OF CSR DURING THE COVID-
19 MARKET CRASH OF 2020

WILLIAM GUSTAFSON

SEBASTIAN ASSIO

Bachelor Thesis  in Finance

Stockholm School of Economics

2021
CSR and firm performance
Abstract:
The COVID-19 virus induced a financial market crash, between February 20th to March
23rd of 2020, during which governments were in a hurry to create aid packages, often
touted as green restarts. Therefore, is it studied whether corporate social responsibility
(CSR) investments pay off for companies during a stock market crash. The study uses
the quantitative research method of cross-sectional regressions and utilizes robustness
tests to confirm results.  In addition, an industry analysis is conducted to deepen the
understanding of the result. In conclusion, the results show no general impact of CSR
during a financial market crash, however CSR ranking had two short-term effects on
firm performance, during the fall it had some negative impact, while  having  a positive
impact  during the initial recovery. Thus, the results do not confirm the hypothesis that
CSR is beneficial during times of crisis.
Keywords:  Corporate social responsibility, COVID-19 crisis, Firm performance,
Shareholder value,  CSR and crisis performance

Authors:
   William Gustafson
   Sebastian Assio

Tutors:
   Ran Guo, department  of finance

Examiner:
   Adrien  d’Avernas, department of finance

Acknowledgements:
We would like  to thank our tutor, Ran Guo,  for  his  genuine interest  and  guidance  during
the  thesis.

Bachelor Thesis  in Finance
Bachelor Program  in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© William Gustafson and Sebastian Assio, 2021

                                   1
   1.  Introduction

Background and relevance

In  the  year of 2020, the world was struck by a  pandemic, killing millions (SVT, 2021).
The  virus  known as  SARS COV 2 changed the landscape of human interactions.  Not
only was trade made difficult, but the labor market stability was also severely affected.
With consumers’ financial stability damaged and the physical trade possibilities
decreased, numerous companies experienced massive losses of revenues, many facing
bankruptcy. Governments responded  to firms’ dramatic loss of  cashflow  due to
restrictions  by  labor  payouts and loans. Each country had their own rules for  firm’s
support  qualification.  Some  countries required  firms  in  need  for  larger economic aid
packages  to  align with the governments’ goals. An example is the financial aid that
Scandinavian Airlines received from the Swedish government in 2020 (Johansson,
2020),  which  requires  a reduction  of  carbon dioxide emissions  in  half.

The economic recession that followed the outbreak of the virus was  accompanied by  a
market crash  where  the S&P  500  index  fell  over 30 percent in less than a month, once
again manifesting  the fragility  of  financial markets.  Recently, many young and
inexperienced investors have entered the market  (Brännström, 2021), and  combined
with  retail  investors  having access  to  complex products  that  previously  were  limited  to
institutional investors, which  constitutes a larger  vulnerability  for investors.  Protecting
non-institutional and institutional participants  from the  largest downside risks  increases
the  necessity  of understanding the  dynamics, and traits of financial market crashes.  This
is especially important since  Unesco  foresee  increased severity and frequency  in
pandemics unless loss of biodiversity is addressed (Unesco, 2020).  Therefore,  this paper
focuses  on the role of  corporate social responsibility (CSR)  as a  dampening  variable by
examining its impact  on firm performance during  the  COVID-19 financial market crash.

In later years, CSR has come up more and more on the agenda as an important aspect in
relation to business, and this was amplified with the COVID-19  market crash.  CSR was
one of the most highlighted aspects  in  many  government’s  economic recovery plans  and
the  Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development advocates for countries
to focus on a green recovery (OECD, 2021). Another example is the EU recovery
package, amounting to 750 billion euros, which is said to be  closely aligned with the
European Union’s long-term sustainable goals which include making the union more
green (European Union).  Considering  this increased focus on  CSR  in  recovery
packages, it provides an opportunity to test  CSR’s  impact on firm performance in  times
of a market recession.

However, opinions diverge when it comes to how CSR should be tackled  in business.
Already in 1970  did  Milton Friedman  argue  in his article “A Friedman doctrine‐-  The
Social Responsibility Of Business Is to Increase Its Profits” that “A corporation is an
artificial person and in this sense may have artificial responsibilities, but “business” as a
whole cannot be said to have responsibilities,” the argumentation deliberates that CSR
is something principals choose  as opposed to  agents, which means that a unanimous
agreement would be necessary from all shareholders to not breach the principal’s rights

                                   2
to  sustain. Following the argumentation in the article means that the executive  that, as
an agent, engages in CSR is equivalent to taxing the shareholder. However, the article
also recognizes that “Of course, in practice the doctrine of social responsibility is
frequently a cloak for actions that are justified on other grounds rather than a reason for
those actions.”  Drawing on the conclusions  of the  article,  Friedman thinks that  CSR  can
at most  represent  a  firm’s  dedication  to  long-term  profits, while in worst case  it  reduces
shareholder  value, due to  inefficiency  because of  an  agency-problem.

Other articles are more positive about the role of CSR in business.  Lins  et al. (2017), for
example, find evidence that good CSR is important in times of low institutional trust,
which often occurs in connection to financial recessions. Lins et al. concluded that in
times with low institutional trust, such as in the time of a  market crash, CSR is an
important way for companies to show investors their trustworthiness. In a market crash
such as the housing market crash in the United States, the crash depended  heavily on a
flawed regulatory system that allowed the market to “deteriorate from the inside”,
which  dealt a huge  blow  towards the trust  that the  market had built up.  Bae et al. (2021)
do a similar test where they look specifically on how CSR impacted firms during the
2020 COVID-19 market crash and find no impact of CSR.  Another report  using  similar
concepts as Lins et al. (2017) is one written by Schinetz and Epstein (2005).  However,
it  instead  researches  how the aspects of corporate reputation and social responsibility
affected firm performance during the failed 1999 Seattle World Trade Organization
meeting. Specifically, the authors argue that the reputation for being socially
responsible should make firms perform better during a crisis, where the benefit of
reputation comes from the isolation of the market decline, rather than increased
financial performance. The report shows that firms with a reputation for social
responsibility were protected from stock decline during the event.  Corporate reputation
for being socially responsible has  a  strong similarity to social capital and trust as
discussed by Lins et al. (2017), as both are grounded in how investors view the
trustworthiness of firms from a non-financial perspective.

The topic  is  interesting to study, since  even with a  heightened interest  -opinions  are still
ranging from  CSR being detrimental,  to  irrelevant,  to  beneficial.  We  hypothesize  that
CSR  is a signaling tool and thus should  have a positive impact on  firm performance
during the  2020 COVID-19 market crash.  To  test  this  hypothesis, we  draw  on the
methodology  used by Lins  et al. (2017), as opposed to Bae et al. (2021),  and import
CSR data on 460 US stocks from the Refinitiv Eikon website. The index we get from
Eikon is then used as the exogenous parameter in our regressions where raw return and
abnormal return are the endogenous variables. In addition, we control for various
control variables and perform an industry analysis, as well as running some robustness
tests.

We find that CSR has had  some  statistically significant impact on firm performance
during one of three periods we investigate. More specifically, we find the strongest
impact in the initial rebound period of the market.  The other periods show  no clear
impact of CSR although there is some evidence that CSR has had a negative impact
during the fall of the market. This is contrary to  what  has been found in previous
research and  only  substantiates  the  yet unknown complexities of financial markets.

                                   3
Research question

The research question that is pursued in this paper is whether CSR  pays  off  for
companies  during a market crash. The crash  in  focus in this paper is the COVID-19
                                                                               th                 rd
financial market crash, which  occurred between February 20  to March 23  of
2020.  This  topic  is important  to research since  companies need to know how their
investments in CSR activities are reflected in the  market  during  a crisis, and it is also
important  to understand how to better protect  investors from the largest downside risks,
especially  with financial crises possibly increasing due to  growing  insecurity in the
world.  In addition, due to the limited measurability of CSR, finding concrete effects of
CSR during specific times could help companies  better  understand the cost  –  benefit
relationship of CSR investments  in  general.

Contribution
The contribution of this paper is in deepening the knowledge of specific dynamics in the
way that corporate social responsibility  influences firm  performance.  Many studies have
been made on this  subject but  are based on slightly different theoretical frameworks.
Our definition stems from the  pure definition of CSR, based on an increase in
importance of CSR in economic activity.  Among the studies that have the same basis as
us in the  dimension  of  corporate  social responsibility, no other study has the deepened
view  that we offer through our unique event window definition  with three main event
windows. We also believe  our focus on the COVID-19  crisis is of great contribution
since  the United Nations  foresee an increased frequency and severity in pandemics.

Scope
The  paper  focuses  on  periods  surrounding  the COVID-19  financial  market crash, and
finds evidence that  CSR has an impact during a certain part of the crisis, but research
about other pandemics or similar market crises is beyond the scope of this paper.  And
whereas we would like to go deeper  into the  role of government intervention in CSR
impact on firm performance, unfortunately our  data  is  too limited to  perform such an
analysis. Should someone continue research based on our paper, we believe  an
interesting starting point  would be to research  how periods of government  market
mediation, both financial and regulatory, impacts the role  that CSR plays for firm
performance.

Disposition
The rest of this paper is structured as follows:  Section  2  discusses the  related literature
of our thesis. Section  3  discusses the  theoretical background.  Section  4  discusses the
methodology pursued in detail.  In section  5, we manifest  summary  statistics  of our data
as well as discuss the data sources we use.  In section  6, we showcase our results and
discuss the implications. Section  7  concludes the paper and section  8  contains the
references.

                                   4
   2.  Related literature

There  have been numerous studies researching the link between corporate social
responsibility and firm performance.  Schnietz and Epstein (2005) asked the question “Is
there financial value in a reputation for corporate social responsibility during a crisis?”
and did this by looking at  whether  reputation for social responsibility acted as a
dampener of goodwill during the 1999 Seattle World Trade Organization (WTO)
failure. The findings in the paper shows that a reputation for social responsibility
protected firms from stock declines associated with the WTO crisis.

Margolis et al. (2009) published a meta-analysis consisting of 251 studies that tries to
answer the question firms ask themselves;  “Does it pay to be good?”.  This is done by
investigating the empirical  link between corporate social performance (CSP) and
corporate financial performance (CFP). Their  findings  show that a small positive effect
can be found.  Furthermore, in august 2017, Lins, Servaes and Tamayo published their
article  about  social capital in  the journal of finance. In their article, they explore how
social capital is economically important for firms during times  of low trust. Due to lack
of trust in financial institutions, investments are more inclined to be made towards firms
that are considered to be trustful. Corporate social governance plays a big part in
creating trust, and so, they explore in their article how companies with high CSR
performed better during the financial crisis of 2009. On the other hand, a contradicting
article was published in the Journal of Corporate Finance (Bae et al.), which  used
similar empirical methods  but using data from the 2020’s COVID-19 crisis. Bae et al.
finds no correlation between CSR and financial performance, and only little to no
correlation when CSR is congruent with the firm’s institutional environment.

Our  thesis uses the methodology of the research article written by Lins  et al.  (2017),
while  using a  similar, yet more complex,  time series as Bae et al. (2021)  -  the authors of
the contradicting article. By building on the methods by Lins et al. (2017) and
researching the same time series as Bae et al. (2021), the thesis expands the current
knowledge of CSR and its impact on firm performance  during  crisis periods.  In
addition, the thesis  discusses  social capital’s,  corporate reputation’s,  and CSR’s  impact
on  firm performance during  times  of crisis. This develops on the research done by both
articles but gives the research a needed assessment due to the contradicting  results.
Additionally,  it deepens the knowledge about the crisis period since an additional time
series is added compared with Bae et al. (2021).  The validity of CSR as a risk
minimizing factor is as much an ethical as an economical dilemma of investing.  Hence
the legitimacy of CSR  becomes  ever more important considering  the  increasing global
conflicts and the forthcoming hardships associated with future crises.

                                   5
   3.  Description of empirical background

Corporate Social Responsibility

Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) has been defined by the European Commission
as “a concept whereby companies integrate social and  environmental concerns in their
business operations and in their interaction with their stakeholders on a voluntary
basis” (European Commission).  As a self-regulated business practice CSR previously
often only included charitable acts and sometimes only the intention of corporate or
social responsibility. However, this has changed. Companies are instead being held to
higher standards where self-regulation on its social and environmental impact is being
tract and considered by customers before engaging in commerce  (Business
for  good).  However, a point to mention is that CSR reports are sometimes named
sustainability reports, which is somewhat misleading. The phrasing sustainability report
might only be associated with environmental sustainability and not the  social facets,
which  also  hold  a  great  deal  of  importance  for CSR. A typical CSR report is published
annually and might include aspects such as; a  presentation of  the corporate structure,  an
industry-specific sustainability context,  a  firm-specific  risk  assessment,  and  a
stakeholder  map  (Youmatter).

The history of CSR is long, and  even though it  only started to become an important part
of business in the late 1900s, mainly through Edward Freeman first detailing the
framework in 1984, it started way back in the
1800s  (Stakeholdertheory.org).  Stakeholder theory tells us about the importance of the
interconnecting relationships between business,  and,  put frankly, everyone else. It
highlights the importance to not only take the stockholders into account, but to also
think about how the business affects all other actors affected by the business operations.
This can be the state, the climate, the local population etc. To maximize firm value,
firms first need to rethink the term “firm value” and identify what negative
consequences pure value maximizing has. The firm must then do what it can to mitigate
those effects and provide value for all stakeholders. Every stakeholder must hold equal
consideration from every invested dollar in the firm. This is starkly different from the
neoclassical value maximizing theory. Rooted in economic  theory, it tells us that  firms
simply need to think of their long-term firm value to be socially efficient  (Jensen,
2001).  Every invested dollar should give as many dollars as possible back in the future.

Both theories have fundamental problems that make them hard to use practically. But
one does not have to believe any of these two theories fully to see the importance of
corporate social governance in firms. In his 2001 paper on enlightened value
maximization, Jensen  criticizes  both  theories for not being socially efficient in practice.
According to him, neoclassical value maximization does not take care  of  negative
externalities,  and stakeholder theory provides no map on how to make trade-offs
between different stakeholders. But even Jensen sees the importance of good CSR, as
his proposal of “enlightened value maximization” is rooted in the idea that firms need to
be  incentivized to not focus on short-term benefits at the expense of other stakeholders.
Whereas he does not agree with the sweeping declarations of Stakeholder  theory, he
stresses the importance of corporate social responsibility in business. Since the 1980s,

                                   6
there has been a big rise in the prevalence of stakeholder theory in business
discussions  (Stakeholdertheory.org).  This shows the importance for businesses  to
combine the interests of the social good in their business and to act in a value-enhancing
way in both dimensions in order to support sustainable development.

We argue that there are different types of CSR. Generally, we believe that a firm with a
business model that creates  positive  externalities or creates a smaller  amount  of
negative  externalities  than a comparable firm  has a higher level of CSR and  will get
more preferential treatment from  the government  as a result of this (Goolsbee, 2016).
We also believe that a firm that  CSR can be enacted in another way, namely through
altruistic motives  such as  sponsoring local kids’ sports  organizations  or donating money
to  sustainability projects.  Both these types of CSR are important to companies  if they
want to be perceived to have  good CSR. However, if a company  fails to communicate
its positive  CSR activities, it  generally  cannot  be perceived as having good CSR by the
general public and by investors. Rim et al. (2016) find that there are several important
aspects to communicating  CSR. Firstly, they find that  a company’s previous
reputation  deeply affects how their CSR activities are perceived. If a company already
has a good reputation with regards to CSR, continued activities will be viewed more
positively.  Furthermore, they find  that a company’s motives pertaining to CSR activities
are important.  Performing  CSR activities  is not enough to be perceived to have high
CSR. Rather, a company needs to show that one has  altruistic motives when performing
CSR activities.

This all relates to a  fundamental problem when it comes to  doing research on CSR.
Namely, that it cannot be measured easily. If a company invests more in  production
control,  it can be seen in the  financial reports, and one can be fairly certain that  in
general,  the investment will lead to more rigid control of production and that the
company will have less problems with  faulty products. An investment in CSR, however,
is more difficult to assess. First of all,  due to the nature of  CSR, it is very  difficult  to
measure. There is no single measure that tells the level of CSR activities  of a company,
and thus, its measure is inexact, as suggested by  Lins  et al. (2017).  It  is  also difficult to
measure a company’s change in CSR over time, and it is difficult for companies
themselves to assess how much they need to invest in CSR and what they will
be  gaining  from their investments.  These problems relate to the use of CSR as a
measure of social capital, which is why we outsource  the assessment of CSR to experts.
However, it also relates to how companies need to communicate their  CSR efforts. We
believe a key in this is signaling.

Signaling

Markets are filled with information asymmetry, which means that all market
participants do not have the same information. Therefore, most companies engage in the
action called signaling,  which is a tool  to express some privately held information. This
needs to be quite costly since it almost always is being used to inform a
less  informed  actor of a firm’s comparably higher quality to its competitors. This is the
result of a situation  where  something  otherwise could not be understood by the public
information that has been provided. A signal can be clearly stated during a press release
or subtly hinted by the actions taken by the firm. However, since firms only engage in

                                   7
signaling when it is beneficial for its image, inversely firms that do not partake in
signaling  might show  their inferior quality. This is why signaling most be quite
expensive and still is a useful tool for revealing information.  We argue that to engage in
CSR is a form of signaling, since it can be quite expensive and difficult to fake, which
greenwashing is an example of.  The difficulty of faking a CSR report does not come
from the first report. Instead,  it is the following reports that easily exposes firms that do
not  take  CSR  seriously, since the metrics and reported numbers often changes  to frame
the firm in the best light. An example of this behavior is the Danish pharmaceutical
company “Novo Nordisk”, who reported the metrics “Wastewater” and “Chemical
oxygen demand in wastewater” in their sustainability report 2012, but quietly removed
the metric in 2014 (Novo Nordisk Financial report 2012  pp. 101  and 2014  pp. 102).
Since the metrics are unlikely to be less important in 2014 than in 2012, this raises
concerns about the motives for removing and about the transparency in sustainability
reporting of the company.

The thinking is also that a firm  that  already partakes in CSR might have a more
favorable treatment when seating regulatory approval, stemming from microeconomic
theory.  Companies that already works in line with the  government’s goals will have it
easier to receive funding for new initiatives.  Additionally, such firms should also have
an easier time facing new environmental regulations, since their business will already be
fully or partly adapted to the new regulation, something that is harder for a firm without
good CSR. To conclude, a firm that already has proven that they are  trustworthy
through using expensive  signaling, which should result in a higher CSR score, should
have an  easier time  dealing  with both the general public and the state.

CSR in Corporate Valuation

In this paper, the firm value of CSR can be derived from the argument that  a firm’s  CSR
score  is a result of reliability and  cooperation. Therefore, a firm with a history of being
cooperative and reliable  will  gain more from situations when this is more significant,
such as when state interventions are unclear. Furthermore,  it is posited by Guiso,
Sapienza, and Zingales (2008, p. 2557) that from the shareholders perspective  “the
decision to invest in stocks requires not only an assessment of the risk-return trade-off
given the existing data, but also an act of faith (trust) that the data in our possession are
reliable and that the overall  system is fair.” Hence, the argument of this paper  is  that in
times of high state intervention uncertainty, as in crisis, investors will look towards
ratings that  shows  a firm’s  reliability and  cooperation  with its stakeholders.  This
argument is  consistent with the notion of reciprocity,  that  stakeholders  willingness to
cooperate  increases with the perception of  firms  reliability  (e.g., for employees, see
Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2015); for customers, see Servaes and Tamayo (2013)).
It is thus argued that reliability and  cooperation  results in high CSR scores and that an
evaluation premium  is  observed  for  these companies during crisis periods, since this is
the time of highest state intervention uncertainty.

                                   8
   4.  Methodology

In conducting our analysis, we follow the method of Lin et al. (2017) closely. However,
due to some technical issues we have encountered, we have had to do some deviations
from their method. In creating our sample on CSR, we use the screener app on the
Eikon database. Whereas Lin et al. use the MSCI website to gather information on
corporate social responsibility, we did not have access to that website, so Eikon was a
good substitution. Eikon grades companies based on corporate social responsibility on a
scale from 0 to  1, with 0 being the lowest score (bad CSR) and  1  being the highest score
(high CSR) a company can get.

Our raw dataset contains over 2700 companies, but the data is then modified to become
a credible sample. We focus our analysis on the American  stock market  due to its high
liquidity, so we remove stocks of companies that are not based in the United States.
Financial firms are excluded due to the extensive financial support from the government
they traditionally get in times of crisis.  Due to liquidity issues, we remove the so-called
micro-stocks, that is to say the stocks with a market capitalization of less than
$250  000  000. Lastly, we remove stocks that have no value on corporate social
responsibility. Other than completely missing values, i.e.  values classified as “N/A”, we
also remove stocks that have the value “0.000”. The reason for this is because we
believe it is unlikely for a stock to have the CSR-value of exactly 0. Even a stock with
low CSR should, in most cases, have a higher value than 0. Of course, some industries,
like the weapon industry for example, could be said to have low CSR naturally, but we
have already omitted such industries where the only thing a firm could do to improve
their CSR is to leave the industry. Therefore, we believe it fit to leave out stocks that
have the CSR value of 0, aware of the risk that we remove a stock that has a true CSR
value of 0. This is also because the “0” CSR score stocks are so numerous and would
severely distort the analysis if included.

To  calculate one of the key measures in our analysis, we employ  event studies
methodology. Namely, we use the market model of the event study branch of finance,
which assumes that a stock’s return is linearly related to the return of the market. As
explained by McWilliams and Siegel (1997), the relationship between firm return and
market return is expressed as
                                𝑅!"  =  𝛼!  + 𝛽!𝑅#"  + 𝑒!"
where  𝑅!"  is the return for firm  𝑖  on day  𝑡,  𝛼!  is the intercept for firm  𝑖,  𝛽!  is the
coefficient for firm  𝑖,  𝑅#"  is the market return on day  𝑡, and  𝑒!"  is an error term for firm
𝑖  on day  𝑡, which is assumed to be normally distributed with a mean of 0. The abnormal
returns for a given day are then expressed as
                              𝐴𝑅!"  =  𝑅!"  − (𝛼!  + 𝛽!𝑅#")
where  𝐴𝑅!"  are the abnormal returns for firm  𝑖  on day  𝑡. The intercept  𝑎!  and the
coefficient  𝛽!  are computed by running a regression on firm returns during an estimation
period before the unanticipated event. In our methodology, we use an estimation period

                                   9
                                                  th                            th
of 60 months (5 years) from September 30  2014 to September 30  2019,  and we use
the S&P500 index as our market return.

When using the event study methodology, as McWilliams and Siegel (1997) express,
there are several important assumptions to consider. First of all, regarding whether it is
reasonable to use the methodology or not, one must address three concerns. Firstly,
markets must be assumed to be efficient, which we assume them to be. Secondly, the
event must be unanticipated. Considering that the spread of coronavirus came very
abruptly, it is sensible to assume that, for the majority of the investors, the event was
unanticipated. One could argue that the spread in the United States could be foreseen, or
predicted, already in January when the virus spread in Wuhan in the Hubei province of
the People’s republic of China, but considering that the market reached its highest point
in history just days before, assuming that the event was unanticipated is in order.
Thirdly, it is important to think about confounding events. This is always important
when doing an event analysis, as the idea with an event study is to isolate the effects of
one event. In this case, even though our event window is relatively long (to be discussed
below), due to the complete defocus of everything except the coronavirus in the early
days  of the global spread, we believe that there are not any major events that will have
confounded the event that we analyze.

Furthermore, one must be careful when determining the main event window. As we
have already indicated, we have relatively long event windows,  ranging from  28 to  75
days. As McWilliams and Siegel (1997) explain, markets are in general very quick to
reflect new information, and therefore short event windows are preferred as they are
more likely to isolate the effects of the studied event. They go on to say that the nature
of the event is what has to determine the length of the event window. We  investigate
three different event windows all related to the same underlying real-world event. The
longest is  well  over two months and the shortest is about  one  month,  which  is  motivated
by the length of, complexity during, and uncertainty of our event. We discussed having
the  main  event window end when the S&P500 hit its lowest point, but as there were
economically important events happening after that (economic subsidies to impacted
firms  for example)  as well as  continued uncertainty, we decided  to add instead add
several event windows to expand our analysis in order to understand the dynamics of
the event deeper. Even though there was still a lot of uncertainty about the future at the
bottom of the crisis, we believe most investors had already understood what kind of
impacts the crisis would have on the future of economic interactions, so extending the
main  event window even longer would mean an increased risk of confounding effects.
Thus,  we  instead  decided to keep an additional  window reserved for the recovery
period.  Figure 1 shows a schematic timeline of our study.

                                  10
                                     Figure 1
                                   Study timeline
  This figure (1) shows a schematic timeline of the study.  First, a timeline  of our study  is shown,
  and underneath a graph of the S&P 500 index  during the first part of 2020. We use abnormal
  returns in our analysis, and our estimation period is the five years period starting September
      th                                     th
  30  2014 and ending September 30  2019, marked as  between T1 and T2.  The estimated values
  are then used to calculate the abnormal returns during period 1, period 2, and period 3. Period
  1 is the “Top-bottom” period, where the market when from its highest level to its lowest,
                                            th                                  rd
  ranging from February 20 , 2020, until March 23 , 2020. Period 2 is the recovery period
  happening after the market crash, where the market recovered much of its value, from March
       rd                             th
  23 , 2020, until June 9 , 2020. Period 3 is the “top-bottom” extended to include the initial
                                                         th                 th
  recovery  period, defined from February 20  until April 9 .

                                        Study timeline

09/30 - 2014                                   09/30 - 2019       02/20-2020   03/23   04/10   06/10

  T1                                        T2           T3        T4   T5     T6 Time

                                                                  Period 1
                     Estimation period                                 Period 3   Period 2

                                    11
Our measures for the period are  crisis period return  and  crisis period abnormal return.
As mentioned, we use the market model to calculate the abnormal returns for the period.
We run cross-section regression analysis on the two measures with CSR score as the
exogenous variable and return as the endogenous variable. In order to avoid outlier
                                                                 st              th
problems, the return variables are winsorized at the 1  and the 99  percentiles.

To create control variables, we also get accounting data from the COMPUSTAT
database.  We collect the data as close to the start of the crisis period, which is the
annual report of the fiscal year 2019 for all companies. When it comes to accounting
data, the size of the company will directly affect the magnitude of each accounting
measure.  To avoid magnitude problems when running regressions, we create a
fractional measure by relating each variable to the total book-value of the company.
That means that, for long term debt for example, the measure variable for a given
company is calculated as,
                                          𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔  𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑚  𝑑𝑒𝑏𝑡$%&'
                                         𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑏𝑜𝑜𝑘  𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒$%&'
In addition, market capitalization, which is used to represent size, is logarithmized.  All
the control variables are chosen  based on theory of how they might affect a business
during a crisis. However, the measure pertaining short-term debt is defined as long-term
debt due in one year. Whereas we are aware that this is not the optimal measure for
short-term liabilities, according to us it is the best way to capture the concept using the
variables that COMPUSTAT provides. Another difficult measure is profitability.
Profitability is usually referred to as a category of key-ratios, rather than as a single key-
ratio. However, due to us wanting to keep things simple and focus on the financial
theory rather than the accounting theory, we employ the simplest definition of
profitability, that is, the profit margin,
                                              𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑠𝑠  𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑓𝑖𝑡$%&'
                                            𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝑟𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒$%&'
Over a large population, one might observe cases where firms do not report gross profit.
Out of all the firms we analyze, however, we did not find any case in which the gross
profit was missing, so  adjustments  were not necessary.  Thus, after  cleaning the data,  we
end up with a sample  size  of 460 nonfinancial stocks.

                                  12
  5.  Data

Data source discussion
Our data sample is created through importing data from several different databases.
Firstly, our data on corporate social responsibility is  imported from the screener app  in
Refinitv Eikon.  Originally, we were planning to use the  MSCI ESG database, but due to
accessibility limitations,  Eikon was a good alternative as it  has over 150 analysts
gathering and evaluating ESG data  (Eikon).  Our sample on American stocks  originally
contained over 2000 stocks. However, since we were  mainly  interested  in the CSR
variable in the data,  by  removing the firms missing a CSR data point the sample shrunk
to only just under 500 stocks.  After removing some sin industries and other unwanted
firms (micro-cap firms etc.) we end up with a sample of 460 firms.  This is a limitation
in our thesis, as both the articles of Lins et al. (2017) and Bae et al. (2021)  had
significantly larger samples (over 1600 firms). This becomes a limitation especially in
our industry analysis, as there are few stocks in  each industry.

Next, our data on  stock prices are collected from the  center for research in security
prices  (CRSP)  daily file database. CRSP is a  research-oriented database on economics
and finance and is used by nearly 500 academic institutions in over 35 countries (CRSP,
2021).  The structure of the data is very practical and is used by other articles  written on
the same subject.  Lastly, our accounting  data, which is used when calculating  control
variables,  is  imported from the COMPUSTAT website, which is part of the  S&P  Global
Market  Intelligence  solution offering.  It provides accounting data on  over 33  900 active
and inactive publicly held  companies  (WRDS).  This database is also used by other
articles on the same subject  and  does not have any real limitations  since  companies
covered are so numerous. Of course, when handling  accounting data, one must always
be mindful of the accounting issues that might come up from companies using different
types of accounting methods.  However, S&P Capital IQ  adjust the accounting data on
the platform to enhance comparability  between firms  (S&P Global).

Data description
Table 1 shows descriptive statistics for our main variables. As mentioned earlier, our
two main performance measures are “Raw return” and “Abnormal return”.  We have
collected values  from  our three periods in the same table.  Raw return  from period 1  is,
as expected from times of financial crisis, negatively skewed, with a mean of  -0.437  and
a  standard deviation of 0.177  and the first and third quartile values being negative at  -
0.562  and  -0.324, respectively. Our second main measure, “Abnormal return”, is also
skewed negatively  during period 1, albeit less than the raw return. The mean is  -0.090,
with the first quartile value being  -0.221  and the third quartile value being 0.021, and
the standard deviation is 0.191.  This tells us that the stocks in our sample performed
worse than the market on average  during period 1.  In period 2  we see very positively
skewed statistics. Raw return has a mean of 0.680  and a standard deviation of  0.561.
Abnormal return has a mean of 0.372 and  a standard deviation of 0.526. During period
3, which also is  a crisis period  but  with the  initial recovery period included, we also see
negatively skewed results, with a mean of  -0.291  and a standard deviation of 0.203  in
terms of raw return, and a mean of  -0.114  and standard deviation of 0.189  in terms of

                                  13
abnormal returns.  Our main endogenous variable is the CSR score, which is an index
ranging from 0 to  1. The mean of this is  0.465, meaning that the average firm is more
negative than positive in terms of CSR scores, which, even if the index creation
methods differ, is consistent with Lin et al.’s (2017) findings in their sample. The
                                                                   th
standard deviation of the CSR value is  0.284, and the 25  percentile is  0.245. This
differs slightly from our second measure of CSR, namely our ESG score variable.

                                   Table 1
                                 Descriptive Statistics
This table (1), presents summary statistics for the main variables in our analysis, as
well as the control variables. The data sample contains  460 American firms from the
Eikon ESG database. Financial firms are excluded from the sample, as well as firms in
industries with naturally low CSR scores such as the weapon industry and micro-cap
firms (market cap < $250 million). The table contains two panels; panel A and panel B.
Panel A includes summary statistics for our main variables and panel B contains a
correlation matrix of all the variables where half of the matrix (the doubles). Panel A
includes the statistical measures “Mean”, “Standard Deviation (Std  Dev)”, “the First
Quartile (Q1)”, “Median”, and “the Third Quartile (Q3)”, arranged as column
headings. P1 Raw Return is the gross return for period 1, the “Top-bottom”  period
                          th                   rd
between February 20  and March 23 . P1 (Period 1) Abnormal Return is the abnormal
returns, computed using the market model over a five years’ estimation period.  The
remaining returns for P2 and P3 are formed the same way as for P1. P2 was from
            rd                th                                 th               th
March 23 , until June 5  and P3 was from  Feb  20  –  April 10 .  These returns are the
dependent variables we are analyzing, and underneath come the control variables.
First, there is Board Size.  Second, there is Cash on Hand, calculated as a ratio  between
cash and total assets.  The accounting measures Short term debt  and long term det  are
also  computed as a ratio with total assets in the denominator.  Market Cap (size) is the
logarithmic  market capitalization before the event,  used to represent  size.  The last
control variable is  Profitability, which is the gross profit  margin. Lastly, there is CSR
Score, which is our main independent variable. It is an index ranging from 0 to  1, where
0 is the lowest possible CSR score a company can attain, and  1  the highest. This
variable is determined externally, by the database Refinitiv Eikon.

                                  14
     Panel A            Mean         Std Dev          Q1          Median          Q3

   P1 raw return           -0.437           0.177            -0.562           -0.424           -0.324

P1 abnormal return        -0.090           0.191           -0.221           -0.097           0.021

   P2 raw return          0.680           0.561           0.346           0.554           0.849

P2  abnormal return        0.372           0.526           0.084           0.275           0.517

   P3 raw return           -0.291           0.203            -0.417           -0.269           -0.155

P3 abnormal return        -0.114           0.189           -0.227           -0.089           0.005

     Board size            9.79           2.164             8              10             11

   Cash on hand          0.084           0.098           0.018            0.05            0.116

  Short term debt         0.026           0.046           0.006           0.013           0.032

  Long term debt          0.33            0.222           0.198           0.321           0.425

 Market cap (size)        22.505           1.735           21.316          22.401          23.653

    Profitability           -0.195           12.553           0.248           0.379           0.522

     CSR score            0.465           0.284           0.245            0.44            0.69

                                           15
 B
                                                               hand   debt   debt
Panel        P1 raw       P2 raw abnormal       P3 raw             Cash on
                                                        Market cap    Short termLong termBoard sizeProfitabilityCSR score
                   P1 abnormal  P2          P3 abnormal

            1
P1 raw

P1               1
  abnormal     0.745

                       1
               -0.66   0.346
P2 raw                -

P2                          1
  abnormal     0.639 0.451 0.982
                   -        -

raw                                      1
P3            0.901 0.602 -0.547 -0.504

P3                                     1
     mal      0.866 0.782 0.45-      0.466 0.949
   abnor                              -

  cap                                           1
     (size)     0.309 0.204  -0.168  -0.152 0.406  0.392
Market

  on                                                1
Cash hand    0.182 0.351 0.068 -0.13   0.152 0.255 0.189
                                      -

                                                         1
Shorttermdebt     0.029 0.035 0.052 0.054 0.034 0.038 0.039 0.096
                   -        -        -        -        -        -        -

                                                               1
Longtermdebt     0.088 0.131 0.101 0.122 0.084 0.114 0.014 0.219  0.134
                   -        -                           -        -        -        -

                                                                    1
  size               0.041 0.102 0.063                     0.036  0.007
Board         0.121  -       -       -       0.188  0.128  0.489  -       -       0.064

                                                                          1
Profitability        -0.024  -0.049  -0.044  -0.038  0.003  -0.011  0.048  -0.099  0.008  0.044  -0.002

                                                                              1
CSRscore       0.022 0.033-      0.032-      0.019-      0.096  0.079  0.452 0.054-       0.034-      0.067  0.385  0.051

                                       16
   6.  Empirical results,  Findings,  and  Interpretation

In this section we present the results from our  analysis.  We also interpret them in this
section as well as reflect on how they impact the current literature and knowledge.  The
results are formed through running regressions on our main variables, as well as
including control variables to control for various confounding factors. The regression
method used is the cross-sectional regression method. The reason that this is used is
because it is suitable  to  use  on  the type of data that we have; with one data point for
each stock.  The regression results from our first period,  Period 1, are collected in  table
2. Shown are the size of coefficient  (under  estimates) for each variable (under
predictors), the P-value  that the coefficient is significantly different from 0 (in
parentheses) and the  significance level for which the null-hypothesis that the coefficient
is equal to 0  can be rejected, with the threshold values being 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01,
respectively  in the form of a star. The regressions are always run with CSR as the
exogenous variable.  The first  two  columns  show regressions  without  control  variables
and the  third and the fourth  column  show  regressions  for CSR  run  with  the control
variables, as motivated above.  For period 1, we find that the coefficients from the
regressions run  without control variables are 0.0274  for raw return, and  -0.0153  for
abnormal return. Thus, a  1  –  point increase in CSR would be related to a 2.74% increase
in raw return during this period, and a 1.53% decrease in abnormal returns. However,
none of these  coefficients are found to be significantly different from 0, thus making it
impossible to confirm that the coefficient values are reliable.

                                   Table 2
                             Results from Period 1
                  “Top-Bottom” period, 02/20-2020  –  03/23-  2020

This table (2) shows the  results from the regressions run from period 1. The period covers
                   th                                  rd
February 20 , 2020, until March 23 , 2020. The regressions are run on our sample consisting
of 460 firms, having excluded financial firms as well as firms in low CSR industries such  as the
weapon industry. Micro-cap firms (market cap < $250 million) have also been excluded as to
avoid liquidity problems. CSR Score is the exogenous variable in the regressions, which is an
index externally determined by Refinitiv Eikon, ranging from 0 to  1, 0 being the lowest
attainable score and  1  being the highest. The two endogenous variables of the regressions are
Raw return, and abnormal return. The Raw Return is the gross return over the period, and the
Abnormal Return is the abnormal returns calculated using the market model over a five years’
estimation period. In the table, the  first two columns show regression results for raw return and
abnormal return when regressing without control variables. The last two columns show results
with control variables.  The significance level is given, with the following threshold values: (*
0.1, ** = 0.05, *** = 0.01). Control variables include Board Size, Cash on Hand, which just
like  Short Term Debt and Long Term Debt are computed as a ratio with total assets in  the
denominator,  Size  is the logarithmic market capitalization, and  lastly, there is Profitability,
which is the gross profit margin of a company.

                                  17
Turning to the control variables, we see  that the coefficient for raw return is seen to be
significantly  correlated with CSR score.  However, the coefficient is negative, meaning
that an increase in the CSR score would mean a decrease in raw return for the period,
going against our  hypothesis that CSR would have a positive impact. Overall, however,
due to three out of four of the estimates seeing no significant effect, the evidence points
towards that during  period 1  firms are seen to  homogenously decline, with no
significant impact from CSR.  The slight effect identified with negative impact could be
explained by investors believing that  investments in CSR are unnecessary when the
company could be using the money to do other things, similar to what Mr.  Friedman
postulates (Friedman,  1970).

Our next period is the recovery period, which is when the market recovered from its
                                     rd
lowest  point on March 23 . The recovery period is defined by us as ranging until June
  th
5 . The regressions are run the same as was described above for period 1, but with the
data representing this period. The table shows negative coefficients for both raw return
and for abnormal return. The first row, for example, shows that when run without
control variables, the coefficient for raw return is  -0.0778 and for abnormal return is  -
0.0434. Thus, a  1  –  point increase in CSR score would be associated with a 7.78%
decline in raw return and a 4.34% decline in abnormal return. However, these
coefficients cannot be significantly confirmed to be different from 0.  When running
with control variables the  coefficients cannot be identified to be significantly different
from 0,  either, but the coefficients are positive, contrary  to the case with raw return.

                                  18
                                   Table 3
                              Results from period 2
                   “Recovery period”, 03/23-2020  –  06/05-2020

This table (3) shows the results from the regressions run from period  2. The period covers
               rd                             th
March 23 , 2020, until  June  5 , 2020. The regressions are run on our sample consisting of 460
firms, having excluded financial firms as well as firms in  low CSR industries such  as the
weapon industry. Micro-cap firms (market cap < $250 million) have also been excluded as to
avoid liquidity problems. CSR Score is the exogenous variable in the regressions, which is an
index externally determined by Refinitiv Eikon, ranging from 0  to  1, 0 being the lowest
attainable score and  1  being the highest. The two endogenous variables of the regressions are
Raw return, and abnormal return. The Raw Return is the gross return over the period, and the
Abnormal Return is the abnormal returns calculated using the market model over a five years’
estimation period. In the table, the  first two columns show regression results for raw return and
abnormal return when regressing without control variables. The last two columns show results
with control variables. The significance level is given, with the following threshold values: (*
0.1, ** = 0.05, *** = 0.01). Control variables include Board Size, Cash on Hand, which just
like Short Term Debt and Long Term Debt are computed as a ratio with total assets in the
denominator,  Size  is the logarithmic market capitalization, and  lastly, there is Profitability,
which is the gross profit margin of a company.

The last period in our analysis is  Period 3, which is the period covering the “Top-
Bottom” period, as well as the initial rebound period. Again, the regressions are run in
an identical way as earlier, with  CSR score  as the exogenous variable and  raw return
and  abnormal return  as the endogenous variables. When running the regression without
control variables we find that the coefficient for raw return is 0.0741, and the coefficient
for abnormal return is 0.0543. To put this into perspective, a  1  –  point increase in CSR
would correspond to a 7.41% increase in raw return during the period. Now, since it is
not very likely that a firm can increase  its CSR score with  1  point, a return this large is
not feasible to achieve. Even though the CSR score variable is not normally distributed,
as is evident from  figure  2, let us imagine it is for a moment. Improving the score with
one standard deviation is not farfetched. The standard deviation of the variable was
28.397. Thus, improving one sigma would correspond to a  0.284 ∗ 0.0741  =

                                  19
0.021 increase in firm returns during this period. With an average market capitalization
of $31.06 billion  (only  logarithmic market cap is shown in summary statistics),  this
would correspond to keeping a value of $653 in the company, which means it is
definitely enough for a company to care about it. The coefficients for the  raw-  and
abnormal return are significant with 5% and 10 % significance level, respectively.

Looking at the control variables,  we do not see the same  positive results as without
control variables.  The control variables seem to scale away the effects we see in  the first
two columns.  Only  the raw return has a significant  estimate when running the

                                  Figure 2
                           Histogram of CSR score

This figure shows a histogram and an Anderson  –  Darling test of the main variable in our
analysis, CSR score. It is an index variable ranging from 0 to 1, with 0 being the lowest and  1
being the highest.  In  Panel A, the index is multiplied with 100 to show an index between  0 and
100. Panel A  shows the histogram of the variable, and it seems clear that the variable is not
normally distributed. To confirm this, we ran an Anderson –  Darling test shown in Panel B. As
the P-value is close to 0, we accept the null hypothesis that the sample is not normally
distributed.

                        Panel B. Anderson  – Darling
                                CSR score

                                   Table 4
                              Results from period 3
                   “Fall and rebound”, 02/20-2020  –  04/10-2020

This  table (4) shows the results from the regressions run from period  3. The period covers
                    th                                  th
February  20 , 2020, until  April  10 , 2020. The regressions are run on our sample consisting of
460 firms, having excluded financial firms as well as firms in  low CSR industries such  as the
weapon industry. Micro-cap firms (market cap < $250 million) have also been excluded as to
avoid liquidity problems. CSR Score is the exogenous variable in the regressions, which is an
index externally determined by Refinitiv Eikon, ranging from 0 to  1, 0 being the lowest

                                  20
attainable score and  1  being the highest. The two endogenous variables of the regressions are
Raw return, and abnormal return. The Raw Return is the gross return over the period, and the
Abnormal Return is the abnormal returns calculated using the market model over a five years’
estimation period. In the table, the  first two columns show regression results for raw return and
abnormal return when regressing without control variables. The last two columns show  results
with control variables. The significance level is given, with the following threshold values: (*
0.1, ** = 0.05, *** = 0.01). Control variables include Board Size, Cash on Hand, which just
like Short Term Debt and Long Term Debt are computed as a ratio with total assets in the
denominator,  Size  is the logarithmic market capitalization, and  lastly, there is Profitability,
which is the gross profit margin of a company.

regression with control variables, and it is negative, just like what we saw during the
“top-bottom” period.  Thus, not much can be said with certainty regarding this period.
The results are interesting, however, so we  have decided  to run an additional  set of
                                                                  rd              th
regressions for the  initial rebound  period from March 23  to April 10  –  the period
included in period 3 but not in period 1.

The results from this set of regressions are collected in table 5.  As is evident from  the
results,  the rebound period saw a very significant impact of CSR on firm performance.
The abnormal return coefficient suggests an 11.9% increase in firm return when
increasing CSR with  1  point, which is larger than when looking at all of the main
periods, while having a very low P-value. The result  for raw return  stays  significant
when controlling for  the control variables, but not for abnormal return. Either way, the
coefficient estimates are positive for all the regressions. The results indicate a positive
impact of CSR during this period.

                                  21
                                   Table 5
                      Results from the initial rebound period

This table (5) shows the results from the regressions run from the resulting period of initial
rebound not included in our original analysis, where we suggest CSR should have a positive
                                                                 rd                                th
impact. This period ranges from March 23 , 2020, until  April 10 , 2020. The period thus
incorporates the “initial rebound” period, where the market had a rapid increase.  The
regressions are run on our sample consisting of 460 firms, having excluded financial firms as
well as firms in low CSR industries such as the weapon industry. Micro-cap firms (market cap <
$250 million) have also been excluded as to avoid liquidity problems. CSR Score is the
exogenous variable in the regressions, which is an index externally determined by Refinitiv
Eikon, ranging from 0 to  1, 0 being the lowest attainable score and 1 being the highest. The two
endogenous variables of the regressions are Raw return, and abnormal return. The Raw Return
is the gross return over the period, and the Abnormal Return is the abnormal returns calculated
using the market model over a five years’ estimation period. In the table, the first two columns
show regression results for raw return and abnormal return when regressing without control
variables. The last two columns show results with control variables. The significance level is
given, with the following threshold values: (* 0.1, ** = 0.05, *** = 0.01). Control variables
include Board Size, Cash on Hand, which just like Short Term Debt and Long Term Debt are
computed as a ratio with total assets in  the denominator, Size  is the logarithmic market
capitalization, representing size, an lastly, there is Profitability, which is the gross profit margin
of a company.

The statistical significance  of the rebound period could be explained with the founding
arguments of CSR, which argues that high scoring CSR firms will have an advantage in
a volatile market facing high uncertainty of regulatory intervention. This can be in the
form of  being prepared  to face harder regulation, but also in the context of  having an
easier time of getting governmental approval for aid, such as grants or loans. The
United States Government’s Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act
                                                          th
(CARES) was passed by the senate on March 25  (CNBC, 2020), and was signed into
                                                                       th
law two days later by President Donald Trump on March 27  (New York Times, 2020).
According to the United States Government (Data Lab US Government, 2020), the
CARES act was “the largest supplemental appropriation in American history”, with an
agency funding of $2.08 trillion. There had been other, smaller financial aid packages

                                  22
before this, but the CARES act outsized the earlier packages by a lot. We believe the
sudden turn in the market is highly correlated to the financial aid packages from the
government. Bank of America (Fortune, 2020), estimated a much larger decline if the
CARES act was not passed than if it was approved. Since this surge  of capital
stimulated the market, it is also important to think about how this is perceived.
Microeconomic theory tells us that governments will be more willing to support  firms
with positive externalities. Since positive externalities and CSR go hand in hand, we
argue that the ambiguity of the exact constitution of the CARES act in relation to the
launch contributes to the positive impact of CSR during period 3. Google Trends shows
that both the number of searches on the internet and the number of articles written about
                                                                      rd                th
the CARES act surged during the period between March 23  until April 5  and was on
                                        th
a high level at least until April 10  (See appendix).  Concludingly having a firm with a
high CSR score gives an initial advantage, which in this case is in the form of recovery,
when uncertainty of governmental intervention is high. However, a general rule for this
phenomenon cannot be determined without further research, since this might be an
outlier due  to external confounding events.

To  summarize, we found  little  evidence for an impact in the “Top-bottom” period
                                        th                   rd
occurring between February 20  and March 23 . The only suggestive evidence was that
there was a negative impact  of  CSR, but the effect was only seen in one of the
regressions for both period 1 and period 3.  Neither  did we find evidence for an impact
                                                                  rd             th
during the recovery period occurring from March 23  to June 5 . During the period
including the “Top  –  bottom” period, as well as the initial rebound period occurring
                       th                   th
from February 20  until April 10 , we do see that there is a  positive  significant impact
from CSR on returns, indicating that CSR had  an  impact on firm performance during
the initial rebound  of the market, but not in the longer run.  This is only seen when not
controlling for other variables, however.  Since period 3 includes the “Top-bottom”
period, in which there was no impact of CSR, we  did  a robustness test on a period not
                                                                                  rd                 th
originally included in our main analysis, namely, from March 23  until April 9 ,  which
coincides with the period of surged interest in the CARES act  (see appendix),  to check
whether the results from this period confirm our suspicions that there has been a
significantly  positive impact  from CSR  in the initial rebound period.

Comparing our results with previous research it is somewhat in line with  Bae et al.
(2021), which find no connection between improved financial performance and pre-
crisis CSR. In our  analysis, two of our windows are the same as the ones that Bae et al.
(2021) cover in their analysis. Specifically, they cover our period 1 and period 2 in their
crisis and post-crisis windows, respectively. Here, our results are homogenous, in that
we find no connection between improved financial performance and pre-crisis CSR
except for the suggestive negative impact of CSR during the fall. We, however, went
deeper into to the crash period and found that there is a positive effect mainly in the
short term  rebound period after the crash. We argue that this is due to the massive
CARES act that the United States government issued in late March. There was a lot of
uncertainty regarding who would benefit from this package during this period but
microeconomic theory tells us the government is more likely to give more aid to firms
creating positive externalities for society. We therefore argue that the reason we see the
positive impact of CSR on firm performance is due to the uncertainty of state

                                  23
intervention. More research on this topic is needed to say whether this is a general
result.

Furthermore, our results do not directly contradict those of Lins et al. (2017). Lins et al.
(2017) find that trust CSR is linked to trust and social capital, so even though our results
say that CSR does not impact crisis firm performance other than  during  a specific  short
period, the results are still consistent since COVID-19 was not a trust crisis. If anything,
it might have been a “trust boom”, according to the Edelman Trust Barometer (Edelman
Trust Barometer, 2021). When comparing our results to Schnietz and Epstein (2005),
which say that corporate reputation works as a dampener during market decline, our
results are contradictory. However, Schnietz and Epstein (2005) tested the  impact of
corporate reputation/CSR in a similar environment as Lins et al. (2017). Specifically,
they tested the results during the 1999 Seattle WTO meeting failure, which was a period
of distrust, and not a crisis caused by physical limitations on economic activities such as
the COVID-19 crisis. All, in all, our results do not contradict these studies and in
regards to Bae et al. (2021), it provides a deeper understanding of the impact of CSR
during the COVID-19 crisis.

Industry analysis
Having established that CSR does not impact firms during period 1 and period 2, but
does significantly impact  part of  period 3, and is very impactful during the initial
rebound period, we now turn our heads to an industry analysis. As mentioned earlier,
our data sample consists of 460 firms from the Refinitiv Eikon database. In our sample
we find 98 unique industries, which means that each industry consists of no more than
4.69 (460/98) on average. Analyzing an industry with only a few observations would
expose the analysis to major representation problems, so we extract the industries with a
more representable number of  observations. We have set our threshold to 10 firms and
end up with a sample of 9 industries with observations ranging from 11 to 24. Industries
represented in our analysis are  commercial real estate investment trusts (REITs),
electric utilities, industrial machinery and equipment, it services and consulting,
medical equipment, supplies and distribution, oil and gas exploration and production,
pharmaceuticals, software,  and  specialized REITs.

Regressions are run for each industry, albeit without control variables. The mean returns
and average CSR scores are also represented in the table (6). Likely not unrelated to the
not so numerous observations in each group, few cells show results with coefficients
that are significant. For raw return of period 1, only two industries are shown to be
significantly affected by CSR, namely IT services and consulting and pharmaceuticals.
Both show a small, significant coefficient, with IT services and consulting having a
coefficient corresponding to a 1.9% increase with a 100  –  point increase in CSR score
and pharmaceuticals showing a 1.7% increase by the same CSR score increase. The
only other coefficients we see being significantly different from 0 are both for
pharmaceuticals, occurring in period 2 (recovery) for raw and abnormal return.
Interestingly, in this case, the coefficients are negative, and it is thus shown that for
pharmaceuticals an increase in CSR score would mean a decline in firm performance,

                                  24
contrary to our hypothesis of a positive impact.  On the other hand,  the argument  could
be  made that  pharmaceutical  companies  central role in vaccine development during this
period  might have grater positive externalities than  investing in CSR,  thus  making pure
CSR investments with  comparably  lower  levels  of  positive externalities an inefficient
use of resources. Therefore,  developing a vaccine  and consequently  helping save people
from getting COVID-19  might be the best way to  improve their corporate reputation
and/or CSR. This could be an indication that the importance of CSR could have a
situational  aspect  determining whether it impacts firm performance positively or
negatively. If it is expected from an industry that  they do something specific that would
contribute to the world, maybe doing something else,  albeit a good thing, could hurt the
perceived CSR  and thus firm performance. This would at least be a plausible
explanation for the statistically significant coefficients of pharmaceutical companies
during the recovery period.

We believe statistical regressions to be an  important tool in analysis, but as there are so
few observations in each group, we believe it fit to also simply compare the mean of the
specific industry to the mean in the general population. This will allow us to expand on
the otherwise limited regression analysis on the smaller industry samples. Commercial
REITs, for example have a CSR mean of 46, which is on par with the population mean
of 46. When looking at the return, both raw and abnormal, it is evident that the return is
lower than the population  every for every period. We can thus infer that this industry
was hit relatively hard by the crisis compared to the rest of the firms in the sample. In
the table (6), a very, the industry means that are higher than the population mean are
written in bold text. Marking the means this way makes an interesting pattern stand out.

                                   Table 6
                             Industry divided analysis

This table  (6)  shows an analysis broken down into industries in the sample. Our sample
consists of 460 firms from the Refinitiv Eikon ESG database. Micro-cap firms (market
cap < $250 million) have been excluded from the sample, as well as financial firms and
firms with  a traditionally low CSR score such as firms in the weapon industry. Our
main variable of interest is CSR, which in our data is represented by CSR score, an
index ranging from 0 to  1  with 0 being the lowest attainable score and  1  being the
highest. The regressions are run with this score as the exogenous variable and returns
for different periods as the endogenous variable.  For each of these periods we have
collected raw return, as well as the abnormal return, which is the abnormal return for
the period calculated using the market model with a five years’ estimation period.
             In the table, regressions are run with CSR as the independent variable and
raw-  and abnormal returns as the dependent variable. The resulting coefficient from the
regressions are represented on the first row of each cell, and the P-value that this is
significantly different from 0 is represented in parentheses underneath. If significant, an
asterisk is displayed next to the p-value with the significance levels as follows:  (* = 0.1,
** = 0.05, and *** = 0.01). Next, the mean for the dependent variable of each
respective industry is represented, as well as the mean for the independent variable. In

                                  25
  Table 6      Comm-    Electric   Industria      IT        Medical    Oil & Gas     Pharma-      Software     Specializ-
                   ercial      Utilities        l       Services &   Equipment   Exploratio     ceuticals                     ed REITs
               REITs              Machine  Consulting   , Supplies     n and                    N= 15       N = 19
                       N = 24     ry &      N =14       &      Productio     N =11
               N = 16              Equipme              Distributio      n
                                      nt                     n        N = 22
                                     N = 19                 N = 12
Period 1
Raw
Coefficient      -0.0012     -5e-04    -0.0015     0.0019      0.0023         0          0.0017        -0.002       -4e-04
(P-value)       (0.3832)   (0.3329)   (0.2929)   (0.0973)*    (0.1863)    (0.9817)    (0.044)**     (0.5641)     (0.7605)
Mean (-0.44)     -0.4757    -0.3845    -0.4305     -0.3848      -0.3652      -0.6281       -0.2816       -0.2797       -0.5441
CSR (46)       46.5736   67.1909   28.9546    49.7112    30.5554    58.2543     61.1532      35.1146     48.0821

Abnormal
Coefficient       -0.001     -2e-04    -0.0011     0.0025      0.0014         0         0.0011       -0.0037       8e-04
(P-value)       (0.4362)   (0.7949)   (0.4531)   (0.1018)    (0.3843)    (0.9957)     (0.2925)      (0.4029)      (0.51)
Mean (-0.09)    -0.2661    -0.2248    -0.0418     -0.0342      -0.0432      -0.1391       0.0326        0.1474       -0.3021
CSR (46)       46.5736   67.1909   28.9546    49.7112    30.5554    58.2543     61.1532      35.1146     48.0821

Period 2
Raw
Coefficient       0.0012     0.0016     0.0034     -0.0037     -0.0022     -0.0066      -0.0049       -0.0034       0.0022
P-value         (0.609)    (0.162)   (0.2758)   (0.1842)    (0.3614)    (0.4366)    (5e-04)***     (0.3923)     (0.6213)
Mean (0.68)     0.4771    0.3418    0.5397     0.4718      0.5586     1.5808      0.4393       0.5192      0.8233
CSR (46)       46.5736   67.1909   28.9546    49.7112    30.5554    58.2543     61.1532      35.1146     48.0821

Abnormal
Coefficient       0.001      0.0013     0.0029     -0.0042     -0.0014     -0.0067      -0.0044       -0.0019       0.001
P-value        (0.6739)   (0.2293)   (0.2778)   (0.1847)    (0.5815)    (0.4229)    (5e-04)***     (0.6808)     (0.8061)
Mean (0.37)     0.2904    0.1989    0.1939     0.1596      0.2708     1.1474      0.1596        0.138       0.6078
CSR (46)       46.5736   67.1909   28.9546    49.7112    30.5554    58.2543     61.1532      35.1146     48.0821

Period 3
Raw
Coefficient      -0.0018    -6e-04     -1e-04     0.0018      0.0014      -1e-04       8e-04        5e-04        2e-04
P-value        (0.2977)   (0.3212)   (0.9591)   (0.1073)    (0.4977)    (0.9635)     (0.3271)      (0.8206)     (0.9295)
Mean (-0.28)    -0.3261    -0.1782    -0.2876    -0.2157     -0.1508     -0.5124      -0.0724       -0.1777      -0.3774
CSR (46)       46.5736   67.1909   28.9546    49.7112    30.5554    58.2543     61.1532      35.1146     48.0821

Abnormal
Coefficient      -0.0017    -4e-04     2e-04      0.0021      0.0001      -1e-04       5e-04        -4e-04       5e-04
P-value         (0.295)     (0.38)    (0.9018)   (0.0769)*    (0.6174)    (0.9711)     (0.5313)      (0.881)     (0.7587)
Mean (-0.11)     -0.219     -0.096    -0.0888    -0.0365      0.0135      -0.2618      0.0882        0.0406      -0.2537
CSR (46)       46.5736   67.1909   28.9546    49.7112    30.5554    58.2543     61.1532      35.1146     48.0821

           our sample of 460 stocks, there were 98 industries represented. We have excluded any
              industry that does not have more than 10 firms represented.

              With the exception of commercial REITs, which has a lower mean for all periods, no
              industry has a consistently higher or lower mean than the population mean. In the table,
              the two periods corresponding to the market crash are period 1 and period 3, and the
              period corresponding to a recovery period is period 2. The table shows the pattern that if
               a firm has higher return than the mean during a crisis period (1 or 3), they will
              automatically have a lower mean during the recovery period, and vice versa. Six
               industries, electric utilities, industrial machinery and equipment, IT services and
              consulting, medical equipment, supplies and distribution, pharmaceuticals, and software

                                              26
all have higher return than the average during the market crash, but have lower return
the recovery period. The remaining two industries (again, excluding commercial
REITs), both have higher return than the mean during the recovery period but lower
during the crisis period.

The result  that industries that had a better/worse performance during the crash had the
opposite effect in the subsequent period is understandable, since firms that performed
better than average in period one are closer to their top potential or has less to “recover”
period two, which makes it logical that they will perform worse than average in the
second period. The same goes for the opposite situation. Firms that performed worse
than average in period one has more to recover in period two, therefore it is logical that
they will perform better than average in the second period. On the other hand, that
commercial REITs  preformed worse in both periods might suggest that this industry can
be  singled out as especially effected by the crisis. That this can be seen with  commercial
REITs  might be explained by the relatively high fixed cost and sensitivity to deferred
payments, in comparison to most other industries.

The industries that have performed the best during each period are pharmaceuticals and
software during period  1 and period 3, with an average of 17.25p.p. and 15.58p.p.
higher return than the mean, respectively, and oil and gas exploration and production
and specialized REITs during period 2, with an average of 83.91p.p. and 19.06p.p.
higher return than the mean.  Turning our heads to the CSR score of these firms shows
us that pharmaceuticals outperforms the mean of 48, with its score of 61, and as well as
oil and gas exploration and production with its score of 58, as does specialized REITs,
although barely, with  its score of 48. Software underperform compared to the mean with
its score of 35. Again, because of the few observations, nothing significant can be said
about the effect of CSR on  individual  industry level, and the wide distribution of CSR
mean and return  mean does not provide a clear insight to how CSR affects return.

Bae et al. (2021) also  perform an industry analysis. However, their industry
classification differs from ours, and they have a much larger sample than us, so the
comparability  strength can  be questioned.  During the first period, we find a significantly
positive  impact of CSR on  the pharmaceuticals level,  and  Bae  et al. (2021) find it for
their industry defined as  “Healthcare, medical equipment, and drugs”, which could be
said to be  at least  overlapping  industry definitions.  In period 3 we only find a significant
impact on the IT services and consulting industry, while  Bae et al. (2021) find it for
“Chemicals and allied products”.  We wish to do a more in-depth  industry analysis to
increase comparability, but our limited sample size also limits are ability to do this. As
we have seen in our industry analysis, there is much information to be extracted from
such an analysis, and this is something we would improve, should we redo  this paper in
the  future.

                                  27
   7.  Conclusion

In our analysis we find  that corporate social responsibility  (CSR)  had no general impact
on  firm performance during the COVID-19 market crash. However, we find that  CSR
did have a significant impact during a certain period  of the crash, namely, the initial
rebound period where there  were  large financial aids  planned by the government.  We
also find a slight hint towards CSR having a negative impact on  firms during the fall of
the market, but more research would have to be done to confirm this.  Additionally, we
find that different industries are affected differently, and that  CSR even had a negative
impact on  certain industries.

When looking at our results with the perspective of previous research in mind it is
somewhat in line with  Bae et al. (2021), who  find that CSR does not impact  firm
performance during COVID-19. This  contradicts trust associated benefits that is
presented in  Lins et al. (2017). Moreover,  our  results show that corporate reputation did
not work as a dampener  during the market crash of 2020, which opposes results by
Schnietz et al. (2003). Subsequently the question  if CSR represents trust and corporate
reputation or if it is something completely different is still unanswered. However, an
interesting finding is that CSR ranking had a positive but short-term impact on firm
performance, which might instead suggest that the metric can be a measure of the firm’s
potential gain from state intervention. On the other hand, high scoring CSR firms
outperforms the market when uncertainty of state intervention is high, which would
explain that the  advantage of having  a high CSR score is protection from uncertainty,
thus resulting in the initial recovery boost. Therefore, reasoning that corporate
reputation has an initial boosting effect for recovery instead of a dampening effect
during a crash, might just be explained  by timing and clarity of state intervention.

In  conclusion,  our results confirm the view of Bae et al. (2021), in that there is no
general  impact of CSR during a market crash, but we also find  significant  impact when
there is ambiguity in state intervention, due to our use of several event windows.  The
scope of our thesis  is limited to the  impact of CSR during the COVID-19 market crash,
but future studies could  use our results as an interesting starting point  and look at the
impact of CSR during other times of state intervention, not necessarily  during times of a
market crash.

                                  28
   8.  References

Bae, K.H., El Ghoul, S., Gong, Z(J)., Guedhami, O., 2021, “Does CSR matter in times
of crisis? Evidence from the COVID-19 pandemic”,  The Journal of Finance, vol. 63,
No. 6.

Brännström, Sara L, 2021, Rekordmånga unga har börjat investera i aktier, SVD
näringsliv, read 2021-02-15. https://www.svd.se/rekordmanga-unga-har-borjat-
investera-i-aktier

Business for good, read 2021-03-10. https://www.b1g1.com/csr-
guide?gclid=EAIaIQobChMIqMW-
3cLi7gIV40iRBR0DPgmsEAAYASAAEgJBJfD_BwE

Cochrane, E., Gay Stolberg, S., 2020, “$2 Trillion Coronavirus Stimulus Bill Is Signed
Into Law”,  The New York Times, read on  2021-04-26.
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/27/us/politics/coronavirus-house-voting.html

CRSP, 2021, “About CRSP”, read 2021-03-02.  http://www.crsp.org/about-crsp

Data lab, 2020, “How is the federal government funding relief efforts for COVID-19?”,
read on 2021-04-27.  https://datalab.usaspending.gov/federal-covid-funding/

Edelman Trust  Barometer Special Report, 2021, “Trust and the Coronavirus in the
U.S.”, read on 2021-05-01. https://www.edelman.com/trust/2021-trust-barometer/trust-
coronavirus-us

European Union. Read 2021-02-17.  https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-
euro/recovery-coronavirus/recovery-and-resilience-facility_en

European Union, read 2021-03-10.
https://ec.europa.eu/growth/industry/sustainability/corporate-social-responsibility_en

Friedman, Milton, 1970, A Friedman doctrine  –  The Social Responsibility Of Business
Is to Increase Its Profits, The New York Times.
https://www.nytimes.com/1970/09/13/archives/a-friedman-doctrine-the-social-
responsibility-of-business-is-to.html

Goolsbee, A., Levitt, S., Syverson, C., 2016, Microeconomics, second edition (Worth
Publishers Inc., U.S.)

Jensen, Michael C., 2001, “Value Maximation, Stakeholder Theory, and the Corporate
Objective Function”,  Business Ethics Quarterly, Vol. 12, No. 2, pp. 235-256

Johansson, Åsa,  2020, Statens krav på SAS för miljardstöd: minska utsläppen,
NyTeknik, read 2021-02-15.  https://www.nyteknik.se/fordon/statens-krav-pa-sas-for-
miljardstod-halvera-utslappen-6997994

                                  29
Lins, K.V., Servaes, H., Tamayo, K., 2017, ”Social  Capital, Trust, and Firm
Performance: The Value of Corporate Social Responsibility during the Financial
Crisis”,  The Journal of Finance, vol. 72, No. 4.

Margolis, J. D., Elfenbein, H. A., Walsh, J.P., 2009, “Does it Pay to Be Good…And
Does it Matter? A Meta-Analysis of the Relationship between Corporate Social and
Financial Performance”,  SSRN Electronic Journal (March 2009).

McWilliams, A., Siegel, D., 1997, “Event studies in management research: theoretical
and empirical issues”,  Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 40, No. 3, pp. 626-657.

Novo Nordisk, 2012, “Annual report”.
https://issuu.com/novonordisk/docs/novo_nordisk_annual_report_2012

Novo Nordisk, 2014,  “Annual report”.
https://www.annualreports.com/HostedData/AnnualReportArchive/n/NYSE_NVO_201
4.pdf

OECD, 2021. Read 2021-04-20. https://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/en/themes/green-
recovery

Pramuk, Jacob, 2020, “Senate passes $2 trillion coronavirus relief bill  –  House aims for
Friday vote”,  CNBC, read on 2021-04-26.  https://www.cnbc.com/2020/03/25/senate-
passes-2-trillion-coronavirus-stimulus-package.html

Rim, H., Yang, S.-U., Lee, J., 2016, “Strategic partnerships with nonprofits in corporate
social responsibility (CSR): The mediating role of perceived altruism and organizational
identification”,  Journal of Business Research, Vol. 69, issue 9, p. 3213-3219.

Schnietz, Karen E., Epstein, Marc J., 2005, “Exploring the Financial Value of a
Reputation for Corporate Social Responsibility During a Crisis”,  Corporate Reputation
Review, Vol. 7, Number  4.

Stakeholderthory.org, About, Read 2021-02-19. http://stakeholdertheory.org/about/

SVT, 2021, Här sprider sig coronaviruset, read 2021-04-15.
https://www.svt.se/datajournalistik/har-sprider-sig-coronaviruset/

S&P global, “The S&P global IQ  platform”, read on 2021-03-27.
https://www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/documents/sp-global-capital-iq-
platform-brochure.pdf

Thomas Reuters Eikon, “ESG Data on Eikon Quick Start Guide”. Read on 2021-02-23.
https://video.training.refinitiv.com/elearning_video/Documents/Eikon_QRC/Quick%20
Start%20Guide_%20ESG%20Data%20on%20Eikon.pdf

Unesco, 2020.  Read 2021-04-30.  https://en.unesco.org/news/pandemics-increase-
frequency-and-severity-unless-biodiversity-loss-addressed

                                  30
Warner, Bernhard, 2020, “This is what the stock market would look like if the CARES
Act never happened”,  Fortune, read on 2021-04-27.
https://fortune.com/2020/07/15/stock-market-sp-500-cares-act-impact-us-economy-
coronavirus-stimulus-checks-unemployment-ppp-loans/

WRDS, “S&P global market intelligence data through Wharton research data services”,
                      1
read on 2021-03-20.   https://wrds-
www.wharton.upenn.edu/documents/1304/SP_Capital_IQ_data_on_WRDS_pVupLeY.
pdf

Youmatter, 2020, read 2021-03-11.  https://youmatter.world/en/definition/definitions-
csr-report-important-examples/

                                  31
Appendix

This graph shows a graph of the amount of searches on “CARES act” during the first
part of  2020.  A surge of interest can be seen in the end of March.  The reader can verify
the graph by going to Google Trends and entering the search term “CARES act”.  Here
is a link from our result:  https://trends.google.com/trends/explore?date=2020-02-
01%202020-07-20&geo=US&q=%2Fg%2F11jf9nn3yz
The same pattern can also be seen when looking at number of news articles written on
the topic.

                                  32