   Swedish Mutual Fund
     Performance and
        Persistence

  Can past performance serve as an indicator for future returns?

Ludvig Harting
Lucas Johnson

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2021
                              Abstract
         This paper presents an overview of the Swedish mutual fund indus-
      try and investigates the prevalence of performance persistence using a
     sample of 139 funds during 2005 - 2020. The study is conducted using
      the Capital Asset Pricing Model for determining funds’ alpha during a
      specific period, and analyses if an investment strategy based on past per-
      formance can consistently generate returns in excess of the market. In
      addition, we investigate whether funds with an ESG theme or funds in-
      vesting exclusively in stocks with small market capitalisation outperform
      their counterparts. Finally, the performance persistence in ESG and small
      cap funds, respectively, is studied. Our overall results suggest that both
      positive and negative performance persistence exists in the Swedish mu-
      tual fund market, but only conclusively during an annual evaluation and
      holding period and with ambiguous inferences during a biannual periodi-
      sation depending on the market benchmark. Persistence does not seem to
      be more or less prevalent in ESG or small cap funds. Furthermore, our
      results imply that small cap funds outperform their counterparts while
      ESG funds fail to yield returns on par with funds lacking an ESG theme.
      Our results agree with most studies suggesting performance persistence
      exists on an annual evaluation basis.
Keywords:

Swedish Mutual Funds, Performance Persistence, ESG, Small Cap

Authors:

Ludvig Harting (24443)
Lucas Johnson (24578)

Tutors:

Marieke Bos, Deputy Director, Swedish House of Finance

Examiner:

Adrien d´Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Acknowledgements:

We want to extend our sincere gratitude to Marieke Bos for her her indispens-
able guidance with this thesis.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Ludvig Harting and Lucas Johnson, 2021

                                  1
1 Introduction

Can actively managed mutual funds persistently deliver risk-adjusted excess re-
turns to investors? A common saying among professionals that rejects this no-
tion is that “past performance is no guarantee for future results ”. This implies
a general consensus that persistence in performance among actively managed
funds is rather a statistical anomaly than an industry standard. While informed
professional fund managers may consistently outperform the market gross of
fees, the common perception starting with Jensen (1969) is that fund investors
rarely enjoy consistent and lasting alpha. However, later studies such as Grin-
blatt and Titman (1992), Elton, Gruber, Das, and Hlavka (1993), and Blake
(1996) argue that funds can indeed persistently deliver excess performance to
motivate their expenses. When Carhart (1997) provided evidence that mutual
fund persistence on a one-year basis is primarily a product of expense ratios
and stock momentum, the previous evidence of mutual fund persistence was
weakened.

This paper examines if actively managed Swedish mutual funds that invest
in Swedish equities can persistently create risk-adjusted excess return net of
fees to their investors. Our approach employs the Capital Asset Pricing Model
(CAPM) to find the required rate of return together with Jensen’s alpha values
for the actively managed funds during 2005-2020. Three portfolios are con-
structed with top performing, middle performing and bottom performing funds
during a holding period with fund weighting correlated to the funds’ deviation
from the mean alpha. Each portfolio’s return in the subsequent evaluation pe-
riod is then evaluated against a passive market index to analyse if portfolios
created based on past performance systematically outperform or underperform
the market.

The Sustainable Finance Disclosure Regulation (SFDR), which went into ef-
fect on March 10, 2021, is the EU’s most recent regulatory amendment from
its 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, according to Regulation (EU)
2019/2088 (2019). Over the next ten years, the SFDR seeks to reorient €1
trillion into renewable investment alternatives (Jessop and Abnett 2021). The
regulations aim to improve financial market participants and financial advisors’
disclosure and transparency of sustainability information. This is ensured by
the SFDR, which requires financial products and financial advisors to balance
financial and sustainability risks, detail the product’s sustainability impact, and
provide general sustainability information (Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 (2019).
The SFDR, according to a study by Asset Management firm Franklin Temple-
ton (2021), is part of a paradigm shift that will significantly increase demand
for ESG-denoted financial products. Previous research on whether investing in
ESG mutual funds delivers higher returns than conventional mutual funds pro-
vide somewhat ambiguous conclusions. Gregory and Whittaker (2007) presented
evidence that UK-domiciled ESG funds underperformed the market in absolute
returns during the measurement period. Accounting for risk-adjusted returns,

                                  2
ESG funds did not underperform their counterparts and managed to deliver
some annual performance persistence, albeit less than non-ESG funds. Climent
and Soriano (2011) revealed that US ESG funds underperformed conventional
funds during 1987-2009 but performed in parity during 2001-2009 specifically.
Due to the slight ambiguity and increased demand for ESG mutual funds, this
paper will also investigate the landscape of Swedish ESG mutual funds. We
aim to evaluate whether actively managed Swedish equity mutual funds with
an ESG thematisation perform better than their non-thematised counterparts
and if previously described persistence analysis differ within these specific fund
sub-samples.

Additionally, we will add to previous research by studying the performance and
prevalence of persistence in actively managed Swedish mutual funds investing
purely in equities with small market capitalisation. The rationale behind this
extension relates to Banz (1981), who suggested that the risk-adjusted return
for equities with a smaller market capitalisation is higher than that for equities
with higher market capitalisation.

Our overall results suggest that performance persistence exists in the Swedish
equity mutual fund market, but only during a 1-year evaluation and holding pe-
riod and somewhat during a 2-year periodisation. Additionally, persistence in
underperformance is prevalent during the 1-year period, and may accelerate or
revert to zero when measuring over 2 years depending on the market proxy used.
Furthermore, small cap funds tend to outperform non-small cap funds over the
sample period and ESG-themed funds are outperformed by its counterparts. No
significant difference is found in persistence when limiting the study to ESG or
small cap funds.

The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. In section 2 we provide
background about the previous literature relating to mutual fund performance
and persistence. Information about the data will be provided in section 3. Sec-
tion 4 describes the methodology used to analyse performance persistence. A
presentation of our results is given in section 5. Section 6 concludes the paper.

2 Previous Literature

This section aims to present the findings of previous research studying persis-
tence in performance of mutual funds. Section 2.1 introduces previous research
on the subject in general, while sections 2.2 and 2.3 touch upon the previous
studies of relative performance and persistence in small cap and ESG-themed
funds.

                                  3
2.1 Performance and Persistence
The performance of mutual funds and whether fund performance can be pre-
dicted by analysing past returns is well documented in finance literature since
the 1960s. Sharpe (1966) and Jensen (1968) pioneered the subject of mutual
fund performance, and laid a foundation that much of recent studies is based
upon. Sharpe concluded that past performance is not a guarantee for future
returns and suggested that a fund manager can construct an equity portfolio
that can deliver returns in parity with the passive benchmark. However, with
deducted fees, the returns fall short of the index. Jensen (1968) employed the
Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) and examined through regression anal-
ysis the funds’ risk-adjusted excess returns - the Jensen’s Alpha. The results
revealed that the average alpha, both gross and net of fees, was negative. Ac-
cordingly, Jensen argued that mutual funds were unable to deliver returns that
compensate for their level of systematic risk.

Analysing whether mutual funds can continually generate excess returns, Hen-
dricks, Patel, and Zeckhauser (1993) employed Sharpe and Jensen’s measures
to analyse the returns of 96 mutual funds between 1974 and 1987. They for-
mulated an investment strategy built on identifying previous “winners ” and
“losers ”. By picking funds with annual “hot hands ”, i.e. those with positive
alphas in the previous year, the authors found that these funds continue to gen-
erate positive risk-adjusted returns net of fees for one to eight quarters. The
mutual funds with “icy hands ”, i.e. those with negative alpha returns in the
previous year, continued to underperform the market benchmark. The authors
concluded that performance persistence was strongest during a one-year eval-
uation period. With shorter periods, noise and individual events eliminated
the possible performance persistence from managerial skill. Over longer periods
than one year, the “hot hands ” investment strategy had diminishing importance
in accordance with the efficient market hypothesis. Goetzmann and Ibbotson
(1994) found similar results in monthly, annual and biannual performance per-
sistence, with stronger evidence in the annual periodisation.

Using a non-parametric methodology, Brown and Goetzmann (1995) divided
funds into four groups depending on their performance relative to the market
index during the period 1976-1977. The results suggested that mutual fund
performance persistence existed for one to three years. The authors also found
evidence of reversal over time; funds that had previously outperformed the
market tended to underperform in later periods. The authors concluded that
persistence is not an effect of managerial skills in stock picking but rather a
group phenomenon. Carhart (1997) extended previous research by analysing
returns using the Four-Factor Model. The results suggested that annual per-
sistence exists, albeit mainly as an effect of stock momentum. Additionally,
Carhart claimed that the fund managers who managed to deliver excess return
persistently did so by unintentionally including stocks with momentum, rather
than employing a strategy built on this. This stands in contrast with Wermers

                                  4
(1996), who reasons that short-term persistence is the effect of funds managing
to incorporate a momentum strategy.

Previous research has also presented evidence that mutual funds can persis-
tently deliver excess returns for more extended periods, up to ten years. Grin-
blatt and Titman (1992), Elton, Gruber, Das, and Hlavka (1993) and Elton,
Gruber, and Blake (1996) presented similar conclusions that performance per-
sistence exists on more extended periods with the cause being managerial talent
and the possible access to superior information. Other research finds evidence of
excess return persistence only in specific time periods. Malkiel (1995) found no
evidence of persistence during the 1980s but during the 1960s. Thus, together
with Berk and Green (2004), Malkiel concluded that the possible prevalence of
performance persistence is likely the effect of the time period.

With many previous studies focusing on US mutual funds, Otten and Bams
(2002) extended the previous research by studying a sample of 506 European
mutual funds between 1991 and 1998. By employing Carhart’s (1997) Four-
Factor Model, Otten and Bams found evidence that European mutual funds
managed to deliver excess returns persistently. The authors also found that
funds with a high weight of small cap equities had a more significant tendency
to deliver alpha net of fees persistently. Moreover, Otten and Bams found sub-
stantial evidence of persistence in UK-based mutual funds, albeit no evidence
in German, French and Italian mutual funds.

Several papers examine the performance persistence in mutual funds in the
Swedish market, with mixed results. Dahlquist et al. (2000) examined Sweden-
based funds between 1993 and 1997, analysing the prevalence of performance
persistence in different fund characteristics. The results indicated that large
mutual funds underperformed smaller mutual funds. Significant evidence of
persistent excess returns was found for money market funds but no other char-
acteristic. Lindeen and Gros (2009) analysed 165 actively managed Swedish
mutual funds between 1998 and 2008. The results indicated significant persis-
tence during the time, but concentrated to underperforming mutual funds that
continued to fall short of the market. Flam and Vestman (2014) studied 115
actively managed mutual funds between 1999 and 2009 and found practically
no evidence of persistence in performance. When funds were grouped according
to their previous returns, the return of the top and bottom performers converge
to the mean after two or three years. Thus, the authors argued that there is
no evidence of managerial skill or superior information influencing fund perfor-
mance.

2.2 Performance and Persistence of Small Cap Mutual
    Funds
An investment strategy focusing on mutual funds with positions in equities
with small capitalisation outperforms the market benchmark, Otten and Bams

                                  5
(2002) argues. The authors found that small cap funds can add value to a
more considerable degree than conventional mutual funds without an investment
specialisation. Analysing the results using Fama and French’s (1992) Three-
Factor model and Carhart’s (1997) Four-Factor model, the authors found that
alphas net of fees were significantly higher for small cap equity funds than
the mean of the sample and that small cap funds delivered significant over-
performance in three out of four countries. Furthermore, Gorman (2003) argued
that there exists some persistence in small cap mutual fund performance, as past
“winners ” continue to perform in the next year.

2.3 Performance and Persistence of ESG Mutual Funds
Gregory and Whittaker (2007) examined the performance and persistence of
ESG funds between 1987 and 2002. The authors employed the Three- and
Four-Factor Model to analyse the returns of the 32 ESG-themed funds and a
corresponding control group of 160 non-ESG funds. The results indicated that
both groups underperformed the market benchmark in absolute returns during
the measurement period. However, none of the groups underperformed when
accounting for their level of systematic risk. Additionally, the authors found
evidence of persistence in both ESG and non-ESG funds on an annual basis.
Some differences between the groups were presented, with the argument that
performance persistence varies depending on the chosen performance metric.

3 Data

Sections 3.1 to 3.6 highlight and motivate the data used to evaluate the funds’
performance and persistence and compare it to data used in previous research.
Additionally, sections 3.7 and 3.8 aim to clarify the naming and disposition of
each dependent and independent variable used in the analysis.

3.1 Swedish Mutual Funds
The fund sample collected from Morningstar consists of 139 diversified, open-
ended mutual funds with Swedish equity exposure, as shown in table 1 in the
Appendix.

The definition of a Swedish Equity Mutual Fund, and thus the criteria for funds
used in this data set is:

1. The fund invests primarily in equities

2. The fund’s geographical domicile is in Sweden

3. The fund’s equity positions are listed on Swedish stock exchanges

                                  6
4. The fund is actively managed with the goal of outperforming the market

3.1.1 Small Cap Funds
The examined Swedish small cap equity funds are funds where the fund manage-
ment explicitly state that their main investment focus is equities of small market
capitalisation. This information is gathered from each fund’s fund information
memorandum.

3.1.2 ESG Funds
According to Morningstar’s definition, ESG-marked funds are funds using En-
vironmental, Social, and Corporate Governance criteria when evaluating invest-
ments. When choosing investments, these funds can either pursue a theme that
relates to creating positive and measurable social impact, a theme related to
sustainability, or both. The ESG funds utilised in this paper are ESG-marked
by Morningstar.

3.2 Time period
Fund performance is analysed during 16 years between January 1 2005 and
December 31 2020. This stands in contrast to Hendricks, Patel and Zeckhauser
(1993) who analyse fund returns for 14 years between 1974 and 1987.

3.3 Evaluation and Holding Period
The choices of evaluation and holding periods follow those applied by Hendricks,
Patel, and Zeckhauser (1993), with some limitations. The authors collected
quarterly fund returns and evaluated the 1 quarter, 1 year, 2 year, 3 year and 4
year performance persistence of these returns. This paper does not include a 3
and 4 year evaluation period as it requires a longer time period where the fund is
active. Implementing this evaluation period would reduce the fund sample size
and decrease the results’ validity. Furthermore, this study only conducts anal-
ysis on matching holding and evaluation periods. Thus, quarterly persistence
is defined as quarterly performance segmented by performance during the pre-
vious quarter. Annual persistence is defined as annual performance segmented
by performance during the previous year. Biannual persistence is defined as
biannual performance segmented by performance during the previous 2 years.

3.4 Market and Risk-Free Rate Proxy
The primary market proxy used is the SIXPRX index, with data gathered from
Fondbolagens F¨orening. This index is used as it reflects many of the constraints
relevant to the equity mutual funds selected for the performance data. SIXPRX
is constructed to reflect the performance of companies on the Nasdaq Stockholm
Stock Exchange, with a constriction in limited exposure to 10 percent of any

                                  7
single company according to EU UCITS investment rules for securities’ funds.
Furthermore, individual positions with more than 5 percent of total market cap-
italisation cannot exceed 40 percent of the index, and dividends are assumed to
be reinvested in the index on the day after the dividend payments.

OMX Stockholm All-shares Gross Index (OMXSGI) is also used as a market
proxy for fund performance evaluation in order to conduct the study more closely
in line with Hendricks, Patel, and Zeckhauser (1993) which used the S&P 500.
OMXSGI, with data gathered from Nasdaq, includes all shares listed on the
OMX Nordic Exchange Stockholm, with all dividends reinvested. Contrary to
the SIXPRX index, OMXSGI does not include exposure limits and has an ex-
clusive aim of reflecting the current status and changes in the market. This
index construction is more similar to the S&P 500 than that of SIXPRX. Im-
portant to note is that OMXSGI’s base date is 28 December 2007, which is after
the beginning of this study’s sample period. Thus, the sample period is shorter
when OMXSGI is used as a market proxy than when SIXPRX is used which
may create some dissonance in the validity of the results.

As a proxy for the risk-free rate, the STIBOR Interbank Rate is used with
data gathered from Sveriges Riksbank. When analysing persistence in quar-
terly fund performance, the 3M STIBOR rate at the time of the quarter’s start
is used. Similarly, the 6M STIBOR is compounded to yield an annual rate for
each time period when analysing persistence on an annual basis, as well as a
biannual risk-free rate when conducting the biannual analysis. The STIBOR
rate is the calculated arithmetic mean of the rates major Swedish banks offer
each other when borrowing and lending in SEK. This proxy calculation follows
the method used by Hendricks, Patel, and Zeckhauser (1993).

3.5 Beta
The funds’ Beta values are fixed 3-year Betas, calculated through a regression
analysis of the fund returns and market returns. The Beta values are provided
directly by Morningstar. Ideally, Betas would be calculated on a rolling basis for
each quarter. However, fixed Betas are used for simplicity as in Hendricks, Patel,
and Zeckhauser (1993). The Betas are calculated using OMXSGI as a market
proxy. Ideally, the Beta values used in this analysis when SIXPRX is used as
a market proxy should be based on SIXPRX as well. However, Morningstar
Direct did not provide SIXPRX as an option for the Beta calculation.

3.6 Quarterly, Annual and Biannual Return
The funds’ quarterly returns, extracted from Morningstar Direct, are the quar-
terly capital appreciation, including dividends. The returns are adjusted for
administrative, management, and 12b-1 fees, which are deducted to attain the
quarterly return. Sales charges and redemption fees are not accounted for.
Quarterly returns are compounded to calculate annual and biannual returns.

                                  8
3.7 Dependent Variables
Summary statistics of the independent and dependent variables are presented in
Table 2 in the Appendix. This section aims to clarify the naming and disposition
of each dependent variable.

3.7.1 Portfolios (Top, Middle, Bottom)
In the final regression, the dependent variables are the returns of the three port-
folios during the given evaluation period on a rolling basis every quarter. The
portfolio creation and portfolio return definition is presented in 4.4. Top port-
folio variables will contain Top, middle portfolio variables will contain Middle,
and Bottom portfolio variables will contain Bottom.

Note that N is the number of funds used to constitute the respective fund
portfolio each quarter, and n is the number of quarters that the regression is
made on (the number of portfolio returns that are evaluated against market
returns).

3.7.2 Evaluation period (Q, Y, 2Y)
Each portfolio also has an assigned evaluation and holding period as defined in
3.3. Q stands for Quarter, Y stands for 1 Year and 2Y stands for 2 Years. The
sampling is conducted on a rolling basis each quarter for all periods.

3.7.3 Market Proxy (SIXPRX, OMX)
The portfolio returns based on SIXPRX as market proxy will simply be labelled
TopQ, MiddleY etc. The portfolio returns based on OMXSGI as a market proxy
will be labelled TopQOMX, MiddleYOMX etc.

3.7.4 Fund characteristic (ESG, Small Cap)
When conducting the analysis with a fund universe limited to those defined as in
3.1.1 and 3.1.2, the following notations are added to portfolio type as described
in 3.7.1:

- Small (Small cap funds only)
- NonSmall (Small cap funds excluded)
- ESG (ESG funds only)
- NonESG (ESG funds excluded)

When conducting the simple performance analysis as defined in 4.6, ESGY,
NonESGY, SmallY, NonSmallY are used as variable names.

                                  9
3.8 Independent Variables
Summary statistics of the independent and dependent variables are presented in
Table 2 in the Appendix. This section aims to clarify the naming and disposition
of each independent variable.

3.8.1 Market Proxy (SIXPRX, OMX)
Market is the returns of the market proxy during the relevant holding period.
When using the SIXPRX index as a market proxy, the independent variable is
simply called MarketQ, MarketY, Market2Y. When OMXSGI is used as a mar-
ket proxy, the independent variable is labeled MarketQOMX, MarketYOMX,
Market2YOMX depending on the evaluation period.

4 Methodology

This section highlights the economic and statistical methods used to conduct
the mutual fund performance analysis and obtain the final results. The section
is divided into mathematical background on regression analysis to clarify the
main statistical method of the paper, and subsequently the specific regression
methods used to analyse the mutual fund performance and persistence.

Sections 4.1 to 4.4 are based on Montgomery, Peck, Vining and Geoffrey (2013).

4.1 Mathematical Background
Regression analysis is a widely applied method to examine the relationship of a
set of independent variables and a dependent response variable. This analysis
is based on a linear regression model, described by

                   yi = β0 + x1,iβ1 + ... + xn,iβn + i

where y is the response variable, βj are the regression coefficients, xi are the
observed values and i is the error term. The model can be expressed in vector
notation as
                        y = Xβ + 
where
                                        
             y1         1 x11 x12 · · · x1p        β0        1
          y2     1 x21 x22 · · · x2p    β1     2
                                        
      y =  .  X = .   .   .             β =  .  ;  =  . 
             ..        .. ..  . .                 ..        .. 
            yn        1 xn1 xn2 · · · xnp       βn        n

The ordinary least squares method (OLS) is used to fit the model on a data
set with n observations of the dependent variable and p independent variables.

                                  10
This is equal to finding the parameter β which minimises the squared sum of the
residuals, ei. These residuals are the vertical distances from the data points y
and the model’s predicted values ˆy, or the regression line. Thus, the parameter
βˆ that minimises the squared sum is calculated by

                             ˆ                        ′
                   β = arg min(y − Xβ) (y − Xβ)
                               β
where βˆ is the estimate of the true regression coefficient β.
                   yˆ = βˆ0 + βˆ1x1 + βˆ2x2 + ... + βˆpxp

4.2 Diagnostics and Handling of Outliers, Leverage and
     Influential Observations
A situation where a few extreme points excessively influence the fit is undesir-
able as the model is supposed to represent all observations. These abnormal
observations shall thus be studied in detail and handled if necessary.

An observation with an abnormal x-value but a y-value in close proximity of
the model regression line is called a leverage point. Such an observation will
not affect the fit of the regression but the model summary statistics such as the
  2
R as well as the standards errors of the coefficients. However, an observation
with an unusual y-value will skew the regression line in its direction. This is
called an influence point. An influence point’s leverage can be determined form
                               ′    −1   ′
the hat matrix, H = X(X X)  X . The elements hij can be interpreted as the
leverage exerted by the ith observation yi on the jth fitted value ˆyj . The greater
the distance from the observation to the centroid, the greater the leverage that
point has. If the hat diagonal exceeds 2p/n, the point is remote enough to be
considered a leverage point, given that 2p/n > |1|. A widely used method for
measuring said influence and the fit of the model is Cook’s distance, described
in 4.2.1.

4.2.1 Cook’s Distance
American statistician R. Dennis Cook suggested a way of dealing with an ob-
servation’s influence by a measure between the fitted coefficients βˆ and fitted
coefficients with the ith observation deleted, βˆ(i). This measure can be calcu-
lated by
                                   2              2
                                 ri V ar(ˆyi)    ri   hii
                  Di =         =
                             p V ar(ei)    p 1 − hii
Generally, the threshold for an observation to be considered influential is D(i) >
4/n.

4.3 Treatment of Influential Observations
The above-described detection of influence points is an important part of di-
agnosing the reliability of the model. The treatment of such influence points

                                  11
is harder and may be considered more of an art than a science. Generally, if
an error was made while collecting the data and the influence point thus is not
part of the intended population sample, then the point can be discarded com-
pletely. However, if the observation is deemed correct in its existence, then a
removal cannot be justified, and it may be left in the model albeit having a
large influence.

4.4 Persistence and Portfolio Creation
To measure fund performance persistence, the Capital Asset Pricing Model, as
described in Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965), was used as follows:

                     ERij1 = αij + βj ExMi + eij

In the model, ERij corresponds to the excess return for the specific fund j and
evaluation period i. αij , also known as Jensen’s alpha, is the risk-adjusted re-
turn of the fund j during evaluation period i. βj is the measure of volatility or
systematic risk of a specific fund j towards the market as a whole, ExMi is the
market excess return for the evaluation period i and eij is the error term.
The regression is conducted in accordance with Hendricks, Patel, and Zeck-
hauser (1993). Each fund j’s alpha is recorded for every relevant evaluation
period i (quarterly, annually, and biannually). For each evaluation period, each
fund’s deviation from the arithmetic mean of all fund’s alpha values is also
recorded. Based on this data, three portfolios of funds are created where each
fund’s portfolio weight is linearly corresponding to its alpha deviation during
the time frame. The top portfolio for a specific evaluation period contains all
funds with an alpha deviation greater than 0.5 standard deviations from the
mean alpha. The bottom portfolio contains all funds with an alpha deviation
less than -0.5 standard deviations from the mean alpha, and the middle portfolio
contains all funds in between.
The portfolios of top, middle, and bottom performers with corresponding fund
weights relative to alpha deviation is then assessed during the next period (the
holding period) with performance measured against market excess returns dur-
ing the same period. When regressing portfolio returns for each time period
subsequent to the period on which the weights are based against market excess
returns, a positive intercept should indicate positive performance persistence
and a negative intercept negative performance persistence. If said intercept
has a p-value below 0.01, the observation is assumed to be of strong statistical
significance. A p-value below 0.05 is considered to be of moderate statistical
significance, whereas a p-value above 0.10 is assumed to be of no evidence.

Below are mathematical notations for the returns of each portfolio.
                                            
             n           α             if α            > 0.5σ
                              deviation,j,i−1    deviation,j,i−1       i−1
      ∑                       
                      0 otherwise              
T opReturni =    ERj,i ∗                                    
              ∑n                        
                        α            if α           > 0.5σ   
                                deviation,j,i−1    deviation,j,i−1       i−1
             j=1            0 otherwise
                              j=1

                                  12
                                                      
                n           |α           | if − 0.5σ   ≤ α            ≤ 0.5σ
                                  deviation,j,i−1           i−1    deviation,j,i−1       i−1
       ∑                             
                        0 otherwise                       
M iddleReturni =    ERj,i ∗                                               
               ∑n                               
                           |α           | if − 0.5σ   ≤ α           ≤ 0.5σ   
                                    deviation,j,i−1           i−1    deviation,j,i−1       i−1
                j=1            0 otherwise
                                  j=1

                                                 
                 n           |α           | if α            < −0.5σ
                                   deviation,j,i−1      deviation,j,i−1        i−1
       ∑                        
                        0 otherwise               
BottomReturni =    ERj,i ∗                                      
                ∑n                         
                            |α           | if α           < −0.5σ   
                                    deviation,j,i−1      deviation,j,i−1        i−1
                j=1            0 otherwise
                                  j=1

, where                       ∑
                                       n
                                           j=1 αij
                              αi =
                                    n

                           αdeviation,ij = αij − αi

                σi = Standard Deviation for αdeviation,ij during time i

4.5 Persistence by Fund Characteristic
Persistence by fund characteristic is analysed by the method presented in 4.4,
but with the fund sample size constricted to the characteristic analysed, i.e.
ESG funds, non-ESG funds, small cap funds, and non-small cap funds.

4.6 Performance by Fund Characteristic
When evaluating if ESG funds have outperformed non-ESG funds and if small
cap funds have outperformed non-small cap funds (excluding persistence), re-
gressions were made on sub-samples of the dataset corresponding to the relevant
aspect of the funds. When examining if ESG funds have outperformed funds
without an ESG classification, a simple regression was made on the average re-
turn for the sample set of ESG funds against the average return of the sample
set of non-ESG funds for each time period. Similarly, a regression on the sample
set of small cap funds’ average returns was made on the average returns of the
sample set of non-small cap funds for each time period. If a positive intercept
was achieved with statistical significance, over-performance by the subsets is
assumed to have existed within the data set.

4.7 Biases
4.7.1 Survivorship bias
The majority of the funds that provide the data, exported from Morningstar,
are still active, suggesting a survivorship bias within the dataset. As non-active
funds are largely excluded, returns may be skewed upwards as low-performing

                                  13
funds are liquidated to a higher degree, creating a reversal effect that may dom-
inate the persistence effect as suggested by Brown, Goetzmann, and Ibbotson
(1992). Survivorship bias is, in this sense, a selection bias, leading to a fund sam-
ple that is not ideally randomised. Carpenter and Lynch (1999) elaborated more
on this subject and found that a systematic disappearance of poor performers
did affect the measure of performance persistence, both when true persistence
exists and when it does not. Furthermore, the mere existence of attrition in
poor performers alters the sample regardless of survivorship bias.

As the dataset provided by Morningstar did not include more closed funds
that operated during the relevant time frame and finding such data that also
corresponded with the measurement methodology of Morningstar was a fairly
complex process, the decision was made to stick with the current data and
accept the chance of an overstated bias.

4.7.2 Sample Size Bias
As mentioned in 4.7.1, the sample of funds is constricted mostly to funds ac-
tively managed by 2020 year-end. However, several funds have been established
during the sample period and included within the sample period. Thus, the
sample size of funds differs each quarter, with the intervals presented below.

                           2005-01-01 2020-12-31
 ESG Funds 21 35
 Small Cap Funds 14 34
 Non-ESG Funds 33 104
 Non-Small Cap Funds 40 105
 Total Funds 54 139

By studying recent research, an estimate of the “true” effect size of the popula-
tion can be extracted, and subsequently a required sample size to capture said
effect size.

Silva and Cortez (2016) studied the performance of green funds domiciled in
the US and Europe, respectively. “Green” funds were those following a general
environmental theme, according to the yoursri.com website. Since this study is
conducted on funds investing in Swedish equities, the results of European funds
in Silva and Cortez (2016) were used as a proxy for effect size. The article sug-
gests an annualised effect size of -4.615% in performance of sustainable funds
compared to an all-world index. It is important to note here that although
the funds are European domiciled, they are not domiciled into the regions in
which their equity investments are registered. This stands in contrast to this
study, only covering funds taking positions in Swedish equities. The annualised
standard deviation of the funds’ performance is 18%.

                                  14
Fama and French (2012) examined, amongst other variables, the size premium
of stocks in North America, Europe, Japan and the Asia Pacific. The paper
presented different conclusions than Banz (1981) and Fama and French (1993)
and found no evidence of stocks with lower market capitalisation having higher
average returns than larger counterparts. Fama and French found an annualised
effect size of 1.21% for global stocks and -0.72% for European stocks when com-
paring returns of the bottom 10% in market capitalisation against top the 90% in
market capitalisation. The annualised standard deviation was 8.28% and 7.59%,
respectively. Important to note is that Fama and French’s study is conducted
on small cap versus large cap stocks, and not funds investing in said equities.
This will significantly increase the number of observations in comparison to this
paper; however, it omits the presence of potential stock-picking skills within
small cap or large cap funds, and the effect of diversification benefits within
especially small cap funds.

With the implied population effect size and standard deviation, the sample size
required to capture said effect size can be calculated according to the following
formula and table presented in Kadam Bhalerao (2010).

                                                   2  2
                           2(Zα + Z1−β ) σ
                        n =        2
                                        δ

  α-error  5%  1%  0.1%  Power  80%  85%  90%  95%
  2-sided  1.96  2.5758  3.2905  Value  0.8416  1.0364  1.2816  1.6449
  1-sided  1.65  2.33

Setting the power of the study to 80%, the effect as two-sided and the accepted
α – error as 0.05, the following values are yielded.

                                                                         Sus. – non Sus.
                    Small – Large cap (EUR) Small – Large cap (Global)
                                                                  (EUR)
  Implied Effect size δ -0.72%   1.21%   -4.615%
 Sd  8.28%   7.59%   18%
  Zα  1.96   1.96   1.96
 Z1−β  0.8416   0.8416   0.8416
  Sample Size  2089   621   247

The required sample size to capture the implied effect size given the studied
literature exceeds the total number of funds available according to the crite-
ria presented in 3.1, and far exceeds the number of small cap and ESG funds.
Especially large is the sample size required for the small cap fund extension
with 2089 observation when referring to European stocks in Fama and French
(2012). This is due to the almost non-existing size premium presented in the
study, which suggests a much larger sample in order to detect such a small
effect size. When referring to the Global set of stocks, the required sample is
621 observations as the implied effect size is larger. However, it far exceeds
the available observations for this paper. Again, important to note is that the
paper by Fama and French (2012) was conducted on individual stock returns

                                  15
and not fund returns with a diversified set of equity positions. The “true” ef-
fect size for fund returns may realistically differ from said value implied from
the study conducted on stock returns which alters the ideal sample size. As
for ESG funds, the implied true effect size through Silva and Cortez (2016) is
larger which limits the required sample size to 247. This is also much larger
than the available fund sample presented above. Important to note is that when
the persistence analysis is conducted and the portfolio distinction made in line
with 4.4, but with the fund universe constricted to ESG, non-ESG, small cap or
non-small cap funds as presented in 5.4 and 5.5, the sample size is even smaller
for each portfolio at any given time and the results’ robustness may suffer.

In order to analyse the implied effect size of the studied papers, it is impor-
tant to discuss the sample size used in the respective study. Silva and Cortez
(2016) used a sample of 95 “green” funds. Although larger than the sample
available in this study, it is less than the implied required sample size to cap-
ture the effect size with a given power. This lesser sample size may inflate the
implied effect size of -4.615%. In Fama and French (2012), the sample size of
stocks was not reported in numbers, but included all publicly traded stocks in
Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy,
the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United
Kingdom during a period of 245 months. This, along with a low standard devi-
ation, witnesses a large sample size. Furthermore, since the implied effect size
is very low, it is not deemed inflated by a lack of sample size. The potential
issue here is instead the possibility of another true effect size for small cap funds
versus general funds relative to small cap stocks versus non-small cap stocks.

Hendricks, Patel and Zeckhauser’s (1993) findings for positive performance per-
sistence among previous winners on a yearly basis (2.6%) can be seen as an
implied effect size for the persistence analysis. The effect size for positive per-
sistence on a yearly basis is chosen due to it’s statistical significance in said study
as well as in this study. However, Hendricks, Patel and Zeckhauser (1993) do
not present the standard deviation in persistence excess returns relative to the
market. If using this study’s standard deviation of 0.08 in said returns for the
Top portfolio on a yearly basis as defined in 4.4, the required sample size for a
2-sided effect with 80% power and the accepted α-error as 0.05 is 152. This is
above this study’s sample period of 56-61 quarters depending on the analysis’
evaluation and holding period. While the required sample size calculation is
inhibited by the use of two different data sets in effect size and standard de-
viation, it provides a hint of small sample bias in the measurement period as well.

Furthermore, there may be some publishing bias in the studies used, as studies
with no results are typically not published.

With potential biases in the implied effect sizes in mind, the sample size of
funds according to the criteria outlined in 3.1 and the sample period as defined
in 3.2 are both still low. This may lead to several biases in the statistical in-

                                  16
ference of this study. Firstly, a small sample size decreases the test’s statistical
power; thus, the probability of finding an effect when there is one to be found.
A small sample size may therefore skew the results by increasing the chance of
a type II error. Since the sample size is directly proportional to the Z-score and
inversely to the margin of error, a reduced sample size leads to less conclusive
results in general as the effect size is likely inflated (Button, Ioannidis, Mokrysz,
et al. 2013).

5 Results

In this section, the primary findings of the study are presented. Furthermore,
the robustness of the results is analysed through a gradual expansion of the
decision rules for the portfolio creations, as well as an analysis of influential
outliers and their significance to the regression output.

5.1 Mutual Fund Performance and Persistence
This section presents the results of the performance persistence analysis as de-
fined in 4.4, divided into the different evaluation and holding periods.

5.1.1 Quarterly Performance Persistence
Table 3 shows the regression for quarterly returns for the three different portfo-
lios using SIXPRX as a proxy for the market index. While all three portfolios
have a positive intercept, none is statistically significant. The market coeffi-
cients are all close to unity with p-values below the 0.01 threshold. This implies
that all fund portfolios follow the market closely during the quarterly time pe-
riods. The greater market coefficient for the top and bottom portfolios can be
interpreted as an inclination towards persistence in volatility. All quarterly re-
                2
gressions have R values above 94.1 per cent which implies a high explanatory
value of the variation of the dependent variable (portfolio excess returns) by the
independent variable (market excess returns).

Table 4 presents the results for quarterly persistence using OMXSGI as a mar-
ket proxy. In line with the results using the SIXPRX proxy, no performance
persistence exists during the quarterly measurement period. Although statis-
tically insignificant, all portfolios show a positive and larger intercept than in
table 3, implying a larger tendency towards persistence.

The lack of quarterly performance persistence might be explained by how the
returns of the funds’ equity positions may be heavily influenced by certain in-
dividual events, thus overshadowing the potential stock-picking skills of funds
managers. Nevertheless, the results fall somewhat in line with the findings of
Hendricks, Patel and Zeckhauser (1993), who find no statistically significant
evidence for performance persistence in this setting.

                                  17
5.1.2 Annual Performance Persistence
Table 5 with the results from the annual performance regression with SIXPRX
as market index paints a different picture. The portfolio of top-performing funds
consistently outperforms the market during subsequent years, with a positive
intercept of 0.045 with a p-value below 0.01. For the middle portfolio, the results
imply negative performance persistence with a statistically significant intercept
of -0.024 at the 1% level. The bottom portfolio is persistently underperforming
on an annual basis with a regression intercept of -0.061 statistically significant
                                                               2
at the 1% level. All three regressions on an annual basis have R values above
90 per cent, and the independent market variable can thus be said to have a
high explanatory value of the dependent portfolio returns.

Table 6 presents the results when using OMXSGI as the market proxy, which
are reasonably similar to those using SIXPRX. The top portfolio has a positive
intercept of 0.048 with a p-value < 0.01, suggesting performance persistence on
a yearly basis. The middle and bottom portfolio have statistically significant
negative intercepts of -0.024 and -0.061, respectively, with p-values below 0.01.
This implies that the middle and bottom portfolio persistently underperform
the market index with a 1-year evaluation and holding period. Compared to
the SIXPRX-based persistence evaluation, the regression intercept for the top
portfolio is farther from 0, suggesting a more extensive performance persistence
with OMXSGI used as a proxy for the market. Contrary to this, the middle
and bottom portfolio have intercepts closer to 0 with OMXSGI, hence a more
minor negative performance persistence than with SIXPRX.

These findings correspond with Hendricks, Patel and Zeckhauser (1993), Brown
and Goetzmann (1995) and Carhart (1997), who find that a top-fund strategy
with an annual evaluation as well as holding period generates significant excess
returns. The negative performance persistence among bottom-performing funds
also falls in line with Hendricks, Patel, and Zeckhauser (1993), who find that
poorly performing funds in the recent year continue to underperform in the near
term.

5.1.3 Biannual Performance Persistence
Table 7 shows the results with a biannual evaluation and holding period using
SIXPRX as the market proxy. The results suggest that performance persistence
is still existing, however, with less significance and only for top and bottom port-
folios. The top portfolio has a positive intercept of 0.014 with a p-value < 0.05.
The bottom portfolio has an intercept of -0.022 with a p-value < 0.1. The
middle portfolio intercept does not differ significantly from zero. This implies
some performance and underperformance persistence among the top and bot-
tom funds over 2 years, but smaller and weaker than with an annual evaluation
and holding period.

                                  18
Table 8 stands in contrast to the findings in table 7. With OMXSGI as the
market proxy, no statistically significant performance persistence exists in the
top-performing fund. However, significant underperformance persistence seems
to be prevalent in the middle portfolio, as suggested by the negative intercept of
-0.079 with a p-value < 0.01. The bottom portfolio has an even lesser intercept
of -0.144 with a p-value < 0.01. This implies that underperformance persis-
tence exists in the middle and bottom portfolios on a 2-year basis and that
these portfolios have a much higher tendency to continuously underperform
than when using SIXPRX as market proxy. Furthermore, the top portfolio in
table 8 also deviates from the findings in table 7, as no statistically significant
performance persistence seems to exist.

These discrepancies could simply be due to a random occurrence, but also the
effect of a plausible explanation rooted in the differences in the indices’ composi-
tions. Since the SIXPRX index enforces limitations in exposure levels to specific
stocks, the persistence results may differ because certain individual stocks have
driven the returns of the OMXSGI during the evaluation and holding periods in
the 2-year study. Meanwhile, the sample funds may have failed to consistently
overperform the market proxy apart from when the exposure to said stocks is
limited in the index as is the case with SIXPRX.

The results regarding positive performance persistence fall somewhat in line
with Hendricks, Patel and Zeckhauser (1993), who find persistence with a bian-
nual evaluation and holding period, albeit on a lesser significance level than on
an annual basis. Their conclusion is that persistence is gradually fading over
time after one year. As Hendricks, Patel and Zeckhauser (1993) omit the study
of negative performance persistence with a biannual evaluation and holding pe-
riod, this study’s results and especially the dissonance between the portfolios’
intercepts with two different market proxies provides an interesting observation.
The inference that positive persistence gradually fades over time might not be
applicable for negative persistence; the OMXSGI results suggest an accelerated
underperformance as the evaluation and holding periods are extended.

5.2 Robustness
This section aims to study if the results are purely mechanical or if there is ro-
bustness in the findings. The section presents an analysis of randomly created
portfolios and a deep dive into the annual performance persistence results by
gradually expanding the portfolio-creating decision rule in six phases. The deci-
sion rule is expanded by extending the alpha deviation intervals that determine
the constituents of each portfolio.

5.2.1 Randomised Portfolios
Tables 9-11 show the results when the three portfolios were randomly created
and analysed for performance persistence on a quarterly, annual and biannual

                                  19
basis. The randomised portfolio returns have no statistically significant alpha
for any of the periods, apart from the middle portfolio during the biannual
analysis, which most likely is random rather than a mechanical effect in the
results. This suggests some robustness in the results.

5.2.2 Phase 1 Placebo Results
Table 12 presents the findings with the extended decision rules defined in the
formulas below. Similar to the results with our initial decision rule shown in
table 5 and 6, all three portfolios show statistically significant intercepts at the
0.01 level, suggesting performance persistence exists on an annual basis. Note-
worthy is that all portfolio intercepts are closer to 0 than in table 5 and 6,
implying a decreasing persistence.

Portfolio return definition with phase 1 decision rules applied:

                                        
             n          α            if α           > 0
                              deviation,j,i−1    deviation,j,i−1
      ∑                    
                      0 otherwise          
T opReturni =    ERj,i ∗                                
              ∑n                    
                      α           if α          > 0 
                               deviation,j,i−1    deviation,j,i−1
             j=1            0 otherwise
                              j=1

                                                      
                n           |α           | if − 0.5σ   ≤ α            ≤ 0.5σ
                                  deviation,j,i−1           i−1    deviation,j,i−1       i−1
       ∑                             
                        0 otherwise                       
M iddleReturni =    ERj,i ∗                                               
               ∑n                               
                           |α           | if − 0.5σ   ≤ α           ≤ 0.5σ   
                                    deviation,j,i−1           i−1    deviation,j,i−1       i−1
                j=1            0 otherwise
                                  j=1

                                            
                 n           |α           | if α            < 0
                                  deviation,j,i−1      deviation,j,i−1
       ∑                     
                        0 otherwise          
BottomReturni =    ERj,i ∗                                 
                ∑n                     
                           |α           | if α           < 0 
                                    deviation,j,i−1      deviation,j,i−1
                j=1            0 otherwise
                                  j=1

5.2.3 Phase 2 Placebo Results
Table 13 shows the findings with the extended decision rules presented below.
In all three portfolios, statistically significant intercepts exist with p-values be-
low 0.01, indicating that performance persistence still exists with this decision
rule. The top and bottom regression intercepts are closer to 0 than in table 12,
showing a diminishing persistence.

Portfolio return definition with phase 2 decision rules applied:

                                             
             n           α             if α           > −0.5σ
                              deviation,j,i−1    deviation,j,i−1        i−1
      ∑                        
                      0 otherwise               
T opReturni =    ERj,i ∗                                      
              ∑n                        
                       α            if α           > −0.5σ   
                                deviation,j,i−1    deviation,j,i−1        i−1
             j=1            0 otherwise
                              j=1

                                  20
                                                  
                n           |α           | if σ   ≤ α           ≤ σ
                                  deviation,j,i−1      i−1    deviation,j,i−1    i−1
       ∑                         
                        0 otherwise                 
M iddleReturni =    ERj,i ∗                                         
               ∑n                          
                         |α          | if σ   ≤ α           ≤ σ   
                                    deviation,j,i−1      i−1    deviation,j,i−1    i−1
                j=1            0 otherwise
                                  j=1

                                                
                 n            |α            | if α            < 0.5σ
                                   deviation,j,i−1      deviation,j,i−1       i−1
       ∑                       
                        0 otherwise              
BottomReturni =    ERj,i ∗                                     
                ∑n                        
                            |α           | if α            < 0.5σ   
                                    deviation,j,i−1      deviation,j,i−1       i−1
                j=1            0 otherwise
                                  j=1

5.2.4 Phase 3 Placebo Results
Table 14 presents the findings of the portfolios with the expanded decision rules
presented below. The top portfolio no longer shows a statistically significant
intercept, implying that the positive performance persistence has diminished.
However, the middle and bottom portfolio continue to show underperformance
persistence as indicated by the negative intercepts at the 0.01 level.

Portfolio return definition with phase 3 decision rules applied:

                                           
            n          α            if α           > −σ
                              deviation,j,i−1    deviation,j,i−1      i−1
      ∑                      
                      0 otherwise             
T opReturni =    ERj,i ∗                                    
              ∑n                       
                      α           if α          > −σ   
                                deviation,j,i−1    deviation,j,i−1      i−1
             j=1            0 otherwise
                              j=1

                                                      
                n           |α           | if − 1.5σ   ≤ α            ≤ 1.5σ
                                  deviation,j,i−1           i−1    deviation,j,i−1       i−1
       ∑                             
                        0 otherwise                       
M iddleReturni =    ERj,i ∗                                               
               ∑n                               
                           |α           | if − 1.5σ   ≤ α           ≤ 1.5σ   
                                    deviation,j,i−1           i−1    deviation,j,i−1       i−1
                j=1            0 otherwise
                                  j=1

                                              
                  n            |α            | if α             < σ
                                   deviation,j,i−1      deviation,j,i−1    i−1
       ∑                      
                        0 otherwise            
BottomReturni =    ERj,i ∗                                   
                ∑n                       
                            |α           | if α           < σ   
                                    deviation,j,i−1      deviation,j,i−1    i−1
                j=1            0 otherwise
                                  j=1

                                  21
5.2.5 Phase 4 Placebo Results
Table 15 presents the findings with further extensions to the decision rule, as
presented below. The results further imply a diminishing persistence. As in
phase 3, the top portfolio has no statistically significant intercept, suggesting
no performance persistence exists. The middle and bottom portfolios deliver
negative performance persistence below the 0.01 threshold with intercepts at
-0.019 and -0.032. Compared to phase 3, the intercepts continue to progress
closer to 0, further signalling a decreasing trend of persistence.

Portfolio return definition with phase 4 decision rules applied:

                                             
             n           α             if α           > −1.5σ
                              deviation,j,i−1    deviation,j,i−1        i−1
      ∑                        
                      0 otherwise               
T opReturni =    ERj,i ∗                                      
              ∑n                        
                       α            if α           > −1.5σ   
                                deviation,j,i−1    deviation,j,i−1        i−1
             j=1            0 otherwise
                              j=1

                                                    
                n           |α           | if − 2σ   ≤ α           ≤ 2σ
                                  deviation,j,i−1         i−1    deviation,j,i−1     i−1
       ∑                           
                        0 otherwise                     
M iddleReturni =    ERj,i ∗                                            
               ∑n                             
                         |α          | if − 2σ   ≤ α           ≤ 2σ   
                                    deviation,j,i−1         i−1    deviation,j,i−1     i−1
                j=1            0 otherwise
                                  j=1

                                                
                 n            |α            | if α            < 1.5σ
                                   deviation,j,i−1      deviation,j,i−1       i−1
       ∑                       
                        0 otherwise              
BottomReturni =    ERj,i ∗                                     
                ∑n                        
                            |α           | if α            < 1.5σ   
                                    deviation,j,i−1      deviation,j,i−1       i−1
                j=1            0 otherwise
                                  j=1

5.2.6 Phase 5 Placebo Results
Table 16 presents the findings with further extensions to the decision rule, as
presented below. The results indicate that the trend of diminishing performance
persistence continues as the decision rule is expanded, as all intercepts reverse
closer to 0, albeit much slower for the bottom portfolio. The top portfolio has a
statistically insignificant negative intercept of 0.006. The middle portfolio con-
tinues to deliver underperformance persistence at the 0.1 level, with an intercept
of -0.013. The bottom portfolio has an intercept of -0.018 with a p-value < 0.01.

Portfolio return definition with phase 5 decision rules applied:

                                            
            n          α            if α           > −2σ
                              deviation,j,i−1    deviation,j,i−1       i−1
      ∑                       
                      0 otherwise              
T opReturni =    ERj,i ∗                                    
              ∑n                       
                      α           if α          > −2σ   
                                deviation,j,i−1    deviation,j,i−1       i−1
             j=1            0 otherwise
                              j=1

                                  22
                                                      
                n           |α           | if − 2.5σ   ≤ α            ≤ 2.5σ
                                  deviation,j,i−1           i−1    deviation,j,i−1       i−1
       ∑                             
                        0 otherwise                       
M iddleReturni =    ERj,i ∗                                               
               ∑n                               
                           |α           | if − 2.5σ   ≤ α           ≤ 2.5σ   
                                    deviation,j,i−1           i−1    deviation,j,i−1       i−1
                j=1            0 otherwise
                                  j=1

                                               
                 n           |α           | if α            < 2σ
                                   deviation,j,i−1      deviation,j,i−1     i−1
       ∑                       
                        0 otherwise             
BottomReturni =    ERj,i ∗                                    
                ∑n                       
                           |α           | if α           < 2σ   
                                    deviation,j,i−1      deviation,j,i−1     i−1
                j=1            0 otherwise
                                  j=1

5.2.7 Phase 6 Placebo Results
Table 17 shows the findings where all three portfolios consist of all funds. With
no statistical significance, all portfolios have a negative intercept of -0.009. This
implies no performance persistence is found when all funds are included in the
portfolios.

5.2.8 Robustness summary
When deep-diving into the robustness of the 1-year analysis to see when the
performance persistence collapses, some interesting findings are made. The re-
sults collapse relatively late in both positive and negative persistence. The top
portfolio’s positive performance persistence disappears in phase 3, when the
decision rule for constituting the top portfolio is relaxed from containing all
funds with alpha deviations larger than -0.5σ during the preceding year, to that
of -σ. This suggests that the negative persistence in the funds between those
two thresholds is enough to erase the positive persistence in some of the funds
constituting the previous top portfolios in phases 0 - 2. The negative perfor-
mance persistence is prevalent much longer, with the bottom portfolio showing
statistically significant underperformance in phase 5. This could partly be due
to the overall underperformance of the fund sample set, as shown in phase 6.
It could also be due to one or several outliers posting significant and consistent
underperforming returns, thus driving down the alpha even when the decision
rule is relaxed upward.

Overall, the results are not deemed mechanical in the sense that a randomised
portfolio composition or portfolios containing all funds show no significant per-
formance persistence. However, the results collapse quite late on both ends,
witnessing some potential outliers driving the results rather than the majority
of the sample.

                                  23
5.3 Influential Points
Figures 1-9 show the Cook’s distance for the respective regressions models ac-
cording to the description in 4.1. As can be seen, several influential points may
skew the model, most notably in BotQ and Bot2Y. However, after investigating
each influential observation, the conclusion is that these are normal outliers that
are measured correctly and should thus be included in the model.

5.4 Small Cap Funds
This section presents the results regarding small cap funds; the analysis on small
cap funds performance relative to non-small cap funds, as well as the persistence
study limited to small cap and non-small cap funds, respectively.

5.4.1 Small Cap Funds’ Performance Relative to Non-Small Funds
In line with the findings of Banz (1981) and Otten and Bams (2002), table 18
presents the results implying that small cap funds tend to outperform non-small
cap funds. The regression intercept of 0.043 at a p-value < 0.01 signals higher
performance of the small cap funds on an annual measurement basis. However,
this goes against the more recent study by Fama and French (2012), which finds
no size premium in European stocks.

5.4.2 Small Cap Funds’ Performance Persistence
Table 19 and 20 present the results for the annual performance persistence of
small cap and non-small cap mutual funds. The top portfolios have positive in-
tercepts for both groups, while the middle and bottom have negative intercepts,
all at the 1% level. Considering there are only minor differences in the intercepts
between the two groups and in the analysis of the whole sample presented in
table 5, the prevalence of annual persistence in small cap funds is not greater
than for non-small cap funds. Thus, both groups are equally likely to gener-
ate persistent excess return. However, as the fund sample size is significantly
smaller when only including small cap funds as described in 4.7.2, the results’
validity may suffer.

5.5 ESG Funds
This section presents the findings regarding ESG funds; the relative performance
analysis against non-ESG funds as well as the persistence study limited to ESG
and non-ESG funds, respectively.

5.5.1 ESG Funds’ Performance Relative to Non-ESG Funds
ESG funds’ performance relative to non-ESG funds is presented in table 21.
There is a small but statistically significant underperformance in relation to
funds not classified as ESG funds. The intercept is -0.010 and coefficient 0.991,

                                  24
both with p-values below 0.01. This suggests that ESG funds overall fail to
perform on par with non-ESG funds. However, they may perform slightly better
during bear markets. Important to note here is that fund fees might differ
significantly, and a negative intercept in the regression does not necessarily
mean underperformance of ESG themed positions. A valid hypothesis is that
theme funds focusing on ESG investing charge higher fees than non-ESG funds,
thus lowering returns after fees.

5.5.2 ESG Funds’ Performance Persistence
The annual performance persistence of ESG and non-ESG funds is presented in
table 22 and 23. For both groups, all three portfolios have statistically significant
intercepts with p-values below 0.01. In line with the persistence study on the
whole fund sample, the top portfolios show performance persistence while the
middle and bottom portfolios show underperformance persistence. Albeit a
slight difference, all portfolios’ intercepts are closer to 0 for ESG funds than
for the other group. This indicates that ESG funds have a smaller tendency
continuously to outperform or underperform the market than non-ESG funds
on a 1-year evaluation and holding period. However, the conclusion may be of
limited significance due to the small sample size of ESG-funds.

6 Conclusion

This paper presents an overview of the persistence in performance of Swedish
equity mutual funds. Analysing 137 mutual funds’ returns between 2005-2020,
we find evidence suggesting that previous “winners ” continue to deliver alpha
net of fees during subsequent periods. However, the results differ depending
on the measured evaluation and holding period. While no persistence is found
in funds’ quarterly performance depending on the returns during the previous
quarter, “hot hands ” as well as “icy hands ” are present on an annual basis. On
a biannual basis, the results are mixed depending on the market proxy used.
With an index adjusted for exposure limits present in mutual funds, perfor-
mance persistence is existent albeit less pronounced than on an annual basis,
while underperformance persistence also converges to the mean. When using
a common gross market index, the positive performance persistence has dimin-
ished completely, whereas “icy hands ” accelerates. These findings appear to be
quite robust to the randomised analysis and the gradual phase-out of the port-
folio decision rule, however less for underperformance persistence in the bottom
portfolio, which a few outliers may drive.

In an extension, the fund sample is split into ESG and non-ESG funds, as well
as small cap and non-small cap funds, to analyse if one characteristic had deliv-
ered greater return than the other during the sample period. Furthermore, the
persistence analysis is conducted on sub-samples containing only ESG- or small
cap-themed funds as well as their counterparts to analyse if previously suggested

                                  25
persistence is more pronounced in any of the fund sub-samples. The results sug-
gest that funds focusing on small capitalisation stocks outperformed other funds
during the sample period, and that ESG-themed funds were outperformed by
non-ESG themed funds. Furthermore, the persistence in all sub-samples is prac-
tically equal, suggesting that performance persistence is not dependent on small
cap or ESG categorisation.

This study presents a few novel findings. While many studies have analysed
performance persistence in mutual funds, few have specialised in the Swedish
market and included underperformance persistence as well and with the exten-
sion into ESG and small cap funds. The findings suggest that the results of
specifically Hendricks, Patel and Zeckhauser (1993) hold even for a more recent
sample period and set of Swedish mutual funds, with an investment strategy
picking a portfolio of last years “winners ” with weighting corresponding to alpha
deviation delivering significant returns above the market. Furthermore, a set
of small capitalisation funds may deliver greater performance to their investors
than common mutual funds at the cost of higher volatility, with the contrary
being true for ESG-themed funds.

In conclusion, our results suggest that some Swedish equity mutual fund man-
agers might experience “hot hands ”, most notably on an annual evaluation and
holding period, while others seem to underdeliver consistently. This effect ap-
pears unrelated to a fund thematisation towards small capitalisation stocks or
Environmental Social and Governance. However, it is unclear if this perfor-
mance persistence is due to managerial skill or another explanatory variable.
While performance persistence still seems to exist on a biannual evaluation
period basis, it gradually reverts to the mean, while underperformers seem to
continue their trajectory depending on the market proxy used. It is possible that
performance persistence finds a sweet spot on an annual measurement basis, as a
middle ground between the short-term quarterly period influenced by individual
events, and a more extended time period where performance eventually reverts
to the mean in line with the efficient market hypothesis. Previous literature,
most notably Carhart (1997), argues that fund persistence on an annual basis
is primarily due to stock momentum. While momentum on a stock basis may
be relevant, momentum in specific market sectors may be interesting to study
in extended research since many funds in the sample have some specialisation.

                                  26
7 References

7.1 Articles
Rolf W Banz. “The relationship between return and market value of common
   stocks”. In: Journal of financial economics 9.1 (1981), pp. 3–18.
Jonathan B Berk and Richard C Green. “Mutual fund flows and performance in
   rational markets”. In: Journal of political economy 112.6 (2004), pp. 1269–
   1295.
Stephen J Brown and William N Goetzmann. “Performance persistence”. In:
   The Journal of finance 50.2 (1995), pp. 679–698.
Stephen J Brown et al. “Survivorship bias in performance studies”. In: The
   Review of Financial Studies 5.4 (1992), pp. 553–580.
Katherine S Button et al. “Power failure: why small sample size undermines
   the reliability of neuroscience”. In: Nature reviews neuroscience 14.5 (2013),
   pp. 365–376.
Mark M Carhart. “On persistence in mutual fund performance”. In: The Journal
   of finance 52.1 (1997), pp. 57–82.
Jennifer N Carpenter and Anthony W Lynch. “Survivorship bias and attrition
   effects in measures of performance persistence”. In: Journal of financial eco-
   nomics 54.3 (1999), pp. 337–374.
Francisco Climent and Pilar Soriano. “Green and good? The investment perfor-
   mance of US environmental mutual funds”. In: Journal of Business Ethics
   103.2 (2011), pp. 275–287.
Magnus Dahlquist, Stefan Engstr¨om, and Paul S¨oderlind. “Performance and
   characteristics of Swedish mutual funds”. In: Journal of Financial and quan-
   titative Analysis (2000), pp. 409–423.
Edwin J Elton, Martin J Gruber, and Christopher R Blake. “The persistence
   of risk-adjusted mutual fund performance”. In: Journal of business (1996),
   pp. 133–157.
Edwin J Elton et al. “Efficiency with costly information: A reinterpretation of
   evidence from managed portfolios”. In: The review of financial studies 6.1
   (1993), pp. 1–22.
Fama Eugene and Kenneth French. “The cross-section of expected stock re-
   turns”. In: Journal of Finance 47.2 (1992), pp. 427–465.
Eugene F Fama and Kenneth R French. “Size, value, and momentum in in-
   ternational stock returns”. In: Journal of financial economics 105.3 (2012),
   pp. 457–472.
Eugene F Fama et al. “Differences in the risks and returns of NYSE and NASD
   stocks”. In: Financial Analysts Journal 49.1 (1993), pp. 37–41.

                                  27
Harry Flam and Roine Vestman. “Swedish equity mutual funds: Performance,
   persistence and presence of skill”. In: Swedish House of Finance Research
   Paper 14-04 (2014).
William N Goetzmann and Roger G Ibbotson. “Do winners repeat?” In: Journal
   of portfolio management 20.2 (1994), p. 9.
Larry Gorman. “Conditional performance, portfolio rebalancing, and momen-
   tum of small-cap mutual funds”. In: Review of Financial Economics 12.3
   (2003), pp. 287–300.
Alan Gregory and Julie Whittaker. “Performance and performance persistence
   of ‘ethical’unit trusts in the UK”. In: Journal of Business Finance & Ac-
   counting 34.7-8 (2007), pp. 1327–1344.
Mark Grinblatt and Sheridan Titman. “Mutual fund performance: An analysis
   of quarterly portfolio holdings”. In: Journal of business (1989), pp. 393–416.
Mark Grinblatt and Sheridan Titman. “The persistence of mutual fund perfor-
   mance”. In: The Journal of finance 47.5 (1992), pp. 1977–1984.
Martin J Gruber. “AAnother Puzzle: The Growth of Actively Managed Mutual
   Funds, Presidential address presented at the American Finance Association,
   San Francisco, January 1996”. In: Journal of Finance (1996).
Darryll Hendricks, Jayendu Patel, and Richard Zeckhauser. “Hot hands in mu-
   tual funds: Short-run persistence of relative performance, 1974–1988”. In:
   The Journal of finance 48.1 (1993), pp. 93–130.
Michael C Jensen. “The performance of mutual funds in the period 1945-1964”.
   In: The Journal of finance 23.2 (1968), pp. 389–416.
Prashant Kadam and Supriya Bhalerao. “Sample size calculation”. In: Interna-
   tional journal of Ayurveda research 1.1 (2010), p. 55.
E Lindeen and J Gros. “Does Size Affect Performance? Study of Size-Driven Ef-
   fects on Performance in Swedish Equity Mutual Funds”. PhD thesis. Masters
   Thesis in Finance Stockholm School of Economics, 2009.
John Lintner. “Security prices, risk, and maximal gains from diversification”.
   In: The journal of finance 20.4 (1965), pp. 587–615.
Burton G Malkiel. “Returns from investing in equity mutual funds 1971 to
   1991”. In: The Journal of finance 50.2 (1995), pp. 549–572.
Douglas C. Montgomery, Elizabeth A. Peck, and G. Geoffrey Vining. Introduc-
    tion to linear regression analysis. Wiley-Blackwell, 2013.
Roger Otten and Dennis Bams. “European mutual fund performance”. In: Eu-
   ropean financial management 8.1 (2002), pp. 75–101.
William F Sharpe. “Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under
   conditions of risk”. In: The journal of finance 19.3 (1964), pp. 425–442.
William F Sharpe. “Mutual fund performance”. In: The Journal of business
   39.1 (1966), pp. 119–138.

                                  28
Florinda Silva and Maria Ceu Cortez. “The performance of US and European
   green funds in different market conditions”. In: Journal of Cleaner Produc-
   tion 135 (2016), pp. 558–566.
Jack Treynor and Kay Mazuy. “Can mutual funds outguess the market”. In:
   Harvard business review 44.4 (1966), pp. 131–136.
Russ Wermers. “Mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition into
   stock-picking talent, style, transactions costs, and expenses”. In: The Journal
   of Finance 55.4 (2000), pp. 1655–1695.

7.2 Electronic
European Commission (2019). Regulation (EU) (2019/2088) of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 27 November 2019 on sustainability-related
disclosures in the financial services sector. Viewed 13 May 2021.
www.data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2019/2088/oj

Franklin Templeton (2021). The Impacts of Sustainable Finance Disclosure
Regulation on the European Distribution Landscape. Viewed 13 May 2021.
www.f ranklintempleton.lu/content − f tthinks/common/sf dr/sf dra0221.pdf

Jessop, S Abnett, K (2018), ’EU prepares to turn the screw on asset managers
over greenwashing’, Reuters, March 9, Viewed 14 May 2021. www.reuters.com/article/us−
europe − regulations − f inance − f ocus − idU SKBN 2B11LM

7.3 Data
Fondbolagens F¨orening, contact: www.fondbolagen.se

Morningstar Direct, contact: www.direct.morningstar.com

Nasdaq, contact: www.nasdaq.com

Sveriges Riksbank, contact: www.riksbank.se

                                  29
8 Appendix

     Figure 1: TopQ Figure 2: MidQ Figure 3: BotQ

     Figure 4: TopY Figure 5: MidY Figure 6: BotY

    Figure 7: Top2Y Figure 8: Mid2Y Figure 9: Bot2Y

                                  30
        Table 1: Summary Statistics, Swedish Equity Mutual Funds
Name Mean return (Quarterly, Net of fees) St. Dev. Beta Age (years)

Agenta Svenska Aktier 1.73% 9.65% 1.07 15
Aktie-Ansvar Sverige A 1.64% 9.53% 0.95 16
Aktiespararna Direktavkastning A 3.03% 8.24% 0.91 12
Aktiespararna Topp Sverige 1.35% 8.82% 1.01 16
AMF Aktiefond Sm˚abolag 3.27% 12.10% 1.03 16
AMF Aktiefond Sverige 1.80% 9.56% 1.03 16
Avanza Zero 1.23% 9.01% 1.01 15
C WorldWide Sweden 1A 2.75% 8.80% 1.07 11
C WorldWide Sweden 5B 3.50% 11.96% 1.07 4
C Worldwide Sweden Small Cap 1A 4.50% 10.58% 0.98 11
C Worldwide Sweden Small Cap 5B 5.34% 9.92% 0.98 9
Carnegie Micro Cap 6.85% 15.38% 1.11 4
Carnegie Sm˚abolagsfond A 4.54% 9.98% 1.01 9
Carnegie Spin-Off A 2.00% 9.74% 1.13 16
Carnegie Sverigefond A 1.94% 9.26% 1.09 16
Case All Star 2.71% 10.75% 0.93 3
Catella Sm˚abolag 2.22% 10.27% 1.06 16
Catella Sverige Aktiv H˚allbarhet 1.59% 10.03% 1.03 16
Catella Sverige H˚allbart Beta A 1.79% 9.44% 0.98 16
CF Tillv¨axt Sverige A 4.48% 10.17% 1.08 5
Cliens Sm˚abolag A 6.32% 11.65% 0.96 5
Cliens Sverige A 2.34% 9.83% 0.89 16
Cliens Sverige Fokus A 3.20% 8.31% 1.07 10
Didner & Gerge Aktiefond 2.22% 11.41% 1.16 16
Didner & Gerge Sm˚abolag 5.22% 11.37% 1.05 12
DIX Sweden Restr SEK W 2.71% 7.89% 0.97 6
Enter Select A 1.87% 11.41% 1.05 16
Enter Select Pro 2.45% 10.83% 1.05 16
Enter Sm˚abolagsfond A 6.91% 13.18% 1.04 6
Enter Sverige A 1.82% 10.48% 1.03 16
Enter Sverige Pro 2.16% 10.51% 1.03 16
Ethos Aktiefond 1.64% 9.98% 0.96 15
Evli Sweden Equity Index B 2.63% 7.25% 1.01 8
Evli Swedish Small Cap A 4.42% 12.51% 1.06 13
Folksam LO Sverige 1.82% 9.87% 1.08 16
Folksam LO V¨astfonden 1.99% 10.03% 1.08 16
Handelsbanken AstraZeneca Allemansfond 2.11% 8.52% 0.77 16
Handelsbanken Microcap Sverige (A4 SEK) 8.50% 14.08% 1.06 4
Handelsbanken Svenska Sm˚abolag (A1 SEK) 3.31% 11.81% 1.09 16
Handelsbanken Svenska Sm˚abolag (B1 SEK) 5.58% 10.24% 1.09 8
Handelsbanken Svenska Sm˚abolag A1 EUR 3.33% 11.94% 1.15 16
Handelsbanken Sverige 100 Ind Cri A1 SEK 3.16% 7.29% 1.02 10
Handelsbanken Sverige Index Crit A1 SEK 1.70% 10.28% 1.01 16
Handelsbanken Sverige Index Crit B1 SEK 3.32% 8.21% 1.07 8
Handelsbanken Sverige Selektiv (A1 EUR) 1.99% 10.53% 1.09 16
Handelsbanken Sverige Selektiv (A1) SEK 1.98% 10.42% 1.03 16
Handelsbanken Sverige Selektiv (A9 EUR) 4.38% 9.93% 1.10 7
Handelsbanken Sverige Selektiv (A9) SEK 4.34% 9.56% 1.03 7
Handelsbanken Sverige Selektiv (B1) SEK 1.98% 10.41% 1.03 16
Handelsbanken Sverige Selektiv B1 EUR 2.00% 10.53% 1.09 16
Handelsbanken Sverige Tema (A1 SEK) 2.20% 10.17% 1.00 16
Humle Sm˚abolagsfond 3.59% 13.60% 1.06 13
Indecap Guide Q30 A 4.56% 13.46% 0.99 3
Indecap Guide Sverige A 1.78% 9.90% 1.02 16
Lancelot Avalon A 5.77% 9.82% 0.80 8
Lannebo Sm˚abolag 3.11% 11.10% 1.10 16
Lannebo Sm˚abolag EUR 5.14% 12.56% 1.14 5
Lannebo Sm˚abolag Select 2.90% 10.29% 1.02 16
Lannebo Sverige 1.74% 9.88% 1.13 16
Lannebo Sverige H˚allbar A SEK 2.74% 9.17% 0.99 10
Lannebo Sverige Plus 3.85% 10.14% 1.15 12
L¨ansf¨ors¨akringar Sm˚abolag Sverige A 3.44% 12.77% 1.02 16
L¨ansf¨ors¨akringar Sverige Aktiv A 1.74% 9.27% 1.01 16
L¨ansf¨ors¨akringar Sverige Indexn¨ara 3.04% 8.58% 1.00 12
Nordea Alfa 1.19% 9.50% 1.17 16
Nordea Inst Aktie Sverige 1.50% 9.30% 0.99 16
Nordea Inst Aktief Sverige icke-utd 1.50% 9.31% 0.99 16
Nordea Institutionell Aktief¨orvaltn Acc 2.96% 9.43% 1.16 6
Nordea Institutionell Aktief¨orvaltn Inc 2.96% 31                   9.44% 1.16 6
Name Mean return (Quarterly, Net of fees) St. Dev. Beta Age (years)

Nordea Olympiafond 1.26% 9.40% 1.13 16
Nordea Sm˚abolagsfond Sverige 4.14% 10.01% 1.04 10
Nordea Sverige Passiv icke-utd 2.60% 9.19% 1.00 13
Nordea Sverige Passiv utd 2.60% 9.19% 1.00 13
Nordea Swedish Ideas Equity 3.01% 9.48% 1.18 7
Nordea Swedish Stars icke-utd 1.50% 9.86% 1.16 16
Nordea Swedish Stars utd 1.50% 9.86% 1.16 16
Nordic Equities Sweden 2.59% 8.62% 0.93 12
Nordnet Indexfond Sverige 3.28% 8.24% 0.97 12
Norron Active NRC SEK 2.70% 11.17% 1.01 3
Norron Active RC SEK 3.90% 8.38% 1.01 10
ODIN Sverige A 3.10% 11.59% 1.08 16
PLUS Mikrobolag Sverige Index 4.65% 14.19% 0.97 4
PLUS Sm˚abolag Sverige Index 5.20% 12.86% 1.03 4
PriorNilsson Sverige Aktiv A 3.60% 7.26% 0.91 8
PriorNilsson Sverige Aktiv B 3.59% 7.26% 0.91 8
Quesada Sverige 1.04% 9.60% 1.08 16
SEB H˚allbar Sverige Indexn¨ara 3.19% 8.52% 0.99 12
SEB H˚allbar Sverige Indexn¨ara Inst 3.32% 8.25% 0.99 7
SEB H˚allbar Sverige Indexn¨ara utd 3.38% 7.66% 0.99 8
SEB H˚allbarhetsfond Sverige Index 3.18% 9.65% 0.99 4
SEB H˚allbarhetsfond Sverige Index utd 1.48% 9.58% 0.99 16
SEB Micro Cap 4.10% 11.89% 1.06 16
SEB Stiftelsefond Sverige 2.06% 10.60% 0.98 16
SEB Sustainability Fund Sweden C 1.76% 9.35% 0.99 16
SEB Sustainability Fund Sweden ID SEK 3.80% 8.83% 0.99 5
SEB Sverige Expanderad 1.50% 9.20% 0.99 16
SEB Sverige Expanderad HNW 3.49% 8.87% 0.99 6
SEB Sverige Expanderad Inst 3.58% 8.87% 0.99 5
SEB Sverige Expanderad utd 3.47% 8.87% 0.99 5
SEB Sverige Sm˚abol C/R utd 6.01% 10.38% 1.04 8
SEB Sverige Sm˚abolagsfond utd 5.54% 10.07% 1.05 8
SEB Sverigefond 1.58% 9.53% 1.00 16
SEB Sverigefond Sm˚abolag 3.01% 11.54% 1.05 16
SEB Sverigefond Sm˚abolag C/R 3.34% 11.94% 1.04 16
SEB Sverigefond Sm˚abolag Inst 5.65% 10.83% 1.05 7
SEB Swedish Value Fund 1.56% 11.20% 1.12 14
SEB Swedish Value Fund utd 3.44% 9.70% 1.12 5
SEF – Kavaljer Quality Focus A SEK 3.82% 12.98% 1.15 5
SEF – Kavaljer Quality Focus I SEK 3.96% 12.97% 1.16 5
She Invest Sweden 2.34% 8.25% 0.77 6
Simplicity Sm˚abolag Sverige A 4.76% 10.75% 0.89 4
Simplicity Sverige 3.36% 7.40% 0.66 5
Skandia Cancerfonden 1.87% 10.02% 1.04 16
Skandia Sm˚abolag Sverige 3.19% 11.45% 1.05 16
Skandia Sverige Exponering 3.20% 7.98% 1.02 8
Skandia Sverige H˚allbar 4.85% 12.57% 1.03 3
Skandia V¨arldsnaturfonden 1.86% 10.06% 1.05 16
Spiltan Aktiefond Investmentbolag 4.72% 8.04% 0.88 9
Spiltan Aktiefond Sm˚aland 3.82% 11.59% 1.13 13
Spiltan Aktiefond Stabil 2.29% 8.27% 0.83 16
Spiltan Sm˚abolagsfond 2.83% 11.95% 1.10 16
SPP Aktiefond Sverige A 1.63% 9.20% 0.99 16
SPP Sverige Plus A 3.88% 9.07% 1.02 5
Strand Sm˚abolagsfond 2.33% 10.71% 0.88 14
Swedbank Humanfond 1.24% 10.12% 1.09 16
Swedbank Robur Access Sverige A 1.08% 9.87% 1.00 14
Swedbank Robur Exportfond A 2.24% 11.18% 1.09 16
Swedbank Robur Sm˚abolagsfond Sverige A 3.33% 11.61% 1.01 16
Swedbank Robur Sverigefond A 1.72% 10.27% 1.15 16
Swedbank Robur Sverigefond MEGA I 1.94% 10.23% 1.14 16
Swedbank Robur Sweden High Dividend A 1.03% 10.63% 1.13 14
Swedbank Robur Transition Sweden A 1.25% 10.12% 1.09 16
Swedbank Robur Transition Sweden MEGA J 1.57% 9.88% 1.08 16
Ohman Etisk Index Sverige A¨                      1.37% 9.38% 0.96 16
Ohman Sm˚¨       abolagsfond A 3.01% 11.07% 0.98 16
Ohman Sverige Fokus A¨                 2.91% 11.02% 1.02 3
Ohman Sverige H˚¨            allbar A 2.52% 7.97% 0.99 8
Ohman Sverige Marknad H˚¨                   allbar A 2.73% 8.88% 0.96 4
Ohman Sweden Micro Cap A¨                     3.30% 11.95% 1.03 16
                                 32
     Table 2: Summary Statistics, Independent & Dependent Variables
             Mean Median Min Max n N
TopQ 0.02321499 0.04020684 -0.2268696 0.27309779 61 40
MiddleQ 0.02023618 0.046608 -0.242313 0.28289 61 56
BottomQ 0.02153637 0.04387773 -0.2487545 0.26893691 61 43
MarketQ 0.01943175 0.04018146 -0.2225963 0.25455491 61 1
TopY 0.14966631 0.179889 -0.484893 0.909764 59 38
MiddleY 0.07254032 0.111836 -0.520561 0.683524 59 59
BottomY 0.03053966 0.072508 -0.510489 0.611972 59 42
MarketY 0.09305215 0.133476 -0.478949 0.676516 59 1
Top2Y 0.18093592 0.2234654 -0.6222135 0.93435694 55 33
Middle2Y 0.17142284 0.188192 -0.645456 0.949088 55 62
Bottom2Y 0.11591984 0.10173262 -0.5635162 0.81140822 55 44
Market2Y 0.16718095 0.193828 -0.640834 0.909547 55 1
TopQOMX 0.02465294 0.04594317 -0.2274173 0.27352608 62 40
MiddleQOMX 0.02116883 0.04768248 -0.2412291 0.28199549 62 54
BottomQOMX 0.02187461 0.04685078 -0.2500685 0.26880266 62 45
MarketQOMX 0.01916478 0.04274565 -0.2327828 0.2384876 62 1
TopYOMX 0.1496202 0.17329495 -0.4850797 0.9105444 60 42
MiddleYOMX 0.07285568 0.10925568 -0.5198563 0.68185714 60 54
BottomYOMX 0.0317704 0.07331517 -0.5098672 0.60996505 60 43
MarketYOMX 0.08970304 0.1288715 -0.4635474 0.64018624 60 1
Top2YOMX 0.32447918 0.35216949 -0.621652 1.24339787 56 37
Middle2YOMX 0.17842427 0.21184673 -0.6350459 0.95055534 56 54
Bottom2YOMX 0.10025738 0.11683984 -0.6852984 0.81134562 56 48
Market2YOMX 0.22725914 0.20811278 -0.4431203 0.90272374 56 1
TopQR 0.02371721 0.04955846 -0.2353743 0.27718736 62 46
MiddleQR 0.01671306 0.03877646 -0.2428753 0.27947326 62 46
BottomQR 0.02120407 0.04672041 -0.243381 0.28043713 62 47
TopYR 0.08607839 0.13156566 -1.0443323 0.77445862 60 46
MiddleYR 0.09683942 0.13487269 -0.5100432 0.96700892 60 46
BottomYR 0.07306188 0.12888092 -1.1799498 0.7226759 60 47
Top2YR 0.18087535 0.25738274 -2.9236388 1.07515254 56 46
Middle2YR 0.24348692 0.29438818 -0.6509291 2.07538617 56 46
Bottom2YR 0.18498829 0.30964554 -2.9481048 1.18898681 56 47
TopYP1 0.14328244 0.17122965 -0.487939 0.90107611 59 67
MiddleYP1 0.07254138 0.11183642 -0.5205609 0.68352398 59 71
BottomYP1 0.03542611 0.07859401 -0.5111582 0.61769166 59 58
TopYP2 0.13273675 0.15868753 -0.4913885 0.86862675 59 83
MiddleYP2 0.07146416 0.11070096 -0.5156081 0.68575871 59 96
BottomYP2 0.04057549 0.08205291 -0.5124662 0.62606894 59 87
TopYP3 0.11304005 0.14467385 -0.4988393 0.79592327 59 97
MiddleYP3 0.07195384 0.11070096 -0.5156081 0.68575871 59 110
BottomYP3 0.05128984 0.10323574 -0.5125662 0.65576986 59 103
TopYP4 0.09868624 0.13212117 -0.4989166 0.77111762 59 113
MiddleYP4 0.0762959 0.11569312 -0.5062573 0.70789414 59 123
BottomYP4 0.06286776 0.11147744 -0.5104489 0.67958847 59 109
TopYP5 0.09295207 0.12999437 -0.4995486 0.75938388 59 124
MiddleYP5 0.0853908 0.11890513 -0.5057307 0.75028564 59 130
BottomYP5 0.08016414 0.11569312 -0.5062573 0.74789414 59 128
TopYP6 0.08935427 0.12999437 -0.4995486 0.75938388 59 139
MiddleYP6 0.08935427 0.12999437 -0.4995486 0.75938388 59 139
BottomYP6 0.08935427 0.12999437 -0.4995486 0.75938388 59 139
ESGY 0.07115977 0.11039711 -0.5090287 0.71013544 60 35
NonESGY 0.08183596 0.12075899 -0.5057368 0.71082424 60 104
SmallY 0.11677509 0.15064784 -0.5225774 0.81310905 60 34
NonSmallY 0.06670736 0.11304985 -0.5011892 0.67660732 60 105
TopSmall 0.1388192 0.1717589 -0.4890309 0.85975242 59 7
MidSmall 0.0711132 0.1098181 -0.4980341 0.66628226 59 17
BotSmall 0.04045957 0.0760756 -0.52125 0.64087172 59 12
TopNonSmall 0.13508495 0.17081287 -0.48023 0.96520298 59 10
MidNonSmall 0.06949825 0.10429417 -0.5003644 0.67719179 59 39
BotNonSmall 0.03094602 0.07396623 -0.509022 0.61446541 59 56
TopESG 0.14108582 0.17281442 -0.4840123 0.85975242 59 6
MidESG 0.07266954 0.12149017 -0.5136649 0.65124691 59 18
BotESG 0.03934032 0.07103238 -0.5180912 0.64052245 59 11
TopNonESG 0.15022704 0.17249153 -0.485003 0.9400762 59 25
MidNonESG 0.0720878 0.10803761 -0.5309334 0.70979095 59 41
BotNonESG 0.02854435 0.07312861 -0.5072303 0.60230989 59 38

                                33
                    Table 3: Results CAPM (quarterly)

                                            Dependent variable:
                             TopQ MiddleQ BottomQ
                                    (1) (2) (3)
                                      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
MarketQ 1.068        1.038          1.071
                                (0.036) (0.018) (0.023)

Constant 0.002 0.0001 0.001
                                (0.004) (0.002) (0.002)

Observations 61 61 61
  2
R                             0.937 0.982 0.974
           2
Adjusted R                       0.936 0.982 0.973
Residual Std. Error (df = 59) 0.027 0.014 0.017
                                        ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
F Statistic (df = 1; 59) 882.083      3,193.851      2,182.899

                                                   ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01
 Table 3 presents the results studying performance persistence in the three portfolios
as defined in 4.4 with one quarter evaluation period and one quarter holding period,
                        with SIXPRX as market proxy.

                                 34
              Table 4: Results w/ OMXSGI proxy (quarterly)

                                              Dependent variable:
                         TopQOMX MiddleQOMX BottomQOMX
                                    (1) (2) (3)
                                      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
MarketQOMX 1.018         0.974           1.018
                                (0.040) (0.026) (0.029)

Constant 0.005 0.003 0.002
                                (0.004) (0.003) (0.003)

Observations 62 62 62
  2
R                              0.916 0.959 0.955
           2
Adjusted R                       0.915 0.958 0.954
Residual Std. Error (df = 60) 0.031 0.020 0.022
                                         ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
F Statistic (df = 1; 60) 658.505        1,400.338         1,268.837

                                                         ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01
 Table 4 presents the results studying performance persistence in the three portfolios
as defined in 4.4 with one quarter evaluation period and one quarter holding period,
                       with OMXSGI as market proxy.

                                  35
                     Table 5: Results CAPM (1 year)

                                            Dependent variable:
                             TopY MiddleY BottomY
                                    (1) (2) (3)
                                      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
MarketY 1.125        1.029          0.983
                                (0.047) (0.021) (0.024)

                                      ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
Constant 0.045         -0.024          -0.061
                                (0.011) (0.005) (0.006)

Observations 60 60 59
  2
R                             0.906 0.977 0.967
           2
Adjusted R                       0.905 0.977 0.966
Residual Std. Error (df = 58) 0.078 0.034 0.040
                                        ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
F Statistic (df = 1; 58) 561.569      2,482.595      1,654.382

                                                   ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01
 Table 5 presents the results studying performance persistence in the three portfolios
 as defined in 4.4 with one year evaluation period and one year holding period, with
                         SIXPRX as market proxy.

                                 36
               Table 6: Results w/ OMXSGI proxy (1 year)

                                              Dependent variable:
                         TopYOMX MiddleYOMX BottomYOMX
                                    (1) (2) (3)
                                      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
MarketYOMX 1.137         1.049           0.997
                                (0.053) (0.025) (0.027)

                                      ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
Constant 0.048         -0.021           -0.058
                                (0.012) (0.006) (0.006)

Observations 60 60 60
  2
R                              0.889 0.969 0.958
           2
Adjusted R                       0.887 0.969 0.958
Residual Std. Error (df = 58) 0.085 0.039 0.044
                                         ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
F Statistic (df = 1; 58) 464.518        1,821.476         1,335.027

                                                        ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01
 Table 6 presents the results studying performance persistence in the three portfolios
 as defined in 4.4 with one year evaluation period and one year holding period, with
                         OMXSGI as market proxy.

                                  37
                     Table 7: Results CAPM (2 years)

                                            Dependent variable:
                              Top2Y Middle2Y Bottom2Y
                                     (1) (2) (3)
                                      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
Market2Y 0.998          1.014          0.826
                                (0.014) (0.011) (0.035)

                                       ∗∗                       ∗
Constant 0.014          0.002 -0.022
                                (0.005) (0.004) (0.012)

Observations 55 55 55
  2
R                              0.990 0.994 0.913
           2
Adjusted R                        0.990 0.994 0.912
Residual Std. Error (df = 53) 0.031 0.026 0.081
                                          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗
F Statistic (df = 1; 53) 5,443.380      8,285.212       557.689

                                                   ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01
 Table 7 presents the results studying performance persistence in the three portfolios
as defined in 4.4 with two years evaluation period and two years holding period, with
                         SIXPRX as market proxy.

                                  38
               Table 8: Results w/ OMXSGI proxy (2 years)

                                                Dependent variable:
                         Top2YOMX Middle2YOMX Bottom2YOMX
                                     (1) (2) (3)
                                      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
Market2YOMX 1.315          1.134            1.075
                                (0.062) (0.031) (0.031)

                                                        ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
Constant 0.026 -0.079            -0.144
                                (0.022) (0.011) (0.011)

Observations 56 56 56
  2
R                              0.893 0.961 0.958
           2
Adjusted R                        0.891 0.960 0.957
Residual Std. Error (df = 54) 0.129 0.064 0.064
                                         ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
F Statistic (df = 1; 54) 448.455         1,331.352          1,219.489

                                                            ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01
 Table 8 presents the results studying performance persistence in the three portfolios
as defined in 4.4 with two years evaluation period and two years holding period, with
                         OMXSGI as market proxy.

                                  39
              Table 9: Placebo Randomised Results (quarterly)

                                            Dependent variable:
                            TopQP MiddleQP BottomQP
                                     (1) (2) (3)
                                      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
MarketQ 1.068          1.039        1.063
                                (0.024) (0.035) (0.025)

Constant 0.002 -0.004 -0.0003
                                (0.002) (0.003) (0.002)

Observations 61 61 61
  2
R                              0.971 0.936 0.970
           2
Adjusted R                        0.971 0.935 0.969
Residual Std. Error (df = 59) 0.018 0.026 0.018
                                          ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
F Statistic (df = 1; 59) 1,981.646      867.280      1,879.389

                                                   ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01
Table 9 presents the results studying performance persistence in three portfolios with
  a random set of funds, one quarter evaluation period, one quarter holding period,
                        and SIXPRX as market proxy.

                                  40
               Table 10: Placebo Randomised Results (1 year)

                                           Dependent variable:
                             TopYP MiddleYP BottomYP
                                     (1) (2) (3)
                                        ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
  MarketY 0.945       0.857        0.944
                                  (0.122) (0.115) (0.126)

  Constant -0.006 0.014 -0.018
                                  (0.029) (0.027) (0.029)

  Observations 60 60 60
    2
  R                             0.509 0.489 0.492
             2
  Adjusted R                      0.501 0.480 0.484
  Residual Std. Error (df = 58) 0.201 0.190 0.208
                                         ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
  F Statistic (df = 1; 58) 60.163       55.429        56.241

                                                ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
  Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01
  Table 10 presents the results studying performance persistence in three portfolios
with a random set of funds, one year evaluation period, one year holding period, and
                         SIXPRX as market proxy.

                                 41
             Table 11: Placebo Randomised Results (2 years)

                                          Dependent variable:
                           Top2YP Middle2YP Bottom2YP
                                   (1) (2) (3)
                                      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
Market2Y 0.989       0.821         0.924
                                (0.199) (0.145) (0.221)

                                                  ∗
Constant 0.006 0.099         0.022
                                (0.071) (0.052) (0.079)

Observations 55 55 55
  2
R                             0.317 0.378 0.248
           2
Adjusted R                      0.304 0.366 0.234
Residual Std. Error (df = 53) 0.464 0.337 0.514
                                       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
F Statistic (df = 1; 53) 24.624       32.188         17.520

                                                ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01
 Table 11 presents the results studying performance persistence in three portfolios
with a random set of funds, 2 years evaluation period, 2 years holding period, and
                        SIXPRX as market proxy.

                                 42
                 Table 12: Placebo Phase 1 Results (1 year)

                                            Dependent variable:
                            TopYP1 MiddleYP1 BottomYP1
                                    (1) (2) (3)
                                      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
MarketY 1.120        1.035          0.991
                                (0.047) (0.020) (0.023)

                                      ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
Constant 0.039         -0.024          -0.057
                                (0.011) (0.005) (0.005)

Observations 59 59 59
  2
R                             0.911 0.978 0.970
           2
Adjusted R                       0.909 0.978 0.969
Residual Std. Error (df = 57) 0.076 0.033 0.038
                                        ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
F Statistic (df = 1; 57) 580.478      2,585.800      1,815.928

                                                   ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01
 Table 12 presents the results of phase 1 of the robustness check as defined in 5.2.2,
  studying performance persistence in the three portfolios with one year evaluation
          period, one year holding period, and SIXPRX as market proxy.

                                 43
                 Table 13: Placebo Phase 2 Results (1 year)

                                            Dependent variable:
                            TopYP2 MiddleYP2 BottomYP2
                                    (1) (2) (3)
                                      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
MarketY 1.105        1.027          0.997
                                (0.043) (0.021) (0.022)

                                      ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
Constant 0.030         -0.024          -0.052
                                (0.010) (0.005) (0.005)

Observations 59 59 59
  2
R                             0.922 0.976 0.972
           2
Adjusted R                       0.921 0.975 0.972
Residual Std. Error (df = 57) 0.070 0.035 0.037
                                        ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
F Statistic (df = 1; 57) 673.912      2,303.931      1,982.056

                                                   ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01
 Table 13 presents the results of phase 2 of the robustness check as defined in 5.2.3,
  studying performance persistence in the three portfolios with one year evaluation
          period, one year holding period, and SIXPRX as market proxy.

                                 44
                 Table 14: Placebo Phase 3 Results (1 year)

                                            Dependent variable:
                            TopYP3 MiddleYP3 BottomYP3
                                     (1) (2) (3)
                                      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
MarketY 1.085          1.030          1.006
                                (0.033) (0.021) (0.023)

                                                       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
Constant 0.012 -0.024         -0.042
                                (0.008) (0.005) (0.005)

Observations 59 59 59
  2
R                              0.949 0.977 0.971
           2
Adjusted R                        0.948 0.976 0.971
Residual Std. Error (df = 57) 0.055 0.034 0.037
                                          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
F Statistic (df = 1; 57) 1,057.121       2,402.921       1,935.079

                                                     ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01
 Table 14 presents the results of phase 3 of the robustness check as defined in 5.2.4,
  studying performance persistence in the three portfolios with one year evaluation
          period, one year holding period, and SIXPRX as market proxy.

                                  45
                 Table 15: Placebo Phase 4 Results (1 year)

                                            Dependent variable:
                            TopYP4 MiddleYP4 BottomYP4
                                     (1) (2) (3)
                                      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
MarketY 1.071          1.029          1.016
                                (0.029) (0.025) (0.024)

                                                       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
Constant -0.001 -0.019         -0.032
                                (0.007) (0.006) (0.006)

Observations 59 59 59
  2
R                              0.959 0.966 0.968
           2
Adjusted R                        0.958 0.966 0.968
Residual Std. Error (df = 57) 0.048 0.042 0.040
                                          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
F Statistic (df = 1; 57) 1,330.500       1,638.368       1,745.704

                                                     ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01
 Table 15 presents the results of phase 4 of the robustness check as defined in 5.2.5,
  studying performance persistence in the three portfolios with one year evaluation
          period, one year holding period, and SIXPRX as market proxy.

                                  46
                 Table 16: Placebo phase 5 Results (1 year)

                                            Dependent variable:
                            TopYP5 MiddleYP5 BottomYP5
                                     (1) (2) (3)
                                      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
MarketY 1.062          1.053          1.056
                                (0.029) (0.029) (0.029)

                                                       ∗       ∗∗∗
Constant -0.006 -0.013         -0.018
                                (0.007) (0.007) (0.007)

Observations 59 59 59
  2
R                              0.958 0.960 0.959
           2
Adjusted R                        0.958 0.959 0.958
Residual Std. Error (df = 57) 0.048 0.047 0.047
                                          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
F Statistic (df = 1; 57) 1,308.885       1,358.644       1,332.258

                                                     ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01
 Table 16 presents the results of phase 5 of the robustness check as defined in 5.2.5,
  studying performance persistence in the three portfolios with one year evaluation
          period, one year holding period, and SIXPRX as market proxy.

                                  47
                 Table 17: Placebo phase 6 Results (1 year)

                                            Dependent variable:
                            TopYP6 MiddleYP6 BottomYP6
                                     (1) (2) (3)
                                      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
MarketY 1.056          1.056          1.056
                                (0.031) (0.031) (0.031)

Constant -0.009 -0.009 -0.009
                                (0.007) (0.007) (0.007)

Observations 59 59 59
  2
R                              0.952 0.952 0.952
           2
Adjusted R                        0.951 0.951 0.951
Residual Std. Error (df = 57) 0.051 0.051 0.051
                                          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
F Statistic (df = 1; 57) 1,136.047       1,136.047       1,136.047

                                                     ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01
 Table 17 presents the results of phase 6 of the robustness check as defined in 5.2.7,
  studying performance persistence in the three portfolios with one year evaluation
          period, one year holding period, and SIXPRX as market proxy.

Table 18: Small Cap funds’ performance against non Small Cap funds (1 year)

                                       Dependent variable:
                                     Small Cap Y
                                            ∗∗∗
           non Small Cap Y 1.106
                                    (0.037)

                                            ∗∗∗
           Constant 0.043
                                    (0.008)

           Observations 60
             2
         R                         0.938
                       2
           Adjusted R                      0.937
           Residual Std. Error 0.062 (df = 58)
                                            ∗∗∗
           F Statistic 884.290    (df = 1; 58)

                                      ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
         Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01
Table 18 presents the results studying excess returns of Small Cap funds against non
                         Small Cap funds, as defined in 4.6.

                                  48
                  Table 19: Persistence Small Cap (1 year)

                                            Dependent variable:
                            TopYSmall MidYSmall BotYSmall
                                    (1) (2) (3)
                                      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
MarketY 1.130         1.019          0.985
                                (0.051) (0.020) (0.023)

                                      ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
Constant 0.034         -0.024          -0.051
                                (0.012) (0.005) (0.005)

Observations 59 59 59
  2
R                              0.896 0.978 0.970
           2
Adjusted R                       0.895 0.978 0.969
Residual Std. Error (df = 57) 0.083 0.033 0.038
                                         ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
F Statistic (df = 1; 57) 493.527       2,540.624      1,832.590

                                                   ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01
Table 19 presents the results studying performance persistence in the three portfolios
 as defined in 4.4 with the fund universe restricted to Small Cap funds as defined in
   3.1.1, one year evaluation period and one year holding period, and OMXSGI as
                                 market proxy.

                                  49
                Table 20: Persistence Non Small Cap (1 year)

                                            Dependent variable:
                             TopLarge MidLarge BotLarge
                                    (1) (2) (3)
                                      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
MarketY 1.131        1.022          0.974
                                (0.041) (0.019) (0.022)

                                      ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
Constant 0.030         -0.026          -0.060
                                (0.009) (0.004) (0.005)

Observations 59 59 59
  2
R                             0.931 0.981 0.972
           2
Adjusted R                       0.930 0.981 0.971
Residual Std. Error (df = 57) 0.067 0.031 0.036
                                        ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
F Statistic (df = 1; 57) 766.870      2,979.850      1,946.925

                                                   ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01
Table 20 presents the results studying performance persistence in the three portfolios
as defined in 4.4 with the fund universe restricted to non Small Cap funds as defined
 in 3.1.1, one year evaluation period and one year holding period, and OMXSGI as
                                 market proxy.

         Table 21: ESG funds’ performance against non-ESG funds

                                       Dependent variable:
                               ESG
                                            ∗∗∗
          Non ESG 0.991
                                    (0.010)

                                            ∗∗∗
           Constant -0.010
                                    (0.002)

           Observations 59
             2
         R                         0.994
                       2
           Adjusted R                      0.994
           Residual Std. Error 0.017 (df = 57)
                                             ∗∗∗
            F Statistic 9,639.230    (df = 1; 57)

                                      ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
         Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01
Table 21 presents the results studying excess returns of ESG funds against non ESG
                                funds, as defined in 4.6.

                                  50
                     Table 22: Persistence ESG (1 year)

                                            Dependent variable:
                         TopYESG MidYESG BotYESG
                                    (1) (2) (3)
                                      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
MarketY 1.131        1.023          0.983
                                (0.053) (0.020) (0.023)

                                      ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
Constant 0.036         -0.023          -0.052
                                (0.012) (0.005) (0.005)

Observations 59 59 59
  2
R                             0.890 0.978 0.969
           2
Adjusted R                       0.888 0.978 0.968
Residual Std. Error (df = 57) 0.086 0.033 0.038
                                        ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
F Statistic (df = 1; 57) 460.603      2,524.934      1,780.670

                                                   ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01
Table 22 presents the results studying performance persistence in the three portfolios
 as defined in 4.4 with the fund universe restricted to ESG funds as defined in 3.1.2,
  one year evaluation period and one year holding period, and OMXSGI as market
                                      proxy.

                                  51
                  Table 23: Persistence Non ESG (1 year)

                                               Dependent variable:
                          TopYNonESG MidYNonESG BotYNonESG
                                      (1) (2) (3)
                                      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗
MarketY 1.127            1.044            0.977
                                (0.049) (0.022) (0.027)

                                      ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
Constant 0.045            -0.025            -0.062
                                (0.011) (0.005) (0.006)

Observations 59 59 59
  2
R                               0.904 0.976 0.958
           2
Adjusted R                         0.903 0.975 0.958
Residual Std. Error (df = 57) 0.079 0.036 0.044
                                          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗          ∗∗∗
F Statistic (df = 1; 57) 539.583         2,309.172        1,309.044

                                                           ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01
Table 23 presents the results studying performance persistence in the three portfolios
  as defined in 4.4 with the fund universe restricted to non ESG funds as defined in
   3.1.2, one year evaluation period and one year holding period, and OMXSGI as
                                 market proxy.

                                  52