THE EFFECTS OF POLITICAL
UNCERTAINTY ON OPTIONS

AN EMPIRICAL STUDY OF S&P 500, EURO STOXX 50, AND
S&P SECTORS AROUND POLITICAL EVENTS

GABRIEL WANNES

NIHAT ANWAR

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2021
The effects of political uncertainty on options: An empirical study of S&P 500, Euro Stoxx
50, and S&P sectors around political events

Abstract:

   We study options spanning political events and examine whether a price premium, associated
   with the political uncertainty from events, exists. First, we use recent data and replicate parts
   of Kelly, Pastor, and Veronesi (2016) by analysing how the price risk, variance risk, and tail
   risk associated with political events, affect equity options on the S&P 500 and Euro Stoxx 50
   indices. Our results indicate a price premium on options spanning political events, and this
   premium is also larger when the economic conditions are weaker. Second, we apply the
   analysis to S&P sectors with varying political exposure by examining if sectors that are more
   affected by political uncertainty, also exhibit higher implied volatility premium during
   political events, compared to less exposed sectors. In fact, we find a pattern supporting this,
   however, the empirical evidence is too weak to draw any firm conclusions. Also, we do not
   find any support that this implied volatility premium difference between the more and less
   exposed sectors, would be any larger when the economy is weaker.

Keywords:

   Political uncertainty, Options, Implied volatility, Sectors.

Authors:

   Gabriel Wannes (24330)
   Nihat Anwar (24488)

Tutor:

   Adam Altmejd, Postdoctoral Researcher, Institute for Social Research at Stockholm
   University and the Department of Finance at Stockholm School of Economics

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance at Stockholm School of
  Economics

Acknowledgements:

   We would like to thank our tutor, Adam Altmejd, for his guidance and helpful support.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Gabriel Wannes and Nihat Anwar, 2021

                                      1
Before a thrilling political event, the uncertainty about the outcome and subsequent policy
changes, can affect the financial market and lead to market turmoil. Considering that options
provide protection against bad outcomes, whether and how options are influenced by political
uncertainty, is therefore a topic of importance. Our understanding of the effects of political
uncertainty on options, however, is still limited.
In this paper, we study S&P 500, Euro Stoxx 50, and S&P sector equity options, by examining
the protection options provide against political risks. We base our empirical design, mainly, on
the findings of Kelly, Pastor, and Veronesi (2016), called KPV hereafter. Using options data
across 20 countries, they conclude that options spanning political events are relatively more
valuable compared to options not spanning the events. Furthermore, they find that the impact of
these events on options is stronger in a weaker economy. To empirically examine the effects of
political uncertainty, KPV use a model developed by Pastor and Veronesi (2013), called the PV
model hereafter. The PV model provides a broad theoretical framework with mechanisms for
how political uncertainty results in different types of shocks which can drive the implied
volatility, variance risk premium, and implied volatility slope for options spanning political
events. These are associated with three types of political risks specified by KPV, namely, the
price risk, variance risk, and tail risk. The main prediction of the PV model is that implied
volatility, variance risk premium and implied volatility slope should all be larger for options
during political events, compared to bordering options that do not span the event. Furthermore,
the framework predicts that the effect is larger in magnitude during weak economic conditions.
Using the PV model as a theoretical guideline, we replicate parts of KPV with updated data for
the U.S. and Eurozone to study this timely topic. Hence, we include recent political events, such
as the enthralling 2016 and 2020 U.S. presidential elections, Brexit referendum and the many
economically relevant summits during the U.S. – China trade war. Additionally, we further
complement KPV’s findings by applying the implications of the framework to S&P sectors. We
select this scope by arguing that the model predictions, also, would apply across sectors with
varying political risk exposure. Specifically, we focus on the model predictions regarding the
implied volatility difference between options spanning the event and bordering options (IVD).
Also, by studying the literature, we find that the amount of empirical work covering this topic is
very modest. Indeed, such research could be valuable, particularly for investors making
investment decisions amidst political uncertainty, or during a recession. Moreover, politicians
and regulators could benefit when suggesting economic policy changes, for instance, regarding
trade agreements that would affect industries differently. Therefore, our sector-level analysis
widens the implications of the PV model and better captures the uncertainty induced by
government policy changes or during elections. Thus, we contribute by studying the topic with
an industry-specific scope, in order to better understand the financial effects of political
uncertainty on equity options across industries with varying political risk exposure. For this
analysis, we divide the sectors into two groups, using the findings of Yu et al. (2017). More
specifically, Financials, Materials, and Information Technology are politically more exposed
since their industry betas are significantly affected by the risks related to economic policy
changes. On the other hand, Energy, Utilities and Consumer Staples, are the least affected by this
uncertainty amongst the S&P sectors.
By constructing a data sample consisting of national elections and global summits related to the
U.S. and Eurozone between 1996-2020, six S&P sectors, economic conditions, and options data,
we design a variety of tests all aimed to capture the effects of political risks in the equity options
market. In short, our tests show empirical evidence that political uncertainty is priced in the
options market for the U.S. and Eurozone, which is shown by the increase in implied volatility,
variance risk premium and implied volatility slope for options spanning political events.
Furthermore, we find support that the effects are even larger given that the economic conditions
are weaker. These conclusions are mostly similar to KPV’s. We then apply the analysis to
sectors and find a pattern supporting that sectors that are more politically exposed exhibit a

                                      2
relatively higher IVD compared to the less exposed. Hence, we identify a trend indicating that
Information Technology, Financials, and Materials, exhibit a larger IVD, on average, than
Consumer Staples, Utilities, and Energy. However, since we do not find any significant results in
most of these tests, we cannot confidently state that this effect exists in the population. Also, we
do not find any empirical evidence that the IVD difference between the more and less exposed
sectors would increase during weak economic conditions. Furthermore, we discuss our findings
and identify possible explanations for our results, relating to specific events, model mechanisms,
data limitations, and the literature. Also, we conduct robustness checks and find that the majority
of our predictions for the U.S. and Eurozone, survive the tests. However, by recognizing the
paper’s limitations, we also acknowledge the importance of further research with larger sample
sizes especially for the sector-level analysis, in order to get a more accurate understanding of the
topic.
Our paper is divided into six sections. Section I clarifies the contribution of this paper and its
connection to the existing literature. Section II specifies our theoretical framework. Section III
describes the empirical design by detailing our data, methodology, variables, and hypotheses.
Section IV presents and interprets our empirical results. Section V further discusses our findings,
including their limitations. Section VI concludes.

                                     I. Literature Review
There is a prevalent amount of literature focusing on the relation between politics and its effects
on the economy. For instance, several papers examine how politics may impact general
macroeconomic outcomes (Alesina and Rodrik, 1994; Olters, 2001). While they cover the
phenomenon of politics and economy, our study is narrowed to the financial effects. Therefore,
our paper is strictly related to studies covering uncertainty induced by politics in the financial
market. A few examples include papers focusing on political uncertainty stemming from national
elections. Pantzalis, Stangeland, and Turtle (2000) analyse stock market behaviour across 33
countries and discover extraordinarily high-levels of stock returns in the two-week-period
preceding elections. Another study, with an almost similar sample size (27 countries), points to
an insignificant equity premium (Bialkowski, Gottschalk, and Wisniewski, 2008). On the other
hand, Li and Born (2006) show significant results, though, they solely include U.S. presidential
elections. Furthermore, Goodell and Vahamaa (2013) state that the VIX rises when the
probability of an eventual winner increases. Additionally, Gemmill (1992) analyses the FTSE
100 implied volatility in relation to the 1987 British parliamentary election and conclude that the
index surged two weeks in advance. Although our paper considers fairly similar topics as the
above studies, we broaden the scope of political uncertainty and include non-electoral political
events. Therefore, our paper is also linked to papers focusing on non-electoral political
uncertainty. Some examples include Bittlingmayer (1998) and Voth (2002) who both conclude
that a positive link relating the uncertainty to stock market volatility existed in-between the two
world wars. Another paper studies the government’s spending policies and their effects on stock
returns and find that firms experience lower stock returns during Republican presidencies (Belo,
Gala, and Li, 2013). While our paper is thematically related to the above studies, none of them
examine options, however.
Other prominent papers focusing on the financial impact of political uncertainty include Erb,
Harvey, and Viskanta (1996) and Brogaard and Detzel (2015). The former focuses on different
measures of country risk and their importance to investors. They find a relation, albeit rather
weak, between political risk and future stock returns. The latter, instead, relates stock data to
economic policy uncertainty, and conclude that government policy changes are considered a risk
factor for equities. Pastor and Veronesi (2012) focus particularly on the reaction of the stock
market to the government announcement of a policy change and find similar results. In a later
study, they, instead, analyse the price response of equities to political signals relating to the
outcome of a future policy change (Pastor and Veronesi, 2013). Hence, they specifically study
                                      3
the asset pricing implications and find, inter alia, that the financial effects are stronger given a
weaker economy. Our study is heavily related to their paper since we use its main theoretical
framework, the PV model, as guideline. Thus, contrary to the above papers, we build our
empirical analysis with a clear theoretical framework.
Additionally, we specifically study the asset pricing implications of political uncertainty, similar
to Pastor and Veronesi (2013). Sialm (2006) has a similar scope and examines the impact of
stochastic taxes on the pricing of equity securities and concludes that investors get compensated
for the political risk stemming from possible changes in tax policies. Also, Croce at al. (2012)
analyse the impact of fiscal policies on asset pricing. However, compared to the aforementioned
two papers, we consider a wider set of government choices and policy changes, including
elections, in addition to using a theoretical model with the inclusion of Bayesian learning.
Excluding Pastor and Veronesi (2013), the closest study to our paper is KPV. They use the PV
model as a theoretical guide but reinterpret the measure of political uncertainty by including
national elections, expanding the sample to include global events, and studying equity options.
KPV find strong evidence for the model predictions and conclude that options spanning political
events are more valuable since they give protection for investors against the price risk, variance
risk and tail risk, created by political events. This effect is also stronger in a weaker economy
and given that the election uncertainty is higher. Indeed, many papers seem to show a link
between political uncertainty and financial market behaviour. However, in a later study, Pastor
and Veronesi (2017) analyse the VIX and argue for a weakened effect over time. They explain
that the Trump administration’s political signals have been difficult to interpret from an
investor’s perspective. Nevertheless, by studying recent events, one could contribute with an
updated belief on the financial effects of this uncertainty.
The literature on this topic is growing in scope. Some studies showcase the link to firm
behaviour and firm-specific differences. For instance, Bloom, Bond, and Reenen (2007) argue
that regulatory changes affect firms' investment dynamics. In addition, Julio and Yook (2012)
find that political uncertainty stemming from national elections could lead to low investment
spending levels. Other studies have explored the effects on firm-level foreign direct investments
(Nguyen, Kim, and Papanastassiou, 2017). Their conclusions indicate that firms increase their
foreign direct investments level in countries where there are low levels of economic policy
uncertainty, in relation to their home country. Although several papers cover political
uncertainty in the above contexts, few have empirically analysed the effects on industries.
Indeed, since there are firm-level differences to political uncertainty, a similar link could be
studied for industries. Boutchkova et al. (2012) focus on how local and global political risks
impact U.S. subsector return volatility. They conclude that industries that are more dependent on
trade and labour often show greater return volatility when the uncertainty induced by national
elections is higher. Moreover, Yu et al. (2017) use the EPU-index developed by Baker, Bloom
and Davis (2016) in relation to the different S&P 500 industries and rank the sectors based on
which sectors are the most affected by economic policy uncertainty. Furthermore, Hill, A.
Korczak and P. Korczak (2019) find that firms within finance and customer-facing sectors were
the most sensitive to political uncertainty during Brexit. Nevertheless, by studying the existing
literature, we expect some sectors to be more affected by political events, and the implications of
this uncertainty on sector equity options is therefore worth studying. Thus, to accurately
understand political uncertainty and its effects in the options market, we add an industry-specific
scope. Also, we include recent political events in order to accurately examine this timely topic.
In short, our contribution to the existing literature comes in two ways. First, we examine political
uncertainty and its effects on equity options while considering recent years events. Second, we
study the sector-level impact of political uncertainty using clear theoretical principles. To the
best of our knowledge, our paper is the first to extend KPV by applying the model predictions on
recent data in addition to having a sector-level focus.

                                      4
                                 II. Theoretical Framework
In the following section, we introduce the main theoretical guidelines for our paper. We build
our theoretical framework based on KPV by presenting the PV model and its implications, as
well as relating the model fundamentals to our sector-level focus.
   A. Model Introduction
The following subsection presents the PV model which is used to analyze political uncertainty
during policy changes, which for example occurs during global summits. Following KPV, the
PV model is a general equilibrium model, where companies' average profitability depends on
which policy’s the government has in place. This can be seen in Equation 1, which describes the
development of firm’s profitability, where 𝑔𝑡 represents the impact of any given policy on the
profitability. All else equal, a higher 𝑔𝑡 implies higher profitability.

                                𝑖                                               𝑖
                   𝑑п𝑡 = (𝜇 + 𝑔𝑡)𝑑𝑡 + 𝜎𝑑𝑍𝑡 + 𝜎1𝑑𝑍𝑡            Equation (1)
Moreover, the PV model assumes that there is no information asymmetry. How any policy
selected by the government will impact overall profitability is uncertain for the investors
(investors own the firms in the economy) and the government, but they will learn about it
through Bayesian learning when they observe the realized profitability. At time 𝑡 = 𝜏, which is
when the political event takes place, the government decides whether or not they want to change
the current policy in place, and also what new policy will be implemented in case of a change. If
the government decides to change policy, investors will update their beliefs about how
profitability will be impacted by taking the new policy into account. Consequently, the actors
will learn and update their beliefs accordingly about the impact of the new policy on profitability
by observing realized profitability.

The government is “quasi-benevolent”, as specified by KPV, meaning that it aims to maximize
the size of the economy (by increasing firm profitability), which is defined as the final value of
total capital in the economy. However, they also consider the political cost associated with
choosing a specific policy. An example of such a cost is that a selected policy might decrease the
probability of the current government being re-elected. Namely, the investors wish to maximize
the wealth function expressed in Equation 2, but the government’s selection of policy will
                                                                                          𝑛
instead maximize a very similar function, shown by Equation 3, where 𝐶  is introduced,
                                                                             𝑛
representing the political cost or benefit of a given policy. If 𝐶  were to be 1 for all n policies,
Equation 2 and 3 would be the same, meaning that the government would select policies which
would be optimal from investors viewpoint.

                                                  𝑗 1−𝛾
                                      𝑗     (𝑊𝑇 )
                         𝑢(𝑊𝑇 ) =                    𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (2)
                                 1 − 𝛾

                                        𝑛   1−𝛾
                                       𝐶  𝑊𝑇
                     max  {[𝐸𝜏          | 𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑦 𝑛]} 𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (3)
                    𝑛∈{0,…,𝑁}        1 − 𝛾

                        𝑛
In the PV model, 𝐶  is not fully known before 𝑡 = 𝜏, and investors cannot predict with certainty
                                                                                                                                                  𝑛
what policy will be selected by the government. The unpredictability surrounding 𝐶 , which
could distort politicians’ incentives, results in uncertainty regarding the government’s selection
of policy which is the main origin of political uncertainty. This uncertainty partly forces an
                                                            𝑛
increase in stock volatility. Agents learn about 𝐶  by interpreting the flow of political signals
through news related to the event. These signals could, for example, occur when politicians
speak about an approaching summit which gives information about what policy the government
might select. These signals cause so called political shocks, which is the main channel explored
in the model. We describe political shocks in more detail in subsection B.

                                      5
The framework can also be interpreted for elections, as explained by KPV. We use the election
interpretation when analysing political elections as opposed to the above interpretation which is
used when analysing global summits. The model equations and dynamics stay the same, only the
interpretation changes. First, the timepoint of the political event, 𝜏, now represents the election
date where the government is elected. Second, the political uncertainty stems from which
government will be selected. Third, the people who vote do not only care about economic
motives, but also other aspects about the candidates such as their personality or their view on
pressing questions (for instance regarding the topic of migration). Fourth, instead of learning
about how a selected policy will impact the profitability of firms, actors learn about the impact
that the elected government will have.

   B. Model Implications

In this subsection, we summarize the fundamental implications of the PV model by, firstly,
introducing a number of relevant equations presented by KPV and, secondly, outlining the key
implications of the model.

B.1. Relevant Equations

                        𝑑𝑆𝑡 = 𝜇𝑆(𝑆𝑡)𝑑𝑡 + 𝜎𝑆(𝑆𝑡)𝑑𝑊𝑆,𝑡 𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (4)

In Equation 4, St represents a vector of state variables, that follows a generic stochastic process.

                                                                𝑁
                                𝑆𝑡 = (𝑔̂ 𝑡, 𝑐𝑡̂ , … , 𝑐𝑡̂  , 𝑡) 𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (5)

As shown in Equation 5, 𝑆𝑡 includes the above state variables prior to the timepoint 𝜏. 𝑔̂ 𝑡 denotes
the perception about the currently set policy’s impact, which captures the state of the economy.
                                                                            𝑁
Intuitively, a high 𝑔̂ 𝑡 represents a strong economy. In addition, 𝑐𝑡̂   represents the perception of
the political cost related to each policy n. Furthermore, political shocks are the driving factor of
  𝑁
𝑐𝑡̂    .

                   𝑑𝑀𝑡
                     = 𝜇𝑀(𝑆𝑡)𝑑𝑡 + 𝜎𝑀(𝑆𝑡)𝑑𝑊𝑀,𝑡 + 𝐽𝑀,𝜏1𝑡=𝜏 𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (6)
                    𝑀𝑡

                                  𝑑𝜋𝑡
                             = 𝜎𝜋(𝑆𝑡)𝑑𝑊𝜋,𝑡 + 𝐽𝜋,𝜏1𝑡=𝜏 𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (7)
                                       𝜋𝑡

In Equation 6 the stock market’s market value 𝑀𝑡 which, intuitively, can be viewed as stock
prices, and the stochastic discount factor 𝜋𝑡, both follow a generic stochastic process with jumps
at time 𝑡 = 𝜏 when policy selection is made. 1𝑡=𝜏, represents an indicator function which is 1 at
𝑡 = 𝜏 and otherwise 0. 𝐽𝑀,𝜏 and 𝐽𝜋,𝜏 represents the jumps at 𝑡 = 𝜏 when the policy selection is
made.

As seen in Equation 6 and 7, the discount factor and stock prices also depend on the state
                                       𝑁
variables which partly includes 𝑐𝑡̂   and 𝑔̂ 𝑡 from Equation 5. More specifically, stock prices and
                                 𝑁
the discount factor react to 𝑐𝑡̂   and 𝑔̂ 𝑡. In the model, there are two central shocks that are related
to these state variables. The first type of shock is the impact shock, which occurs when investors
update their perception about the current policy’s impact on profitability resulting in an updated
𝑔̂ 𝑡. If investors observe that profitability is increasing under any current policy 𝑛, they revise 𝑔̂ 𝑡
upwards, and thus their expectations regarding profitability in the future are higher, leading to an
increase in stock prices. The second type of shock that drives stock prices and the discount rate

                                      6
is political shocks. Political shocks occur when investors receive signals prior to the political
                                                                                                                                           𝑁
event, for example when politicians speak, updating investors’ beliefs about political costs (𝑐𝑡̂  )
and thus their assigned probabilities that a given policy will be implemented. The larger these
shocks are, the larger the stock price volatility will be. These shocks and their subsequent impact
are discussed in more detail below.

B.2. Main Implications

The probability of a specific policy being implemented depends partly on the political cost.
When the political costs associated with the policy are higher, the probability of implementing
the policy is lower. Another fundamental implication is that when the economy is weak, the
probability of the government replacing the prevailing policy is relatively high. A low 𝑔̂ 𝑡 simply
indicates that the prevailing policy is not working well, and thus the probability of replacing the
policy is higher. If 𝑔̂ 𝜏 is relatively high, the probability of changing the currently set policy at t =
τ is lower. When 𝑔̂ 𝜏 is very high, sticking to the prevailing policy is expected, and thus stock
prices would not react to such a decision. In this case, there would be a small or no jump in 𝐽𝑀,𝜏,
hence no jump in the discount factor or stock price in Equation 6 or 7. Implementing another
policy when 𝑔̂ 𝜏 is very high is most likely negative news for the stock market since the deviation
from retaining the successful policy is most likely driven by political costs rather than what is
best for the stock market. If 𝑔̂ 𝜏 is low, however, keeping the old policy is negative for the stock
market, and changing to a perceived low risk policy will most likely lead to a positive jump in
stock prices.

Following KPV, the implied stock market volatility, also called implied volatility or IV, is higher
when there is uncertainty regarding whether or not a new policy will be implemented, since any
news signal prior to the event would be of more importance leading to larger political shocks
impacting Equation 6 or 7. In contrast, political signals prior to the event would be of very little
importance if 𝑔̂ 𝑡 is very high, leading to relatively low stock market volatility. The reason for the
low volatility is because investors stop caring about the signals prior to the event, since they
know that the government will almost certainly not change the prevailing policy given that 𝑔̂ 𝑡 is
extremely high. In such a case, political shocks that impact Equation 6 and 7 are much smaller.

The key takeaway from the above two paragraphs is that expectations about what policy will be
implemented are partly driven by 𝑔̂ 𝑡 and 𝑐𝑡̂ . Also, higher uncertainty regarding whether or not a
new policy will be implemented results in higher volatility, since signals preceding the event
carries more information about what policy the government might introduce.

B.2.1 Implications on IV, VRP and Slope

In the sections below we firstly, in B.2.1.1, explain how option prices are derived in the
framework, utilizing the Black-Scholes formula, and considering some of the state variables. In
B.2.1.2 – B.2.1.4, we discuss three quantities that in a measurable manner capture the different
model predictions. Similar to KPV, these are all used to construct our variables for our analysis,
which we explain in-depth in Section III. More precisely, they are utilised to empirically test
whether or not the model predictions occur in reality. To shortly summarize this, IV is selected
since it is a way to measure the predictions regarding the increased stock volatility during
political events that makes options more valuable. We also discuss the prediction that options are
more valuable in weak economic conditions, compared to strong economic conditions. The
model also predicts that the variance risk, which is defined in B.2.1.3, should be higher during
political events. Furthermore, the model predicts that the variance risk should be higher in weak
economic conditions compared to strong economic conditions. Since the variance risk premium,
or VRP, is generally higher when investors are ready to pay much for the protection against the
                                      7
variance risk, VRP allows us to test these predictions. As explained by KPV, analysing the VRP
would indicate if political uncertainty affects the state price density. Lastly, we include the
implied volatility slope, or Slope. Since the model predicts that the risk of a very bad policy
change (tail risk) is larger during weak economic condition, Slope should also be larger during
weak economic condition. The reason for this is explained in B.2.1.4.

B.2.1.1. Option Price Formula

Investors assign probabilities that any given policy choice n would be implemented by the
government at t = τ. Depending on the state variables, such as 𝑔̂ 𝑡 and 𝑐𝑡̂ , investors’ assigned
probability of each policy will differ. Following KPV, the price of a put option is derived by
firstly calculating the different Black–Scholes prices given the expected outcome of each
potential policy. Thereafter, the prices are probability-weighted using the investors assigned
probabilities to arrive at the option price. Equation 8 gives the put option price.

                                           𝜋𝑚
             𝑃𝑢𝑡(𝑆𝑡, 𝑚, 𝐾) = 𝐸 [    max(𝐾 − 𝑀𝑚, 0) | S𝑡] 𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (8)
                                                            𝜋𝑡

In the above equation, m represents the option’s maturity, 𝑀𝑚 is the market value (stock price)
of the underlying index at maturity, K represents the strike price, and S captures the state
variables such as ĝ  t and ĉ t.

B.2.1.2. Implied Volatility (IV)

As stated by KPV, much of the value of an ATM option stems from the protection it provides
against an unfavourable, from the perspective of an investor, policy choice at t = τ, which would
descend stock prices. For bordering options not spanning the political events, there is no risk of a
policy change that would be perceived as unfavourable, since there is no event during the control
group’s options’ lifespan. Thus, all else equal, options that span the political event are of
relatively higher value compared to bordering ones due to the protection they provide against the
increased price risk related to potential policy changes, which we capture through a higher IV.
IV is also higher when there is more uncertainty regarding the policy selection (as discussed
above in B.2.), which naturally drives IV for options spanning the event higher.

Recall that when the economy is very strong and 𝑔̂ 𝑡 is very high, the probability of a policy
change is very low. This means that the uncertainty regarding policy selection is low, making IV
lower compared to options in weak economic condition. If the probability of a policy change is
low, then the probability of a policy change that would be perceived as unfavourable is also low,
hence, all else equal, options spanning the political event during strong economic condition are
of relatively lower value compared to options in weaker economic conditions. Because of this,
implied volatility is also relatively low during strong economic conditions.

B.2.1.3. Variance Risk Premium (VRP)

In the theoretical framework, the variance risk premium is normally high if investors are ready to
pay much for the protection against the variance risk. According to KPV, variance risk can be
decomposed into the variance in stock returns and the risk of a price jump at t = τ. The variance
in stock returns prior to the event stems from different political shocks. The price change at t = τ
occurs because investors now know what policy is selected and adjust market prices accordingly.
The selected policy, and whether its economic consequences after being implemented is
considered more or less uncertain, will impact the variance after t = τ. Policies with higher
uncertainty will normally result in a price drop at t = τ and an increase in variance after t = τ.

                                      8
For bordering options, there is no risk of political shocks or price jumps related to a policy
change since no event occurs during the options’ lifespan. Therefore, the variance risk is lower
during the options lifespan, meaning that, all else equal, VRP is expected to be lower compared
to options spanning event.

When the economy is strong, VRP is expected to be relatively low. A strong economic state
implies that the current policy will most likely be kept, hence, investors pay very little attention
to the signals they receive prior to the event since they know that the current policy is most
likely going to be kept. More specifically, the political shocks prior to the event are less
impactful, decreasing the variance risk compared to when the economy is weak. Furthermore,
since it is anticipated that the government will not change their current policy, there is also low
probability of a big price change at t = τ, decreasing the variance risk further. This can be clearly
illustrated using an extreme case presented by KPV: if 𝑔̂ 𝑡 is infinitely high, all agents know that
the government will not change the current policy, thus no signals prior to the event matters and
no political shocks therefore occur. Furthermore, there will not be any price reaction at t = τ
since all investors know that the government will keep its current policy.

B.2.1.4. Implied Volatility Slope (Slope)

In the case of implied volatility slope, the value becomes larger when OTM options are
relatively more expensive compared to ITM options. As stated by KPV, the important
differentiating factor between the two is that OTM options deliver better protection against very
bad outcomes, which in this model occurs when, for example, the government changes to a
policy with very high uncertainty regarding its impact on the economy. Since there is no policy
change during the lifespan of options not spanning the event, the risk of a very bad policy
selection outcome does not exist, resulting in implied volatility slope being lower for bordering
options.

As previously explained, the PV model assumes that the probability of a new policy being
implemented is much lower when the economy is strong. Therefore, the risk of a very bad policy
being implemented is also lower during strong economic condition, making Slope lower during
strong economic condition.

    C. Sector-specific Predictions

In this subsection, we utilize the PV model to make predictions regarding how sectors with
different level of political exposure will react around major political events.

C.1. Comparison between More and Less Exposed Sectors

As discussed in the literature, for instance by Boutchkova et al. (2012) and Yu et al. (2017),
some industries are more exposed to political uncertainty, and are thus more sensitive
(profitability wise) to political events. To connect this to our theoretical guidelines, we know that
depending on what policy the government sets, firm profitability will be affected in different
ways. Furthermore, as explained in subsections A and B, the uncertainty about what policy the
government will implement at 𝑡 = 𝜏 contributes to uncertainty about how future firm
profitability will be impacted by the event, driving IV. Since the more exposed sectors’
profitability would to a greater extent be affected by what policy the government sets, IV is
predicted to be larger for these sectors compared to the less exposed sectors. We expect that this
greater profitability dependency will lead to more volatility prior to the political event. The
relatively higher volatility prior to the event is expected to occur because every political signal in
the form of political shocks, which updates investors’ beliefs about what policy the government
might select, will be larger for the more exposed sectors. The political shocks are larger for the
                                      9
more exposed sectors since their profitability is more sensitive to the selection of the policy. An
easy way to illustrate this is through an extreme case: assuming that the less exposed industries’
profitability does not depend at all on what policy the government sets, then, the flow of
information prior to the event produces no political shocks for these industries, thus not
increasing IV. On the other hand, these signals would still matter for the more exposed industries
whose profitability is more dependent on the selection of policy, driving IV and making it, all
else equal, relatively larger compared to the less exposed industries. In Section III, we
thoroughly define the IV difference (IVD), for any given event, between options spanning the
event and nearby options not spanning the event. Using the PV model, we therefore predict the
IVD to be larger for the more exposed industries.

C.2. The Impact of Economic Conditions

We also argue that the IVD difference between the more and less exposed sectors, described
above, will be smaller in a stronger economy. We arrive at this prediction by using the PV
model. A simple way to illustrate this is through an extreme case described by KPV: when the
economy is in an infinitely good state, the probability that the government will change the
currently set policy is 0%. In this case, the flow of information prior to the event produces no
political shocks for any industry that would update investors beliefs about what policy the
government might select. This is because all investors know that the government will not change
the current policy due to the extremely good economic state. The absence of any political
shocks, would mean that the mechanism where political signals matter more for exposed sectors,
would totally disappear. Thus, this extra IV stemming from exposure differences between the
sectors would not exist, meaning that the extra IVD difference between the more and less
exposed sectors would also disappear. Following KPV, when the economy is weak, the
probability of a policy change increases. Therefore, we predict that these signals prior to the
event start to matter relatively more for the more exposed sectors again, as explained in C.1,
increasing IV and subsequently IVD relatively more for the exposed sectors.

                                    III. Empirical Design

In the following section, we specify our empirical design, and in the process, we describe our
variables of interest and data in more detail. The empirical design follows the main sections of
KPV and incorporates the principal findings of Yu et al. (2017) in our procedure for the sector-
level analysis.

   A. Data Description
A.1. Options

Similar to KPV, we use the U.S. database in OptionMetrics for options data spanning 1996-
2020. For data covering U.S. political events, we use the country’s most followed stock market
index, namely, the S&P 500 index. For data covering events relevant to the Eurozone, we use the
Euro Stoxx 50 index. While KPV does not include this index, we argue that it can be used as a
proxy for the region. In fact, this is considered Europe’s leading blue-chip index for the Euro
area and it is made up by 50 of the largest stocks from 8 countries in the Eurozone (Qontigo,
2021). Lastly, for our industries, we use available indices for the S&P 500 sectors (the selection
of these sectors is further explained in A.4). The start-dates of the Eurozone and industry options
data differ from the start-date on the S&P 500 index. For Eurozone data, we use options from
2008 to match our events of interest, and for our industries, we use options data from 2000 since
OptionMetrics does not provide S&P sector-level data earlier than that.

                                      10
Our options data set includes, inter alia, quotidian data on implied volatilities, deltas, and open
interest. Also, besides OptionMetrics, we use the Oxford-Man Institute’s Realized Library for
data on realized variances. We use the options data to construct our options variables of interest.

A.2. Economic Conditions

We use the economic conditions data to construct our macroeconomic variables (GDP, CLI, FST
and MKT); these are further explained in subsection B. We use the International Monetary Fund
(IMF), Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), and FactSet.
Regarding OECD and FactSet, we use their online databases, while the data from IMF is hand-
collected from different World Economic Outlook reports ranging from 1996 to 2020.

A.3. Political Events

In our analysis, we relate data on a list of relevant political elections and global summits to our
option market and macroeconomic variables. To better capture political uncertainty, these events
strictly follow the main criteria set by KPV and, hence, must be political in nature and lead to
substantial policy shifts. Also, the event dates must be determined far in advance (at least four
weeks prior to the event date) so that they are publicly known on the dates at which we examine
the options spanning the relevant events.

First, we select data on national elections ranging from 1996 to the presidential election of 2020
for the U.S. and our sectors. These include both the U.S. senate elections and the presidential
elections since the U.S. president has executive control over changes in government policy. In
addition, similarly to KPV excluding other countries’ elections in the U.S.-analysis, we cannot
include U.S. elections in the Eurozone-analysis or vice versa. Also, we cannot include the
different national elections of Eurozone countries in our analysis (since an election in Finland
will generally not cause a major impact on the Euro Stoxx 50, for instance). However, we
deviate slightly from this logic when we include three additional national elections of special
importance for the Euro area. As mentioned by KPV, the two Greek elections of 2012 had a
profound impact on the future of Eurozone, mostly due to a possible Greek exit from the area
and subsequent impact on the future of endangered economies such as Spain and Italy.
Additionally, we include the 2016 United Kingdom EU membership referendum in the sample.
This extraordinary event created major political uncertainty among Eurozone member states and
is thus of importance (Graziano, Handley and Limao, 2021). Table AI in Appendix summarizes
our list of election events, including their dates and option availability.

Second, we consider four types of global summits, namely, the G7/G8/G20 summits and
European summits. Since we include post-2011 data, as opposed to KPV, we include G7
summits due to the 2014 Crimean crisis and subsequent exclusion of Russia from the member
list. Not all summits are used in the empirical analysis however, instead, the allowed summits
should primarily focus on economic issues and have the possibility of leading to major changes
in economic policy, as stated by KPV. We have, besides from including the summits used by
KPV, also identified recent events by studying the summit agendas and the content of the final
announcements to support our selections. For each potential summit, we study the topics and
final announcements using available information from the G7 Research Group, G20 Research
Group, European Council, and Council of European Union. Regarding the European summits,
we consider both EU and Eurozone summits. Since all Eurozone countries are members of the
EU, our inclusion of EU summits fits perfectly well in the Eurozone analysis. In our sample, we
include all global summits except the European summits for the USA, while the Eurozone
analysis is based on all relevant summits since the EU member states are all part of the G20
meetings. In addition, France, Germany, and Italy are part of the G7/G8 group. Although they
are a minority of the Eurozone, France and Germany are, by far, the largest economies in the
Euro area. Also, all three contribute to 75% of the Euro Stoxx 50 index, as of March 2021
                                      11
(Qontigo, 2021). Thus, it would be wise to include all economic relevant G7/G8 summits in the
Eurozone-analysis to capture the uncertainty of those meetings on the major members and,
thereafter, indirectly on the Eurozone. Furthermore, our S&P sectors’ options data are related to
U.S. events only, as the European summits are not relevant for the U.S. analysis and thus
irrelevant for the sectors. Table AII in appendix presents our list of summits, including their
dates, topics, and option availability.

A.4. Sectors

We collect industry options data spanning U.S. events starting in 2000 and use an identical test
procedure to the U.S.- and Eurozone analysis. To fully test the predictions introduced in Section
II, we compare the different industries by sorting our group of sectors based on different levels
of political sensitivity. Apart from the PV model, we use the main findings of Yu et al. (2017) to
guide this analysis. In their study, they investigate how economic policy uncertainty (EPU)
drives the different betas of the S&P 500 industries. The EPU-index, developed by Baker,
Bloom and Davis (2016), is an index on uncertainty related to economic policy. Although EPU
and political uncertainty are not directly interchangeable, as stated by KPV, this index has been
used as a proxy for political uncertainty by Pastor and Veronesi (2017). Furthermore, we argue
that all our political events are strongly related to EPU as this is a main criterion when selecting
events. All political events have been thoroughly chosen studying their topics and/or the
different decisions taken, hence, these events should lead to both EPU and political uncertainty.
Thus, the inclusion of EPU as a guidance in our analysis is suited with regard to theory and our
event sample.

Yu et al. (2017) conclude that the betas of Financials, Materials, and Inf. Tech., are most likely
higher than other industries in their tests. Hence, they conclude that these industries are
significantly affected by uncertainty related to economic policy changes. On the other hand,
Energy, Utilities and Con. Staples, are less affected by this uncertainty and, therefore, have betas
that are least driven by EPU, implying that they are politically less exposed. The U.S. industry
ranking, presented by Yu et al. (2017), is shown in Table AI, in Appendix. Following their
findings, we include the aforementioned sector indices and divide them accordingly in
subsequent analysis. Indeed, we recognize that our industry sample is narrowed to S&P sectors.
However, even though our scope is limited, the inclusion of other market’s sectors is currently
problematic since there is a lack of empirical studies on the relationship between political
uncertainty and non-U.S. sectors in terms of exposure. Although Hill, A. Korczak and P.
Korczak (2019) rank UK sectors, their tests are limited to the Brexit referendum, as mentioned in
Section I. Nevertheless, we hesitate to design a broader analysis covering other markets due to
the limited literature.

B. Variable Description

In the following subsection, we construct our variables and further clarify their function in our
empirical analysis.

B.1. Implied Volatility Difference (IVD)

Using implied volatility introduced in our theoretical framework, we construct our first option
variable. Following KPV, we specify implied volatility for an option that is ATM at time 𝑡 and
matures at time 𝑚 > 𝑡, as 𝐼𝑉𝑡,𝑚. For each option, OptionMetrics calculates the implied volatility
value. In subsequent tests, we focus primarily on options with accompanying 𝐼𝑉𝑡,𝑚 for which
𝑡 < 𝜏 < 𝑚 holds, for each political event with the date τ. When choosing this data, we first find
the two expiration dates, called 𝑎 and 𝑏, that surround τ. More specifically, these dates must
fulfil 𝑎 < 𝜏 < 𝑏 (note that 𝑏 is the expiration date for options spanning the event). In the
selection of appropriate dates, we examine the distance from the event to the nearest expiration
                                      12
date. If this distance is six days or more, we select 𝑎 and 𝑏 so that they are one month apart.
However, if the distance is five days or less, the two dates should be two months apart. As KPV
mentions, this requirement helps us avoid using “ultra-short-maturity options” and dealing with
political uncertainty that gets settled a few days from the event date. Thereafter, we choose the
expiration date following 𝑏 which is denoted 𝑐 (note that this expiration date must always be one
month apart 𝑏 regardless of the distance between 𝑎 and 𝑏 according to KPV). Both 𝑎 and 𝑐 are
expiration dates of the control groups. Hence, options with 𝑏 as expiration date (treatment group)
are related to bordering control group options in subsequent calculations and tests.

Options included in our sample must satisfy three criteria specified by KPV. First, they must be
ATM options with deltas less than 0.5 but greater than 0.4, in terms of absolute values. Second,
they must have positive open interest. Finally, all options must have 𝑠 days until the relevant
expiration date, 𝑎, 𝑏 or 𝑐. Hence, within each group, we consider implied volatilities from
multiple dates that are 𝑠 days from the relevant expiration date. For instance, in our treatment
group, the event date is in-between 𝑏 − 𝑠 and 𝑏, or more precisely, 𝑏 − 𝑠 < 𝜏 < 𝑏. Following
KPV, we define 𝐼𝑉𝑏−𝑠,𝑏 and adjust it to make it more robust. First, we modify by computing
𝐼𝑉𝑏−𝑠,𝑏 − 0,5 ∗ (𝐼𝑉𝑎−𝑠,𝑎 + 𝐼𝑉𝑐−𝑠,𝑐). Thereafter, we replace the aforementioned three components,
for any given 𝑠, by averages of 𝐼𝑉-values across multiple different 𝑠-values. We conduct this
modification to reduce the “noise in the estimation”, as stated by KPV. Subsequently, we create
̅𝐼𝑉̅ ̅ 𝑏, ̅𝐼𝑉̅ ̅ 𝑎 and ̅𝐼𝑉̅ ̅ 𝑐. For instance, we express ̅𝐼𝑉̅ ̅ 𝑏 as

             ̅𝐼𝑉̅ ̅ 𝑏 = 𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛 {𝐼𝑉𝑏−𝑠,𝑏 ∶ 𝑏 − 𝑠 ∈ [𝜏 − 20, 𝜏 − 1]} 𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (9)

Following KPV, ̅𝐼𝑉̅ ̅ 𝑏 is the average implied volatility over all acceptable options up until 𝜏 − 1,
that expire at 𝑏. More precisely, it is the (equal-weighted) average of 𝐼𝑉𝑏−𝑠,𝑏 across all
acceptable options and where 𝑏 − 𝑠 is in the 20-trading-day window preceding the event. We
follow KPV and select the specific length of this window to account for the “day-to-day option
price fluctuations”. Thereafter, we repeat the procedure and adjust the timeframe accordingly for
the control groups, in order to create ̅𝐼𝑉̅ ̅ 𝑎 and ̅𝐼𝑉̅ ̅ 𝑐. Finally, we define our first option variable,
namely, the implied volatility difference (IVD) as

                         𝐼𝑉𝐷𝜏 = ̅𝐼𝑉̅ ̅ 𝑏 − 0,5 ∗ (̅𝐼𝑉̅ ̅ 𝑎 + ̅𝐼𝑉̅ ̅ 𝑐) Equation (10)

Following the PV model, if this value is above 0, for any given event, it would indicate that
options with 𝑏 as expiration date, have higher implied volatility values, on average, than
bordering options belonging to the control groups.

B.2. Variance Risk Premium Difference (VRPD)

Our second option variable is denoted 𝑉𝑅𝑃𝐷𝜏 and is the variance risk premium difference
(VRPD) for event date 𝜏. First, we define the variance risk premium at time 𝑡 for an acceptable
option maturing at time 𝑚 > 𝑡 as

                                    2       2
                            𝑉𝑅𝑃𝑡,𝑚 = 𝐼𝑉𝑡,𝑚 − 𝑅𝑉𝑡,𝑚            𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (11)

                         2
In the above equation, 𝑅𝑉𝑡,𝑚 denotes the (average) realized variance between 𝑡 and 𝑚, and it is
used to construct the quotidian list of 𝑉𝑅𝑃𝑡,𝑚. As KPV states, this variable provides an impartial
and fair measure of the expected variance across an option’s life. When calculating VRPD, we
choose 𝑎, 𝑏 and 𝑐, in the same fashion as in the above section. Thereafter, we utilize the
following equation:

                     𝑉𝑅𝑃𝐷𝜏 = ̅𝑉𝑅𝑃̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ 𝑏 − 0,5 ∗ (̅𝑉𝑅𝑃̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ 𝑎 + ̅𝑉𝑅𝑃̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ 𝑐) 𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (12)

                                      13
where the three components are computed in the same way as in B.1. Note that the acceptable
options sample for our 𝑉𝑅𝑃𝐷 calculations is the same as for 𝐼𝑉𝐷 since the criteria do not
change. If VRPD is positive, for any given political event, KPV suggests that investors value the
insurance against the variance risk for options spanning the event date relatively more, compared
to bordering options in the control groups.

B.3. Implied Volatility Slope Difference (SlopeD)

Our final option variable, SlopeD, is constructed by the slope coefficient of the function that
links implied volatility to an option’s Black-Scholes delta, as specified by KPV. From our data
sample, we construct a quotidian list of slopes, namely, 𝑆𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑡,𝑚. Also, we follow KPV and
change the criteria for our acceptable options. Specifically, we include put options at time 𝑡 with
positive open interest and deltas less than -0,1 but greater than -0,5. Also, these options are
OTM.

When calculating 𝑆𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑡,𝑚, we construct a regression that relates the options’ implied volatilities
against their deltas. However, we only compute the slope coefficient given that at least three
acceptable options exist for any time 𝑡, as KPV states. Thereafter, we compute our variable with
the following equation:

           𝑆𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑒𝐷𝜏 = 𝑆𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑒̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ 𝑏 − 0,5 ∗ (𝑆𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑒̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ 𝑎 + 𝑆𝑙𝑜𝑝𝑒̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ ̅ 𝑐) 𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (13)

The above three components are defined and calculated in the same manner as their counterparts
in B.1. If the value is above 0, for any given event, KPV suggests that investors pay a higher
price for protection against the tail risk, for options in the treatment group compared to bordering
options not spanning the event.

B.4. Macroeconomic Variables (GDP, CLI, FST, and MKT)

Similar to KPV, we relate our option variables to the economic conditions data to test whether
the pricing of political uncertainty is influenced by the state of the economy. A high value of any
these variables indicates that the economic conditions are strong. We use the OECD database for
data on the seasonally adjusted real GDP growth in the same quarter as the event date for each
observation. This variable is called GDP onward. Also, we import data on the Composite
Leading Indicator, CLI, in the same month as the event for each observation. More specifically,
this variable identifies signals of turning points in business cycles, as stated by KPV. Our next
macroeconomic variable, FST, is the most recent real GDP growth forecast for the following
year from the event date of each observation, and it is obtained from the IMF. Finally, we use
FactSet for the stock market index return over the previous three months from the date of the
event for each observation, called MKT in our analysis.

C. Hypotheses

Based on our theoretical framework and empirical design, we formulate four hypotheses related
to the three risks associated with events related to the U.S., Eurozone, and S&P sectors. We
exclude VRPD and SlopeD from our sector-level analysis, as the relevant data on realized
variance is not available for the S&P sectors. In addition, there is a lack of industry options data
for SlopeD due to the variable criteria. Therefore, our hypotheses and subsequent tests for the
sector-level analysis slightly differ from the U.S.- and Eurozone analysis. We specify our
hypotheses, including their predictions, below.

Hypothesis (1): On average, the option variables (IVD, VRPD, and SlopeD) are all positive.
Namely, the uncertainty stemming from major political events is priced in the options market.

                                      14
Hypothesis (2): On average, the option variables (IVD, VRPD, and SlopeD) are greater when
the economic conditions are weaker. Namely, political uncertainty has larger effects on options
when the economy is weaker.
Hypothesis (3): On average, IVD is greater for sectors that are more sensitive to political
uncertainty. Namely, political uncertainty has larger effects on the implied volatility of options
in sectors with higher exposure to political uncertainty.
Hypothesis (4): On average, the IVD difference between the more and less exposed sectors is
greater when the economic conditions are weaker. Namely, political uncertainty has larger
effects in terms of IVD on the more exposed sectors, when the economy is weaker.

                                  IV. Empirical Results
In the following section, we present and interpret our main empirical results from our tests. We
divide our findings into regions and sectors.

A. U.S. and Eurozone analysis
Table I.

                                    Option market variables

                                           IVD VRPD SlopeD
  Mean (All observations) 0,029 0,018 0,021
  P-value two-tailed 0,0013 0,0066 0,0240
   t-statistic 3,40 2,84 2,35
  Obs. 86 84 69
  Std. error 0,0086 0,0062 0,0087

                                           IVD VRPD SlopeD
  U.S. mean 0,016 0,0057 0,016
  Eurozone mean 0,037 0,024 0,024

In Table I, we test if IVD, VRPD and SlopeD are significantly different from 0. “Mean” represents the mean of
IVD, VRPD and SlopeD across all events (U.S. plus Eurozone). Furthermore, the p-values, t-statistics,
numbers of observations and standard errors refer to the test where all events (U.S. plus Eurozone) are
included. The p-values also refer to the two tailed p-value. We use standard errors that are clustered on a
monthly basis, since IVD, VRPD and SlopeD for events that occur during the same month, occur during
similar conditions, and are therefore correlated with each other. IVD, VRPD and SlopeD are reported in
decimals, meaning that 0.029 represents a 2.9 percentage-point difference between the treatment and control
group. We also report the mean for the U.S. and Eurozone subsamples.
A.1. Option variables during Political Events
The first hypothesis states that political uncertainty is priced in the option market. For this to
hold true, IVD, VRPD and SlopeD should all be larger than 0, on average. Table I summarizes
the empirical results related to the first hypothesis. Similar to KPV we find support for the
prediction stating that all three option variables are larger than 0, on average.
A.1.1. IVD prediction
The positive IVD in Table I represents the price premium for options spanning the political
event, since an increase in implied volatility results in higher option prices. More specifically,
IVD represents the extra cost for the protection against the political uncertainty related to
political events. Accounting for all observations across the U.S. and Eurozone, we observe an
                                      15
average IVD of 0.029 (p-value = 0.0013). This represents a price premium for a put option
during an average political event of roughly 12% compared to the control group. As stated by
KPV, a percentage increase in implied volatility for ATM put options approximately result in the
same percentage increase in the put option’s price. Hence, 12% is calculated by taking the IVD
divided by the average IV of the control group. Furthermore, we observe a 0.016 IVD in the U.S.
subsample and a 0.037 IVD for Eurozone. Possible explanations for the difference between the
U.S. and Eurozone results are presented in Section V.
A.1.2. VRPD prediction
We also observe a positive VRPD on an aggregate level and across both the U.S. and Eurozone
samples. The observed VRPD across all events is 0.018 and is statistically significant (p-value =
0.0066), implying that the variance risk associated with the political events results in a price
premium for options spanning the event, affecting the state price density. VRPD is 0.024 in the
Eurozone sample and 0.0057 in the U.S. sample. Once again, we observe a higher value for
Eurozone.
A.1.3. SlopeD prediction
As shown in Table I, Slope is 0.021 higher in the treatment group compared to the control group
(p-value = 0.024), indicating that the tail risk associated with political events is priced in the
treatment options. Consequently, this supports the first hypothesis. The average value of SlopeD
is 0.016 in the U.S. sample and 0.024 in the Eurozone sample. Once again, we observe a higher
value in the Eurozone sample.

                                      16
Table II.
                  Option market variables regressed against economic conditions

                                        IVD
                  GDP CLI FST MKT
Slope coefficient -0.022*** -0.021*** -0.018** -0.031***
P-value (coef.) 0.002 0.004 0.013 0.00
t-statistic -3.16 -2.99 -2.53 -4.72
  2
R                  0.106 0.096 0.071 0.212
Obs. 86 86 86 85
Std. error 0.0069 0.0070 0.0070 0.0066

                                  VRPD
                  GDP CLI FST MKT
Slope coefficient -0.012** -0.010* -0.0070 -0.014***
P-value (coef.) 0.018 0.052 0.156 0.004
t-statistic -2.4 -1.97 -1.43 -2.92
  2
R                  0.066 0.045 0.024 0.094
Obs. 84 84 84 84
Std. error 0.0048 0.0048 0.0049 0.0048

                                        SlopeD
                  GDP CLI FST MKT
Slope coefficient -0.033*** -0.030*** -0.028*** -0.020**
P-value (coef.) 0.000014 0.000104 0.000380 0.0120
t-statistic -4.69 -4.13 -3.74 -2.59
  2
R                  0.247 0.203 0.173 0.092
Obs. 69 69 69 68
Std. error 0.0071 0.0073 0.0074 0.0079

In Table II, we run a OLS regression. Each of the four economic condition variables, placed on the x-axis, are
one by one regressed, firstly, against IVD, which is on the y-axis. We then run the same test but swap IVD for
SlopeD and VRPD. Each coefficient represents the slope coefficient in each standalone regression. We run 12
different regressions (4 economic measures * 3 options market variables). For example, the slope coefficient
of -0.022 in the above table means that a one increase, which represents one standard deviation, in the GDP
metric would result in a 0.022 decrease in IVD. Recall that GDP, CLI, FST and MKT is zero mean and unit
variance standardized. The interpretation is the same for CLI, FST and MKT. All observations where data is
available for both U.S. and the Eurozone are included. The p-values and t-statistics refer to the test if the slope
coefficients are significantly different from 0. The p-values represent the two-tailed p-value.
* p-value < .1, ** p-value < .05, *** p-value < .01
A.2. Option variables in Relation to Economic Conditions
The second hypothesis states that IVD, VRPD and SlopeD are all relatively larger in weaker
economic conditions, compared to stronger economic conditions. From our OLS regressions in
Table II, we find a clear relationship, where larger values of IVD, VRPD and SlopeD are
associated with a relatively weaker economic condition. As shown by the graphs in Figures I -
III and in Table II, there is a negative slope coefficient when IVD, VRPD and SlopeD, are each
regressed against the four different macroeconomic variables. These outcomes thus support the
PV model’s prediction that political uncertainty has a larger impact on the option variables
during weak economic conditions. In conclusion, we find support for the second hypothesis. The
only two regressions where the slope coefficient is not statistically significantly negative on the
                                      17
5% level are when VRPD is regressed against CLI (p-value = 0.052) and when VRPD is
regressed against FST (p-value = 0.156). Similar to KPV, we find that the effects of the option
variables are larger during weak economic conditions, the only difference being that KPV also
finds significance when VRPD is regressed against FST and CLI. Since all economic metrics are
standardized to zero-mean and with unit variance, a one standard deviation decrease in the GDP
metric would result in a 0.022 IVD increase, as an example (see slope coefficient in Table II).

Figure I-III are graphical illustrations of the OLS regressions in Table II. The x-axis represents standard
deviations of each economic metric. The y-axis represents the values of the three option variables in decimal
form.
Figure I.

                                      18
Figure II.

Figure III.

                                      19
B. Sector-level Analysis
B.1 IVD Difference between More Exposed and Less Exposed Industries
Table III.

                                                IVD mean on industry level
                 Aggregate More exposed group Less exposed group Materials Energy Inf. Tech. Financials Utilities Con. Staples
 IVD mean 0.016** 0.018** 0.014* 0.021*** 0.020** 0.016** 0.017** 0.012* 0.0090*
 P-value two-tailed 0,036 0,013 0,085 0,005 0,027 0,012 0,028 0,075 0,061
 t-statistic 2,23 2,67 1,79 3,07 2,34 2,69 2,32 1,85 1,95
 Obs. 180 90 90 30 30 30 30 30 30
 Std. error 0,0071 0,0066 0,0077 0,0067 0,0086 0,0059 0,0072 0,0067 0,0046

In this table, we display each U.S. industry’s average IVD during all US events for which data is available.
The aggregate IVD mean is the average IVD including all events for all industries. 180 observations come
from 6 industries * 30 events per industry. Furthermore, the p-value, t-statistic and numbers of observations
refer to testing if IVD is different from 0. The p-value also refer to the two- tailed p-value. The test for the
aggregate mean uses standard errors clustered on a monthly basis. The reason we use clustering on the
aggregate sample is because each industry observation results in one observation for the aggregate sample,
which means that during each event, 6 datapoints are used (one for each industry). These data points are
naturally correlated to each other since they occur during the same month, making clustering relevant. The
more exposed and less exposed samples also use standard error clustered on a monthly basis due to the same
reasoning as for the aggregate.
* p-value < .1, ** p-value < .05, *** p-value < .01
Table IV.

                              High exposure group IVD - low exposure group IVD
                           Mean IVD difference 0,0039
                             P-value 0,10
                                  t-statistic 1,69
                            Obs. 30 (180)
                             Std. error 0,0023

In this table, the mean refers to the average difference between the average IVD of the more exposed group
and the less exposed group (0.018-0.014 from Table III = 0,0039). Each observation therefore includes 3
observations from the exposed group, and 3 observations from the less exposed group. Each observation in the
“Mean IVD difference” is constructed by grouping these 6 industry IVD values per event into the less exposed
and more exposed group. We then compute the difference between the two groups’ average IVD during every
event. Specifically, we receive 1 “Mean IVD difference” observation per event, and thus 30 data points in
total. The p-value (two-tailed) and t-statistic refer to testing if these 30 measures of the IVD difference
between the two groups is significantly larger than 0, which would indicate a higher IVD for the more exposed
group. The standard errors are not clustered in this table since all industry IVD observations during each
event are together constructed into 1 data point for the test. 180 refers to all IVD data points on an industry
level, which are used to construct the 30 points used in the test. See description in Table V for an alternative to
this test, utilizing 270 observations which are instead clustered, yielding the exact same results as this table.

                                      20
Table V.

                    Mean IVD difference between more and less exposed group
                                         More exposed group
                                    Inf. Tech. Financials Materials
          p
             u Utilities 0,003 0,004 0.008**
            or
             g
          d
            es
            o Energy -0,004 -0,003 0,001
          p
            x
            e
              ss
            e Con. Staples 0.007*** 0,008 0.012***
             L

In this table, we compute the mean IVD difference between each sector in the more exposed group and each
sector in the less exposed group. -0.003 in the middle of the table therefore represents the mean IVD in
Financials minus the mean IVD in Energy. We also test if there is a significant difference between each pair of
sectors. More specifically, we compute the IVD difference between the two chosen sectors during each event,
resulting in 30 total IVD differences. In the next step we test if these IVD differences are significantly larger
than 0. Standard errors are not clustered for the same reason as in table IV. Another way to construct the test
in Table IV it to compute each high exposure industry minus each low exposure industry as in this table, which
would give 9*30 = 270 observations. These 270 observations are then clustered on an event basis. We then
test if the 270 observations on an aggregate lever is greater than 0. When conducting this test, we observe
exact same results as in Table IV, with the exact same p-value, mean IVD difference and standard errors.
* p-value < .1, ** p-value < .05, *** p-value < .01
As shown in Figure III, the more exposed basket, which includes Materials, Inf. Tech., and
Financials, displays a IVD of 0.018, compared to 0.014 for the less exposed basket. This
difference of 0.004 is not statistically significant (p-value = 0.10). In Table V, we also compute
the mean IVD difference between each sector in the more exposed group and each sector in the
less exposed group. As displayed, all sectors exhibit larger IVD values in the more exposed
group compared to the less exposed group, except for when Energy is compared to Inf. Tech.
and Financials. The difference between Inf. Tech. and Con. Staples, as well as the difference
between Materials and Con. Staples are significant on a 1% level, while the difference between
Materials and Utilities is significant on a 5% level. To conclude the results, we find a pattern
supporting our prediction that the more exposed sectors will display a higher IVD during
political events, but we cannot confidently state that this pattern exists in the real population due
to the p-value being too high in majority of the comparisons. The low power of the test could be
a potential issue. This is discussed in more details in Section V.
In Table III, we provide a ranking of the individual sectors in terms of IVD. As displayed,
Materials, Inf. Tech. and Financials represent the three of the four sectors with highest IVD.
What is interesting is that Energy, which we classified in the less sensitive basket, is the sector
with the second highest IVD. This is further discussed in Section V.
We also test if IVD on an aggregate level in the different samples are larger than 0, to ensure that
political uncertainty is priced on a sector level. We find that the average IVD across all
observations is 0.016, which is statistically significant on a 5% level.

                                      21
B.2. IVD Difference between More Exposed and Less Exposed Industries in Relation to
Economic Conditions
Table VI.

           (High exposure group IVD - low exposure group IVD) regressed against economic conditions
                    GDP CLI FST MKT
 Slope coefficient 0,005 0,002 0,001 0,006
 P-value (coef.) 0,023 0,402 0,541 0,015
 t-statistic 2,40 0,85 0,62 2,6
  2
 R                     0,171 0,025 0,014 0,195
 Obs. 30 30 30 30
 Std. error 0,0022 0,0023 0,0024 0,0021

In Table VI, we run a standard OLS regression. Each of the four economic condition variables, placed on the
x-axis, are one by one, in separate regressions, regressed against the IVD difference between the more
exposed and less exposed group. Each coefficient represents the slope coefficient. For example, the slope
coefficient of 0.005 under GDP means that a one standard deviation increase in the GDP metric would result
in a 0.005 increase in the IVD difference between the more exposed and less exposed group. The p-values and
t statistics refer to the test if the slope coefficients are significantly different from 0.
Table VI displays the test for our final industry hypothesis, namely, that the IVD difference
between the more and less exposed sectors will be smaller in a stronger economy. We run a
simple OLS regression with the difference in IVD between the two groups against the economic
condition variables. We are looking for a negative slope coefficient, which would indicate a
decrease in the difference in IVD when the economy is stronger. Based on our sample, we see no
evidence of this expected prediction. No coefficient is negative; hence we cannot find any
empirical evidence for the fourth hypothesis.

                                     V. Discussion
In the following section, we discuss our empirical results in relation to the theory, as well as
assessing the robustness of our analysis and presenting limitations worth acknowledging.

   A. Comparison between the U.S. and Eurozone
When interpreting our results in Table I, we spot an eye-catching finding related to the U.S.- and
Eurozone-analysis. Namely, IVD, VRPD and SlopeD are all, on average, clearly larger in the
Eurozone sample compared to the U.S. sample. While there are several potential explanations,
we discuss a few factors that the PV model would point towards below. Firstly, economic
condition is, as can be viewed in Table II and Figures I-III, clearly negatively related to the size
of IVD, VRPD and SlopeD. We observe that all four macroeconomic variables are noticeably
lower in the Eurozone sample compared to the U.S. sample. For example, the average seasonally
adjusted real GDP growth in the given quarter is 0.45% in the U.S. and 0.01% in Eurozone,
meaning that the difference in the option variables between the two groups could partly be
explained by the difference in economic condition. Using the slope of -0.027 in the regression of
IVD against the non-standardized quarterly GDP growth (See Figure AI in Appendix), we can
infer that a 1 percentage-point decrease in GDP growth would, according to the regression, result
in a 2.7 percentage-points higher IVD. The average GDP growth in the Eurozone sample is 0.44
percentage-points lower compared to the U.S., which implies that there should be a 1.2
percentage-points higher IVD in the Eurozone sample (2.7 * 0.44 = 1.2). This can be compared
to the realized difference of 2.1 percentage-points. Surely, our regression is not a perfect
representation of the population effect, but it clearly indicates that economic conditions could
play a role in explaining the difference.

                                      22
Another potential factor that could cause differences in the three option variables is how
unpredictable politicians are regarding policy changes, in the two regions. As discussed in the
theoretical framework, more uncertainty would lead to larger shocks. Since we lack a measure to
capture this, we avoid drawing any further conclusions.

   B. Insights from Extraordinary Events
From our results, we identify several abnormally high IVD values, especially for the U.S. and
Eurozone, compared to their averages. Interestingly, these values often occur during
extraordinary events. Thus, we further discuss our results with accompanying potential
explanations using the intuition from our theoretical framework. Hence, by studying these
observations in-depth, we can better assess our results in relation to the model mechanisms. The
first example concerns the second 2012 Greek election where the Eurozone IVD was 0.09 (which
is almost three times the average IVD in our sample). We illustrate this case in Figure AII. This
event occurred during the peak of the financial crisis from Greece’s perspective. In fact, we find
that the economic conditions in Eurozone were substantially lower compared to other events,
especially against post-2012 summits. Naturally, given our model predictions, these weaker
conditions increase IVD. Furthermore, major uncertainty regarding the future of the Eurozone
was present during this period. First, the political situation in Greece was heavily troublesome
with considerable election uncertainty, especially after the May election in which no party took
an absolute majority of the seats. Second, the two Greek legislative elections also induced
uncertainty within the Eurozone (Dimitrakopoulos, 2012). In short, it is possible that this very
uncertain environment would lead to higher implied volatility as predicted by our theoretical
framework, thus, making options spanning the event date more valuable and increasing the
protection against the price risk. As a result, IVD becomes abnormally high. Other events during
the peak of the Eurozone crisis (2010-2012) also include such values. In this case, the economic
conditions were also substantially lower compared to other years. In addition, many of the global
summits discussed the crisis implying a general uncertainty about possible government
interventions which indicates a strengthening of the political shocks. For instance, the Eurozone
IVD reached 0.13 in the 2010-06-26 G20 summit which included the recovery from the debt
crisis on the agenda (in comparison, the U.S. IVD was less than 0.01). Furthermore, we see that
the Eurozone IVD surged to 0.09 during the Brexit referendum of 2016. Compared to the
aforementioned events, the economic conditions were not relatively weaker and are, therefore,
not the main driver for the relatively higher IVD. In fact, there was a deep uncertainty among
policymakers, investors, and within the general public, regarding the election outcome and
subsequent consequences on the relationship between the UK and EU. Consequently, this could
potentially lead to larger political shocks, driving IVD. Furthermore, companies dependent on
the UK-EU relationship (which surely include Eurozone firms) were unsure regarding the impact
on their businesses in terms of profitability given a Brexit outcome. Since the realized outcome
was to leave the EU, this future profitability uncertainty is expected to have strengthened the
impact shocks. Additionally, as Hill, A. Korczak and P. Korczak (2019) states, several sectors
were deeply affected by the political risk surrounding the event (mainly because of firm-level
uncertainty about profitability). Though this study is limited to the UK, non-UK firms dependent
on the relationship could have also been affected by this uncertainty. Nonetheless, the impact
shocks were most likely noteworthy which could explain the high IVD.
Other extraordinary events include the different elections and summits surrounding the global
financial crisis starting in 2007. In December 2008, the Eurozone IVD peaked at almost 0.45,
and the U.S. IVD surged to 0.11 a month earlier in the 2008 U.S. presidential election (in which
battling the financial crisis was a critical theme). In fact, the economic conditions were relatively
weaker during this period. Furthermore, we see similar findings for the U.S. presidential
elections 2016 and 2020. In the former, the U.S. IVD was 0.03 (more than twice the average),
and in the latter, it was almost five times the average. Though the economic conditions were not

                                      23
notably weaker, major election uncertainty could have surrounded both events which possibly
strengthened the political shocks.

   C. Investigating the Sectors
While we observe a pattern supporting our third hypothesis, we do not identify significant results
in the majority of our tests. However, we observe interesting findings about our sectors that
could explain some of our results. For instance, the case of the Energy sector is striking and
worth analyzing in-depth. Comparing the sectors on an event-to-event basis, we find abnormal
values for many events, and in particular the 2008 U.S. presidential election. In fact, the IVD
value of over 0.20 for Energy was 10 times its average while the other sectors show IVD values
between 0.09-0.13. According to Table AIII, Energy’s beta measuring the systematic risk is
expected to be the least affected by political uncertainty, amongst our sectors. However, we
observe that the average IVD value for Energy is the second highest in our sample, surpassing
both Inf. Tech. and Financials. The aforementioned observation has, most likely, driven this
conflicting case due to its magnitude. Interestingly, Yu et al. (2017) comment that during periods
of turmoil (pointing at the financial crisis starting in 2007), the betas of our sectors are expected
to be less driven by EPU. Instead, other factors impacting the betas and that occur
simultaneously are worth acknowledging, such as market and funding liquidity or general
macroeconomic distress. Whether these factors contribute to political uncertainty can be further
discussed, however, we emphasize that the factors, surely, could be of economic relevance and
could induce both policy and election uncertainty. Nonetheless, considering the changed relation
between EPU and industry betas during periods of turmoil, it is likely that other factors can
explain the anomalies for Energy. Regarding the 2020 election, we also see a case in which
Energy has the highest IVD value of all sectors. We argue that it is possible that the case could
be explained by studying Trump’s politics. Prior to the 2020 election, the Trump and Biden
administrations were distinctly different from each other which certainly created policy
uncertainty in the Energy sector. More specifically, the Republicans favored an “energy
dominance agenda” while the Democrats suggested a vision dominated by investments in clean
energy and an increased focus on decarbonization (Goldwyn and Clabough, 2020). Thus, the
increased IVD relative to the more exposed sectors could be explained by a general policy
uncertainty amongst firms in the Energy sector, which possibly strengthened the shocks for these
companies from the election.
Another case concerns the IVD values relating to the 2018-11-30 G20 summit. While the main
talk was the U.S.-China trade war, one of the main outcomes included the U.S.-Mexico-Canada
agreement (UMCA) which replaced the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
Interestingly, although these topics are of economic relevance for trade and the general
economy, the three most exposed sectors have the lowest IVD in this event and we find no
support for our predictions. However, it was expected that UMCA would positively affect the
U.S. economy on an aggregate level and many export-dependent sectors, such as Materials,
would be benefitted according to the United States International Trade Commission (2019). In
addition, the report also states that the new agreement would be notably cost-effective in terms
of operating costs for U.S. financial firms. Also, within-industry groups related to information
technology reported their support for the agreement prior to the announcement, particularly
amongst the big internet companies. Thus, by studying the agreement, the level of uncertainty
surrounding the event compared to other events, could have been lower for Inf. Tech, Materials
and Financials. Another potential explanation could be difficulties in interpreting the political
signals, pointing back to Pastor and Veronesi (2017). However, we hesitate to make any firm
and conclusive comments in this subsection since the above examples are solely possible
explanations.

                                      24
   D. Robustness tests
To assess the robustness of our empirical results, we conduct two critical tests. The results are
presented in Tables AIV-AVI, in Appendix. First, we follow KPV and repeat our tests while
excluding a group of events in which there is uncertainty about the event dates. Specifically, we
remove these because we cannot fully be certain whether the dates were announced at least 20-
trading-days prior, with regard to the criterion listed by KPV. Only six events from Table AII are
affected by this exclusion since political events, in general, are scheduled many months or even
years in advance. The affected events are the European summits that occurred on 2008-11-07,
2009-03-01, 2010-05-07, 2011-07-21 (also excluded due to data unavailability), 2011-10-26
(also excluded due to data unavailability), and 2015-06-22. Thus, we repeat our tests for the
hypotheses concerning Eurozone. We obtain very similar findings in most cases. The key
difference concerns the prediction of VRPD in the second hypothesis. Contrary to our main
results, we find insignificance on a 0.05-level for GDP against VRPD. In addition, the p-values
have dramatically increased when CLI and FST are regressed against VRPD. Although one could
argue that the excluded events could have driven VRPD, we still find strong empirical evidence
for the other predictions.

Second, we conduct a robust regression instead of OLS regression for the second hypothesis.
The results are presented in Table AVI. KPV do not use robust regression when comparing the
option variables to the economic conditions, however, we argue that this is critical due to the
presence of the almost striking outliers seen in Figures I-III. Thus, we use this method to handle
our outliers and compare the analysis to the OLS regression. From our robust regression tests,
we obtain different results for VRPD and SlopeD compared to our main analysis in terms of
significance. For the former, we now find insignificant results for GDP, and for the latter, we
find insignificance against MKT, both on a 0.05-level. Thus, we recognize that the presence of
outliers in an already small sample size could have had an effect on our main findings.

   E. Limitations
Several limitations are worth considering when interpreting our results. For instance, being
limited to events solely relevant to the U.S. and Eurozone, reduces the size of our data sample
(which is smaller than KPV’s). Hence, the statistical power of our tests for all hypotheses is a
salient limitation worth recognizing in our analyses, particularly for sectors. Indeed, this
increases the risk of type II errors. We discuss the potential issues with effect size and power
specifically for the industry comparison, utilizing Lakens (2013). To the best of our knowledge,
it exists no previous literature to determine whether the effect size is expected to be large, small,
or non-existent in the IVD industry comparison (specifically for our third hypothesis). The effect
size in our sample from Table IV, by calculating Cohen’s D to 0.114, is definitely considered
small. If the effect size from our sample in Table IV were to be close to the real population effect
size, the test would require a relatively larger sample size to detect the effect. Even if the
population effect size were to be double the difference of our sample, Cohen’s D would be
around 0.2, which is still considered small. Surely, we cannot use our sample to determine the
effect size of the population in the industry comparison, because it could very well not exist an
effect at all. Thus, we are not arguing that the effect would exist in a larger sample, but that it is
worth noting that there could be potential issues with low power in our test if it exists a small
effect in the population. This is not a problem we can solve, due to the fact that the indices
tracking the S&P sectors have not existed long enough to capture events before the year 2000.
Furthermore, there has not occurred a sufficient number of relevant events in the U.S. between
2000-2020 to make the sample larger.

                                      25
Additionally, we acknowledge that the option data availability is unbalanced when comparing
the S&P 500 index to the other indices. For instance, there are far more acceptable options to
include in the U.S. analysis compared to the Eurozone- or the sector-level analysis. Also, in
some cases, there is a considerable variation among our treatment and control groups in terms of
number of acceptable options. Surely, this might have had an impact on the construction of the
option variables and consequently on our results. Another limitation concerns the exclusion of
the third hypothesis of KPV which states that the price of political uncertainty is higher when the
uncertainty is higher. Although this is one of the key predictions of KPV, the exclusion of these
tests does not impact our results. In addition, KPV states that the uncertainty variable, UNC, only
applies to elections. In our event sample, our election sample size is substantially smaller than
for summits. Hence, the construction of UNC would be problematic. Nevertheless, given a larger
election sample, and by testing whether high uncertainty levels would impact options, a broader
result, and a more precise replication, could be obtained.

                                    VI. Conclusion
We empirically examine the pricing implications of political uncertainty on U.S., Eurozone, and
S&P sector equity options. First, by replicating parts of KPV using recent data, we find
empirical support consistent with the key predictions of the PV model, similar to the authors.
Our results imply that political uncertainty is priced in the option market, hence, commanding an
option price premium stemming from the price risk, variance risk, and tail risk, associated with
political events relevant to the regions U.S. and Eurozone. Also, we conclude that this premium
is greater during weak economic conditions.
Second, we introduce a sector-specific scope to the PV model, and use the model predictions to
test if IVD is larger for industries that are more sensitive to political uncertainty. In fact, we find
a pattern that more exposed S&P sectors, show higher IVD during major political events,
compared to less exposed sectors. More specifically, we identify a trend indicating that the IVD
for Inf. Tech, Financials, and Materials, are larger than corresponding values for Con. Staples,
Utilities, and Energy. However, since we do not find any significant results in most of the tests,
we cannot confidently state that these effects exist in the real population. Also, we do not find
any empirical evidence for the IVD difference between the two groups to increase, during weak
economic conditions. Thus, we find no empirical evidence for the main predictions when
analyzing political uncertainty and equity options, by comparing more exposed sectors to less
exposed. After further discussing our findings, we identify possible explanations for our results,
relating to specific events, model mechanisms and the literature. Also, we recognize that several
limitations are worth considering, especially concerning the data. In order to better test the
model predictions, future research could use a larger sample size, particularly in the industry-
level analysis. Additionally, by including other markets’ industries, a wider understanding of the
financial effects on sector equity options, could be obtained.

                                      26
                                     References

Alesina, A., & Rodrik, D., 1994, Distributive Politics and Economic Growth, The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 109(2), pp. 465-490.
Baker, S.R, Bloom, N., & Davis, S.J., 2016, Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty, The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(4), pp. 1593-1636.
Belo, F., Gala, V.D., & Li, J., 2013, Government spending, political cycles, and the cross section
of stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 107(2), pp. 305-324.
Bialkowski, J., Gottschalk, K, & Wisniewski, T., 2008, Stock market volatility around national
elections, Journal of Banking & Finance 32(9), pp. 1941-1953.
Bittlingmayer, G., 1998, Output, Stock Volatility, and Political Uncertainty in a Natural
Experiment: Germany, 1880–1940, The Journal of Finance 53(6), pp. 2243-2257.
Bloom, N., Bond, S., & Reenen, J.V., 2007, Uncertainty and Investment Dynamics, The Review
of Economic Studies 74(2), pp. 391-415.
Boutchkova, M., Doshi, H., Durnev, A., & Molchanov, A., 2012, Precarious politics and return
volatility, The Review of Financial Studies 25(4), pp. 1111-1154.
Brogaard, J., & Detzel, A.J., 2015, The Asset Pricing Implications of Government Economic
Policy Uncertainty, Management Science 61(1).
Croce, M.M., Kung, H., Nguyen, T.T., & Schmid, L., 2012, Fiscal Policies and Asset Prices,
Review of Financial Studies 25(9).
Dimitrakopoulos, D.G., 2012, The Greek Elections of 2012 and Greece’s future in the Eurozone,
European Policy Analysis 2012(7), Swedish Institute for European Policy Studies, Available at:
https://www.sieps.se/en/publications/2012/the-greek-elections-of-2012-and-greeces-future-in-
the-eurozone-20127epa/sieps_2012_7epa.pdf [Accessed 22 March 2021].
Erb, C.B., Harvey, C.R., & Viskanta, T.E., 1996, Political Risk, Economic Risk, and Financial
Risk, Financial Analysts Journal 52(6), pp. 29-49.
European Council & Council of the European Union, n.d., Meeting calendar, Consilium
Available at: https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/meetings/calendar/?Category=meeting
[Accessed 23 March 2021].
G20 Research Group, n.d., G20 Information Centre, University of Toronto, Available at:
http://www.g20.utoronto.ca/ [Accessed 3 March 2021].
G7 Research Group, n.d., G7 Information Centre, University of Toronto, Available at:
http://www.g8.utoronto.ca/ [Accessed 2 March 2021].
Gemmil, G., 1992, Political risk and market efficiency: Tests based in British stock and options
markets in the 1987 election, Journal of Banking & Finance 16(1), pp. 211-231.
Goldwyn, D.L., & Clabough, A., 2020, Election 2020: What’s at stake for energy?, Atlantic
Council, Jan 9 2020, Available at: https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/in-depth-research-
reports/issue-brief/election-2020-whats-at-stake-for-energy/ [Accessed 15 April 2021].
Goodell, J.W., & Vahamaa, S., 2013, US presidential elections and implied volatility: The role
of political uncertainty, Journal of Banking & Finance 37(3), pp. 1108-1117.
Graziano, A., Handley, K., & Limao, N., 2021, Brexit uncertainty and trade disintegration in
Europe and beyond, The Centre for Economic Policy Research, 26 January 2021, Available at:

                                      27
https://voxeu.org/article/brexit-uncertainty-and-trade-disintegration-europe-and-beyond
[Accessed 23 March 2021].
Hill, P., Korczak, A., & Korczak, P., 2019, Political uncertainty exposure of individual
companies: The case of the Brexit referendum. Journal of Banking & Finance 100, pp. 58–76.
Julio, B., & Yook, Y., 2012, Political Uncertainty and Corporate Investment Cycles, The Journal
of Finance 67(1), pp. 45-83.
Kelly, B., Pastor, L., & Veronesi, P., 2016, The Price of Political Uncertainty: Theory and
Evidence from the Options Market, The Journal of Finance 71(5), pp. 2417-2480.
Lakens, D., 2013, Calculating and reporting effect sizes to facilitate cumulative science: a
practical primer for t-tests and ANOVAs, Frontiers in Psychology 4(893).
Li, J., & Born, J.A., 2006, Presidential election uncertainty and common stock returns in the
United States, The Journal of Financial Research 29(2), pp. 609-622.
Nguyen, Q., Kim, T., & Papanastassiou, M., 2017, Policy uncertainty, derivatives use, and firm-
level FDI, Journal of International Business Studies 49, pp. 96-126.
Olters, J.P., 2001, Modeling Politics with Economics Tools: A Critical Survey of the Literature,
IMF Working Paper 1(10).
Pantzalis, C., Stangeland, D.A, & Turtle, H.J., 2000, Political elections and the resolution of
uncertainty: The international evidence, Journal of Banking & Finance 24(10), pp. 1575-1604.
Pastor, L., & Veronesi, P., 2012, Uncertainty about Government Policy and Stock Prices, The
Journal of Finance 67(4), pp. 1219-1264.
Pastor, L., & Veronesi, P., 2013, Political Uncertainty and Risk Premia, Journal of Financial
Economics 110(3), pp. 520-545.
Pastor, L., & Veronesi, P., 2017, Explaining the puzzle of high policy uncertainty and low
market volatility, The Centre for Economic Policy Research, 25 May 2017, Available at:
https://voxeu.org/article/puzzle-high-policy-uncertainty-and-low-market-volatility [Accessed 18
February 2021].
Qontigo, 2021, Blue-Chip Indices: Euro Stoxx 50 Index, March 2021, Available at:
https://www.stoxx.com/document/Bookmarks/CurrentFactsheets/SX5GT.pdf [Accessed 20
March 2021].
Sialm, C., 2006, Investment Taxes and Equity Returns, NBER Working Paper No. w12146.
United States International Trade Commission, 2019, U.S.-Mexico-Canada Trade Agreement:
Likely Impact on the U.S. Economy and on Specific Industry Sectors, USITC Publication 4889,
April 2019, Available at: https://www.usitc.gov/publications/332/pub4889.pdf [Accessed 29
April 2021].
Voth, H.J., 2002, Stock Price Volatility and Political Uncertainty: Evidence from the Interwar
Period, MIT Department of Economics Working Paper 2(9).
Yu, H., Fang, L., Du, D., & Yan, P., 2017, How EPU drives long-term industry beta. Finance
Research Letters 22, pp. 249–258.

                                      28
                                 Appendix
Table AI.

                                               Elections

   Event type Date Option data in OptionMetrics
   U.S. Presidential Election 1996-11-05 Yes
   U.S. Senate Elections 1998-11-03 Yes
   U.S. Presidential Election 2000-11-07 Yes
   U.S. Senate Elections 2002-11-05 Yes
   U.S. Presidential Election 2004-11-02 Yes
   U.S. Senate Elections 2006-11-07 No
   U.S. Presidential Election 2008-11-04 Yes
   U.S. Senate Elections 2010-11-02 Yes
   Greek legislative election 2012-05-06 Yes
   Greek legislative election 2012-06-17 Yes
   U.S. Presidential Election 2012-11-06 Yes
   U.S. Senate Elections 2014-11-04 Yes
   United Kingdom EU membership referendum 2016-06-23 Yes
   U.S. Presidential Election 2016-11-08 Yes
   U.S. Senate Elections 2018-11-06 Yes
   U.S. Presidential Election 2020-11-03 Yes

This table lists all elections considered in our data sample between November 1996 and November 2020
together with their dates and option availability information. These elections are parliamentary and/or
presidential. Note that in those cases U.S. Senate and Presidential elections occur on the same date, we
consider the events as a single observation, similar to KPV. We include all elections with available options
data in our empirical analysis.

                                      29
Table AII.

                                       Global summits

This table lists all global summits considered in our data sample between October 2008 (same start-date as by
KPV) and December 2020. These summits are either of the type European, G7, G8 or G20. Also, we list the
topics discussed in the meetings by studying the press announcements or the different decisions taken at the
summits. Note that several events occurring in 2011 lack options data. We include all summits with available
options data in our main empirical analysis.

                                      30
Table AIII.

                                        Industry ranking

               Industry Mean (β) Mean (Ranking number) Group
               Inf. Tech. 2.087 9.500 More exposed
               Financials 1.772 9.273 More exposed
               Materials 1.279 8.080 More exposed
                Utilities 0.633 3.000 Less exposed
               Con. Staples 0.552 2.000 Less exposed
               Energy 0.142 1.000 Less exposed

In this table, we summarize the key points used in our empirical analysis from “Table 2: Summary statistics of
industry beta and its ranking group” in Yu et al. (2017). They estimate the industry betas by using the DCC-
MIDAS-EPU model. The information above lists the S&P sectors used in our analysis, as well as their means
(for their industry betas and their relative ranking numbers). Similar to Yu et al. (2017), we divide these
sectors into two groups based on exposure to EPU. As an example, the industry beta mean of Inf. Tech. is the
largest from their sample which implies that the industry beta is most affected by EPU. The ranking numbers
suggest that the betas of Inf. Tech, Financials, and Materials, mostly remain relatively more driven by EPU,
implying that those sectors are significantly exposed to EPU, as Yu et al. (2017) states.

Figure AI.

                            Regression IVD against non-standardized GDP

In this figure, we run the same regression as in Figure I for the GDP regression, where the only difference is
that we do not standardize the GDP metric to zero mean with unit variance. Hence, the figure shows the
regression of IVD against non-standardized GDP. The x-axis in this graph thus illustrates the GDP
percentage growth. 1 on the X axis represents a 1% GDP growth during the given quarter that the event is
taking place.

                                      31
Figure AII.

In this figure, we illustrate the computed IVD values from our data sample for specific extraordinary events.
Note that the U.S. average IVD across all events is 0.016, and the corresponding value for Eurozone is 0.037.
We calculate this data following the method described by KPV, which is presented in Section II in this paper.
Table AIV.

                          Option market variables regressed against economic conditions

                                               IVD
                          GDP CLI FST MKT
Slope coefficient -0.022 -0.020 -0.017 -0.032
P-value (coef.) 0.006 0.010 0.025 0.00
t-statistic -2.81 -2.64 -2.28 4.62
  2
R                           0.09 0.0802 0.0612 0.2125
Obs. 82 82 82 81
Std. error 0.0079 0.0075 0.0072 0.0068

                                        VRPD
                          GDP CLI FST MKT
Slope coefficient -0.007 -0.005 -0.005 -0.012
P-value (coef.) 0.226 0.311 0.355 0.020
t-statistic -1.22 -1.02 -0.93 -2.38
  2
R                           0.02 0.01 0.01 0.07
Obs. 80 80 80 80
Std. error 0.0054 0.0051 0.0049 0.0049

                                               SlopeD
                          GDP CLI FST MKT
Slope coefficient -0.033 -0.030 -0.028 -0.020
P-value (coef.) 0.0000174 0.000125 0.000439 0.0130
t-statistic -4.63 -4.08 -3.7 -2.56
  2
R                           0.25 0.20 0.17 0.09
Obs. 68 68 68 67
Std. error 0.0072 0.0074 0.0075 0.0080

In this table we run the exact same test as in Table II, the only difference being that we exclude the European
summits occurring on 2008-11-07, 2009-03-01, 2010-05-07 and 2015-06-22, in order to assess the robustness
of our results.
                                      32
Table AV.

                                                 Option market variables

                                                      IVD VRPD SlopeD
                       Mean 0.030 0.017 0.021
                        P-value two-tailed 0.0010 0.0090 0.022
                         t-statistic 3.39 2.73 2.38
                       Obs. 82 80 68
                         Std. error 0.0087 0.0061 0.0088

In this table we run the exact same test as in Table I, the only difference being that we exclude events: 2008-
11-07, 2009-03-01, 2010-05-07 and 2015-06-22, for the same reason as for Table AIV.

Table AVI.

                         Option market variables regressed against economic conditions

                                              IVD
                       GDP CLI FST MKT
       Slope coefficient -0.022** -0.021** -0.018** -0.031***
       P-value (coef.) 0.036 0.046 0.018 0.001
       t-statistic -2.13 -2.02 -2.41 -3.34
         2
       R                 0.106 0.096 0.071 0.212
       Obs. 86 86 86 85
       Std. error 0.0102 0.0103 0.0074 0.0093

                                       VRPD
                       GDP CLI FST MKT
       Slope coefficient -0.011 -0.010 -0.0070 -0.014**
       P-value (coef.) 0.270 0.211 0.217 0.047
       t-statistic -1.11 -1.26 -1.24 -2.02
         2
       R                 0.061 0.045 0.024 0.094
       Obs. 84 84 84 84
       Std. error 0.0105 0.0075 0.0056 0.0069

                                              SlopeD
                       GDP CLI FST MKT
       Slope coefficient -0.033*** -0.030*** -0.028*** -0.020
       P-value (coef.) 0.00 0.009 0.0089 0.133
       t-statistic -5.34 -2.67 -2.69 -1.52
         2
       R                 0.247 0.203 0.173 0.092
       Obs. 69 69 69 68
       Std. error 0.0062 0.0113 0.0103 0.0134

In this table we construct the exact same test as in Table II, the only difference being that we instead run a
robust regression instead of a standard OLS regression in order to examine the robustness of our main results
for the second hypothesis.

                                      33