The Impact of Private Equity on
Firm Resilience and Performance
During Crisis

A Study of Portfolio Companies in Sweden

  GUSTAF FRUMERIE

  ISAK ÖHLUND

   Bachelor Thesis

   Stockholm School of Economics

  2021
The Impact of Private Equity on Firm Resilience and Performance During Crisis: A
Study of Portfolio Companies in Sweden

Abstract:

Do PE-backed firms contribute to financial stability, and do PE-backed firms perform superior
compared to their non-PE-backed peers during crises? These are the two central questions of this paper
when company data from 2004 – 2010 is examined for the Swedish market amid the Great Recession,
2008. A sample of 79 PE-backed and 129 non-PE-backed firms are compared. We find evidence that
portfolio companies experience improved access to equity capital amid the recession, a finding that is
traced to the PE investor relationship. This appears to have enabled the PE-backed firms to reduce
investments less and maintain a higher level of investments post-crisis, suggesting that PE-backed firms
contribute to stability and not fragility. Furthermore, PE-backed firms are shown to outperform non-
PE-backed firms, measured in ROA and market share growth. To add a dimension to the results and
explore complementary explanations, we conducted a survey of PE professionals that indicated that
also operational assistance in portfolio companies might be an explanatory factor for their stability and
performance.

Keywords:

Recession, Portfolio Company, Private Equity

Authors:

Gustaf Frumerie (24465)
Isak Öhlund (24306)

Tutor:

Ran Guo, Visiting Teacher, Department of Finance

Examiner:

Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Gustaf Frumerie and Isak Öhlund, 2021

______________________________________
We thank Ran Guo for excellent assistance and valuable input for our thesis. We also extend our thanks to Jonas
Skilje for his help with RStudios as well as the Stockholm School of Economics Library.

                                                                         1
Introduction

The COVID-19 pandemic has raised questions regarding whether or not some companies are better
positioned to overcome steep economic downturns. Private equity (PE) is a phenomenon that has been
subject to a large degree of scrutiny, and hypotheses regarding their unique ownership structure in
relation to firm performance have been explored. The majority of the literature concerning PE-backed
companies has focused on firm performance during “normal” economic times, and the results indicate
                                                    1
that these firms perform better than their peers.  However, important to note is that contradictory
evidence has also been presented, which instead argues that there is no difference between firm
performance and that PE firms mainly concentrate their efforts on growth instead of overall
              2
performance. The main argument brought forward by the advocates of PE is that the individual firms’
financial constraints are relaxed due to the PE fund, which, combined with expert knowledge, allow the
companies to outperform their peers.

Circulating back to the COVID-19 pandemic thus further emphasizes questions regarding firm
performance in the wake of economic downturns. Followingly, data illustrates that PE transactions are
highly cyclical (MacArthur et al., 2019), where both deal values and numbers of transactions tend to
follow the economy’s overall health. Furthermore, Kaplan and Stein (1993) also presented data
implying that transactions made during economic booms tend to be structured in a problematic manner
with an increased risk exposure compared to regular times. A phenomenon they referred to as
“overheating”. Former literature within the field of comparing PE-backed firms to non-PE-backed firms
during economic downturns has thus stemmed from the hypothesis that the overwhelming amount of
deals during economic booms combined with poorer structuring of the transactions will contribute to
financial fragility during economic crises.

Bernstein et al. (2017) explored the above-mentioned hypothesis (main hypothesis) and concluded that
it was not the case. Instead, they found evidence supporting the importance of PE funds, mainly that
industries chosen by the funds experience faster growth. Consequently, Bernstein et al. (2019) then
explored an alternative hypothesis; that PE-backed companies, in fact, are more resilient to economic
downturns and thus act as stabilizers during economic downturns. Motivated by primarily three
assumptions; the first one that PE-backed firms perhaps could obtain external financing to a larger
extent due to the PE funds’ connections with the banking industry (Kovner & Ivashina, 2011; Fang et
al., 2013). Secondly, PE funds may have capital ready to be invested during economic downturns since
they raise capital which they invest over many years (capital referred to as “dry powder”). Thirdly, PE
investors can dedicate their human capital to their current commitments rather than finding new ones
when a crisis hits (Bernstein & Sheen, 2016; Gompers et al., 2012). Why the latter adds value has been
researched by several prominent academics advocating the advantages of PE. They conclude that a part
of the added firm-value that PE investments lead to is because of the extension of the management
team’s knowledge to the portfolio companies (Cressy et al., 2007; Kaplan & Strömberg, 2009).
Nonetheless, what Bernstein et al. (2019) found in their study of the market in the United Kingdom
(UK), was that PE-backed companies, during the 2008 crisis, decreased their investments less than their
peers, gained more equity contribution, experienced greater debt inflows, higher asset base growth and
also increased market share.

1
 Examples of research on the area: Boucly et al. (2011), Bernstein & Sheen (2016), Jensen et al. (2006), Jensen (1986), Hammer et al. (2021),
Kaplan (1989), Smith (1990), Cohn et al. (2014), Kaplan et al. (2014), Smart & Waldfogel (1994), Cressy et al. (2007), Cohn et al. (2020).
2
 Examples of research on the area: Koo (2016), Leslie & Oyer (2008), Sheen et al. (2020), Hedberg & Bergström (2013).

                                                                         2
The purpose of this study is to contribute to the existing literature regarding firm performance and
stability during economic downturns. The COVID-19 pandemic would therefore be a suitable and
interesting period to investigate. However, as the pandemic is currently ongoing, and the financial
statements for the companies have not yet been made public, a comprehensive analysis is therefore
difficult to perform. Consequently, the 2008 crisis was chosen as the core of our study, principally due
to two reasons. The first is that the particular crisis in 2008 is the latest economic recession that resulted
in negative world-GDP growth (The World Bank, 2018), as COVID-19 presumably led to during 2020
(International Monetary Fund, 2020). The second reason is owing to contemporary literature, which
focuses on the 2008 crisis but in different markets, why we aim to contribute with a focus on the Swedish
market. It is also of significance to underline that the two economic downturns, the 2008 recession, and
the COVID-19 pandemic, differ to a certain extent concerning the drivers of the respective crises. The
2008 recession was primarily linked to disruptions in financial institutions. In contrast, the COVID-19
downturn can be considered a result of declining economic activity due to the efforts to hinder the
spread of the virus. Moreover, the governments moved more quickly to provide additional liquidity to
the economy compared to the Great Recession (Osterland, 2020). Despite these differences, the core
effect of the two events can be argued to have impacted the overall economic health in similar ways.
However, due to the earlier mentioned reason regarding limitations of studying the COVID-19 crisis,
2008 will be the focus of the study.

The focus of the study will be Sweden, and the alternative hypothesis brought forward by Bernstein et
al. (2019) will be explored. By exploring the alternative hypothesis (our first research question), we will
attempt to establish whether or not PE contributes to stability or not during times of economic recession.
Additionally, we will explore if portfolio companies perform superior compared to non-PE-backed
companies (our second research question). We chose to distinguish between stability and performance
because the first research question primarily focuses on investment and funding policies, whereas the
second research question focuses on firm performance metrics. We argue that investments and
performance are not fully dependent on each other, why it is of value to analyze them separately. In
summary, the following two research questions are the focus of this paper:

       R1: Do PE-backed firms contribute to financial stability during economic crises?

        R2: Do PE-backed firms perform superior compared to non-PE-backed peers during crises?

The rationale for choosing Sweden as the country of our study is due to the following reasons. Firstly,
the Nordic region has not been thoroughly examined in this context, as opposed to the, e.g., the UK
(Bernstein et al., 2019) and France (Boucly et al., 2011), which means that a valuable contribution to
the current body of literature may be achieved. In the Scandinavian region, Sweden is an essential part
as it is the country where most of the deals are made - by a large margin (Argentum, 2018). Secondly,
PE plays a central role in the Swedish economy. As of 2018, over 1000 companies had received
investments from PE funds in Sweden, which accounted for approximately 150 billion SEK in funding.
Amounts that correlated to roughly 7.5% of the workforce in the private sector, and 5.5% of the total
national GDP (Næss-Schmidt et al., 2017). Thirdly, even though Sweden ranks 24th when the world’s
countries are ranked by their GDP, the 8th largest PE fund is based in Sweden. To contextualize, eight
of the top ten funds are based in the US (Wallach, 2020), implying that the PE industry in Sweden is
cutting-edge. Fourthly, each limited company in Sweden is required to file annual financial statements
with varying lengths to the Swedish Companies Registration Office every year (Årsredovisningslag,

                                                                         3
       3
2020). This requirement enables analyses of private companies of varying sizes. Lastly, lending to both
households and non-financial corporations took a big hit during 2008 when the growth rate for lending
dropped from more than 6% to less than 2% (Figure 1). In addition, aggregated investments during the
year in Sweden plunged (OECD, 2008). The combination of the stagnated lending with plunging
investments implies that Sweden was indeed severely affected by the crisis. Therefore, further
indicating that Sweden is a prominent environment for the study.

Figure 1
Lending growth rates in Sweden 2006-2020
This figure illustrates the growth rate of lending to both household and non-financial corporations in Sweden during 2006 and
2020. The part which is primarily of interest is the time around the financial crisis (2006-2010). Data and figure from the
Government Agency, Statistics Sweden (SCB, 2020).

Our final treatment group (PE-backed or portfolio company) consisted of 79 PE-backed firms, and the
control group (non-PE-backed) consisted of 129 non-PE-backed peer companies, meaning that the
                                                                                      4
analysis was based on 208 firms. In this sample, we included firms defined as small to keep the sample
as vast as possible. The foundation of our analysis was a difference-in-difference (DID) regression,
which requires that the sample and control group are alike prior to the event/treatment effect. A
prerequisite referred to as the “parallel trend assumption”. In the context of this paper, the
event/treatment effect is the Great Recession. To satisfy the model’s requirement, we have chosen
sample groups from the same industry and used a sampling technique similar to Bernstein et al. (2019)
which based their approach on Boucly et al. (2011). Furthermore, we excluded certain industries in line
with Michaely and Roberts (2012). Based on a combination of these three papers, we sampled the peers
based on asset base (a proxy for size), leverage (in absolute values), and return on assets (ROA) (a proxy
for profitability). Calculations on revenue, ROA, investments, net equity contribution, net debt issuance,
and leverage (where all metrics except revenue were normalized by assets) were then made in order to
show that the two groups had similar trends prior to 2008 and at the onset of the crisis. This was indeed
the case. The benefit of this approach is that we were able to establish whether or not any differences

3
 Swedish Accounting Legislation for Swedish firms. We have checked that the legislation affecting our study was in place and legislated at
the time of 2007 to make sure that we do not use present legislation that was not in place as of 2007.
4
 To maintain comparability between our results, we followed the definition of small companies used by Bernstein et al. (2019). Although this
may be misrepresentative as that definition concerns UK firms. We consider it as irrelevant for the purpose of our study. Our aim is not to
examine the definition of small firms in different countries. Definition used by Bernstein et al. (2019) is as follows: small company is defined
as meeting at least two of the three following criteria: total assets less than £3.26 million, annual turnover less than £6.5 million, and an
average number of employees fewer than 50. The values denoted in pound sterling was calculated to SEK as of 2007 exchange rate GBP/SEK

                                                                         4
we discovered after the crisis stemmed from organizational structure instead of any differences from
the respective firms’ financial reports.

After establishing that the DID method could be used, as the parallel trend assumption was fulfilled, we
continued by comparing our groups’ financial statements during the economic downturn through our
main regression (main analysis). As investments depend on capital, debt or equity, and is most often
the foundation of firm performance, we began our analysis there. Our analysis shows that the PE-backed
firms invested more, approximately 11.4%, during the period. The direction in which the finding points
is in line with contemporary research, but the magnitude stands out. Important to note, however, is that
both groups decreased their investments, meaning that PE-backed firms only decreased their
investments less. This part of the main analysis was statistically significant.

In order to explain the increased investments (relative to assets) compared to their peers, we then
explored if the PE-backed firms experienced more net equity contribution and net debt issuance. It was
concluded that our treatment group experienced a higher net equity contribution, by 2.4%, which was
strongly statistically significant. Net debt issuance showed a similar result, where PE-backed firms
experienced a 1.9% higher debt issuance. This result, however, was not statistically significant. Even
though both capital-related metrics were not strongly statistically significant, the result hints that the
higher investment rate for our treatment group compared to the control group could be attributed to
improved access to capital markets through their relationship with a PE investor.

As PE-backed firms appeared to be less bound by financial constraints, we then also found that their
leverage increased by roughly 2% more than the control group, which is in line with the higher net debt
issuance ratio. This finding was statistically significant at 10%. Thus far, our findings support what
Bernstein et al. (2019) found in their study, except for the magnitude of investment difference. However,
we then found what was partly contradictory, namely that the PE-backed firms’ relative cost of debt
(COD) increased by 1.9% in relation to the control group, opposed to cheaper COD which Bernstein et
al. (2019) found. Nevertheless, as the statistical significance of the finding is 10%, the implications
might be limited.

After establishing the balance sheet metrics, we moved on to analyze performance metrics during the
post-crisis period. As previously stated, PE-backed firms invested more than their peers. In line with
this, we found evidence supporting that our treatment group increased their market shares more
(statistically significant at 10%). Both of these metrics - heightened investments and increased market
share - may be seen as growth indicators, which means that our treatment group managed to grow more
amid the crisis. These results raise several other questions, such as whether the PE-backed firms' growth
focus comes at the expense of profitability. Such a finding would be in line with Bernstein et al. (2019),
as they concluded that their treatment group did not outperform their peers. Based on our findings, it
appears like this is not the case as our treatment group experienced both greater ROA and EBITDA
over revenue, however, with varying statistical significance. Another finding which contradicts current
literature. Nonetheless, PE firms appear to experience both higher profitability and higher growth.

Each definition of the used metrics and our chosen cut-off point in terms of statistical significance will
be presented in more detail in the following sections. Additionally, as previously stated, all of the
observed differences appeared in 2008 and the period afterwards. Before 2008, the differences between
the two groups were not significant for any of the metrics.

In order to get an understanding of the discrepancies compared to the findings by Bernstein et al. (2019),
i.e., a higher investment rate, a relative heightened COD, and superior ROA for our treatment group,

                                                                         5
we included a discussion in Section 4. An alternative regression (alternative analysis) was performed -
where we excluded the small firms from the sample and then repeated the analysis - the rest of the
section merely attempted to find plausible qualitative explanations to the discrepancies. A few potential
reasons appeared, where the size of our firms and other issues relating to, e.g., our treatment group’s
relationship to their PE investor and capital structure were of interest, but no exhaustive explanation
was found.

To complement the above-mentioned discussion, we also executed a survey. The survey was aimed at
professionals in the PE industry who have experienced a severe market downturn in the Swedish market.
As we managed only to find 11 respondents, this section should be analyzed accordingly. Nonetheless,
the received answers did offer us insights into some of the surprising results. It thus became a valuable
alternative - although qualitative - complement to previous sections.

Relating back to the previously mentioned hypotheses, we do not find evidence for the main hypothesis,
that PE-backed firms are more sensitive to aggregated shocks in the economy. Our findings instead
point to the alternative hypothesis. Namely, in the wake of an extensive economic crisis, the PE-backed
companies managed to maintain higher levels of investments, indicating that they were able to
contribute with a more resilient stance to the overall economy compared to their non-PE-backed peers.
Therefore, providing insights to the first research question. The higher resilience, i.e., the more
aggressive investment approach during the post-crisis period, is mainly explained through PE-backed
firms' enhanced ability to access the financial markets with regards to debt and particularly equity.
However, we find evidence that the increased leverage ratio our treatment group experiences also results
in an increased relative COD. Nonetheless, the PE-backed firms still manage to exhibit superior
profitability and higher relative market shares compared to their non-PE-backed peers. Even though the
statistical significance of the findings in terms of performance vary, they provide an explanation and
plausible answer to our second research question. In particular, that PE-backed firms outperform their
non-PE-backed peers. Furthermore, our survey respondents also indicated that PE funds’ human capital
might have enabled their portfolio companies to outperform their peers. Taken together, the findings
mentioned above imply that PE-backed firms are more resilient to economic downturns and instead act
as financial stabilizers while simultaneously managing to outperform their non-PE-backed peers.

The following sections will detail the process and techniques that lead to the results. In the upcoming
Section (1.0), the data will be scrutinized, and the overall methodology behind the data collection will
be explained. The matching of the control group will also be clarified. In the next Section (2.0), the
empirical strategy will be introduced. Afterwards, in Section (3.0), our main analysis will be presented.
That particular section will also include various robustness tests that attempt to validate and verify the
results. When the robustness of our analysis has been discussed, Section (4.0) will review our results in
relation to earlier research on the area. The focus will be on the deviations in our data sample compared
to previous research where possible explanations to our diverging results are discussed. The alternative
analysis will also be presented in this section. Section (5.0) includes a discussion of the survey’s results.
Lastly, Section (6.0) summarizes and concludes our findings with a discussion of future research and
implications of our results.

                                                                         6
1. Method for Data

1.1 Data-Collection - Treatment Group
The first step of our data gathering was to find companies that were PE-backed at the onset of the crisis.
To do this, we used S&P Capital IQ and searched for “PE-transactions” from 1989 to 2008. Deals that
were announced during this period but finalized after 2008 were excluded. As the database does not
recognize “PE-transactions”, we had to find various proxies for the search engine. Therefore, we used
keywords in line with Bernstein et al.’s (2019) method, which included words/phrases such as
“Leveraged Buyout”, “Private Equity”, “Mergers & Acquisitions”, “M&A” and “Management
Buyout”. In doing so, we chose not to include any transactions made by investment firms or venture
capital firms. To further narrow the sample, we included only PE-transactions within the geographic
area of Sweden.

Similar to the approach of Boucly et al. (2011), we chose to include companies that had reports within
a corporate consolidated structure. To control for this, we read the administration report and controlled
for data on revenue and employees as Boucly et al. (2011), to make sure that we included data from the
correct company with regards to the transaction. As some of the companies in our treatment group
consolidated their reports for the corporate structure as an effect of the leveraged buyout (LBO) or
management buyout (MBO), we backtracked the assets and revenue to the year prior to the finalization
of the deal to make sure that we were consistent in using the same company. Most commonly, this
resulted in the use of the parent company’s report, instead of the consolidated report.

Approximately 400 transactions became the result of the search - meaning that we were able almost to
capture all the transactions made in Sweden during our given time-frame, please compare Figure 5 to
Figure A.1 for a closer look - which was later reduced further to 79 respective firms. In that process,
we manually went through the deals and made sure that the target company still was PE-backed by the
end of 2007 and that the PE fund had not yet made an exit by the end of 2008. The reasoning for this
was to make sure that the PE fund still had operational and financial influence in the target company
following the onset of the crisis. We also ensured that each of the portfolio companies that fulfilled our
                                                                                                  5
requirements had financial reports available for the period 2003-2010 in the database Retriever. At this
time, we decided to exclude 2011 as its own year because our sample would have been reduced further
otherwise. Instead, we made sure that the specific company did not declare bankruptcy or liquidate the
company during 2011, which meant that we also checked for the availability of reports showing an
ongoing business for that year. As mentioned earlier, each limited company in Sweden, independent of
size, is required to file annual financial statements, meaning that it was rather effortless finding reports
even for private companies, independent of size, that dated back almost 20 years. In contrast to previous
literature, where the research has been limited to medium-sized companies because of limitations
relating to the availability of certain items in the financial reports, we have included small companies
to a large extent as Swedish regulations demand thorough financial reports for these firms. However,
some of the smaller firms were excluded as their reports were too vague as they lacked key information
               6
for this study.  The inclusion of smaller size firms might also contribute to the existing literature by
adding a new dimension, and it also allowed us to keep the sample as vast as possible. Lastly, we
followed Michaely and Roberts’ (2012) industry selection by excluding companies within the financial
and public sector.

5
 Retriever is a database which, inter alia, stores official financial reports from the Swedish Companies Registration Office (Bolagsverket).
6
  Examples included lack of information of depreciation and interest payments which resulted in exclusion.

                                                                         7
Afterwards we manually went through each of the companies’ financial statements and extracted the
following items: total assets, depreciation, total debt, EBIT, equity, net profit, revenue, and interest
payments. In addition to these items, we also derived industry data from the Swedish Agency for
Economic and Regional Growth (Tillväxtverket), which allowed us to establish the respective
companies’ market share. The two first digits of the SNI-code were then used in order to find industry
revenue (Tillväxtverket, 2021). These items meant that we could calculate our sought-after metrics,
which are: investment over assets, net equity contribution over assets, net debt issuance over assets,
debt over assets, ROA, EBITDA over revenue, COD, and market share (please footnote 7 for
             7
definitions). To limit the influence of outliers, we winsorized all of the metrics at 2%.

1.2 Data-Collection - Control Group
Important to keep in mind is that PE-backed companies often exhibit higher leverage ratios in
combination with larger asset bases as a result of help from the PE fund (Frontier Economics, 2013).
These factors have to be taken into consideration when the control group is constructed. Simply because
we aim to have a control group that is as similar as possible to the characteristics of the PE-backed firm
when the crisis hit. It would be ideal to find peer companies that were truly identical to our PE-backed
firms; the only difference is that one company is PE-backed, and the other is not. However, as those
kinds of comparable firms do not exist in the real world, we circle back to controlling for the
aforementioned differences. During the remainder of this section and the next one, we will discuss how
the control group was constructed and if the DID model we aspire to utilize may be used.

When collecting data on our control group, we followed a variant of Bernstein et al.’s (2019)
methodology, which, in turn, used a more conservative method than Boucly et al. (2011). In order to
find a proper control group, we selected peer companies operating in the same 5-digit SNI-code. If the
company was operating within multiple SNI-codes, we chose the SNI-code most fitting to its core
         8
business.  Furthermore, in those cases where no comparable firms within the 5-digit SNI-code were
                                                                                             9
found, we instead used Bernstein et al.’s (2019) method of only using the first two digits  in the SIC-
code (equivalent to SNI-code). We then further restricted our search for companies on the basis of
leverage, ROA, and asset base. We included companies that were alike, in the sense that they were
within a 30% bracket of the PE-backed firm. However, as Sweden is a smaller market than the UK, we
had to alter the alike factor to get a meaningful size of the control group. This alternative method thus
became a middle-ground between the two mentioned papers’ methods. In the cases when necessary, a
50% bracket was used, similar to the method Boucly et al. (2011) adopted. With our method, this meant
that we controlled that the matching sample fulfilled at least two out of three criteria within the 50%
bracket or one within the 30% bracket. A rather obvious exclusion criterion was that the peer companies
were not allowed to be PE-backed at the onset of the crisis. We ended up with 129 companies in the

7
  Investment:Assets(t)-Assets(t-1)+Depreciation(t)
Net equity contribution: Equity(t)-Equity(t-1)-Net Profit(t)
Net debt issuance: Total Debt(t)-Total Debt(t-1)
Leverage over assets: Total Debt(t) / Total Assets(t-1)
ROA: Net profit(t) / Total Assets(t-1)
EBITDA over revenue: EBITDA(t) / Revenue(t) where EBITDA is calculated as our EBIT item + Depreciation (we included both
depreciation and amortization in that item), and EBITDA means: Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization
Market Share: Firm Revenue(t) Total Industry (2-digit SNI code) Revenue(t)
CoD: Interest payment (t) / Total debt (t-1)
8
 Many of the bigger companies for instance had “70100” as one of their SNI codes, which most often only represented that the company had
a headquarter. In those cases we instead chose an industry-code closer to the actual business by reading the company report, specifically the
administration report.
9
  Bernstein et al. (2019) used a 3-digit SIC code for industry classification. The 3 digit is equivalent to the 2 digit, which is why we have
described it as two digit code. See page. 1341 in Bernstein et al. (2019).

                                                                         8
control group. Later on, we manually went through their financial reports and extracted the sought-after
items (similar to the method described in Section 1.1).

1.3 Comparison of the Two Groups

Table 1. Industry Distribution
 Industry Distribution PE Group Control Group Total:

 Services 26 (33%) 45 (35%) 71 (34%)
 Wholesale Trade 18 (23%) 33 (26%) 51 (25%)
 Manufacturing 29 (37%) 36 (28%) 65 (31%)
 Retail Trade 5 (6%) 13 (10%) 18 (9%)
 Construction 1 (1%) 2 (2%) 3 (1%)

 Total: 79 129 208
Table 1 illustrates the industry distribution for both our groups. No companies within the financial and public sector are
included, as previously stated. The chosen industry is based on their respective SNI codes. If the company operates within
multiple industries, and thus has more than one SNI-code, the industry closest to the core operations was chosen.

Table 2. Summary of Chosen Metrics 2007
                                  PE sample Control Group

                       N Mean Median SD N Mean Median SD Mean Difference   T-value
                                                                                                                                                                             (In %-points,
                                                                                                                                          except Revenue)

 Revenue (MSEK) 79 469 223 528 129 405 159 684 64 0,1941

 ROA 79 11,04% 10,4% 8,77% 129 8,32% 8,12% 10,83% 2,72% 0,0799*

 Investment/asset 79 14,93% 14,87% 22,90% 129 11,03% 9,14% 22,19% 3,90% 0,2162

 Net Equity              79 -7,25% -3,13% 15,70% 129 -4,81% -1,82% 16,21% -2,44% 0,1291
  contribution/asset

 Net Debt Issuance/asset 79 8,14% 4,73% 18,21% 129 4,01% 3,09% 19,20% 4,13% 0,0602*

 Debt/Assets 79 59,68% 62,64% 21,32% 129 61,01% 61,77% 36,56% -1,33% 0,491
In Table 2 we find a summary statistics table for our chosen metrics at the end of 2007. The last two columns show the
difference between the two groups’ means and the respective T-values. The differences were not statistically different from
one another in any of the cases. Please read the continuation of this section for a more detailed description of the test and
which cut-off point was used.

Table 3. One Year Growth Trends for Chosen Metrics (2006-2007)
                            PE sample Control Group

                   N Mean Median SD N Mean Median SD Mean     T-value
                                                                                                             Difference

 Revenue 79 26,24% 11,91% 89,30% 129 15,91% 9,80% 39,23% 10,33% 0,2311

 ROA 79 33,24% -9,59% 361,72% 129 18,34% 1,70% 524,31% 14,89% 0,6956

 Investment/asset 79 17,23% 22,54% 431,42% 129 -9,43% 37,45% 291,22% 28,00% 0,1182

 Net Equity           79 -31,84% -40,84% 875,11% 129 -28,21% -70,77% 469,72% -3,63% 0,6345
  contribution/asset

 Net Debt            79 37,82% -6,54% 545,19% 129 -41,56% 9,93% 650,78% 79,38% 0,0678*
  Issuance/asset

 Debt/Assets 79 1,48% -1,75% 21,23% 129 2,83% -1,24% 25,89% -1,35% 0,1302
Table 3 shows how the two groups evolved during the period until the crisis. The table shows the growth rate in percentage
points for the year up until the crisis. The last two columns show the difference between respective groups’ mean, and also the
following T-values. None of the differences in the table are statistically significant at our chosen cut-off point.

                                                                         9
Table 4. Two Year Growth Trends for Chosen Metrics (2005-2007)
                               PE sample Control Group

                     N Mean Median SD N Mean Median SD Mean    T-value
                                                                                                                    Difference

 Revenue 79 95,23% 33,05% 489,17% 129 23,82% 10,45% 69,45% 71,41% 0,1525

 ROA 79 102,45% -9,56% 1126,25% 129 114,23% 14,01% 2751,62% -11,78% 0,4305

 Investment/asset 79 12,15% 4,39% 231,83% 129 10,15% -6,32% 325,36% 2,00% 0,071*

 Net Equity            79 -61,25% -58,75% 170,17% 129 -100,01% -45,67% 256,11% 38,76% 0,1988
  contribution/asset

 Net Debt             79 80,72% 33,78% 600,36% 129 34,15% -1,26% 2027,70% 46,57% 0,527
  Issuance/asset

 Debt/Assets 79 -1,51% -0,04% 74,54% 129 6,26% 2,11% 65,64% -7,77% 0,0587*
Table 4 shows how the two groups evolved in terms of our chosen variables, in percentage points, for the two years leading to
the crisis. The last two columns show the difference between respective groups’ mean, and also the following T-values.
None of the differences are statistically significant at our chosen cut-off point.

Table 1 shows how our treatment group and control group are distributed based on their industries.
Columns 2 and 3 in Table 1 report that the differences between each industry’s share of the total
distribution are alike in all cases. This implies that the companies in each of the groups originate from
the same industries to a large extent. The differences that exist are rather derived due to the process we
chose to adopt if a company had multiple SNI-codes. In those cases, we, as mentioned above, chose the
industry we believed was closest to the individual company’s core business. Minor differences may
therefore arise in the selection. Nonetheless, the similarities in industry distribution are thanks to our
rigorous control group selection, which originated from pairing based on the 5-digit SNI-codes.
Furthermore, as the table suggests, the companies within our study are mainly concentrated around three
industries, namely Services (34%), Manufacturing (31%), and Wholesale Trade (25%). The rest of the
sample (10%) is either within the Retail Trade (9%) or Construction (1%) sector.

Table 2 indicates a sample of rather mid-sized companies that show tendencies of similarities. This is
partly in regards to revenue, with averages of around 469 and 405 million SEK for the treatment group
and control group, respectively. The similarities are not only attributed to revenue but also the rest of
the metrics. Both groups appear to issue debt to almost the same extent, have approximately the same
equity contribution, essentially have the same leverage ratios, and be equally profitable (based on ROA).

Following, in order to establish if differences, in fact, existed based on statistical significance instead
of merely seeing that they appear to be alike, we performed t-tests on the variables. These variables
were defined in Section 1.2, and they are part of the firms’ investment and funding policy, capital
structure, and operational performance. Before we did so, we developed two hypotheses that were fitting
for our setting:

𝐻0 =The investment and funding policies/capital structure/operational performance are the same for
                           the PE-backed firms and their comparable peers

𝐻𝑎 =The investment and funding policies/capital structure/operational performance are different for
                          the PE-backed firms and their comparable peers

After the construction of the hypotheses mentioned above, we began testing them. We performed t-tests
for all of the respective variables. Followingly, the t-tests revealed no p-values that would imply that

                                                                        10
                                                                       10
the null hypothesis should be rejected in favor of the alternative one.  Additionally, this formal test of
the differences was our first part in testing if the parallel trend assumption that the DID model relies
upon was fulfilled. For the assumption to hold, it is important that the companies do not differ prior to
the study’s event/treatment effect, which, in this case, is the 2008 financial crisis.

Table 2 thus summarizes the chosen metrics and also reports the mean difference between the two
groups. If there would be two or more asterisks (*) next to the t-values, it would imply that the mean
                                     11
differences indeed were significant.  As neither of the differences were significant according to the t-
tests, no t-values are accompanied by two or more asterisks. The groups’ financial health thus appear
to be alike right before the Great Recession.

In Tables 3 and 4 we attempt to verify the pre-crisis parallel trend assumption that Table 2 began
investigating. To do so, we used both 1-year and 2-year growth rates that both stretched until the end
of 2007. These tables consist of the same metrics used in Table 2, but are now written as percentage
points instead of absolute values. In order to establish whether or not the differences are significant, we
once again performed t-tests on all of the respective variables based on the same hypothesis (𝐻0 and
𝐻𝑎). The results were similar to the ones in the previous tests. None of the differences were statistically
significant at our cut-off point, meaning that the null hypothesis could not be rejected in any of the
cases.

Adding to the tables mentioned above, we also included Figures 2,3, and 4. The figures show growth
patterns for three of the used metrics (investments, net equity contribution, and net debt issuance). As
exhibited by these figures, the treatment and control group developed similarly prior to the recession,
where the two groups' standard error bars overlapped for each of the years. Thus, these figures further
strengthen the conclusion that the two groups were alike and not statistically different pre-recession.

Taken together, our treatment and control group appear to be alike at the onset of the crisis. Not only
based on the three dimensions we used when selecting the companies, but also in regards to investments,
equity contribution and debt issuance. The parallel trend assumption thus appears to hold, which is a
crucial part of our study, since the DID-model would not be applicable otherwise.

10
  We used a p-value of 5% as the cut-off point. This is the most commonly used value, and might be seen as a more conservative one rather
than 1%. Meaning that even though a more conservative cut-off point was used, neither of the differences were significant.
11
  One * equals 10% significance, two ** indicates 5% significance and three asterixis means 1% significance (see footnote 10 for more
information regarding the cut-off).

                                                                        11
Figure 2
Average Investment over Assets (2004-2010)
Figure 2 illustrates the change in the variable ‘investment over assets’ for PE-backed and non-PE-backed companies,
respectively for the Swedish market. The time period starts 2004 and ends 2010. Annual observations illustrate the year effects
with standard errors at group level. Computed at default confidence interval of 95%.

Figure 3
Average Net Equity Contribution (2004-2010)
Figure 3 illustrates the change in the variable ‘net equity contribution’ for PE-backed and non-PE-backed companies,
respectively for the Swedish market. The time period starts 2004 and ends 2010. Annual observations illustrate the year effects
with standard errors at group level. Computed at default confidence interval of 95%.

                                                                        12
Figure 4
Average Net Debt Issuance (2004-2010)
Figure 4 illustrates the change in the variable ‘net debt issuance’ for PE-backed and non-PE-backed companies, respectively
for the Swedish market. The time period starts 2004 and ends 2010. Annual observations illustrate the year effects with standard
errors at group level. Computed at default confidence interval of 95%.

1.4 Is the PE market in Sweden similar to other PE markets?
Before we start with the core of the analysis, it is first meaningful to establish that the findings of this
study are representable for private equity in a broader sense. At least in the sense that the results will
add value to existing literature. Sweden is, as mentioned earlier, a rather small country compared to
other nations if each country’s national GDP is taken into consideration. Therefore, we will examine if
Sweden’s PE market despite this is fairly similar to PE markets in other countries in a general way.

The first part of the analysis is to examine whether or not the PE market in Sweden follows similar
growth patterns as the rest of Europe. Figure 5 shows Sweden’s growth patterns from 1988 to 2006,
and Figure 6 shows the same growth metric for Europe as a whole for the same period of time. The two
graphs exhibit noticeably similar patterns. Around the year 2000, both of the graphs display a maximum
point, followed by a decrease during a few years, which is then followed by a steep uphill curve. From
this general comparison, it thus looks like Sweden follows the growth patterns of Europe.

The next part of the analysis is to explore if Europe can be assumed to be similar to the US. These two
geographic areas were chosen because they, together with Canada, accounted for at least 92% of the
global PE market between 1985 and 2007 (Kaplan & Strömberg, 2009). The two markets’ similarities
have been thoroughly researched, and the conclusion from these studies is that Europe follows similar
patterns to the US (Bernstein et al., 2019; Kaplan & Strömberg, 2009).

Therefore, the general conclusion is that Sweden does follow the growth pattern of the aggregated PE
market. An argument that further strengthens this conclusion is that Europe’s second-largest PE fund is
located in Sweden, and that Sweden is an important actor in the European PE market (Copenhagen
Economics, 2020; Wallach, 2020). Meaning that even though the first part of the analysis (Sweden’s
similar growth patterns in relation to Europe as a whole) might be vague, the conclusion can instead
mainly be attributed to the well-documented second part of the analysis. Namely, the similarities

                                                                        13
between Europe and the US. Despite this analysis being of a more general character, we believe it to be
an acceptable proxy for Sweden’s similarities with other PE markets. Sweden is a unique country (e.g.,
because of its size); however, despite this uniqueness, we still argue that findings in relation to the
Swedish PE market can be generalized in a broader sense due to the arguments mentioned above.

Figure 5
Number of PE transactions and by value during 1988-2006 in Sweden
This figure portrays the activity on the Swedish PE market from 1988 to 2006 (Næss-Schmidt et al., 2017). Both deal value,
and number of transactions are included in the figure. The important part for this part of the analysis, namely for section
(1.4) is mostly the graph showing the deal values, as this is the metric that figure 6 shows. Furthermore, the other graph,
“number of transactions” shows a similar pattern to what we found in our own numbers. We managed to include almost all
the transactions on the Swedish market, which further strengthens the reliability of our data (see Figure A.1).

Figure 6
PE transactions’ deal value during 1988-2006 in Europe
This figure depicts the deal value of all the PE transactions in the Europe region between 1988 and 2006. The values are
depicted in billions of euros. (Guennoc, 2007)

                                                                        14
2. Empirical Strategy

The empirical strategy of this paper has its base the years prior to 2008, i.e., 2004-2007, and is compared
to the years during and after the recession (2008-2010). The rationale for this time-span is to establish
a comparison between our treatment group and control group before and after the financial downturn
in 2008, and how it potentially has affected the respective firms’ 1) investment and funding policy, 2)
capital structure, and 3) financial performance. With the basis of our identified treatment group and
control group, we have earlier (Section 1.3) performed statistical hypothesis tests showing similarities
prior to the recession, and later on, we will compare the groups post-crisis with the help of our DID
model (which will be introduced in this section). As our distinction of the time period suggests, we
assume 2008 to be the first year of the recession. This is both in line with Figure 1, which illustrates
that the availability of credit dropped steeply during 2008, and with existing literature within the subject
(Kahle & Stulz, 2013; Duchin et al., 2010).

As previously stated, our groups displayed similar trends prior to the crisis and also similarities relating
to the chosen metrics - in absolute values - at the onset of the crisis. Therefore, indicating that the
parallel trend assumption, which our chosen model relies upon, holds. This is an integral part of our
analysis since the DID model relies on the two groups - treatment and control group, respectively -
evolving equivalently in the absence of the financial crisis, 2008. Primarily, Tables 3 and 4, combined
with Figures 2-4, offer insight into this by depicting similarities in growth patterns prior to the Great
Recession. Ergo, implying that equivalent progress in the absence of the recession is probable.

Owing to these relationships, the DID regression helped us establish differences during the post-2007
downturn that are attributed to variations in organizational and operational character, i.e., that one group
is PE-backed and one is not. Pursuant to this isolation of the organizational character, we were able to
isolate it from differences that otherwise could have been influenced by aspects from respective groups’
financial reports or performance prior to the crisis. Furthermore, the DID model also informs us whether
                                                                                   12
or not the differences found are statistically significant or caused by chance.  The model we have
developed and used throughout this paper is closely linked and influenced by Bernstein et al. (2019):

                           𝑦𝑖𝑡 = 𝛼𝑡 + 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽1(𝑃𝐸−𝑓𝑖𝑟𝑚 ∗ 𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒) + 𝜖𝑖𝑡

The model consists of multiple parts. 𝑦𝑖𝑡varies with the chosen outcome variable (e.g., ROA or
Investment / Assets) and is based on company (i) at time (t). Furthermore, the two next variables, namely
𝛼𝑡 and 𝛼𝑖, represent both year (t) and company (i) fixed effects. The rationale for having firm fixed
effects is because we wanted to control for any time-invariant differences between our two groups
(similar to what Bernstein et al. (2019) did). The next part of the model is two dummy variables where
𝑃𝐸−𝑓𝑖𝑟𝑚gets the value of 1 if the specific company is PE-backed, and the 𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒 variable turns into 1
if the year is later than 2007 (i.e., 2008). Lastly, the 𝜖𝑖𝑡variable display that we chose to cluster our
                                                                     13
standard errors at the firm level (Bertrand et al, 2004).

12
   See either section 1.3 or 3 for definitions regarding statistically significant
13
  Bertrand et al. (2004) found that because of serial correlation, conventional DID standard errors may overestimate the significance levels.
Meaning that findings may not be as significant as previously thought. In order to minimize this risk we chose to cluster the standard errors at
the firm level, a decision in line with Bernstein et al. (2019).

                                                                        15
3. Main Results

In line with our first research question (the alternative hypothesis) - our main analysis provides insight
into whether or not PE-backed companies contribute to stability or not during a crisis. This analysis
suggests that the PE-backed firms were more resilient. Our findings also offer insights into our second
research question, whether portfolio companies perform superior compared to their non-PE-backed
peers. Relating to the first research question, this is implied by the investment policy. The findings in
terms of ROA and revenue growth post-2008 provides an understanding of the second research
question. However, the findings from the DID regression indicated results that in part are in
contradiction to contemporary literature. This was in regards to noticeably larger investments levels as
well as a higher relative COD and a higher ROA for the treatment group compared to the control group.

The results from our main regression, as a whole, will be analyzed in-depth in the ensuing section.
Starting with investment and funding policies and later continuing by presenting findings in terms of
performance metrics and lastly, a robustness check. Followingly, Section 4 will attempt to explore
probable explanations for the diverging results and their implications compared to previous literature.

3.1 Investment and Funding
Table 5, Column 1, shows that the treatment groups’ investment policy differs compared to that of the
control group. Coalesce, the entire sample of our Swedish firms, both PE-backed and non-PE-backed,
experienced an overall decline in investments post-2007 (Figure 2). However, as Column 1 in Table 5
indicates, the PE-backed companies experienced higher investment over asset levels (11.4% - meaning
that they decreased their investment less) compared to the control group after 2007. A substantial part
of the significantly contrasting result in Column 1 stems from a set of factors that have had a collective
impact. The first is the PE-backed firms' slight increase in investments 2007-2008, when the non-PE-
backed peers, in contrast, experienced a sharp decrease (Figure 2). The second is the higher investment
levels in the subsequent years, as implied by Figure 2. As indicated, the treatment group maintained
higher levels of investments throughout the crisis, which adds to the higher investment over assets in
Column 1, Table 5.

Column 2 in Table 5 demonstrates net equity contribution over assets and illustrates a similar contrast
between our treatment and control group, respectively. This is with regards to the infusion of equity
capital which was 2.4% higher for our treatment group. A possible explanation for this might be PE-
backed companies' relationship with PE funds. This partnership enables high accessibility of equity
capital even in the event of economic downturns. Predominantly, this is made possible due to the
                                                                                                           14
concept of “dry powder” (see the following footnote for a reminder of the definition).  A more in-depth
discussion of this will be held in upcoming sections; however, in this section, it is worth mentioning
that this superior access to equity capital may partly explain the higher investment rate our treatment
group exhibited. This line of reasoning is also partially supported by our hypothesis testing prior to the
crisis that indicated similarities in both investments and equity contribution (Table 2). Consequently,
when the treatment group, later on, experienced a higher inflow of equity, it is not unlikely that
investments also increased.

Our results in Table 5 imply that other factors may have influenced the PE-backed firms’ investment
policy. These findings are not mutually exclusive from net equity contribution, meaning that the metrics
in Columns 3-5 in Table 5 could also have impacted the respective firms’ investment policy. The results

14
   “Dry powder” refers to capital which PE-funds have raised, but not invested, meaning that this capital can be used on their current
commitments in their portfolio, instead of finding new investments when a recession hits.

                                                                        16
in Column 3, Table 5, for example, suggest that the treatment group issued 1.9% more debt relative to
the control group. Furthermore, as shown by Column 4, the treatment group also increased their
leverage relatively more. Similar to the above discussion regarding access to equity, it is possible that
the treatment group, through their connection with their PE investor, can access debt financing more
               15
easily as well.  However, the results in Column 5 suggest that although the treatment group is capable
of taking on more leverage, they experience a higher relative COD by doing so.

The findings relating to Columns 3-5 (Table 5) should, however, be read with caution due to the
respective columns’ statistical significance levels. Both Columns 4 and 5, respectively, were statistical
significance at 10%, and Column 3 was non-significant. Albeit the statistical significance, our data
imply a trend of higher net debt issuance and consequently higher leverage growth for our treatment
group (Figure 4 & Columns 3-4). As seen in Figure 4, debt issuance remained more stable and at higher
ratios at all times compared to the control group. Thus, our data points towards, although with the
possibility of being caused by chance, that the treatment group expanded their debt more.

Binding the above together, it is evident that the treatment group experienced what can be considered a
softened downturn regarding their investment policy, net equity contribution, and expansion of debt.
Relating to our first research question (the alternative hypothesis), our results, therefore, suggest that
PE-backed firms do not contribute to financial fragility. Instead, they contribute to financial stability as
they experienced a higher resilience amid the financial downturn. As indicated by Table 5, this is
possibly enabled through superior access to capital markets, where equity appears to be the most crucial
metric. This indicates that portfolio companies were less financially restrained amid the crisis. As
previous sections highlighted that the parallel trend assumption holds, our observed results are plausibly
explained by the PE funds’ relationship with the portfolio companies. This implies that the PE funds
enable infusion of capital when access to external capital otherwise may be restrained because of
economic outlooks deteriorating. Part of our findings diverges from contemporary literature,
                                                          16
specifically concerning Columns 1 and 5 in Table 5.  The following section explores what these
findings in Section 3.1 meant for the performance of the firms.

15
   Ivashina & Kovner (2011) show that repeated bank relationships through the PE investor may reduce information asymmetry and enable
easier access to debt financing.
16
  Findings by Bernstein et al. (2019) are in line with our results in Column 1, Table 5. However, the magnitude of the investment stands out
(11.4% in our results compared to 5.9%). Moreover, the results in Column 5, Table 5, goes against the findings in their paper as the relative
COD for our treatment group increased, as opposed to decreased as in the Bernstein et al. (2019) paper (significant at 5%). Additionally,
Ivashina & Kovner (2011) found that credit spread should be lower for the treatment group owing to PE-funds bank relationships.

                                                                        17
Table 5. Investment and Funding Policies
                                      (1)                           (2)                            (3)                   (4)              (5)
                         Investments/Assets      Net Equity Cont./Assets      Net Debt Iss./Assets     Leverage    Cost of Debt
 PE_Firm * Time 0,114**                 0,024**                  0,019            0,021*        0,019*
                                  (0,034)                      (0,03)                       (0,011)             (0,019)         (0,012)
 Year Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes

 Firm Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes

 Observations 608 582 597 615 602

 R-Squared 0,06 0,004 0,01 0,06 0,02
Table 5 illustrates our result of the DID regression in relation to the groups’ investment and funding policies. More specifically,
the investments of the firm, capital inflow metrics, leverage ratios and also whether or not their COD changed. Section 2
contains a breakdown of the regression model, and as can be seen in the table, all of the calculations include firm and year
fixed effects. Furthermore, all standard errors are clustered at the firm level. The first part shows what component of the model
we are mostly interested in, namely the 𝑃𝐸−𝑓𝑖𝑟𝑚 ∗ 𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒 parameter, as the rest of the variables rather work as noise-reduction.
Please see section 1.1 for definitions of the particular metrics. Lastly, ** denotes statistical significance at 5% and * at 10%.

3.2 Performance Metrics
After establishing that our treatment group chose a more aggressive investment policy approach to
tackling the crisis, it will now be investigated whether or not this had any impact on their performance.
Compared to their peers, our treatment group invested more, experienced larger capital inflow, higher
relative leverage ratios, and higher relative increase in COD (at varying significance levels). The
increased capital outflow in terms of investments and higher cost of capital suggest that PE-backed
firms’ performance ought to be affected negatively, but simultaneously that their share of the total
market should increase as a result of the investments. The metrics chosen to answer this question are
ROA, EBITDA over revenue, and market share, where the latter primarily works as a proxy for growth.
To start this particular analysis, we begin by examining if the expansive investment policy paid off in
regards to increasing market share.

Market share can be interpreted in various ways. However, we believe it functions as an effective proxy
for growth in this case. This is because it cannot, without doubt, be attributed to “performance” in its
purest form as the metric solely reports firm revenue in relation to total industry revenue, meaning that
expenses are not considered. As PE-backed firms decided to invest more during the crisis, a reasonable
conjecture is that their market share also increased relative to their peers. Table 6, Column 3, explores
this hypothesis by using our DID model. It can be seen that PE-backed companies increased their market
share more than their peers (2.1%), a result in line with our conjecture which also is statistically
significant at 10%.

Inevitably, the question which now arises is if PE-backed firms’ focus on growth has hampered their
overall performance. This phenomenon has been thoroughly researched, where multiple contemporary
papers have concluded that PE funds’ focus on growth has a limited effect on their portfolio companies’
performance (Koo, 2016; Bernstein et al., 2019; Hedberg & Bergström, 2013). Furthermore, Table 6
contains our two chosen performance metrics, where Columns 1 and 2 depict their results. Both ROA
and EBITDA over revenue imply that the PE-backed companies were able to outperform their non-PE-
backed peers. However, the statistical significance of these results vary. Although the low significance
of the EBITDA over revenue metric in isolation should not be an indicator of superior performance, we
argue that the aggregated performance indication with ROA’s strong statistical significance should be
taken into consideration. Furthermore, one might also reason that EBITDA is a metric that in its nature
is more lagging than ROA, if related to the increased investments, meaning that it might take longer for

                                                                        18
it to appear in the financial statements. An argument that further strengthens the improved performance
case.

Pursuant to the above, it is implied that the PE-backed firms’ investment-focused strategy appears to
have paid off in multiple ways. Not only did their market share increase relative to their peers. The
market share growth was also accompanied by improved performance. This implies that the treatment
group outperformed the control group, a finding that provides explanatory value to our second research
question. Initially, we believed this was unlikely as the accounting principles generally tell us that a
strategy that entails increased cash outflow (larger investment rate and heightened COD) with no direct
link to increased cash inflows is detrimental for the company’s performance. However, that somewhat
naive and straightforward way of thinking forgets to keep in mind that investments are made to
hopefully boost future revenue. In this case, the higher investment levels appears to have been beneficial
and therefore managed to enhance both growth and performance. Furthermore, even though the finding
might be unlikely, and that the result is not completely in line with Bernstein et al. (2019), it is not in
contrast with other previous research (Cohn & Towery, 2014; Boucly et al., 2011). However, these
studies are performed during regular economic times, but nonetheless illustrating that the result is
indeed plausible.

The key results of Section 3.1 and 3.2 provide insights into our two research questions. PE-backed
companies appear to be more resilient to economic downturns compared to their non-PE-backed peers.
Not only were our treatment group able to pursue a more capital-intensive growth strategy following
the crisis. They were also able to transform that growth into improved performance. Most of the findings
are in line with contemporary research concerning this topic. However, some parts of the results stand
out. In particular, the magnitude of the investment differences (11.4%), partly statistically significant
differences relating to COD and the treatment group’s superior ROA. These aspects are of interest for
future studies as insights into those might offer additional explanatory value within this topic; we will
also attempt to explain them further in Section 4. An understanding of the differences may result in
further knowledge surrounding the Swedish PE market. Ultimately, this could provide insights into how
both extraneous macroeconomic conditions domestically may impact PE-backed firms but also how
this may be considered in terms of future market volatility. Besides the possible explanations covered
above, the differences in terms of company size will be discussed. Prior to this, the differences between
the treatment and control group, respectively, will be tested for robustness in order to determine whether
or not our findings appear to be reliable.

Table 6. Performance Metrics
                                                     (1)                                 (2)                                 (3)
                                 ROA               EBITDA/Revenue            Market Share
 PE_Firm * Time 0,017**                      0,005                      0,021*

                                               (0,012)                           (0,007)                           (0,011)
 Year Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes

 Firm Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes

 Observations 611 605 615

 R-Squared 0,07 0,01 0,002
Table 6 shows the difference in performance metrics, namely ROA, EBITDA/Revenue and Market Share, calculated through
our DID model. As the table indicates, year and firm fixed effects are included in all cases. Also, the standard errors are
clustered at the firm level. For a more detailed explanation of the model used, please see section 2. Furthermore, please see
section 1.1 for the definitions of the metrics used in the table. The parameter of interest in this case is 𝑃𝐸−𝑓𝑖𝑟𝑚 ∗ 𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒.
Finally, ** denotes statistical significance at 5% and * at 10%.

                                                                        19
3.3 Robustness
As the study’s findings are now in place, we will continue by performing various robustness tests in
this section to validate the results and verify their reliability. The first of which is the same hypothesis
test as we performed in “Section 1.3”. We believe this to be a favorable test because we executed an
identical one the year prior to the crisis, which indicated that our treatment group and control group
were similar as none of the differences in Tables 2, 3 and 4 were statistically significant at our cut-off
point.

During the period after the initial economic shock to the world economy, we managed to find evidence
that the two groups evolved and performed differently. This would, therefore, suggest that our two
sample groups indeed would be different from one another after the crisis (as measured in 2010). The
following table reports the result of the tests:

Table 7. Summary of 2010
                              PE sample Control Group

                      N Mean Median SD N Mean Median SD Mean Difference (in %-points except
                                                                                                                                     revenue)

 Revenue (MSEK) 79 649 313 755 129 457 151 640 192 ***

 ROA 79 10,42% 1,27% 15,07% 129 5,78% -0,09% 8,90% 4,64% **

 Investment/asset 79 9,59% 9,81% 20,30% 129 3,98% 6,69% 23,92% 5,61% **

 Net Equity               79 -2,15% 0,24% 18,99% 129 -2,01% 1,86% 8,24% -0,14%
  contribution/asset

 Net Debt Issuance/asset 79 0,82% 0,92% 16,69% 129 -3,12% 1,26% 39,19% 3,94% **

 Debt/Assets 79 62,18% 57,75% 18,77% 129 62,8% 57,11% 24,26% -0,62%
Table 7 reports a summary statistics of the two groups at the end of 2010. This table can be related to Table 2, which had the
same characteristics, but in an earlier year. The last column shows the difference between the two groups’ means. As before,
*** denotes statistical significance at 1%, ** at 5% and * at 10%.

In order to replicate the earlier t-tests to the extent possible, the same hypothesis-tests were executed.
Meaning that the following hypothesis were used:

𝐻0 =The investment and funding policies/capital structure/operational performance are the same for
                           the PE-backed firms and their comparable peers

𝐻𝑎 =The investment and funding policies/capital structure/operational performance are different for
                           the PE-backed firms and their comparable peers

Furthermore, the same cut-off point at 5% was also used to increase the comparability. As Table 7
shows, all metrics except two are statistically different from one another at least at 5%. In other words,
the t-tests return p-values four out of six times that indicated that the null hypothesis actually could be
rejected. Therefore, these metrics are statistically different from one another, a result that emphasizes
that our previous results indeed appear to be correct.

In addition, a point worth emphasizing once again is the process that was adopted in order to limit the
influence of outliers. Instead of excluding data points (through e.g., detection of extreme values through
the standard R-analytics formula - 𝑄1 − 1,5 ∗ 𝐼𝑄𝑅 and 𝑄3 + 1,5 ∗ 𝐼𝑄𝑅- and consequently declaring
those values as N/A), we instead chose to winsorize the data. This is a favorable approach due to various
reasons. First of all, our sample is rather limited to begin with due to the nature of the Swedish market,
meaning that exclusion of data is not preferred if the goal is to keep the sample size as vast as possible.
Secondly, winsorizing of data is an accepted phenomenon within academic circles, and contemporary

                                                                        20
literature has used the same technique, e.g., Bernstein et al. (2019). Followingly, in terms of reliability
of the finding, this means that the neutralization of certain data was objectively executed and not
affected or biased by our own beliefs. Simply put, we had no knowledge regarding the origin of the
respective outlier that was normalized.

This section has attempted to validate our results by illustrating that the sample groups were
significantly different regarding the majority of our metrics at the end of our chosen period of time,
which was indicated by our findings in earlier parts of Section 3. Furthermore, we also covered the
method we adopted when manipulating the data to show the reader that the selection was not biased in
any direction. The normalization of data was based on objective measures for the entire data set.

The upcoming section will critically discuss some of our results that diverged compared to
contemporary research. Section 4.4 will also include a new - alternative - regression on a smaller
sample, which to some extent also functions as a robustness check. Lastly, a survey we performed will
be discussed to evaluate the robustness of our findings further.

4. Qualitative Discussion

The interpretation of the regression in section “3.1. Investment and Funding and 3.2. Performance
Metrics” may be dissected further by analyzing the differences that were seen and by comparing to the
UK market as covered in Bernstein et al. (2019). This will be done by discussing; 1) contrast in
investment policy between treatment- and control group, 2) a relative increase in COD for the treatment
group, and 3) our treatment groups’ superior performance, primarily measured in ROA. Additionally,
as we also decided to include small firms, our sample group’s revenue on average is smaller than the
sample group’s revenue in the Bernstein et al. (2019) paper. Our entire sample had an average revenue
of approximately 435 million SEK during 2007. In comparison, Bernstein et al.’s (2019) sample roughly
had 80 million USD as average (equaling to ∼ 541 million SEK based on the average USD/SEK
                                                      17
exchange rate in 2007) (Sveriges Riksbank, 2007).  Therefore, throughout this section, we will also
investigate if the size of our firms has affected the results. This is done because research suggests that
smaller firms experience more volatile investments and returns, meaning that the sheer size of the
sample perhaps can offer insights into our findings (Tsyplakov, 2008; Reinganum, 1983).

The upcoming sections will focus primarily on finding plausible explanations to the contradictory
results through qualitative manners. However, Section 4.4 will include an alternative regression to
investigate if our findings hold to be true even if we exclude the small firms in our sample.

4.1. Investment and Funding Policy
The degree to which our treatment group, in relation to the control group, invested (defined as
investment over assets) during the crisis was the first finding that warranted additional discussion. Not
because of the implication that PE-backed firms invest more, but mainly due to the magnitude of the
difference (11.4%, which was statistically significant at 5%). Questions surrounding the possibilities of
such a result thus inevitably surfaces. Section 3.1 brought up two parts of the observed trends, which,
to a large extent, accounted for the significant investment difference. The main part of interest from this
section is the resilience to the general economic outlook the PE-backed group exhibited in 2007-2008
and their continuously higher investment over assets rate after the downturn in 2008.

17
  Average exchange rate was 6.7607 (1 USD to 6.7607 SEK) in 2007.

                                                                        21
Earlier sections introduced the concept of “dry powder”, which we explained may be infused to the
portfolio companies, opposed to searching for new investment opportunities, in the events of
deteriorating economic outlooks. That available capital, combined with the PE funds’ beneficial
connections with the banking industry (Ivashina & Kovner, 2011), allows the PE-backed firms to have
superior access to gaining additional capital when the general supply of credit is limited. For instance,
McKinsey & Company (2019) recently released a study where they argued that the dry powder could
function as a “war chest” in the face of a crisis. Furthermore, EY’s Saenz (2020) also implies that owing
to this capital that is easy to access, PE-backed firms are more resilient (mainly due to PE funds’
diversification, human capital, and the availability of dry powder) to economic downturns. In
combination with improved banking relationships, this allows portfolio companies to invest more.

Unfortunately, we were unable to perform our own tests regarding that it is partly the improved
availability of capital that influenced our findings, such as our treatment groups' higher investment rate.
This was mainly since we were unable to find adequate data regarding dry powder or other related
proxies for the PE funds in our sample. However, Bernstein et al. (2019) tested this particular hypothesis
(focusing on the equity aspect with regards to dry powder) and concluded that it was indeed the case
for the UK market. Their main findings were further strengthened when they accounted for dry powder
                         18
in their treatment group.  This means that portfolio companies backed by PE funds with more available
capital at the onset of the crisis invested more than the other PE-backed companies. A finding which is
in line with our conjecture that it is partly PE-backed companies' availability of capital which derived
our results in Table 5.

The above discussion highlights possible explanations why the PE-backed firms managed to exhibit
higher levels of investments at the onset of the crisis and later on greater levels of investments, implying
a higher resilience in the ensuing years. Our discussion suggests that this can be traced to the PE-backed
firms’ superior access to capital. PE-backed firms' beneficial access to capital was evident in our results,
where equity was the statistically significant capital measure, meaning that an overall less decrease in
investments is justified. This particular finding is in line with Bernstein et al.’s (2019) paper (see
footnote 18). However, the discussion so far does not explain the significant contrast of our results
compared to Bernstein et al.’s (2019) paper. Therefore, it is of interest to further analyze possible
explanations for this substantial difference in investment levels (11.4% compared to 5.9%).

Coupling with the above, our treatment group demonstrated a higher net equity contribution (2.4%)
compared to Bernstein et al. (2019) (2.1%). A possible explanation for this difference is that our sample
group was backed by PE funds, which had relatively more dry powder available at the onset of the
crisis. Following the argument that dry powder plays a key role in regards to different levels of
investments thus imply that a higher investment rate is justifiable in our case. However, whether it is
net equity contribution that on its own caused this significant difference in investments cannot be
statistically established. Furthermore, we cannot establish that our PE funds actually had more capital
at their disposal at the onset of the crisis; our data merely implies this.

Another possible explanation can be discussed from a perspective of access to debt. Our PE-backed
firms’ higher net debt issuance and leverage, seen in Columns 3 and 4 (Table 5), align to some extent
with other research on this area (Bernstein et al., 2019; Ivashina & Kovner, 2011). The latter paper
describes that PE investors’ repeated bank relationships reduce information asymmetry and allow for

18
  Bernstein et al. (2019) found that PE-backed companies decreased their investments less than their peers, gained more equity contribution,
experienced greater debt inflows, higher asset base growth and also increased market share. Overall, these findings are in line with our findings
in Table 5. Please see appendix for an excerpt from their regression.

                                                                        22
more leverage. However, the magnitude of differences between the treatment and control group in our
sample appear to diverge from the UK market findings (Bernstein et al., 2019). With respect to Column
3, our treatment group experienced a relative increase in net debt issuance (1.9%) compared to the
control group. In comparison, the UK market exhibited an increase of 3.9% in terms of the same metric.
This difference of 2%-points gives an alternative focus for the discussion; there may be other factors
besides equity contribution and dry powder affecting the investment. Important to note, however, the
finding in Column 3 is not statistically significant, meaning that our results in regards to debt issuance
could be caused by chance.

Nonetheless, an interesting finding is the opposite trend that the growth in leverage illustrates. Column
4 (Table 5) shows a growth of 2.1% for the Swedish market, and Bernstein et al. (2019) found 1.2% for
the British market when it comes to a comparison between treatment vs. control group. This tells us that
although our treatment group on the Swedish market experienced lower net debt issuance levels
compared to the British market, our treatment group still experienced higher growth in leverage
(significant at 10%) compared to the treatment group on the UK market (not significant at 10%).

The discussion of the firms’ debt policy does not necessarily help us explain the significant difference
in investments. However, it implies that our sample is more volatile (which is in line with our decision
to include small firms). Owing to the statistical significance of the results, combined with the
ambiguities presented above, establishing a probable link between debt issuance and increased leverage
to the significantly higher investment rate thus appears problematic. Although findings from other
papers (Ivashina & Kovner, 2011) imply that our results in regards to debt may be reasonable, the high
statistical significance of equity contribution makes it the preferred capital-measure to focus the
discussion on.

Coupling the above together, it can be reasoned that our findings imply - backed by the idea that dry
powder has enabled infusion of capital - that the significant difference in investments is predominantly
attributed to the higher equity contribution. Simply because “dry powder” indicates the importance of
availability of capital, and debt, in this case, does not appear to be the explanatory capital measure.
However, such a hypothesis cannot be substantiated by statistical proof. Hence it should be read with
caution. Other factors such as operational assistance by PE investors and our samples’ firm size might
also partially have caused the differences in investments. These aspects will be discussed in later
sections.

4.2 Cost of Debt
The COD discrepancy, where the PE-backed firms experienced a higher relative increase in COD post-
crisis when compared to their equivalent non-PE-backed firms (Column 5, Table 5), can be discussed
further. Although the statistical significance (10%) of our findings is questionable, the following
discussion will attempt to find a probable answer to the discrepancy.

An initial perspective is the macroeconomic conditions in Sweden, which was volatile regarding the
interest rate during the time span of our study. The Swedish National Bank (Sveriges Riksbank) had
during the period up until 2008 slightly increased the interest rate, and this spiked in 2008 when the
interest rate hit its maximum for the period 2004-2012/13 (Figure A.2). However, proceeding years -
starting 2009 - experienced a drastic decrease due to adjusted monetary policy aimed at ameliorating
economic conditions. A line of reasoning is that this may explain the relative increase in COD for our
sample of Swedish firms. However, compared with the monetary policy in the UK at the time, it
indicates a similar monetary policy (Figure A.2). This contradicts the above belief that Sweden’s

                                                                        23
domestic monetary policy would be the cause for the higher relative increase in COD for PE-backed
firms in Sweden as a similar trend with regards to COD is not evident on the British market (Bernstein
et al., 2019). Furthermore, such a discussion fails to account for why PE-backed firms experienced a
relative higher COD compared to their non-PE-backed counterparts, as it can be assumed that the
interest rate environment affects all firms equally regardless of financial backing.

An alternative explanation could be according to previous research on capital structure relationships
and cost of capital, which seeks to explain an increase in leverage as a factor for increased COD. This
phenomenon is widely researched - but also intuitive - where increased leverage ratios on the firm’s
balance sheet result in higher firm risk (Poledna et al., 2014; Palmer & Sanders, 2008). The additional
risk, in turn, leads to a higher cost of capital, where both equity and debt investors demand a higher
price in order to compensate for additional risk-taking (Baxter, 1967; Modigliani & Miller, 1958).
Additional risk-taking in the form of increasing leverage is evident in our treatment group, which can
be seen in Column 3, Table 5, where the PE-backed firms issued 1.9% more debt which, in turn, can be
seen to have resulted in higher leverage (Column 4). A side note here is that the higher issuance of debt
for our treatment group is not the focus of this argument, it is rather the increased leverage.

The heightened leverage could explain the discrepancy relating to COD for the treatment group
(Column 5, Table 5), as the PE-backed firms are taking on more risk as a consequence of the increased
leverage, which results in a higher cost of capital (COD). The same linkage between higher net debt
issuance and increased leverage is not observed in the Bernstein et al. (2019) paper. They could not
establish that the higher net debt issuance resulted in higher leverage ratios with a p-value of less than
10%. Therefore, the discrepancy between the two papers’ COD can, at least partly, be explained by
research on capital structure and cost of capital. However, this argument is further conflicted by the
results of Ivashina and Kovner (2011). They found that credit spreads ought to decrease for portfolio
companies through PE funds' repeated and continuous bank relationship.

Altogether, macroeconomic factors do not appear to offer explanatory value to the COD discrepancy.
Other markets exhibited similar trends relating to interest rates, and in the absence of those similarities,
the inevitable question regarding why only PE-backed firms then would be affected surfaces.
Furthermore, a possible explanation for the difference is the different development in terms of capital
structure that the sample groups exhibited. Bernstein et al. (2019) did not find evidence supporting
increased leverage for their treatment group with a p-value of less than 10%, which we did. Following
the logic of increased cost of capital in the event of higher leverage (risk) thus results in a higher relative
increase in COD for our treatment group. Despite the capital structure reasoning, contemporary research
(Ivashina & Kovner, 2011) gives a contrasting angle. As our statistical significance of the COD finding
is inadequate, we cannot conclude which of the two perspectives that are most in line with our results.
The findings may be random and thus actually in line with the contrasting angle. However, if our
findings are true, the above-mentioned arguments offer some insight into why that discrepancy might
exist.

4.3 Return on Assets
Despite our treatment group’s growing market shares, they also managed to outperform their peers with
regards to ROA (1.7% higher) - statistically significant at 5%. As mentioned in previous sections, this
is in contrast to traditional accounting principles as increased cash outflow - relatively higher COD and
more investments - without any direct indications of higher cash inflow should result in reduced profits.
However, as this is not the case, it appears like the investments managed to pay off during our time
frame. As earlier mentioned, our treatment group managed to keep investing during 2007-2008 when

                                                                        24
the control group steeply decreased theirs. Investments are generally long-term, especially in the sense
of seeing their effects, meaning that one year more might be enough to see a part of the financial returns
from the capital expenditures. A part of the superior performance might therefore stem from the time
perspective.

Furthermore, our findings imply that our sample increased their leverage relatively more than their
peers. Increased leverage effect on firm performance is a widely explored subject, where much of the
current research from different countries during the period of the crisis conclude that leverage is
negatively correlated with firm performance (Vithessonthi & Tongurai, 2015; Mule & Mukras, 2015;
Akram et al., 2015). Other research shows that the link between leverage and firm performance varies
between countries. Mainly, two factors determine the link: companies’ access to bank credit and the
efficiency of the legal system (Weill, 2008). Followingly, our findings thus suggest that the Swedish
market offers its companies superior access to bank debt financing and has a more efficient legal system.
However, based on our data, these implications cannot be substantiated without any doubt. The
difference in terms of the UK market and Swedish market in terms of those two factors is questionable.
We can, therefore, not explain the difference in regards to profitability merely by the leverage factor.

The final point which will be brought up is that the size of the firms in our sample might be the reason
for the higher ROA, in combination with the investment horizon. As previously touched upon, small
firms are in general more volatile, and their investments' returns also tend to follow that pattern. The
following section will thus discuss the possibility that the sheer firm size in our sample is a part of the
reason why our treatment group exhibited superior returns, among the other contradictory findings.

4.4 Size
A difference between this paper and Bernstein et al.’s (2019) paper is the size of the companies in our
sample. In our sample, some of the companies included are what Bernstein et al. (2019) would consider
small firms and exclude as they use medium- and large-sized companies. This may impact the findings
in our paper as smaller companies may result in more skewed results with regards to higher volatility
(as evident in our results). Due to this, we repeat the main analyses with an alternative matching
procedure. Instead of including all (except certain exclusions as described in Section 1.1) firms, we now
exclude those defined as “small”. Using the definition of small companies, which Bernstein et al. (2019)
      19
used  , but with emphasis on asset base and revenue, we now get 68 PE-backed firms and 99 non-PE-
backed firms (a total of 167 companies, meaning that approximately 20% of our original sample size
was excluded).

Our alternative matching process has primarily one advantage and one disadvantage. The advantage is
that this matching is closer to the approach which contemporary research (e.g., Bernstein et al., 2019)
predominantly uses. The reason being that researchers most often are unwilling to include small firms
due to the flaws mentioned earlier. However, that reluctance is one of our reasons for including smaller
firms, as we aim to contribute to the current body of literature by adding a new perspective. This is
especially as markets outside of the traditional economies (UK, France, US) for PE transactions consist
of smaller companies. The disadvantage is that the Swedish market is limited in size to begin with,
which means that the sample size is further slimmed as a result of this alternative approach. Although

19
  As we aim to achieve comparability to Bernstein et al.’s (2019) paper by adding a new dimension of smaller companies we based the
definition of small companies on the definition proposed by them. Although this can be misrepresentative of the official definition of small
firms in Sweden, we consider this as the preferred choice as our objective is to explore the size-factor and not the definition as proposed by
regulations. Therefore, the definition as proposed in Bernstein et al. (2019) was used: a small company is defined as meeting at least two of
the three following criteria: total assets less than £3.26 million, annual turnover less than £6.5 million, and an average number of employees
fewer than 50. The values denoted in pound sterling were calculated to SEK as of 2007 exchange rate GBP/SEK.

                                                                        25
we argue that the sample size remains satisfactory to run statistical tests upon, as this analysis mainly
aims to function as a robustness check and therefore potentially add insights into the differences we
encountered in the main analyses.

In Tables 8 and 9, we repeat the main analysis with the alternative sample. What can be seen is that the
results are relatively unchanged. The main differences (in terms of investment and funding policies) are
that the magnitude of the investment difference now is reduced (11.4% to 7.9%) and the statistical
significance of the net equity contribution finding is reduced (5% to 10%). Furthermore, the net debt
issuance finding instead becomes significant at 10%, and the COD difference is reduced (1.9% to 0.9%)
and no longer significant at 10%. Moreover, Table 9 is noticeably similar to Table 6, where the major
difference is ROA’s lowered statistical significance (5% to 10%). Nonetheless, the implications of the
findings remain unchanged. Our PE-backed firms reduced their investments less, experienced higher
equity - and debt - contribution, exhibited heightened leverage ratios, and also faced a relatively higher
increase in COD.

Overall, this implies that the smaller firms indeed impacted the results in the main analysis. In terms of
investments, the difference was 3.5%-points lower when small companies were excluded. The
discrepancy in performance was reduced, both in terms of magnitude and statistical significance.
Furthermore, the COD difference now became non-significant with a magnitude of 0.9%. In other
words, the differences we encountered in the main analysis, which was in contrast to contemporary
research, are reduced when small firms are excluded from the sample. The difference in terms of
investments is still considerable but only 2%-points larger (instead of 5.5%-points) compared to the
finding by Bernstein et al. (2019). Superior performance for our treatment group became ambiguous as
the regression indicates that the PE-backed firms exhibited 0.9% higher ROA, which was statistically
significant at 10%. Due to the small magnitude and borderline significance, it is problematic to establish
whether or not any of the two groups actually performed better or not. A finding in line with Bernstein
et al. (2019), as they were unable to conclude that neither of their sample groups managed to outperform
the other. Lastly, Bernstein et al. (2019) found that the relative COD decreased by 0.3% for their
treatment group (significant at 5%), and our alternative analysis suggests that our treatment group
experienced a relative increase of 0.9% in COD (not significant at 10%). This implies that we cannot
provide evidence supporting that there actually were any differences between the groups in terms of
COD. As 0.3% is almost negligible with zero, our finding is fairly similar.

Nonetheless, important to keep in mind is that the size of the firms in our sample is still smaller in terms
of revenue compared to the sample in the Bernstein et al. (2019) paper. The new average in revenue for
the entire sample with both treatment and control group (when small firms are excluded) is 480 million
SEK (compared to 435 million before the exclusion). In comparison, they had 80 million USD as
average (approximately 541 million SEK). Therefore, it is likely that the characteristics of the Swedish
market (most notably its size compared to the UK market), combined with the other factors that the
discussion section has brought forward, at least partly account for the remaining differences.

                                                                        26
Table 8. Investment and Funding Policies (with alternative sampling technique)
                                       (1)                        (2)                        (3)                 (4)             (5)
                       Investments/Assets        Net Equity            Net Debt        Leverage     Cost of
                                               Cont./Assets          Iss./Assets                     Debt
 PE_Firm * Time 0,079**                0,028*                0,022*           0,027*       0,009
                                 (0,021)                  (0,012)                 (0,007)           (0,022)       (0,006)
 Year Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes

 Firm Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes

 Observations 495 480 488 502 491

 R-Squared 0,084 0,009 0,04 0,055 0,013
Table 8 reports the same DID regression which was executed in Section 3.1 (relating to the groups’ investment and funding
policies). The difference being that the sampling technique now excludes small companies. Section 2 includes a more thorough
description of the regression model which was adopted. Nonetheless, as the table shows, all calculations include firm and year
fixed effects. Additionally, the standard errors are clustered at the firm level. The main parameter of interest is the 𝑃𝐸−𝑓𝑖𝑟𝑚 ∗
𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒 parameter, as the rest of the variables rather work as noise-reduction. Please see section 1.1 for definitions of the
particular metrics. Lastly, ** denotes statistical significance at 5% and * at 10%.

Table 9. Performance Metrics (witch alternative sampling technique)
                                                   (1)                                (2)                                (3)
                                ROA              EBITDA/Revenue           Market Share
 PE_Firm * Time 0,009*                      0,011                      0,024*

                                            (0,01)                         (0,005)                        (0,015)
 Year Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes

 Firm Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes

 Observations 498 492 501

 R-Squared 0,058 0,011 0,004
Table 9 illustrates the same DID regression which section 3.2 performed (in terms of performance metrics), however with the
alternative sampling technique. As the table indicates, year and firm fixed effects are included in all cases. Furthermore, the
standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Please see section 2 for a more in-depth explanation of the regression model
which was used. Additionally, please see section 1.1 for the definitions of the metrics used in the table. The parameter of
interest in this case is 𝑃𝐸−𝑓𝑖𝑟𝑚 ∗ 𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒. Finally, ** denotes statistical significance at 5% and * at 10%.

4.5 Amalgamation of Discussion
Taking the above discussions in Section 4 into consideration, it is probable that the size of the firms,
among other factors in our sample, both in the control and the treatment group, have affected our results.
As an example, it is not an unfamiliar finding that PE funds’ portfolio companies invest (measured in
% of assets) more than their non-PE-backed peers. However, the magnitude of the discrepancy we found
in our main analysis is not in line with current research. The smaller size of our companies in the study,
combined with our treatment group’s PE funds’ potentially larger relative quantity of dry powder,
appears to offer some explanation to the difference. Furthermore, our treatment group experienced a
higher relative increase in COD in the main analysis. We argue that this difference might have been
caused by our treatment group’s increased leverage (resulting in heightened risk). However, due to the
problematic p-value, which was further worsened when we excluded small firms, we instead see it as
likely that the discrepancy predominantly is attributed to the size of our sample firms. Moreover, our
treatment group’s superior performance in the main regression might be attributed to their higher
investment rate in 2007-2008. This means that the higher ROA might be due to the investments realizing
returns earlier than their peers’ investments. Although, our alternative regression indicated that the
superior performance was mostly a result of including smaller-sized firms in our sample. Meaning that

                                                                        27
the two groups’ performance was no different from one another when the small firms were excluded.
Nevertheless, an exhaustive explanation for any of the diverging results could not be found.

As mentioned at the beginning of Section 4, most parts presented, with the exception of Section 4.4,
lack statistical tests. Their implications should therefore be interpreted accordingly. Consequently, to
gain a better understanding of our results and ambiguities, and complement the earlier robustness tests,
we have included a survey aimed at professionals in the Swedish PE industry.

5. Survey

The survey’s main objective was to get a possible and alternative explanation of the discrepancies our
results presented compared to previous literature. The target group of the survey was professionals who
have, or currently are, worked/working in the PE sector in Sweden. Respondents who had not been
working amid one of the major economic/financial downturns (the 90s, 2008, or the COVID-19 crisis)
were excluded. Furthermore, the survey also attempted to check if additional factors, such as operational
improvements, may have caused our results, opposed to only financial activities. To make a distinction
of this, our survey is inspired by the one that Bernstein et al. (2019) executed on the British market,
with a focus on the following blocks: 1) Operational activities, 2) Financial activities, and 3) Possible
explanations with regards to capital market and debt.

It is important to point out that this survey is not attempting to find new results. This is because of the
limited sample of respondents (11). Instead, it is a way to verify our findings and get a qualitative
perspective of our data. Therefore, the following section should be read accordingly and considered a
complement to the quantitative analysis in our study. We will first discuss the answers in regards to our
contradictory or diverging findings (investment over asset levels) and will end with a short discussion
in terms of operational improvements.

A core part of our previous discussions has revolved around PE-backed firms' superior access to capital.
This capital, we argued, has enabled the treatment group to pick a more aggressive approach to tackle
the crisis. Consequently, our survey consisted of two questions regarding equity and debt financing to
shed light on this. The result of the respondents’ answers is supportive of this assumption. 64%
answered that PE funds infuse “more” additional equity capital to alleviate financial constraints for their
portfolio companies during a crisis. This was further strengthened by 18% who responded that this is
done “significantly more” during a crisis. Furthermore, 54% responded that assistance with debt
financing was done “more” during a crisis, and 37% believed it to be significantly more.

In combination with the responses mentioned above supporting the conjecture that PE-backed firms
enjoy increased access to capital, approximately 73% of the respondents believed PE funds to help their
portfolio companies find new investments. One respondent believed this was not the case amid crises.
Taken together, these findings imply that our treatment group’s increased investments are probable.
However, the magnitude of the difference (11.4% than their peers) cannot be fully explained.

Followingly, we discovered another interesting perspective in our survey; 45.5% of the respondents did
not know or answered no, to whether PE funds enable cheaper debt financing for their portfolio
companies. This is of interest as it points towards one of the problematic aspects of our data results, i.e.,
with regards to the higher relative COD for the treatment group. This particular part of our survey can
supposedly strengthen the robustness of our findings in one of two ways. Firstly, the spread in terms of
the answers illustrates that PE-backed firms indeed may experience higher COD. Secondly, our

                                                                        28
respondents showed a clear ambiguity to the question, 54.5% of the respondents believed PE funds to
enable cheaper debt, and the rest believed this not to be the case. Taking this finding one step further
might then infer that our finding regarding the higher relative COD, which was only statistically
significant at 10%, actually was caused by chance. This is because our respondents showed no clear
stand in regards to the question, and our p-value was not satisfactory.

Lastly, we found that a majority of the respondents - 73% - believe that portfolio companies were
assisted “more” with operational problems during a crisis. This may explain some of the unexplainable
factors for the results in regards to the control and treatment group, respectively. Such a line of reasoning
would thus point toward that operational improvement and assistance is one of the factors that resulted
in superior performance (measured in ROA) and higher investment rates.

In summary, the survey illustrated a picture of PE-backed firms' superior access to capital, their
advantageous access to operational assistance, but also an ambiguity from our respondents in terms of
PE-backed firms’ COD. To a large extent, these responses validate our results in the main analysis.
Particularly in regards to our findings which exhibited either contradictory or extreme tendencies
compared to contemporary literature.

                                                                        29
6. Conclusion & Implications

Firms backed by private equity and the implications of this type of financing have been widely
researched. We conducted a study on the Swedish market from 2004-2010 amid the Great Recession,
2008. The objective of this paper was to explore whether PE-backed firms contribute to financial
fragility or stability amid crisis and whether they outperform non-PE-backed peers. The sample
consisted of 79 PE-backed firms and 129 non-PE-backed peers, resulting in 208 firms. In order to
scrutinize these questions, we executed a main regression (including small firms), an alternative
regression (where those small companies were excluded), and added a qualitative discussion together
with a survey to get additional insights.

The main regression shows that the PE-backed companies maintained higher investment levels
throughout the post-crisis period (2008-2010) compared to their non-PE-backed counterparts,
indicating that the treatment group was more resilient amid the financial crisis. Our findings further
indicate that the treatment group's relationship with their respective PE fund enabled superior access to
capital, where the equity metric was statistically significant while debt was non-significant. Despite the
portfolio companies’ partnership with PE funds, the main analysis shows that our treatment group
experienced a relative increase in COD compared to the control group. Nonetheless, they achieved
superior performance and growth - measured in ROA and market share - compared to their non-PE-
backed peers. Overall, these results from the main regression are in line with current research. However,
three findings stand out compared to contemporary literature. Namely, the magnitude of the investment
differences, heightened relative COD, and superior ROA that portfolio companies experienced
compared to the non-PE-backed sample. In combination with the qualitative discussion and survey, our
alternative analysis was leveraged to get plausible explanations for the diverging results.

Our alternative regression pointed towards that the size of our sample firms affected the magnitude of
the investment differences, however, simultaneously suggesting that other factors predominantly
accounted for the differences. Consequently, the more expansive investment policy was mainly
attributed to the portfolio companies' relationship with the PE funds, which enables advantageous access
to capital. In our case, dry powder appeared to offer insights into the higher equity contribution and the
accompanied higher investment levels. Moreover, in terms of COD, our additional analysis highlighted
that the companies’ size, combined with a higher cost of capital in events of increased leverage, could
plausibly explain the observed discrepancy. Relating to ROA, it is possible that the treatment group’s
higher investment levels at the onset of the crisis were able to pay off earlier compared to their peer’s
investments. However, the alternative regression offered an additional perspective, where a part of the
superior performance instead appeared to be attributed to the smaller companies in our sample.

All things considered, the alternative regression indicated similar findings as our main regression, where
the uncertainties mentioned above surrounding the contradictory results were reduced. Thus, the
inclusion of small firms appeared to have impacted our results by providing increased volatility to the
overall sample. In addition, a survey of 11 PE industry professionals supported the findings in the main
analysis by providing complementary insights regarding access to capital. The respondents also offered
a new angle concerning operational improvements, which partly might justify some of the
unexplainable factors we encountered.

Amalgamating, in our main analysis we found that the PE-backed firms maintained a higher investment
rate, primarily explained by equity contribution from their PE funds. This enabled a more resilient
stance amid the 2008 crisis, where the PE-backed firms functioned as stabilizers as opposed to

                                                                        30
contributing to financial fragility during the Great Recession. Finally, we found strong support that the
PE-backed companies outperformed their non-PE-backed peers.

The implications of our results could provide insights into the financial industry’s impact on economic
stability. To further study this, an interesting angle would be to replicate our study but focus on specific
industries to examine if the results hold. Alternatively, one could conduct a study on markets similar to
Sweden to examine if similar results are found. Additionally, we believe the three diverging findings,
combined with the size factor, to be of interest for further studies. Lastly, a longer time horizon post-
crisis might also offer explanatory value as some metrics are more lagging in their nature and would
thus benefit from more time.

A potential shortcoming of our study is the process that was adopted when gathering the data. We
manually went through thousands of annual reports, meaning that mistakes might have occurred due to
the human factor. With that said, our ambition has been to report the findings as objectively as possible.
Hopefully, the number of mistakes is therefore negligible. Furthermore, a limitation of the data used in
our analysis is that the respective firms’ accounting numbers were used. This can be seen as an issue as
balance sheet items are reported at book value instead of fair value which means that discrepancies
might exist. Finally, the sample size can be considered as low compared to contemporary research on
the same area. In itself, this is not necessarily problematic. However, this increases the likelihood of
extreme values affecting the results in our data.

                                                                        31
7. References

Argentum. (2018). “The state of Nordic private equity 2018”. https://argentum.no/wp-
content/uploads/sites/73/2019/04/Argentum_The-state-of-Nordic-private-equity-2018_digital.pdf

Akram, B., Nazir, M., Rao, H., & Javed, Z. (2015). “Effect of Financial Leverage on Performance of
the Firms: Empirical Evidence from Pakistan”. SPOUDAI Journal of Economics and Business, 65(1-
2), 87-95.

Baxter, N. (1967). “Leverage, Risk of Ruin and the Cost of Capital”. The Journal of Finance, 22(3),
395–403. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.1967.tb02975.x

Bernstein, S., Lerner, J., & Mezzanotti, F. (2019). “Private Equity and Financial Fragility during the
Crisis”. The Review of Financial Studies, 32(4), 1309–1373. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhy078

Bernstein, S., Lerner, J., Sorensen, M., & Strömberg, P. (2017). “Private Equity and Industry
Performance”. Management Science, 63(4), 1198–1213. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2015.2404

Bernstein, S., & Sheen, A. (2016). “The Operational Consequences of Private Equity Buyouts:
Evidence from the Restaurant Industry”. The Review of Financial Studies, 29(9), 2387–2418.
https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhw037

Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., & Mullainathan, S. (2004). “How Much Should We Trust Differences-in-
Differences Estimates?”. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1), 249–275.
https://doi.org/10.1162/003355304772839588

Boucly, Q., Sraer, D., & Thesmar, D. (2011). “Growth LBOs”. Journal of Financial Economics,
102(2), 432–453. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2011.05.014

Cohn, J., Mills, L., & Towery, E. (2014). “The evolution of capital structure and operating
performance after leveraged buyouts: Evidence from U.S. corporate tax returns”. Journal of Financial
Economics, 111(2), 469–494. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2013.11.007

Cohn, J., Hotchkiss, E., & Towery, E. (2020). “The Motives for Private Equity Buyouts of Private
Firms: Evidence from U.S. Corporate Tax Returns”. SSRN Electronic Journal.
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2318916

Copenhagen Economics. (2020). “Economic Footprint of Swedish Private Equity”. Swedish Private
Equity and Venture Capital Association (SVCA). https://www.svca.se/wp-
content/uploads/2020/12/Economic_Footprint_of_Swedish_Private_Equity.pdf

Cressy, R., Munari, F., & Malipiero, A. (2007). “Playing to their strengths? Evidence that
specialization in the private equity industry confers competitive advantage”. Journal of Corporate
Finance, 13(4), 647–669. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcorpfin.2007.04.007

                                                                        32
Duchin, R., Ozbas, O., & Sensoy, B. (2010). “Costly external finance, corporate investment, and the
subprime mortgage credit crisis”. Journal of Financial Economics, 97(3), 418–435.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2009.12.008

Elmér, H., Guibourg, G., Kjellberg, D., & Nessén, M. (2012). “Riksbankens penningpolitiska åtgärder
under finanskrisen - utvärdering och lärdomar”. Riksbanken.
https://www.riksbank.se/globalassets/media/avdelningar/svenska/afs/finanskrisen-2007-
2009/rap_pov_artikel_1_121017_sve.pdf

Fang, L., Ivashina, V. & Lerner, J. (2013). “Combining Banking with Private Equity Investing”. The
Review of Financial Studies, 26(9), 2139–2173. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hht031

Frontier Economics. (2013). “Exploring the impact of private equity on economic growth in Europe”.
https://www.investeurope.eu/media/1110/frontier_economics_report.pdf

Gompers, P., Mugford, K., & Kim, D. (2012) “Bain Capital: Outback Steakhouse”. Harvard Business
School Case, no.212-087. https://www.hbs.edu/faculty/Pages/item.aspx?num=41502

Guennoc, D. (2007). “European Private Equity: Facts and figures”. European Private Equity &
Venture Capital Association. https://www.eesc.europa.eu/resources/docs/guenoc_000.pdf

Hammer, B., Hinrichs, H., & Schweizer, D. (2021). “What is Different About Private Equity-Backed
Acquirers?”. Review of Financial Economics, Forthcoming. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2832444

Hedberg, P., & Bergström, E. (2013). “A study on the performance of private equity owned
companies during booms and busts”. Handelsh ö gskolan i Stockholm.

International Monetary Fund. (2020). “A Crisis Like No Other, An Uncertain Recovery”.
https://www.imf.org//media/Files/Publications/WEO/2020/Update/June/English/WEOENG202006.as
hx

Ivashina, V. & Kovner, A. (2011). “The Private Equity Advantage: Leveraged Buyout Firms and
Relationship Banking”. The Review of Financial Studies, 24(7), 2462–2498.
https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhr024

Jensen, M. (1986). “Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Takeovers”. The
American Economic Review, 76(2), 323–329. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.99580

Jensen, M., Kaplan, S., Ferenbach, C., Feldberg, M., Moon, J., Hoesterey, B., & Davis, C. (2006).
“Morgan Stanley Roundtable on Private Equity and Its Import for Public Companies”. Journal of
Applied Corporate Finance, 18(3), 8-37. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-6622.2006.00096.x

Kahle, K., & Stulz, R. (2013). “Access to capital, investment, and the financial crisis”. Journal of
Financial Economics, 110(2), 280–299. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2013.02.014

Kaplan, N.S., & Strömberg, P. (2009). “Leveraged Buyouts and Private Equity”. The Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 23(1), 121–146. https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.23.1.121

                                                                        33
Kaplan, N.S., & Stein, C.J. (1993). “The Evolution of Buyout Pricing and Financial Structure in the
1980s”. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(2), 313–357. https://doi.org/10.2307/2118334

Kaplan, N.S., Harris, S.R., & Jenkinson, T. (2014). “Private Equity Performance: What Do We
Know?”. The Journal of Finance, 69(5), 1851–1882. https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12154

Kaplan, N.S. (1989). “The effects of management buyouts on operating performance and value”.
Journal of Financial Economics, 24(2), 217–254. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-405X(89)90047-0

Koo, J. (2016). “Private Equity as an Alternative Corporate Restructuring Scheme: Does Private
Equity Increase the Operating Performance of PE-Backed Firms?”. KDI Journal of Economic Policy,
38(2), 21–44. https://doi.org/10.23895/kdijep.2016.38.2.21

Leslie, P., & Oyer, P. (2008). “Managerial Incentives and Value Creation: Evidence from Private
Equity”. National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper. https://doi.org/10.3386/w14331

MacArthur, H., Burack, R., De Vusser, C., Yang, K., & Rainey, B. (2019). “Private Equity: Still
Booming, but Is the Cycle Near its End?”. Bain & Company. https://www.bain.com/insights/year-in-
review-global-private-equity-report-2019/

McKinsey & Company. (2019). “Private markets come of age, Mckinsey Global Private Markets
Review 2019”.
https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/industries/private%20equity%20and%20principal%20i
nvestors/our%20insights/private%20markets%20come%20of%20age/private-markets-come-of-age-
mckinsey-global-private-markets-review-2019-vf.ashx

Michaely, R., & Roberts, R.M. (2012). “Corporate Dividend Policies: Lessons from Private Firms”.
The Review of Financial Studies, 25(3), 711–746. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhr108

Modigliani, F., & Miller, M. (1958). “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and the Theory of
Investment”. The American Economic Review, 48(3), 261-297.

Mule, R., & Mukras, M. (2015). “Financial leverage and performance of listed firms in a frontier
market: Panel evidence from Kenya”. European Scientific Journal, 11(7).
https://eujournal.org/index.php/esj/article/view/5339

Næss-Schmidt, S.,Heebøll, C., & Karlsson, H. (2017). “Swedish Private Equity Market: A Footprint
Analysis, Copenhagen Economics”.
https://www.copenhageneconomics.com/dyn/resources/Publication/publicationPDF/2/402/149917729
5/the-swedish-private-equity-market-a-footprint-analysis-copenhagen-economics-july-2017.pdf

OECD. (2008). “OECD Economic Surveys: Sweden”. OECD Publishing. https://read.oecd-
ilibrary.org/economics/oecd-economic-surveys-sweden-2008_eco_surveys-swe-2008-en#page9

Omri Wallach. (2020). “The 25 Largest Private Equity Firms in One Chart”. Visual Capitalist.
https://www.visualcapitalist.com/25-largest-private-equity-firms-chart/

                                                                        34
Osterland, A. (2020). “Here are key ways the coronavirus crisis differs from the Great Recession”.
CNBC. https://www.cnbc.com/2020/05/27/here-are-key-ways-coronavirus-crisis-differs-from-the-
great-recession.html

Palmer, M., & Sanders, B. (2008). “Going Concern Debt Ratios: Is the Firm Safe?”. Corporate
Finance Review, 13(3), 25-33. https://ssrn.com/abstract=1815534

Poledna, S., Thurner, S., Farmer, J.D, & Geanakoplos, J. (2014). “Leverage-induced systemic risk
under Basle II and other credit risk policies”. Journal of Banking & Finance, 42, 199–212.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbankfin.2014.01.038

Reinganum, M. (1983). “The anomalous stock market behavior of small firms in January: Empirical
tests for tax-loss selling effects”. Journal of Financial Economics, 12(1), 89–104.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-405X(83)90029-6

Saenz, A. (2020).” How private equity is redefining resiliency by incorporating purpose”. EY.
https://www.ey.com/en_gl/private-equity/how-private-equity-is-redefining-resiliency-by-
incorporating-purpose

SCB. (2020). “Growth rate of lending to non-financial corporations declined in October”.
https://www.scb.se/en/finding-statistics/statistics-by-subject-area/financial-markets/financial-market-
statistics/financial-market-statistics/pong/statistical-news/financial-market-statistics-october-2020/

Sheen, A., Fracassi, C., & Previtero, A. (2020). “Barbarians at the Store? Private Equity, Products,
and Consumers”. National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper.
https://doi.org/10.3386/w27435

Smart, S., & Waldfogel, J. (1994). “Measuring the Effect of Restructuring on Corporate Performance:
The Case of Management Buyouts”. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 76(3), 503–511.
https://doi.org/10.2307/2109975

Smith, A. (1990).”Corporate ownership structure and performance: The case of management
buyouts”. Journal of Financial Economics, 27(1), 143–164. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-
405X(90)90024-T

Sveriges Riksbank. (2007). “Årsgenomsnitt valutakurser (ackumulerat)”.
https://www.riksbank.se/sv/statistik/sok-rantor--valutakurser/arsgenomsnitt-
valutakurser/?y=2007&m=12&s=Comma&f=y

The World Bank. (2018). “GDP growth (annual %)”.
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.KD.ZG

Tillväxtverket. (2021). “Basfakta om företag”. https://tillvaxtverket.se/statistik/foretagande/basfakta-
om-foretag.html?chartCollection=4#svid12_f607e5d15aeacd3b3d1f441

Tsyplakov, S. (2008). “Investment frictions and leverage dynamics”. Journal of Financial Economics,
89(3), 423–443. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2007.09.004

                                                                        35
Vithessonthi, C., & Tongurai, J. (2015). “The effect of firm size on the leverage–performance
relationship during the financial crisis of 2007–2009”. Journal of Multinational Financial
Management, 29, 1–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mulfin.2014.11.001

Weill, L. (2008). “Leverage and Corporate Performance: Does Institutional Environment Matter?”.
Small Business Economics, 30(3), 251-265. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11187-006-9045-7

Årsredovisningslag. (SFS 2020:1033). https://www.riksdagen.se/sv/dokument-
lagar/dokument/svensk-forfattningssamling/arsredovisningslag-19951554_sfs-1995-1554

                                                                        36
8. Appendixes

Figure A.1
Number of transactions each year from our own (full) sample
The following figure illustrates what figure 5 also showed, in other words, the amount of PE transactions being made in
Sweden during 1989 and 2007. The differences between the two figures are that figure 5 shows PE-transactions from
Sweden as a whole between 1988 and 2007, and this figure shows our (full) sample of transactions between 1989 and 2007.
The important takeaway from this figure is that only a few transactions appear to be missing from our data, meaning that our
sample was a good proxy for the full Swedish market.

Figure A.2
Comparison of Repo Rates of UK, US, Eurozone and Sweden, 2004-2013
Figure A.2 shows the repo rate for the United Kingdom, USA, the Eurozone, and Sweden, 2004-2013. (Elmér et al., 2012)

                                                                        37
A.3
Excerpt of Regression Table in Bernstein et al.’s (2019) paper
This table depicts similar characteristics as seen in Tables 5,6,8 and 9 in our study. They used a DID regression, with both year
fixed effects and firm fixed effects. The main parameter of interest is the PE firm x Post variable. The difference between the
odd and even column numbers is that the even-numbered columns include firm-level controls. Furthermore, they cluster the
standard errors at the firm level. Finally, *** denotes statistical significance at 1%, ** at 5% and * at 10%.

A.4
Excerpts from the Survey Design

                                                                        38
39
40