EVERYTHING IS RELATIVE

UNDERLYING MECHANISMS AFFECTING INVESTOR REACTIONS TO CONTRAST

EFFECTS IN THE US FINANCIAL MARKET

EMMA LEXHED

WILMA ÖSTMAN

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2021
Everything is Relative: Underlying Mechanisms Affecting Investor Reactions to Contrast
Effects in the US Financial Market

Abstract:

Contrast effects influence our perception of information because it biases us to perceive matters
relative to each other and not by their absolute values. This paper explores contrast effects in a
financial setting. Contrasts are measured by comparing earning news of firms with announcement
dates following each other. We replicate and extend a study conducted by Samuel M.Hartzmark and
Kelly Shue (2018) in which they find that contrast effects distort market reactions to firm earnings
announcements in the US financial market. We study later years (1990-2020) and expand the sample
size to also incorporate small firms and we find that investors’ return reactions are biased by contrast
effects. We extend the study to include tests of possible underlying mechanisms affecting reactions to
contrast effects. First, we test if varying market conditions influence the effect. We find that for
positive earnings surprises, reactions to contrast effects decrease as market strength increases and for
negative earnings surprises, reactions to contrast effects increase as market strength increases. Second,
we look at contrast effects in relation to behavioral psychology and find that the varying return
response to previous days’ earning surprises could be explained by investor loss aversion. After
studying these potential mechanisms, the conclusion is that both factors influence investors’ reactions
to contrast effects.

Keywords:

   Contrast effects, Prospect theory, Reference point, Earnings announcement, Earnings surprise,
   VIX, The relative level of market strength, Decision-making theory, Loss aversion

Authors:

   Emma Lexhed (24312)

   Wilma Östman (24473)

Tutor:

   Adam Altmejd, Postdoctoral Researcher, Institute for Social Research at Stockholm University and
   the Department of Finance at Stockholm School of Economics

Examiner:

Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis

Bachelor Program in Finance

Stockholm School of Economics

© Emma Lexhed and Wilma Östman, 2021

                                                                                 1
                            Acknowledgements

To begin, we would like to thank our supervisor Adam Altmejd for his support and guidance.

 His enthusiasm and pedagogy has been of tremendous value to us during this process. We

  would also like to thank the Stockholm School of Economics for three very insightful and

                                        exciting years.

                                                                                2
                     I. Introduction

A contrast effect is a psychological bias that makes us judge matters relative to each other
instead of individually. This is a natural human tendency since we often use benchmarks
against which our emotions, performances, experiences, and other aspects of our lives are
measured. For instance, it has been found that when individuals are exposed to extremely
harsh crimes and then asked to choose the penalty for a lighter crime, the punishment is set
lower compared to when individuals are first exposed to much milder crimes and then told to
penalize the same crime (Rodríguez & Blanco, 2016). Not surprisingly, contrast effects also
exist in assessment evaluation. In an experiment where clinicians viewed videos of good,
mediocre, and poor performances in randomized order by first year doctors, when a good
performance preceded a poor one, the ratings for the good performance topped those given by
the control group who had not viewed the poor performance. Similarly, mediocre
performances were rated lower when preceded by good performances than when only the
mediocre performance was viewed (Yeates et al, 2015). Evidently, contrast effects rely on
reference points as we make judgements based on deviations from such points. This has been
studied in behavioral economics and psychology for decades and is often called reference
dependency. Kahneman and Tversky discuss a model of reference dependency, namely
prospect theory. Prospect theory states that individuals view outcomes as gains and losses
rather than final states, where gains and losses are relative to a reference point (Kahneman &
Tversky, 1979). This loss and gain outlook from the reference dependency theory can also be
applied to contrast effects since a contrast can make matters appear better (a gain) or worse (a
loss) than if the contrast had not been present.

This paper explores contrast effects in a setting not discussed above, namely in the financial
market. We aim to replicate and extend the study A Tough Act To Follow, conducted by
Hartzmark and Shue (2018) (below referred to as HS) in which they investigate if contrast
effects exist in the US financial market and distort the return reaction to earnings
announcements there. An earnings announcement is a public statement, usually every quarter,
in which a company reports its earnings. The market reacts to these announcements because
prior to a firm’s earnings announcement, several analysts will have made predictions of what
the firm’s earnings will amount to. The analyst forecasted earnings serve as a reference point
to which the actual earnings are compared. The difference between the firm’s actual earnings
and the analyst forecasted earnings are the unexpected earnings, often also referred to as an
earnings surprise.

Market reactions to firm-specific earnings announcements have been explored in several
previous studies. Ball and Brown (1968) were among the first to study earnings surprises and
discovered that the market reacts differently to positive and negative surprises. A positive
surprise is when the actual earnings exceed the forecasted earnings and a negative surprise is
when the reverse is the case, actual earnings are below forecasted earnings. They found that
positive earnings surprises result in an increase in returns while negative earnings surprises
result in a decrease in returns. In later years, this study was replicated and extended by Craig

                                                                                 3
and Wahlen (2004). They confirmed that annual stock returns are positively correlated to
earnings surprises.

The positive relation between annual stock returns and earnings surprises is in accordance
with rational theory since we assume that all assets are fairly priced and that the only thing
the market should react to on the announcement day is the surprise. That is, the amount by
which the actual earnings deviate from the forecasted earnings. In this sense, earning
announcements represent the news to which the market reacts. The direction of the reaction
depends on the contrast (good or bad) between the forecasted earnings (the reference point)
and the actual earnings. One can broaden this context and, as in HS, instead of just looking at
single firm-specific earnings surprises, look at whether firms’ surprises yesterday affect the
perception of other firms’ surprises today. It is reasonable to assume that if investors read
about a very large earnings surprise today, they will be disappointed if their companys’
earnings surprise reported the day after is worse. As a result, if contrast effects exist in
financial markets, the theory predicts that there is a negative relation between the earnings
surprise the day before and the return reaction to the following day’s earnings surprise (HS,
2018). In other words, if the earnings surprise the day before is positive, this will make the
surprise the following day appear less favorable due to the contrast to yesterday’s very good
surprise, and returns should be lower. Similarly, if the earnings surprise the day before is
poor, the surprise today will appear better by comparison, and returns should increase.
Studying contrast effects in the financial market is of interest because the existence of such
an effect means prices are distorted and that all assets are not fairly priced. The study is
highly relevant because as HS finds and we replicate, contrast effects do affect prices of
assets and thus describe a new form of mispricing. A mispricing not simply due to the lack of
or concealed information (news) and the absolute content of these news, but from a bias
created due to the perceived relativity of the news (HS, 2018).

The aim of this study is to determine if there are any underlying mechanisms influencing the
return reactions to contrast effects in the US financial market. We follow the same procedure
used in HS to first confirm that contrast effects in the US financial market persist when
studying later years and a larger sample containing several small firms. It is especially
interesting to see if contrast effects persist when incorporating small firms as they tend to get
less attention from investors. Hypothetically, this could imply that the magnitude of
investors’ return reactions are lower. Similarly to HS, we also analyze reactions to firms’ own
surprise, taking into consideration if the previous days’ surprises were more positive or more
negative. This test is relevant since the theory of contrast effects predicts that the reaction to
contrast effects is of greater magnitude when the previous days’ earning surprise was
negative (HS, 2018). After finding that contrast effects persist in later years and using a larger
sample, we test two potential mechanisms underlying return reactions to contrast effects.
More specifically, market strength and loss aversion. These have been studied in various
contexts before. However, we have not found any previous studies that link them in an
analysis of contrast effects. For this reason, and since these two underlying mechanisms
could be active at the same time, it is relevant to incorporate them in a single study.

                                                                                 4
We begin the extension by analyzing if investors react differently depending on the prevailing
level of market strength. Inspired by Conrad et al. (2002), who study if the markets’ strength
influences the return reaction to single firms’ earnings news, we want to see if market
strength influences investors' reactions to contrast effects. More specifically, we test if
reactions differ in a strong, relative weak market. This is a topic of interest, especially now
during the ongoing pandemic, when the market has been very volatile. It is reasonable to
expect that investors are influenced by the markets’ strength. More specifically, since
investors tend to make extrapolative expectations, it is possible that the relative level of the
market could initiate investor over or underreactions to earnings news (Kewei et al. 2006). A
high relative market could lead to overconfidence amongst investors, thus high expectations
for earnings and subsequent negative earnings surprise due to those expectations not being
met. Alternatively, a low relative market could, using the same logic, lead to positive earnings
surprises.

We proceed by testing if a psychological bias, namely loss aversion, is a mechanism
underlying investors’ reactions to contrast effects. The theory of loss aversion states that
losses loom larger than corresponding gains (Tversky and Kahneman, 1991). This is a
fascinating theory because it implies that we have an asymmetric response to gains and
losses. Logically, we tend to enjoy gains while we do not like losses. However, this theory
goes deeper than that and claims that we value gains less than what we despise losses. In our
setting of contrast effects, this entails that investors will react stronger if previous days’
earnings news were bad compared to if they were good. We explore if the varying return
responses to previous days’ surprises can be explained by investors being loss averse.

In terms of the results, from our baseline regression, we confirm HS’ findings and show that
investors react to contrast effects also in smaller firms. Moreover, similarly to HS, we find
that return reactions to firms’ own surprises are stronger when the previous days’ surprises
are more negative than more positive. With regards to the results of our extensions, we find
that for positive earnings surprises, the return reaction to contrast effects decreases as the
market strength increases and for negative earnings surprises, the return reaction to contrast
effect increases as the market strength increases. Furthermore, we find that investors’
reactions to earnings news are asymmetric and that this could possibly be explained by loss
aversion.

                 II. Literature Review

The market’s reaction to earnings announcements has been of interest to several researchers
before and the effect these news have on returns has been studied in slight variations by
many.

                                                                                 5
Ball and Brown (1968) were one of the pioneers in studying price reactions to firm’s earnings
announcements. They found that the market reaction differs depending on if the earnings
surprise was positive or negative, where a positive earnings surprise triggered an increase in
returns and a negative surprise led to a decrease in returns. Later, Ball, this time together with
Shivakumar (2008), sought to quantify how large the influence of earnings announcements
on returns is. Their study is meaningful since evidently there are various externalities that can
affect returns. Moreover, since so many studies look at earnings announcements’ impact on
returns, it is highly relevant to assess how significant this impact really is. While Ball and
Shivakumar (2008) found that earnings announcements far from explain the full return
reaction, they found that four quarterly earnings announcements explain circa 6%-9%
(1%-2% in annual terms) of the total information incorporated in the share price.

The research on return reactions to firm-specific earnings announcements is both vast and
comprehensive. In later years, it appears as if researchers niche their studies on firm-specific
earnings announcements in an attempt to discover new valuable findings. For instance,
DellaVigna and Pollet (2009) also find that investors react positively to good earnings news
and negatively to bad earnings news. However, digging deeper into these reactions, they
compare investor reactions to weekday and Friday earnings announcements. They find that
due to distractions and investor inattentiveness, investors’ reactions to Friday earnings
announcements are both delayed and an underreaction. Then, once investors realize the
information they missed, they begin to trade and this powerful response reverses the previous
underreaction. DellaVigna and Pollet’s (2009) study is relevant to our study for two main
reasons. First, they conclude that the day of the week influences the return reactions to
firm-specific earning announcements which entails that there are underlying mechanisms that
bias investors’ perceptions of earning news. Second, it shows that return reactions depend on
investors’ attentiveness. This is relevant to our study since we incorporate small firms which
generally receive less attention from investors. Thus, it is interesting to see how this affects
investors’ return reactions to contrast effects.

Deshpande and Svetina (2014) also narrow the focus of their earnings announcement study
and look at local firm-specific return reactions to negative earnings surprises. Referencing
several previous studies that find a positive relation between earnings surprises and returns,
their study assumes this relation persists and they focus solely on negative earnings surprises.
They compare negative earnings surprises today to the last-year same-quarter earnings and
find that if the current earnings are higher than last years’, the negative impact on returns is
lessened. On the other hand, if the current earnings are lower than last years’, the negative
impact is heightened. Evidently, their study indicates that firms’ historical performance
influences investors’ reactions and that historical performances serve as a reference point for
how current earnings are perceived. This is an indication that reference points, consciously or
not, play a key role in investor return reactions. Furthermore, reference points are a central
element in our study since contrast effects build on comparisons against reference points.

Similarly to DellaVigna & Pollet (2009) and Deshpande & Svetina (2014), Conrad et al.
(2002) differentiates their study on return reactions to firm-specific earnings announcements

                                                                                 6
by incorporating market strength as an element. More specifically, they investigate whether
the return reaction to good and bad firm-specific earnings surprises changes as the relative
level of the market changes (market strength). They conclude that the reaction to negative
earnings surprises increases with the market level, while for positive earnings surprises, they
find that the return reaction decreases as the market level increases. This study is interesting
because it could be evidence of a form of contrast effect for single firm earnings
announcements. How so? Well, it is rational that if the market is strong, negative earnings
news will appear worse than if the market is weak because the contrast will be greater.
Applying similar reasoning to positive news, in a strong market, good earnings news do not
differentiate as much from the reference point (the strong market) as if the market had been
weak and thus the return reaction will be smaller.

Evidently, while a form of contrast effect could have been captured in the Conrad et al.
(2002) study, HS extends previous studies by broadening the perspective from simply looking
at the effect on returns that individual firm’s earnings surprises has. Instead, they test and
confirm that investors’ return response to earnings announcements today is biased by
yesterday’s earnings news. The HS study is highly relevant to our study since before testing
potential mechanisms underlying return reactions to contrast effects, we replicate HS to
confirm that contrast effects persist in later years and using a larger sample.

Previous studies have shown evidence of external influences on investors’ reactions. Conrad
et al. (2002) show that market strength influences the return reactions to single firms’ earning
announcements. However, they have not studied this in the context of contrast effects. Since
market strength is a potential factor that could affect the return response to contrast effects, it
is interesting to investigate it as a potential underlying mechanism. Other research has found
evidence of internal influences, for instance loss aversion. Bouteska and Regaieg (2020) find
that loss averse investors negatively impacts US firm performance. Their findings indicate
that loss aversion is a powerful bias with important consequences. This makes it relevant to
investigate loss aversion in a contrast effect setting, specifically exploring if the varying
return responses to previous days’ surprises can be explained by investors being loss averse

                     IV. Data

   A)Data Collection & Sample Selection

We use quarterly data between 1990-2020 on actual earnings and analysts’ consensus
estimates for US listed firms from The Institutional brokers estimate system (IBES). Further,
we use daily stock price data and number of shares outstanding from The Center for Research
in Security Prices (CRISP). The sample only includes earnings announcement data from
calendar days and day t refers to the day of the announcement. Day t-1 refers to the last day
when the market was open. For example, if an earning announcement occurs on a monday,
t-1 refers to a friday. Day t-2 refers to two days prior to the day of the announcement and day

                                                                                 7
t+1 refers to one day after the announcement when the market was last open. Furthermore,
for the measure of market uncertainty, the variable VIX is used. VIX is The Chicago Board
Options Exchange Volatility Index, which measures the expected 30-day volatility on the
S&P 500.

Our data set includes 192,824 number of observations. We use a larger sample compared to
HS (with 75,897 obs), incorporating both small and large US listed firms. We are interested
in determining if the results from the original study (conducted using a sample from
1984-2013) remain when looking at a later time period as well as both small and large firms.

   B) Summary Statistics
In this section we present the summary statistics for the most relevant variables in our study.
All variables in table 1 are explained in greater detail in the empirical framework section
below.

                             Table 1 - Summary Statistics
   A firm’s own surprise is measured as ((EPS actual - EPS consensus)/Price(t-3)). The unexpected
   return for each observation is measured as the actual stock return minus the expected return of its
   reference portfolio, calculated by value weighting 125 portfolios based on market capitalization,
  book-to-market value, and momentum. The market cap is calculated three days before each firm’s
  earning announcement day and scaled by dividing each company's market cap(t-3) with the yearly
 average market cap. The 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒    is value-weighted by using each company’s scaled market cap
                                                𝑡−1
                          three days before the company's announcement.

As can be seen in table 1 above, firms’ market capitalization in the sample stretch from circa
0.4 millions of dollars to circa 940,000 millions of dollars. This indicates a sample with a
wider range of different market capitalization levels, compared to HS.

                                                                                 8
             IV. Empirical Framework

   A)Earnings Surprise Based on Analysts’ Consensus Estimates

The Earnings surprise is a key variable in our study. We follow the same procedure as in
DellaVigna and Pollet (2009) and calculate each firm’s earnings surprise as the difference
between a firm’s actual earnings and analysts’ consensus estimate, divided by the stock price
three days before the announcement day. Analysts’ consensus estimates are calculated as an
average of several analysts’ forecasts for company earnings. The forecasts are made between
2 and 15 days prior to the actual firm’s announcement day. A time window between 2 and 15
days prior to the announcement day follows the procedure in HS. They argue that the reason
behind the given time window is to avoid outdated information while still obtaining a large
sample of firms with analyst coverage.

A positive surprise corresponds to when a firm’s actual earnings exceed the analysts’
forecasted consensus. A negative earnings surprise occurs if the opposite is the case - if the
analysts’ forecast is above the firm’s actual earnings.

The earnings surprise formula can be written as:

                                                                        𝐴𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙 𝐸𝑃𝑆   − 𝐸𝑃𝑆 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑠
                                                                              𝑖𝑡                          𝑖, [𝑡−15, 𝑡−2]
                     𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒  =             𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒                           (1)
                                                    𝑖𝑡                                  𝑖, 𝑡−3

Earnings surprises are calculated for US listed firms with announcement dates between the
years 1990-2020. To reduce the influence of outliers, similarly to HS, observations in the 1st
and 99th percentile for earnings surprises are excluded from the sample.

   B) Value-weighted Surprise t-1

Similarly to HS, we value-weight each observation using the market capitalization of each
firm three days prior to the announcement day. The reason is that a firm's market
capitalization is related to how much attention the firm receives. An earnings surprise for a
large firm will get much more attention and be noticed by more investors. Thus, to capture
that the earnings surprises for larger firms will have a more significant impact on the earnings
surprises the next day, we value-weight earnings surprises with the market capitalization
three days prior to the earnings announcement. We use the market capitalization three days
prior to the announcement because that is in accordance with HS. Furthermore, it reduces the
risk of the earning surprises having the time to affect the value of the market capitalization.

                                                                                 9
Further, as in HS, we scale market capitalization by the average in each year. The scaled
market capitalization is calculated by dividing each firm’s market capitalization with the
yearly average market capitalization in the sample. As discussed in HS, the reason for using
the scaled market capitalization is because the average market capitalization has increased
over time and thus it is a way to avoid the risk of mechanically overweighting recent
observations. Thus, unless otherwise stated, henceforth we value-weight each observation
using each firm’s market capitalization three days prior to the firm’s announcement, scaled by
the average market capitalization in that year.

The formula for calculating the value-weighted previous days’ surprise can be written as:

                                                                                         𝑁
                                                                       ∑ (𝑀𝑘𝑡𝑐𝑎𝑝      * 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒     )
                                                                                  𝑖, 𝑡−4              𝑖, 𝑡−1
                                                                                𝑖=1
                        𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒    =        𝑁                                 (2)
                                     𝑡−1
                                                                                       ∑ 𝑀𝑘𝑡𝑐𝑎𝑝
                                                                                                                                                𝑖, 𝑡−4
                                                                                             𝑖=1

   C) Unexpected Return

We use the same procedure as in HS to calculate return reactions. A return reaction is the
difference between the actual return and the expected return, also known as the unexpected
return. There are two return windows for the unexpected return, a shorter one using stock
prices at market open and a longer one using stock prices at market close. The shorter return
window is calculated from the day of the announcement until two days after the
announcement, while the longer return window is calculated from two days prior to the
announcement until one day after the announcement. A regression with a longer return
window is advantageous because it includes the time period before each firm's announcement
date. More specifically, HS explain that a longer return window decreases the risk that a
negative relation between 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   and unexpected return can be explained by an
                                                𝑡−1
overreaction to news on day t-1 and a subsequent correction when a firm's earnings are
announced on day t.

In order to calculate the unexpected return, we first calculate the expected return. Similarly to
HS, the expected return is calculated as the average return of a matched portfolio. The
matched portfolio is calculated using a portfolio sorting technique in which common stocks
from NYSE are grouped into 5 quintiles based on market capitalization, book-to-market
value, and momentum. This procedure is similar to the portfolio sorting technique used in
Daniel et al. (1997). The portfolio sorting results in a total of 125 (5x5x5) reference portfolios
which, as in HS, are value-weighted by the average market capitalization of the stocks in
each portfolio. Thereafter, all observations are matched with the one reference portfolio (out
of the 125 portfolios) that they are a part of. Lastly, the unexpected return is calculated by
subtracting the average return of the matched portfolio from the actual return.

                                                                                10
The Unexpected return (UR) is calculated using the formula:

               𝑈𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 = 𝐴𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 − 𝐴𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑓𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑜 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛

The theory of contrast effects predicts that firms’ earning surprises the previous day will have
a negative relation with the return reaction the following day. Given this information, we
follow HS and estimate the following regression using stock prices at market open:

         𝑈𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛       = β  + β 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   + ε          (3)
                                       𝑖, [𝑡, 𝑡+2]      0      1            𝑡−1     𝑖𝑡

Standard errors are clustered by announcement date. All information contained in
𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒    is announced before the left-hand-side return measure begins. Thus, in an
             𝑡−1
efficient market, β1 should equal zero. The contrast effects hypothesis, however, predicts that
a high surprise yesterday makes any surprise today look slightly worse than it would appear if
yesterday’s surprise had been lower and vice versa. Thus, the theory of contrast effects
predicts a negative coefficient on β1.

Notably, while regression (3) aims to test the contrast effects hypothesis, it is not the most
direct test for contrast effects according to HS. In particular, HS explain that a negative β1 in
regression (3) can be attributed to an alternative behavioral explanation whereby investors
have mistaken expectations about what 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   implies for a firm announcing earnings
                                                                  𝑡−1
the following day. For instance, investors may overinfer that a positive 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   is good
                                                                                                            𝑡−1
news for a firm with an earnings announcement the following day t, leading to positive
returns on day t-1 and then a negative return correction on day t when the firm’s actual
earnings are publicized. Thus, to avoid the results capturing this effect rather than the contrast
effect, HS argues that a longer return window (t-2 to t+1) is to be preferred. Therefore, we
follow HS and extend the return-window. Furthermore, as we extend the return window,
similarly to HS, we use stock price data from market close instead of stock price data from
market open.

We modify regression (3) into the following regression:

         𝑈𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛         = β  + β 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   + ε         (4)
                                      𝑖, [𝑡−2, 𝑡+1]      0     1            𝑡−1     𝑖𝑡

As discussed by HS, it is important to control for the earnings surprise associated with the
firm’s own earnings announcement as this will also influence the 𝑈𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛. With

                                                                                   11
this in mind, we flexibly control for all firm’s own earnings surprises by adding several
dummy variables (Own Surprise Bins), one for each bin, to the regression, following the
procedure used in HS. The Own Surprise Bins variable represents 20 equally sized bins,
grouped in percentiles based on the size of each firm’s earnings surprise. As described by HS,
by using dummy variables for each bin, we nonparametrically allow each surprises’
magnitude to be associated with a different level of unexpected return response. By
implementing these changes (longer return window and the Own Surprise Bins), a negative
β1 is direct evidence of the contrast effect between the previous days’ surprises and
unexpected return (HS, 2018).

When adding the dummy variable, Own Surprise Bins, to regression (3) and (4) we get the
following new regressions:

         𝑈𝑅       = β  + β 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   + 𝑂𝑤𝑛 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑠 + ε      (5)
                𝑖, [𝑡, 𝑡+2]      0      1            𝑡−1                                   𝑖𝑡

         𝑈𝑅         = β  + β 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   + 𝑂𝑤𝑛 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑠 + ε     (6)
               𝑖, [𝑡−2, 𝑡+1]      0     1            𝑡−1                                   𝑖𝑡

   D) The Return Reaction and Level of Market Uncertainty
This section is a direct replication of HS, however, we find it meaningful to test whether the
results from our larger sample are influenced by the level of market uncertainty. At times, the
stock market can be very volatile. For instance, during financial crises, when large and
influential company news or scandals are released, during global crises, and surrounding
initial public offerings. This can lead to high fluctuations in stock prices and cause a lot of
uncertainty. Thus, we want to investigate if the theory of contrast effects still holds when
controlling for market uncertainty. As in HS, we modify the baseline regression by including
The Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index, VIX, which measures the expected
30-day volatility on the S&P 500.

The regression can be written as:

    𝑈𝑅         = β  + β 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   + β 𝑉𝐼𝑋 + 𝑂𝑤𝑛 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑠 + ε   (7)
         𝑖, [𝑡−2, 𝑡+ 1]       0      1            𝑡−1      2     𝑡                                     𝑖𝑡

In addition, and as tested in HS, another factor of interest is how previous days’ earning
surprises interact with market uncertainty and affect unexpected returns. To further
investigate this interaction effect, regression (7) is modified by adding the variable
𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   x VIX(t). The coefficient of this independent variable shows the continuous
             𝑡−1
interaction between previous days’ surprises and VIX. Moreover, it captures the market

                                                                                12
uncertainty’s influence on the relation between 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   and Unexpected return. The
                                                                            𝑡−1
regression can be written as:

𝑈𝑅          = β  + β 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   + β 𝑉𝐼𝑋  + β 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   * 𝑉𝐼𝑋 + 𝑂𝑤𝑛 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑠 + ε   (8)
    𝑖, [𝑡−2, 𝑡+ 1]     0     1          𝑡−1     2    𝑡      3          𝑡−1       𝑡                                 𝑖𝑡

Notice that regression (7) and (8) are direct replications of HS. However, HS study large
firms and thus we follow the same procedure since we want to see how the level of market
uncertainty influences the return reaction to firms’ earnings surprises when looking at both
large and small firms in the US financial market.

   E) Other Potential Underlying Mechanisms

After testing contrast effects in relation to the level of market uncertainty, we were inspired to
investigate if there are other underlying mechanisms affecting investors’ perception of
previous days’ earnings surprises. Inspired by Conrad et al. (2002), we test the markets’
strength in relation to contrast effects. Conrad et al. (2002) find that investors react differently
to single-firm earnings announcements in good and bad times. This makes it relevant to test
their findings in a contrast effect setting. Furthermore, researchers such as Kahneman and
Tversky (1991) have found that humans are susceptible to loss aversion and that this
psychological bias influences our behavior. In turn, Bouteska and Regaieg. (2020)
specifically study loss aversion amongst investors. They find that investor loss aversion
negatively impacts firm performance. Therefore, it is also of interest to test if loss aversion
biases investors’ reaction to previous days’ earnings surprises.

  i. The Relative Level of Market Strength
A potential mechanism underlying the return reaction to contrast effect is the relative level of
market strength. Previous studies, namely Conrad et al. (2002), have shown that the stock
market response to negative firm-specific earnings surprises increase as the relative level of
the market rises. Thus, we modify our study to find out if the contrast effect in the financial
market is affected by the level of market strength. More specifically, we want to see if each
firm’s earnings announcement occured in a high or low valuation state and determine if this is
an underlying factor affecting the relation between 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   and Unexpected return.
                                                                                 𝑡−1

As discussed by Conrad et al. (2002), due to the influence of inflation, the level of the market
needs to be compared to some benchmark. In their study, they use future earnings as a
benchmark for the level of prices and we chose to follow the same procedure. However, as
pointed out by Conrad et al. (2002), there might still be a dilemma regarding if a strong
market should be defined in absolute or relative terms. More specifically, if the absolute level

                                                                                13
of the P/E ratio or the difference between the current P/E ratio and the recent historical P/E
ratio should be used to define the relative level of the market. Following Conrad et al. (2002),
we choose the second alternative and measure the level of market strength using the variable
DIFFPE. DIFFPE is calculated as the difference between each month's market P/E ratio and
the average of the market's monthly P/E ratio over the previous 12 month period.

See the following formula:

        𝐷𝐼𝐹𝐹𝑃𝐸 = 𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑡ℎ𝑙𝑦 𝑃/𝐸(𝑚𝑘𝑡)  − 𝐴𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑙𝑦 𝑃/𝐸(𝑚𝑘𝑡)     (9)
                                                                          𝑡                                                        𝑡

Where average market monthly P/E over the previous 12 months is calculated as:

                                                 1
                    𝑃/𝐸(𝑚𝑘𝑡) =                     (10)
                                                   𝑡
                                                    ∑ 𝑤 (𝐸 (𝐸𝑃𝑆 )/𝑃
                                                                                                                       𝑖𝑡     𝑡          𝑖       𝑖𝑡
                                                                                                   𝑖=[1, 𝑁𝑡]

The higher the value of DIFFPE, the stronger the market. Similarly, the lower the value of
DIFFPE, the weaker the market.

We test DIFFPE in two ways. First, unlike Conrad et al. (2002), we begin by doing a similar
test for DIFFPE as done for market uncertainty (VIX). More specifically, we are interested in
determining if the return reaction to contrast effects in the financial market can be explained
by the level of market strength. The market strength fluctuates and some periods are
characterized by good times, while others as bad times. The market’s strength is sensitive and
it will quickly respond to shocks such as financial crises and significant disturbances. That
said, we investigate if the relation between 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   and Unexpected return persists when
                                                                       𝑡−1
accounting for the relative level of market strength. We modify our baseline regression by
including the independent variable, DIFFPE.

The regression is modified into:

 𝑈𝑅          = β  + β 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   + β 𝐷𝐼𝐹𝐹𝑃𝐸 + 𝑂𝑤𝑛 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑠 + ε    (11)
     𝑖, [𝑡−2, 𝑡+ 1]      0      1            𝑡−1      2           𝑡                                     𝑖𝑡

Another factor of interest is how the interaction between 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   and Unexpected return,
                                                                                         𝑡−1
changes as the level of market strength rises. To further investigate this interaction effect, the
regression is modified by incorporating an interaction variable, 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   x 𝐷𝐼𝐹𝐹𝑃𝐸 . This
                                                                                                       𝑡−1             𝑡
variable shows the continuous interaction between previous days’ surprises and DIFFPE.

                                                                                14
Moreover, the coefficient of the variable captures how much more 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   affects
                                                                                                      𝑡−1
Unexpected return for every unit that market strength rises.

The regression can be written as:

𝑈𝑅          = β  + β 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   + β 𝐷𝐼𝐹𝐹𝑃𝐸 + β 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   * 𝐷𝐼𝐹𝐹𝑃𝐸  + 𝑂𝑤𝑛 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑠 + ε    (12)
    𝑖, [𝑡−2, 𝑡+ 1]     0     1          𝑡−1     2          𝑡      3          𝑡−1             𝑡                               𝑖𝑡

Having conducted similar tests for DIFFPE as for VIX, we then proceed to test market
strength similarly to Conrad et al. (2002). They group single earnings surprises based on
DIFFPE and measure the reaction to good and bad earnings surprises in bad (low DIFFPE)
and good times (high DIFFPE). While they study single-firm surprises, we perform the same
test but using value-weighted 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒    to study contrast effects. We separate 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒
                                               𝑡−1 𝑡−1
into positive and negative surprises to test if the contrast effect varies in a strong or weak
market. To do so, DIFFPE is sorted into five quintiles based on size where the lowest quintile
represents a weak market and the highest quintile represents a strong market. The regressions
below are run in a weak market (DIFFPE quintile = 1) and in a strong market (DIFFPE
quintile = 5).

The following regressions are used:

       𝑈𝑅          = β  + β 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒    + 𝑂𝑤𝑛 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑠 + ε           (13)
            𝑖, [𝑡−2, 𝑡+ 1]     0     1                𝑡−1                                𝑖𝑡

      𝑈𝑅         = β  + β 𝑁𝑒𝑔𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒    + 𝑂𝑤𝑛 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑠 + ε          (14)
           𝑖, [𝑡−2, 𝑡+ 1]     0     1                𝑡−1                                 𝑖𝑡

  ii. Investor Loss Aversion
To further investigate investor reactions, for example if some earnings news are more
meaningful to investors than others, it is interesting to incorporate a discussion about
decision-making theory. For example, do investors react more or less strongly when earnings
news are worse or better than a reference point? A decision-making theory that is reference
dependent is the theory of loss aversion, because for something to be deemed a loss or gain, it
has to be relative to some benchmark. In our case, the reference point is the previous day’s
earning surprise. Thus, if investors showcase asymmetric behaviour, specifically supposing
that losses are more psychologically painful than gains, it could be explained by the theory of
loss aversion. Loss aversion is an interesting theory, especially when it comes to financial
decisions. The theory suggests that investors are less likely to buy stocks deemed risky, with
a high chance of leading to a loss of money, even if the reward from such stocks could be

                                                                                15
very high. Thus, potential losses scare investors more than what potential gains are viewed as
lucrative.

We test if the reactions to contrast effects are asymmetric and could be explained by investors
being loss averse. Using the previous day’s earnings surprise as a reference point, we
categorize gains as when the value of a firms’ own earning surprise is above the value of the
previous day's surprise and losses as the reverse - when the value of a firm’s own earning
surprise is below the value of the previous day's earnings surprise. This entails that gains and
losses are not defined as the actual surprise being positive or negative, rather they are defined
by how they are perceived by investors in relation to the surprise the day before.

Loss aversion is tested using the following regressions:

𝑈𝑅          = β  + β 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒    + 𝑂𝑤𝑛 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑠 + ε  when 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒 > 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   (15)
    𝑖, [𝑡−2, 𝑡+1]      0     1           𝑡−1                                  𝑖𝑡        𝑡         𝑡−1

𝑈𝑅          = β  + β 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒    + 𝑂𝑤𝑛 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒 𝐵𝑖𝑛𝑠 + ε  when 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒 < 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   (16)
    𝑖, [𝑡−2, 𝑡+1]      0     1           𝑡−1                                  𝑖𝑡        𝑡         𝑡−1

   F) Trading Strategy

The contrast effect theory predicts that today’s earning news will appear slightly less
impressive if yesterday’s earnings surprise was positive and more impressive if yesterday’s
earning news were disappointing. This means that a positive 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   will make firms
                                                                                              𝑡−1
with an announcement date the following day look less attractive, lowering investors’
willingness to invest in those firms and result in decreased stock prices. While if 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒
                                                                                                                         𝑡−1
is instead negative, investors will find the earnings news of firms that announce the following
day more impressive, leading to increased stock prices for those companies.

In an attempt to exploit these investor over- and underreactions, HS creates a trading strategy
where one shorts (longs) companies that will announce the day following a positive
(negative) 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   . We follow the same logic and trading method. That is, we use the
                           𝑡−1
same long-short leg decision rule as HS to trade. However, thereafter the calculations are our
own. Furthermore, since HS analyzes this trading strategy for large firms, it is interesting to
test the strategy on our larger sample to see if these over-and unerreactions can be exploited
when also incorporating smaller firms. Smaller firms tend to get less attention from investors.
Thus, one could expect that when incorporating smaller firms, the payoffs from a trading
strategy based on mispricings due to the contrast effects might be lower. However, using the
same argument - that smaller firms get less attention - one could also hypothesize that while
the arbitrage profits might be lower for small firms, they might be more long-lived due to the
lack of attentiveness and subsequent lower competition amongst investors.

                                                                                16
We assume no transaction costs and that we can borrow at the risk-free rate. Furthermore, we
disregard dividends even if they affect stock prices, and thus could affect the results. The
portfolios, consisting of firms that report earnings on the same day, will be held from t-1 to
t+1. Using stock prices on market close, we start by calculating the daily return for every
portfolio. Since a different number of companies report their earnings each day, we take this
into consideration by calculating an average portfolio return(t-1 to t+1) based on the number
of earning announcements each day, using the formula:

                                                                                                                        𝑁
                                                                                          ∑ (𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              𝑖𝑡
                                                                                                           𝑖=1
      𝐴𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑓𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑜 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛         = 𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠         (17)
                                                      [𝑡−1, 𝑡+1]                                                 𝑡

We value-weight each trading portfolio, following the same approach as for value-weighted
𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒    , using the scaled market cap(t-3) for all firms in each portfolio. This gives
             𝑡−1
value-weighted portfolio returns for all trading portfolios between 1990-2020. The reason for
value-weighting is because we want to account for the size of the firms in all trading
portfolios.

See the following formula:

                                                                                       𝑁
                                                                    ∑ (𝑀𝑘𝑡𝑐𝑎𝑝       * 𝐴𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑃𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑓𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑜 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛          )
                                                                            𝑖, [𝑡−3]                                    [𝑡−1, 𝑡+1]
                                                                              𝑖=1
    𝑉𝑊 𝑃𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑓𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑜 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛         =               𝑁                              (18)
                                [𝑡−1, 𝑡+1]
                                                                                                  ∑ (𝑀𝑘𝑡𝑐𝑎𝑝
                                                                                                                                                                𝑖, [𝑡−3]
                                                                                                           𝑖=1

Then we convert the value-weighted portfolio returns into quarterly terms, giving us quarterly
value-weighted portfolio returns. Lastly, we calculate the total quarterly returns each quarter
between 1990-2020. The calculated portfolio returns are compared against the
value-weighted S&P 500 market index, to see which yields higher returns.

                       III. Results

The following section includes the results from replicating HS but using later years and a
larger sample, and the results from the extensions.

                                                                                17
   A)Baseline Results

Table 2 below shows the baseline results from the replication. The aim is to analyze if the
return reaction to contrast effects persists in later years and when the sample size is increased
to also incorporate smaller firms.

                                Table 2 - Baseline Results
This table shows the relation between unexpected return reactions and earning surprises of other firms
 that announced the previous day. The unexpected return is measured as the actual stock return minus
  the expected return of its reference portfolio, calculated by value weighting 125 portfolios based on
market capitalization, book-to-market value, and momentum. Column (1) examines unexpected return
 from the market open on t to t+2 and column (2) examines unexpected return from the market close
       on t-2 to t+1. The 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   is value-weighted by using each company’s scaled market
                                              𝑡−1
 capitalization three days before the company's announcement. The market capitalization is scaled by
 dividing each company's market cap(t-3) with the yearly average market cap. In both column (1) and
  (2), we flexibly control for firms’ own earnings surprise by adding several dummy variables (Own
 Surprise Bins), one for each bin, to the regression. Standard errors are clustered by date and reported
  in parentheses. The confidence interval is 95%. *,** ,and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%,
                                        1% levels, respectively.

Column (1), with a shorter return window and calculated using stock prices on market open
day t to t+2, shows a significant β of -0.422. Further, column (2), with a longer return
                                   1
window calculated using stock prices on market close from t-2 to t+1, also shows a
significant β of -0.438. Thus, column (2) shows a stronger negative relation between
             1
𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒    and Unexpected return compared to column (1). The significant negative
             𝑡−1
coefficients in the columns above, indicate that investors’ reactions are biased from contrast
effects in both small and large firms. Thus, the market is not efficient.

As in HS, we find a negative relation between the previous days’ surprises and the
corresponding return reaction to todays’ surprises. Notably, our strongest relation (-0.438) is

                                                                                18
significantly weaker than HS’s strongest relation (-0.924). However, this is reasonable
because unlike them we incorporate several small firms which generally receive less attention
from investors, thus the return reactions are likely less pronounced.

Following the procedure in HS, the results above are illustrated graphically, with
𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   on the x-axis and Unexpected return on the y-axis.
             𝑡−1

Figure 1. Unexpected Return Reaction to Surprise(t-1). The graphs illustrate the negative relation between
unexpected return and previous days’ surprises, for the two different return windows. The shorter return
window, with stock prices on market open is illustrated in the left graph and the longer return window with
stock prices on market close is illustrated in the right graph. The confidence interval is 90%.

The left sided graph in Figure 1 shows a clear downsloping relation between the previous
day's surprise and the unexpected return response. This indicates that today’s earnings news
will seem slightly less impressive, if yesterday’s earnings surprises were positive and more
impressive if yesterday’s earnings news were disappointing.

The same graph, but with a longer return window, is illustrated to the right. This graph shows
a steeper downsloping relation compared to the graph on the left. This could be because a
longer return window better captures the contrast effects since it includes the time period
before 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒    .
                      𝑡−1

To summarize, both graphs indicate that there is a clear negative relation between previous
days’ earnings news and the return reaction to today’s earnings news. This means that
investor reactions continue to be biased by contrast effects when looking at later years and a
wider range in firm size compared to HS.

                                                                                19
   B) Unexpected Return Reaction to Firms’ Own Surprise

We want to see whether more positive and more negative earnings surprises on the previous
day contribute differently to the return response to firms’ own surprise. To do so, we replicate
figure 3 in HS. The earnings surprises in the previous day (𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒 ) are separated into
                                                                                            𝑡−1
deciles, where the blue line illustrates the highest decile and the red line the lowest decile.
The result is depicted in figure 2 below.

Figure 2. Unexpected Return Reaction to Firm’s Own Surprise. This graph shows the unexpected return
response to firms’ own surprises day t, when the previous day's surprise is either in the highest or lowest decile,
illustrated by the blue and red line respectively. The Firm’s own surprise is calculated as ((EPS actual - EPS
consensus)/Price(t-3)) and separated into hundred percentile ranks based on size. The unexpected return for each
observation is measured as the actual stock return minus the expected return of its reference portfolio, calculated
by value weighting 125 portfolios based on market capitalization, book-to-market value, and momentum. The
confidence interval is 90%.

Figure 2 shows a clear upward sloping relation, for both the blue and the red line, between
the return reaction and firms’ own earnings surprises. Similarly to what HS finds, the return
reaction is consistently higher for all values of firms’ own surprises when the previous day’s
earnings surprise of other firms is in the lowest decile (red line) compared to when it is in the
highest decile (blue line). This result indicates that investors react stronger to firms’ own
surprise when the previous days’ earnings surprise is more negative compared to when it is
more positive.

   C) Market Uncertainty
The results from replicating HS and incorporating the variable VIX to measure the influence

                                                                                20
of market uncertainty can be seen in table 3 below.

                            Table 3 - Market Uncertainty
 This table displays whether the relation between surprises in the previous day and unexpected return
  can be explained by variations in market uncertainty (VIX). Column (1) displays regression 1 and
 column (2) displays regression 2. The variable 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   x VIX(t) shows the continuous interaction
                                                                             𝑡−1
  between previous days' surprises and VIX, capturing market uncertainty’s influence on the relation
 between 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   and Unexpected return. Both regressions use close-to-close returns from t-2 to
                          𝑡−1
   t+1. We flexibly control for firms’ own earnings surprise using several dummy variables (Own
 Surprise Bins), one for each bin. Standard errors are clustered by date and in round parentheses. The
   regressions are carried out at a 95% confidence interval.*,** , and *** indicate significance at the
                                 10%, 5%, 1% levels, respectively.

Column (1) shows that 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   still has a significant negative relation with Unexpected
                                            𝑡−1
return after controlling for VIX. This indicates that the result is not significantly influenced
by variations in market uncertainty.

Column (2), when including the interaction variable 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   x VIX, shows how the
                                                                                   𝑡−1
relation between 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   and Unexpected return changes as the level of VIX rises. The
                                    𝑡−1
non-interaction coefficient (-2.011) explains how much 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   effects returns when VIX
                                                                                        𝑡−1
is zero while the interaction coefficient (0.081) explains how much more 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   effects
                                                                                                               𝑡−1
returns as VIX rises. Notably, the relation between 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   and Unexpected return
                                                                                 𝑡−1
remains negative when incorporating the interaction variable.

                                                                                21
  D)Underlying Mechanisms

This section shows the results from testing potential mechanisms underlying the contrast
effect. More specifically, if investors react differently to contrast effects under varying market
strengths and due to psychological biases, namely loss aversion.

  i. The Relative Level of Market Strength
This section includes the results from measuring the influence of market strength on the
return reaction to contrast effects.

The results from modifying the regression by adding a variable for market strength, DIFFPE
as well as an interaction variable, 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   x DIFFPE, can be seen in table 4 below.
                                                          𝑡−1

                    Table 4 - The Relative Level of Market Strength
 This table displays whether the relation between surprises in the previous day and Unexpected return
   can be explained by variations in the relative level of the market (market strength), measured by
  incorporating the variable DIFFPE. DIFFPE is calculated as the difference between each month's
   market P/E ratio and the average of the market's monthly P/E ratio over the previous 12 months'
   period. In regression 2, we add the interaction variable 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   x DIFFPE, which shows the
                                                                                           𝑡−1
continuous interaction between previous days surprises and DIFFPE. The returns are calculated, using
   close stock price data from t-2 to t+1. We flexibly control for firms’ own earnings surprise using
 several dummy variables (Own Surprise Bins), one for each bin. Standard errors are clustered by date
  and in round parentheses. The confidence interval is 95%.*,** , and *** indicate significance at the
                                 10%, 5%, 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                                22
As shown in table 4 column (1), 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   still has a significant negative relation with
                                                         𝑡−1
Unexpected return after controlling for DIFFPE.

Column (2) shows how the relation between 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   and Unexpected return changes as
                                                                         𝑡−1
the market strength rises. The non-interaction coefficient shows that 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   still has a
                                                                                                         𝑡−1
negative relation with Unexpected return after implementing the interaction variable
𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   x DIFFPE. Moreover, the coefficient of the interaction variable explains how
             𝑡−1
much more 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   effects returns as DIFFPE rises from zero. Notably, it is not
                             𝑡−1
significantly different from zero.

Conrad et al. (2002) find that the return reaction to negative single-firm earnings surprises
increases with market strength while positive single-firm earnings surprises decrease as
market strength increases. The results from testing these findings in a contrast-effect setting
can be found in table 5 below.

          Table 5 - Positive and Negative Surprises Relative Market Strength
 This table shows the relation between 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒    and Unexpected return, when the previous days’
                                                                  𝑡−1
    surprise is divided into positive and negative and the market is defined as either weak or strong.
  Column (1) and (2) illustrate the results when 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   is positive and column (3) and (4) when
                                                                             𝑡−1
     𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒    is negative. Column (1) and (3) indicate a weak market (DIFFPE quintile = 1) and
                  𝑡−1
column (2) and (4) a strong market (DIFFPE quintile = 5). All columns include own surprise controls
   which are 20 equally sized bins, grouped based on own earning surprises, plus a dummy for zero
 earning surprises. The Unexpected returns are calculated, using close stock price data from t-2 to t+1.
  We flexibly control for firms’ own earnings surprise using several dummy variables (Own Surprise
     Bins), one for each bin. Standard errors are clustered by date and in round parentheses. The
      confidence interval is 95%.*,** , and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, 1% levels,
                                               respectively.

                                                                                23
In table 5 column (1) and (2), when looking at positive surprises the day before, we find a
stronger relation between 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   and Unexpected return when the market is weak
                                                𝑡−1
compared to when it is strong. Evidently, when earnings surprises the day before are positive,
the return reaction to contrast effect decreases as the market strength increases.

Column (3) and (4) include the results for negative earnings surprises the day before. We find
that the relation between 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   and Unexpected return is more negative when the
                                               𝑡−1
market is strong compared to when it is weak. In other words, when 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   is negative,
                                                                                                        𝑡−1
the return reaction to contrast effect increases as the market strength increases.

  ii. Investor Loss Aversion
This section includes the results from our investigation whether the varying return reaction to
previous days’ earnings surprises could be explained by investors being loss averse. Since the
theory of loss aversion is reference dependent, we test if investors use the previous days’
earnings surprises as a reference point. This means that a gain is when the value of a firms’
own earnings surprise is above the value of the previous days’ surprises and a loss is when
the value of a firm’s own earnings surprise is below the previous days’ earnings surprises.

             Table 6 - Investor Loss Aversion in Relation to Contrast Effects
   This table shows how varying return reactions to previous days’ surprises could be explained by
    investors being loss averse. We use the 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   for every observation as a reference point.
                                                                       𝑡−1
 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒 > 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒    refers to a gain and 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒 < 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒    refers to a loss. Column (1)
              𝑡            𝑡−1     𝑡            𝑡−1
   shows the relation between previous days’ earning surprises and returns for gains and column (2)
shows the relation between previous days’ earning surprises and returns for losses. We flexibly control
  for firms’ own earnings surprise using several dummy variables (Own Surprise Bins), one for each
bin. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and clustered by date. The confidence interval is 95%.
             *,** , and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                                24
Column (1) illustrates the return reaction to previous days' surprises when investors
experience a gain. Notably, the results are weakly significant apart from zero and the relation
is less negative compared to the baseline results found in table 2.

Column (2) illustrates the return reaction to previous days' surprises when investors
experience a loss. The results show a negative significant relation. Moreover, the negative
relation between 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   and Unexpected return is stronger compared to the baseline
                                    𝑡−1
results found in table 2.

The results of column (1) and (2) indicate that when investors experience a loss, the return
reaction is stronger to previous days' surprise, compared to when they experience a gain.

   E) Trading Strategy

The evidence of contrast effects from our results make it possible to predict investor reactions
on day t by analyzing firms’ earning surprises that were announced in the previous day.
Similarly to HS, we construct trading portfolios based on the previous days’ earnings surprise
to see if one can take advantage of investors' over-and underreactions from the contrast effect.
The results from the short-term trading strategies, held from day t-1 to t+1, can be found
below.

                                                                                25
Figure 3. Quarterly Long-Short Portfolio Excess Return. The figure illustrates the portfolio excess return
from the long-short portfolio trading strategy. That is, the difference between the total quarterly return from the
long-short trading portfolio which incorporates the effects of the contrast effect and the market return (S&P 500
Index).

Total quarterly excess returns are measured as the difference between the total quarterly
returns of the trading portfolios and the S&P 500 index (market portfolio). The graph
indicates that the total excess returns are very volatile 1990-2020.

Further, to look at the excess return on a yearly basis, we calculate annualized returns each
year between 1990-2020 and compare against the market index. These results can be found in
figure 4 below.

                                                                                26
Figure 4. Annual Long-Short Portfolio Excess Return. The figure illustrates the annual excess return,
calculated as the difference between the annualized return for the constructed long-short trading portfolio and
S&P 500 index between 1990-2020.

Figure 4 shows that the long-short trading portfolio only yields higher annualized returns in
five years between 1990-2019. This indicates that it is more profitable to invest in the market
(S&P500) than in the contrast-effect trading portfolio.

  i. Long Trading Portfolio Strategy

Having found that the market portfolio outperforms the long-short trading strategy, we test
only the long-leg of the contrast-effect trading strategy to see if it can outperform the market.
We know from previous tests (illustrated in figure 2) that investors’ return response to firms’
own surprise on day t is higher when the earnings surprise the previous day is more negative
compared to when it is more positive. This result speaks to only testing the long-leg of the
contrast-effect trading strategy because it should perform better than the combined long-short
leg strategy. To test this, we go long firms that will announce the following day if
𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒    < 0 and instead of going short when 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒    < 0, we invest in the market.
           𝑡−1 𝑡−1

                                                                                27
Figure 5. Quarterly Long Portfolio Excess Return. The figure illustrates quarterly excess return from the long
portfolio trading strategy. That is, the difference between the long trading portfolio and the market portfolio
(S&P 500 Index) between 1990-2020.

From figure 5 above, it is evident that there are high-points where the long-leg strategy beats
the market, however, there are also several low-points where the strategy underpreforms the
market.

The quarterly returns are converted into annualized returns to get the results on a yearly basis.
We compare the annualized long-leg portfolio returns with the market to see which yields
higher returns.

                                                                                28
Figure 6. Annual Long Portfolio Excess Return. This table illustrates the annual excess return for the long
portfolio strategy from 1990 to the end of 2020. The yearly excess return is calculated as the difference between
the annualized yearly return for the long portfolio and the S&P 500 index.

Figure 6 above shows that the long-leg trading portfolio strategy yields higher returns in
seven years between 1990-2020. Thus, the market tends to outperform the long-leg trading
portfolio and it appears to be more profitable to invest in the market.

To summarize the trading-strategy results, given our previously stated assumptions, we find
that the market generally outperforms both contrast-effect trading strategies. Furthermore, we
do not find a significant difference in the performance of the long-short and long-leg
contrast-effect trading strategies.

                     V. Limitations

The study contains some limitations. First, the use of VIX to measure market uncertainty can
be discussed. VIX measures short-term market volatility in option prices on various
exchanges. In our case, we chose VIX for the S&P 500. Since we study both large and small
firms, some of the companies in our dataset are not included in the S&P 500 index and thus
we lost a few smaller companies when incorporating the VIX measure. As a result, one could
argue whether VIX is an appropriate approximation for the level of the market uncertainty for
all the companies in our sample.

Second, the use of 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   as the reference point in our loss aversion test might not be
                                      𝑡−1
the best representation of reality. 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   is calculated as a value-weighted average of
                                                         𝑡−1
several companies’ own firm surprises that announce the same day. However, investors might
not use the value-weighted sum of the surprises the day before as their reference point but
rather the surprise of the largest firm the day before. Therefore, only using the largest firm as
the reference point for gains and losses might be to prefer.

Lastly, as mentioned in HS, another concern with regards to the analysts is that they are
susceptible to different biases. For instance, if analysts are biased or generally uninformed
when making their forecasts, the consensus estimate might not be a true reflection of reality.
This creates a snowball effect in which there might appear to be earnings surprises when in
fact these are simply created due to biases or misinformation. Misleading earnings surprises
in turn affect the return reaction due to contrast effects and can create the illusion that such an
effect exists when in reality, it might not. This is very difficult to investigate and thus
something we cannot rule out nor incorporate into our calculations.

                                                                                29
                  VI. Conclusion

In this paper, we study underlying mechanisms affecting investor reactions to contrast effects
in the US financial market. To begin, we follow the same procedure as HS, however, studying
later years (1990-2020) as well as both large and small firms to confirm that contrast effects
in the financial market persist. Thereafter, we extend their study and include new parameters,
namely market strength and loss aversion. The aim is to explore if these potential underlying
mechanisms influence investors’ reactions to contrast effects.

The baseline results from the replication of HS, studying a later time period and a larger
sample of firms, confirms that investors' perceptions are biased from previous days' news.
This concludes that contrast effects result in market over- and underreactions that are
reflected in mispricings in the stock market. Furthermore, when continuing the replication by
separating the earning surprises the day before into more positive and more negative
surprises, we also confirm the results in HS (see figure 2 above). That is, in accordance with
the contrast effect hypothesis, the return response to a given earnings surprise today is higher
when yesterday’s news was bad compared to when yesterday’s news were good.

In terms of our extensions, when studying market strength as an underlying mechanism to
contrast effects, we can conclude that investor behavior differs depending on market strength
and if the earnings surprise the day before was positive or negative. More specifically,
investors appear to be most susceptible to contrast effects in a strong market when the
earnings surprise the day before was negative. Having studied external factors that could
influence investor behavior, we proceed to look at internal processes, namely psychological
biases. We find that the return response to earnings surprises is of higher magnitude when
investors experience a loss compared to when they experience a gain. This result shows that
investor behavior is asymmetric and thus the varying return reaction to contrast effects could
be explained by investors being loss averse.

Since we find that investors' decisions are influenced by news from the previous day, it was
of interest to study if these mispricings could be exploited in any way. Similar to HS, we
construct a long-short trading strategy, however, we also include smaller firms. Different
from HS, we also create a single long-leg trading strategy. Both trading strategies aim to take
advantage of mispricings from the contrast effect. Interestingly, unlike HS, we find that both
trading portfolios generally underperform the market. It is relevant to analyze what might
have contributed to this surprising result. One possible explanation is that our sample
contains more smaller firms than HS. Many of these small firms only have one analyst
forecast, indicating that they receive less attention from analysts and therefore likely from
investors as well. HS even confirms, in their study, that contrast effects are strongest for firms
covered by two or more analysts. Thus, it is logical to assume that since smaller firms receive
less coverage, the arbitrage opportunities will be smaller, making them more difficult to
exploit in a profitable trading strategy.

                                                                                30
                   VII. Discussion

Firm earning surprises have been studied in various settings before. Ball and Brown (1968)
were among the first to study single firm earning announcements. Later on, HS analyzed
earning surprises in a new setting, namely in relation to contrast effects. We extend the study
by HS and inspired by several other researches such as Conrad et al. (2002), we investigate
potential underlying mechanisms affecting return reactions to contrast effects. When
incorporating the relative level of market strength into our study, we find evidence that
investors' reactions to contrast effects are linked to the prevailing stock market state.
Macroeconomic factors, such as interest rates and inflation, largely influence the stock
market state. Evidence of this is now during the ongoing pandemic, where monetary policy in
the form of quantitative easing has resulted in a stronger stock market than usual during the
first and thus far in the second quarter of 2021 (Monetary Policy Report, Riksbanken). That
said, it would be no surprise if the return reaction to contrast effects is also influenced by
macroeconomic factors. However, studying contrast effects in relation to macroeconomic
factors would be an entirely new study in itself. For instance, an interesting alternative study
for the future would be to analyze the relation between monetary policy and investor's
reaction to contrast effects.

From studying contrast effects in the financial market and in relation to psychological biases,
we find that it can be critical to incorporate a discussion on human behavior in order to be
able to interpret results. We learn that investors are not only biased from previous days'
earnings announcement in absolute terms, but also in relative terms. This is consistent with
prospect theory discussed earlier in the text, which states that individuals classify outcomes
as gains and losses relative to a reference point. Moreover, when closely examining these
results, we also learn that investors' reactions to contrasts differ in magnitude depending on if
the contrast makes earnings appear better or worse. More specifically, we find that investors
react more negatively to bad news, compared to how they react positively to good news and
conclude that this could be evidence of loss aversion. This inconsistent behavior - that return
reactions are stronger for losses compared to gains - is in turn reflected in the stock market
and leads to asymmetric mispricings from earning news. If investors learn more about human
asymmetric behaviors such as these, they could find and exploit new arbitrage opportunities
that they were previously unaware of.

While on the subject of loss aversion, we are aware that concluding that our results could be
driven by investors being loss averse might be a simplification of reality. What defines a gain
and what defines a loss is subjective. In our case, a loss is when today’s surprise is lower than
the previous day's surprise, while a gain is when the opposite occurs. This definition relies on
the relative relation between the previous days’ surprise and today’s surprise. However, one
could question whether the use of a reference point to define gains and losses is in accordance
with loss aversion theory. According to Khaneman and Tversky who emphasize reference
points in relation to loss aversion, it probably is. In fact, they criticize standard models of
decision making because they assume that preferences - which are largely determined by

                                                                                31
reference points - do not depend on one’s current state or current assets (Khaneman &
Tversky, 1991). Moreover, in their discussion of loss aversion, Khaneman and Tversky
explain that the central assumption of the theory is that losses and disadvantages have a larger
impact on preferences than gains and advantages (Khaneman & Tversky, 1991). According to
this formulation, a 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒 value below 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   would arguably classify as a
                                        𝑡        𝑡−1
disadvantage if not as a loss and the reverse - a 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒 above 𝑆𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑒   - as an
                                                                                𝑡           𝑡−1
advantage, if not as a gain. This entails that loss aversion is a broader theory than simply
focusing on whether value in absolute terms is lost or gained. In other words, losses and gains
can also be measured in relative terms.

After studying market conditions and human behavior in relation to the financial market, we
can conclude that both are underlying mechanisms affecting investors’ reactions to contrast
effects. However, there are still several unknowns. For instance, there could be other
underlying factors that are difficult to detect and that can have affected the outcome of the
results. Because of this, in future studies, it would be interesting to test other market
conditions and behavioral biases and their relation to contrast effects. Doing so could provide
new insightful findings as to what factors underlie investors’ reaction to contrast effects.

                                                                                32
                   VII. References

Amos Tversky, and Daniel Kahneman. “Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice: A
Reference-Dependent Model.” The Quarterly journal of economics 106.4 (1991): 1039–1061.
Web.

Bouteska, A. and Regaieg, B. (2020), "Loss aversion, overconfidence of investors and their
impact on market performance evidence from the US stock markets", Journal of Economics,
Finance and Administrative Science, Vol. 25 No. 50, pp. 451-478.

Deshpande, Shreesh, and Marko Svetina. “Negative Earnings Surprises: When Is the Glass
Half-Full?” Managerial finance 40.8 (2014): 804–820. Web.

Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (1993). Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds.
Journal of Financial Economics, 33(1), 3-56. doi:10.1016/0304-405X(93)90023-5

Hartzmark, S. M., & Shue, K. (2018). A tough act to follow: Contrast effects in financial
markets. Journal of Finance, 73(4), 1567-1613. doi:10.1111/jofi.12685

Hou, Kewei, Lin Peng, and Wei Xiong. 2006. A tail of two anomalies: The implications of
investor attention for price and earnings momentum. Working Paper, Ohio State University.

Jennifer Conrad, Bradford Cornell, and Wayne R. Landsman. “When Is Bad News Really
Bad News?” The Journal of finance (New York) 57.6 (2002): 2507–2532. Web.

Kent Daniel et al. “Measuring Mutual Fund Performance with Characteristic-Based
Benchmarks.” The Journal of finance (New York) 52.3 (1997): 1035–1058. Web.

Köszegi, Botond, and Matthew Rabin. “A Model of Reference-Dependent Preferences.” The
Quarterly journal of economics 121.4 (2006): 1133–1165. Web.

Nichols, D. Craig, and James M Wahlen. “How Do Earnings Numbers Relate to Stock
Returns? A Review of Classic Accounting Research with Updated Evidence.” Accounting
horizons 18.4 (2004): 263–286. Web.

Ray Ball, and Lakshmanan Shivakumar. “How Much New Information Is There in
Earnings?” Journal of accounting research 46.5 (2008): 975–1016. Web.

Ray Ball, and Philip Brown. “An Empirical Evaluation of Accounting Income Numbers.”
Journal of accounting research 6.2 (1968): 159–178. Web.)

Rodríguez, Gabriel, and Sara Blanco. “Contrast Effect on the Perception of the Severity of a
Criminal Offence.” Anuario de psicología jurídica (Madrid, España)26.1 (2016): 107–113.
Web.

                                                                                33
Stefano DellaVigna, and Joshua M. Pollet. “Investor Inattention and Friday Earnings
Announcements.” The Journal of finance (New York) 64.2 (2009): 709–749. Web.

Sveriges Riksbank. “Monetary Policy Report, April 2021”. Sveriges Riksbank. (2021): Web.
www.riksbank.se

Yeates, Peter et al. “Relatively Speaking: Contrast Effects Influence Assessors’ Scores and
Narrative Feedback.” Medical education 49.9 (2015): 909–919. Web.

                                                                                34
        VII. Appendix

             Table 1 - Summary Statistics

               Table 2 - Baseline Results

Figure 1 - Unexpected Return Reaction to Surprise(t-1)

                                                                 35
Figure 2 - Unexpected Return Reaction to Firm’s Own Surprise

                Table 3 - Market Uncertainty

                                                                     36
         Table 4 - The Relative Level of Market Strength

Table 5 - Positive and Negative Surprises Relative Market Strength

  Table 6 - Investor Loss Aversion in Relation to Contrast Effects

                                                                      37
Figure 3 - Quarterly Long-Short Portfolio Excess Return

Figure 4 - Annual Long-Short Portfolio Excess Return

                                                                   38
Figure 5 - Quarterly Long Portfolio Excess Return

Figure 6 - Annual Long Portfolio Excess Return

                                                            39
40