PREVAILING IN THE
CRISIS

A STUDY OF SWEDISH PRIVATE EQUITY PORTFOLIO FIRMS
DURING THE FINANCIAL CRISIS

FILIP LUNDBERG

MATHIAS WALDEMARSSON

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2021
Prevailing in the Crisis: A Study of Swedish Private Equity Portfolio Firms during the
Financial Crisis

Abstract:

   Are PE-backed firms more resilient in face of a financial crisis than non PE-backed firms in
   terms of company performance? This topic is examined through a study of the performance
   of a sample of 96 Swedish PE-backed firms and 96 non PE-backed peers during the financial
   crisis of 2008. The empirical findings suggest that PE-backed firms were more successful in
   maintaining profitability during the crisis years, but were not able to maintain growth any
   more than peers. The findings indicate that the outperformance in profitability did not come
   as a results of changes to the labour force in terms of employment growth or labour
   productivity. Comparing these results with empirical findings on the Swedish market during
   non-crisis periods, it suggests that the outperformance of PE-backed firms becomes even
   stronger in times of crisis, suggesting that PE firms’ industry expertise may be even more
   critical during periods of financial turmoil.

Keywords:

   Private Equity, Operating performance, Financial crisis

Authors:

   Filip Lundberg (24460)
   Mathias Waldemarsson (24554)

Tutors:

   Peter Alexander Aleksziev, Visiting Teacher, Department of Accounting, Visiting Teacher,
   Department of Finance
   Irina Gazizova, Assistant Professor, Department of Accounting

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Filip Lundberg and Mathias Waldemarsson, 2021

                                        1
Acknowledgements

We would hereby like to express our gratitude for the valuable input and support from Peter
Alexander Aleksziev and Irina Gazizova throughout the process of writing this thesis.

                                        2
1 Introduction

1.1 Background
Prior research indicates that Private Equity buyout funds have consistently outperformed public
equity markets in terms of returns (see e.g., Harris and Kaplan, 2014; Brown et al., 2015; Kaplan
and Sensoy, 2015; Strömberg and Døskeland, 2018). However, from which activities these
returns actually stem is a source of conflict. Proponents of Private Equity would argue that PE
firms are experts who undertake a combination of financial and operational initiatives that
generate true value in their portfolio companies. Contrary to this, critics may assert that the
majority of PE firms’ ability to generate fund returns is a consequence of exploiting financial
tools, leverage and market inefficiencies, rather than their ability to create value in their
portfolio firms. Another concern raised in relation to Private Equity is whether the extensive
use of leverage in portfolio firms could be associated with an increased risk of financial distress
during economic downturns (see e.g., Gregory, 2013; and Giroud and Mueller, 2015). Related
to this, empirical studies such as Hotchkiss et al. (2020) seek to examine if and how shifting
economic environments might influence PE firms’ choice of debt levels in their portfolio firms.
To study Private Equity in relation to shifting economic environments could be interesting for
other reasons as well. As previously stated, critics of Private Equity argue that most of PE
returns come from engaging in financial activities that do not generate true value in their
portfolio firms. It would be reasonable to assume that these financial activities are more
restricted during periods of economic crises, which could force PE firms to instead focus on
creating operational value to generate fund returns. This reasoning is suggested by e.g., Davis
et al. (2019), and is also in line with the findings from a survey with more than 300 PE investors,
which showed that PE investors were significantly more likely to assist portfolio companies
with operational issues and strategic guidance during the 2008 crisis, compared with non-crisis
periods (Bernstein et al., (2019). From the perspective of portfolio firms, the potential benefits
of being PE-backed in terms of operational improvements could therefore be more crucial in
times of crisis, relative non-crisis periods. It should be noted that the majority of empirical
research indicates that PE ownership has a positive impact on the operating performance in
portfolio firms during non-crisis periods. (For a comprehensive summary of empirical
literature, see Strömberg and Døskeland, 2018.) The main focus of this thesis is thus to
investigate if these positive effects also are evident in times of crisis. Specifically, we
investigate whether PE-backed firms were more resilient in terms of operating performance

                                        3
compared to non PE-backed peers during the financial crisis of 2008 and the economic
downturn which followed.
       Bernstein et al., (2019) have conducted a study similar to this on the U.K. market. To
better allow for comparisons between the two studies, our thesis will follow the methodology
used in their paper. For instance, all metrics used as proxies for operating performance in this
study were also used in theirs. However, this paper also includes an additional analysis of
metrics which are not directly related to company performance on a stand-alone basis, but
which still contribute to the discussion of how Private Equity influences the operations in
portfolio firms. These metrics relate to employment growth and how efficiently labour and
capital are managed. In other words, the additional analysis could provide results that give an
indication as to which strategies PE firms employ in their portfolio firms in an effort to improve
the operating performance.
       In this thesis, we have chosen to study the Swedish Private Equity market. There are
three main reasons as to why this is a suitable market to study.
        Firstly, the Private Equity market in Sweden is well-developed and integrated with the
rest of the economy. For instance, Sweden had the world’s third highest PE investments as a
percentage of GDP in 2007 (Bergström et al., 2007), and Europe’s second highest annual
average PE investments as a percentage of GDP between 2007-2012 and 2015-2019 (Invest
Europe, 2014), (SVCA, 2019). Moreover, between 2007 and 2017, over 1,000 Swedish firms
had been funded by Private Equity firms, and PE investments contributed to the Swedish GDP
with approximately 5.5 percent over the same period (Næss-Schmidt et al, 2017). As we study
changes related to labour, it is also relevant to note that 7.5 percent of the Swedish private
employees were employed in Private Equity funded firms between 2007 and 2017. (Næss-
Schmidt et al, 2017). Private Equity ownership therefore influences a considerable portion of
Swedish private employees.
       Secondly, the Swedish economy was influenced differently than many other economies.
Specifically, the economic downturn that followed the crisis was in many ways more severe
and longer-lasting in, for example, the U.K. than it was in Sweden. In Sweden, GDP decreased
by approximately 5 percent in 2009, which constitutes a sharper decrease than both the
European average of 4.4 percent and the U.K. decrease of 4.0 percent (Elm é r et al., 2012; Piroli,

                                                 1
2015; U.K. Office for National Statistics ). However, in terms of GDP, the Swedish economy
recovered quickly, and so GDP increased by 6.1 percent in 2010 and thus returned to pre-crisis

1
 The GDP decrease U.K. was calculated by the authors using data from U.K. Office for National Statistics.
                                        4
levels in absolute terms (Elm é r et al., 2012). In Europe and the U.K., GDP levels did not return
to pre-crisis levels until 2014 and 2012, respectively (Piroli, 2015; U.K. Office for National

           2
Statistics ). Financing opportunities for the corporate sector were also influenced differently in

                                                                       3
Sweden compared to the U.K. For instance, the basis spread , which is an indication of the cost
of capital in an economy, rose more drastically in both the U.K. and in Europe as a whole than
it did in Sweden, in response to the financial crisis (Elm é r et al., 2012). Monteiro (2013)
concludes that the economic and financial crisis severely affected the flow of credit in the U.K.,
and appears to have been significantly more pronounced in the U.K. than in the rest of the Euro
area. Comparing to Sweden, Bäckström (2014) conclude that the downturn in credit growth for
the corporate sector was relatively small, considering the severity and scope of the crisis. Not
only did the crisis have a more severe effect on financing opportunities in the U.K., but these
effects also lasted for a longer period of time. In 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014 the U.K. received
so-called Country-specific Recommendations (CSRs) from the Council of the European Union
to “significantly improve the availability of bank and non-bank financing to the private sector
and in particular to SMEs” whereas Sweden did not receive this or any other similar
recommendation (Council of the European Union (CEU), 2011; CEU 2012; CEU 2013; and
CEU 2014). When it comes to the effects on the Private Equity market, investment levels in
Sweden were down 42 percent in 2008 and 80 percent in 2009, compared to 2007, but returned
to pre-crisis levels in 2010 (SVCA, 2010). However, in the U.K., Private Equity investment
levels were down 34 percent in 2008 and 72 percent in 2009, compared to 2007, but had not
yet returned to pre-crisis levels in 2016 (Statista, 2017; Statista 2020). The average Private
Equity investment level in U.K. between 2010 and 2016 represented approximately 50 percent

                                 4
of the investment level in 2007  (Statista, 2017; Statista 2020). To summarise, on the basis of
the economic indicators discussed above, Sweden was considerably affected by the crisis, but
to a lesser extent than the U.K. both in terms of effect magnitude and duration. These differences
may be sufficiently large that the findings of Bernstein et al., (2019) might not generalise to the
Swedish market.
       Thirdly, conducting the study on Swedish companies allows us to have access to
qualitative company-level data on both private and public companies, in terms of income
statements and balance sheets. This gives us a level of flexibility and freedom in our analyses,
which we would not have for foreign companies. For instance, it is not mandatory for non-

2
 The GDP numbers for U.K. was calculated by the authors using data from U.K. Office for National Statistics.
3
  Measured as the difference in interbank rates and policy rates.
4
 Buyout investments levels are calculated by subtracting Venture Capital investments from total Private Equity investments.
                                        5
public US firms to disclose their accounting reports. Given these arguments, there is significant
value in conducting this study in a Swedish setting.

1.2 Purpose and research question
The aim of this paper is to investigate if PE-backed firms were more resilient in terms of
operating performance during the economic downturn that followed the financial crisis of 2008,
relative to non PE-backed peers. The research question that this paper seeks to investigate is
thus:

Are PE-backed firms more resilient in face of a financial crisis than non PE-backed firms in
terms of company performance?

Investigating this field of research is relevant for three main reasons. Firstly, as our study is
conducted on the Swedish market, it allows for comparisons with the paper “Private Equity and
Financial Fragility during the Crisis” by Bernstein et al., (2019), who investigate the operating
performance of U.K. PE-backed firms during the years after the crisis. Their findings seem to
suggest that PE-backed firms’ superior access to financing during the crisis years influenced
their operating performance by allowing them to maintain growth more successfully than non
PE-backed peers. As the crisis influenced Sweden differently than the U.K., both generally and
in terms of access to financing specifically, it is not unlikely that the crisis also influenced
Swedish PE-backed firms differently. Secondly, there are many studies which seek to examine
the impact of PE ownership on the operating performance in portfolio firms during non-crisis
periods, however there are fewer which study PE ownership and crisis in conjunction. By
contributing to the literature on crisis periods, it allows for further comparisons between non-
crisis and crisis periods. In this regard, it is particularly relevant to compare any findings we
may obtain with Bergström et al. (2007), who conducted a study on the Swedish PE market
between 1993 and 2005. This comparison could provide indications regarding the particular
effects of a crisis period, as both studies take aim at the same geographical market. Lastly, PE
investment levels in Europe were back at an all-time high in 2019, and exceeded the levels
experienced in 2007 by more than 20 percent (Invest Europe, 2019). Moreover, PE investment
levels as a percentage of GDP were also at the same levels as those experienced in 2007
(approximately 0.55 percent of GDP) (Invest Europe, 2019; Invest Europe, 2014). At the same
time, many of the world’s stock market indices are currently at all-time highs, such as the S&P
500, OMX30 and DAX (Yahoo Finance, as of May 5, 2021). Although one cannot be sure when
there will be another crisis, one can almost certainly be sure that there will be one in the future.
                                        6
To understand how Private Equity influences the operating performance in portfolio firms
during crisis periods is thus a topic that is relevant for the future as well.

1.3 Scope of investigation
This study uses a target sample of 96 Swedish PE-backed firms during the financial crisis of
2008. To investigate the effects of PE ownership, a matching sample of 96 non PE-backed firms
is constructed to allow for a difference in differences analysis between the two samples. The
matching sample is collected based on the nearest neighbour approach in regards to the
following metrics: return on assets, total assets, total debt, and revenue. Operating performance
is proxied using four accounting metrics, namely: revenue growth, EBITDA margin, return on
assets and asset growth. The additional analysis considers the metrics: employment growth,
labour productivity (revenue divided by the number of employees) and normalised NWC.

1.4 Contribution

The results of this study contribute to the literature and discussion on how Private Equity
influences its portfolio firms regarding their operations in general, with a specific focus on
performance. The thesis will specifically add to the literature that covers this topic in relation
to times of crisis and economic downturns, which is something that is currently not widely
studied. To the best of our knowledge, the operating performance of PE-backed firms during
economic downturns has only been studied on the U.K. market. Our main contribution will thus
be to conduct a similar study on the Swedish market.

1.5 Terminology
Private Equity and PE are used interchangeably throughout the paper and refer to the buyout
segment of Private Equity, i.e. not venture capital. Similarly, PE firms and PE sponsors are used
interchangeably and refer to investment companies that acquire firms through a buyout,
typically using a significant amount of leverage. Companies owned by a PE firm are referred
to as portfolio firms, target firms, or PE-backed firms. Firms which are owned by a PE firm are
referred to as non PE-backed. The term peer is used to signify such a company which is regarded
as similar to a given PE-backed firm, but which is not PE-backed itself. Note that the terms firm
and company are used interchangeably. The crisis in definite form refers to the financial crisis
in 2008, whereas the term crisis years denotes the years which are most significantly affected
by the crisis, namely 2008 to 2011. The last pre-crisis year is thus 2007 and the first post-crisis
year is 2012. Crisis periods refers to such periods that are generally accepted as economic crises,

                                        7
while all other periods are referred to as non-crisis periods. The term revenue will be used to
signify the income a company receives from its normal business activities. If a reference study
uses the term sales rather than revenue, sales will be used when discussing that specific paper.
In such a discussion, sales and revenue will be regarded as equal.

2 Literature Review

Section 2.1 of the literature review provides a theoretical framework and presents empirical
findings on Private Equity and value creation in portfolio firms during non-crisis periods. Note
that value creation is not synonymous with operating performance, but rather an umbrella term
for the activities that PE firms normally employ to create value in their target firms, where
operating performance is one key element. There are two primary reasons to why it is
worthwhile to begin by looking at non-crisis periods. Firstly, it should be noted that most
research is focused on the effects of Private Equity in non-crisis periods. Secondly, and more
importantly, obtaining a thorough understanding of Private Equity in non-crisis periods will
create a solid foundation for better understanding which aspects are important to consider when
we turn our attention to times of crisis. Section 2.2 aims to provide an understanding of how a
financial crisis might influence PE-backed firms, and how the strategies that PE firms normally
employ in their portfolio firms might change in response to a crisis. Section 2.3 examines the
financial crisis in Sweden in general, and its implications for the Swedish Private Equity market
in particular.

2.1 Value creation in portfolio firms during non-crisis periods

A common conceptual framework to categorise the activities that PE firms commonly engage
in to generate value in their portfolio companies is the one put forward by Kaplan and
Strömberg (2009). They propose that the changes applied by PE firms can divided into three
categories: governance engineering, financial engineering, and operational engineering.
Governance engineering is closely related to agency theory, which describes the relationship
between principals and agents. The core objective of governance engineering is to align the
interests of the management (agents) with those of the owners (principals) of a company. Jensen
(1989) presents, among other things, the organisational control and incentive systems that PE
firms usually implement in their portfolio companies to achieve this alignment. These are e.g.
pay-for-performance compensation systems and substantial equity ownership in the firm for
managers and directors. The idea is to incentivise the management team to maximise the value
                                        8
of the firm, which is also the fundamental driver that generates fund returns for the PE firm.
Several empirical studies document that the management team in leveraged buyouts (LBOs)
receive substantially higher ownership stakes than comparable public companies (Kaplan and
Strömberg, 2009). In addition to these measures, PE firms normally employ financial
engineering as a tool to further ensure that the management team acts in the interest of the
owners. Specifically, it is used to resolve the conflict between managers and owners concerning
the use of free cash flow (Jensen, 1989). According to Jensen, there is a risk that managers
waste a company’s free cash flow by engaging in activities that are not value-maximising, such
as investing in sub-optimal projects and increasing corporate size, rather than to distribute
excess cash to shareholders. By leveraging a company with the use of debt, managers are forced
to make interest and principal payments which limits the risk of management wasting free cash
flow. Leveraging a company could also be an effort to increase the value of a company through
tax deductibility of interest (Kaplan and Strömberg, 2009). Operational engineering refers to
PE firms using their industry knowledge and expertise within business operations to identify
attractive investments, develop value creation plans (VCPs) for those investments, and to
implement those VCPs. Examples of such VCPs might include cost-cutting plans, productivity
improvements, strategic change or repositioning, company acquisitions, and management
changes (Kaplan and Strömberg, 2009).
       Systematic evidence of the extent to which PE firms employ the three different kinds of
engineering, as well as how different strategies and measures are combined, is largely lacking
as this is confidential information. However, Biesinger et al. (2020) obtain this information on
emerging markets deals and categorise the VCPs employed in portfolio firm. The study reports
the following use of strategies during the years 2007 to 2011: top-line growth (~85% of sample
deals), operational improvements (~82%), governance engineering (~58%), financial
engineering (~45%) and cash management (~18%). Within the conceptual framework of
Kaplan and Strömberg (2009), operational improvements, top-line growth and cash
management would most likely be categorised as operational engineering. As Biesinger et al.
(2020) study emerging market deals, it is plausible that the numbers could be different from a
developed market such as Sweden, considering that target firms in emerging markets might be
in greater need of operational engineering, and that the possibility of financial engineering
might also be more limited. However, the study provides an overall indication of how PE firms
employ different value-creating strategies in their portfolio firms.

                                        9
       There is a wide body of empirical research that documents the effects of PE ownership
on the operating performance in portfolio firms. Cumming, Siegel, and Wright (2007)
summarise it by concluding that there “is a general consensus across different methodologies,
measures, and time periods regarding a key stylized fact: LBOs and especially MBOs enhance
performance and have a salient effect on work practices”. This conclusion is in line with the
summary made by Strömberg and Døskeland, 2018, who conclude that “[…] the majority of
empirical studies support that PE-investments improve the performance of the portfolio
companies, and that these improvements do not seem to come at the expense of other
stakeholders or long-term value”.

2.2 Effects of a financial crisis on portfolio firms
Section 2.1 gives an account of previous literature concerning the ways in which Private Equity
firms generally create value in their portfolio firms. However, it is reasonable to assume that a
financial crisis would influence this process and give rise to changes and additional effects that
should be considered. The purpose of this section is therefore to provide an understanding of
how the value creation process in PE-backed firms could be influenced by a financial crisis.

2.2.1 Leverage in portfolio firms

Concerns have been raised about PE firms’ aggressive use of debt financing and the
consequences this might have, not only for target firms but also for the stability of financial
systems (Gregory, 2013; and Giroud and Mueller, 2015). One concern is that the indebtedness
of target firms could make them particularly vulnerable to economic recessions and changing
credit conditions. The argument is that having to service a large amount of debt during
economic downturns could lead to considerable costs associated with financial distress and even
bankruptcy. These concerns should be viewed in light of the empirical findings that indicate
that PE firms’ use of leverage tends to vary with the conditions on credit markets. Axelson et
al. (2013) find that the one robust predictor of LBO leverage is the prevailing condition of debt
markets. The authors also find that LBO activity is pro-cyclical, meaning that LBO leverage
peaks during periods of cheap and abundant debt, such as the period leading up to the crisis in
2006 and 2007, and decreases drastically when debt markets deteriorate, such as in 2008 and
2009. The authors also find evidence that deal values tend to increase during these periods of
“hot” credit markets and that the subsequent fund returns are thus lower.
       The actual impact of leverage on target companies is documented in studies such as
Hotchkiss, Smith, and Strömberg (2020). Their results suggest that PE-backed firms default
                                        10
more frequently than non PE-backed firms. However, when controlling for firm-level
indebtedness, this effect disappears. Furthermore, when they compare firms with particularly
high levels of debt, they find that PE-backed firms were less likely to default than non PE-
backed firms, indicating that PE companies are effective at managing distress risks at high
levels of debt. One should note that this study examines the period 1997 to 2010, i.e. not during
a crisis period. However, Bernstein et al., (2019) examined this topic during the financial crisis
of 2008 on the U.K. market. Their study found that PE-backed firms were not more likely than
non PE-backed firms to declare bankruptcy (controlled for firm-level indebtedness), and
concluded that their results seem to suggest that PE-backed companies play a stabilising role
during uncertain times, rather than posing a risk to the financial system.

2.2.2 Access to capital during the crisis years
Bernstein et al., (2019) conclude that their results indicate that PE-backed companies play a
stabilising role during bad times. The results that underpin this suggestion are their findings that
PE-backed firms seemed to have had greater access to capital and financing during the crisis
years. They find that PE-backed firms decreased investments less, issued more debt and equity,
and lowered their cost of debt compared to non PE-backed firms. In aggregate, the authors
conclude that their results indicate that PE ownership helps to relax the financial constraints of
portfolio companies during crisis periods. These findings could partly be explained by the study
by Ivashina and Kovner (2011), who obtain results suggesting that PE-backed firms receive
favourable loan terms, both in terms of interest rate and covenant structure (debt to EBITDA
covenant), as a result of Private Equity firms’ bank relationships. The study suggests that
“repeated interactions between PE firms and banks reduce inefficiencies from information
asymmetry and allow leveraged buyout sponsored by private equity firms to occur on
favourable loan terms”. Note that the findings of this study are not specifically in relation to a
crisis period, but rather relate to PE ownership in general. However, Bernstein et al., (2019),
who do study a crisis period, summarise their findings by concluding that “private equity groups
appear to have taken advantage of their fund structures and bank relationships to provide both
equity and debt financing to their portfolio companies, with the latter at a lower cost”. The
empirical findings discussed above thus seem to suggest that PE-backed firms have superior
access to financing, both in non-crisis periods and crisis periods. Relating superior access to
financing to company performance, Bernstein et al., (2019) obtain results indicating that
portfolio firms could maintain higher levels of investments and increase their market share as

                                        11
a result of superior access to financing during the crisis years. To the best of our knowledge, no
empirical studies regarding financing opportunities during a crisis have been conducted on the
Swedish PE market specifically. However, considering that Sweden had the world’s third
highest PE investments as a percentage of GDP in 2007, which was only surpassed by the U.K.
and the U.S. (Bergström et al., 2007), it is reasonable to assume that Swedish PE firms enjoyed
favourable bank relationships during the time of the crisis.

2.2.3 Operational assistance by PE firms in their portfolio companies
Bernstein et al., (2019) also present findings from a survey with more than 300 PE investors,
seeking to investigate if and how PE investors changed their operational and financial activities
during the crisis, relative to non-crisis periods. The results of their survey show that, during the
crisis, PE investors were significantly more likely to assist portfolio companies with their
operational issues, provide strategic guidance, and assist portfolio companies with financial
structuring issues. They also find that PE investors were less likely to search for new deals. In
accordance with these findings, Bain Capital chose to redeploy all of their 175 investment
professionals to focusing on assisting their portfolio firms with operational and financial
activities during the crisis, rather than to search for new deals (Bernstein et al., 2019).

2.2.4 Conclusion
Given the observations presented in this section, the following three effects should be
considered regarding Private Equity and value creation during times of crisis:
      1. PE firms’ use of leverage in portfolio companies could lead to costs associated with
         financial distress and even bankruptcy.
      2. PE-backed firms could have greater access to capital and thus be less financially
         constrained during a crisis. This could have a positive effect on PE-backed firms’
        operating performance in terms of an ability to maintain investments and increase
          market share during the crisis period.
      3. Private Equity firms could be more likely to assist their portfolio companies with both
         operational and financial structuring issues, compared to non-crisis periods.

2.3 The financial crisis in Sweden
This section provides an understanding of the financial crisis in Sweden generally, and its
implications for the Swedish Private Equity market in particular. To understand how the crisis
played out in Sweden is relevant, as it allows for better comparisons with other markets, and

                                        12
could potentially provide indications of which effects of the financial crisis should have more
or less salient influence on Swedish PE-backed firms.

2.3.1 The Swedish economy
The onset of the global financial crisis, marked by the bankruptcy of the American investment
bank Lehman Brothers in September 2008, quickly spread to the Swedish market. As Sweden’s
economy was largely dependent on its export and import industries, which constituted
approximately 50 and 40 percent of the economy, respectively, the effects were tangible in 2009
when international trade was abruptly reduced, and the Swedish GDP consequently decreased
by more than 5 percent (Elm é r et al., 2012). However, as international trade resumed during
2010, the Swedish economy recovered quickly in terms of GDP, which rose by 6.1 percent in
2010 (Elm é r et al., 2012). Although GDP levels were back at pre-crisis levels, the real effects
on the economy were still tangible in both 2010 and 2011. According to the Swedish National
Institute of Economic Research (SNIER), the real economy was still in recession in mid 2011,
as a result of the financial crisis (SNIER, 2011). For instance, unemployment levels had risen
from 6.1 percent in 2007 and peaked at 8.3 and 8.6 percent in 2009 and 2010, respectively, and
thereafter stabilised at approximately 8 percent between the years 2011 and 2014 (SCB, 2021).
Turning to the effects on the financial system, Bäckström (2014) concludes that the Swedish
banks were, in comparison to banks in other countries, well-prepared for the crisis. Not only
were their finances relatively stable, but they had also experienced a crisis during the 1990,
which had forced them to undertake cautionary measures. Although the crisis entailed a sharp
increase in the basis spread (Elm é r et al., 2012), the downturn in credit growth for the corporate
sector was in relative terms small, considering the severity and scope of the crisis, according to
Bäckström (2014). It should be noted, though, that access to capital was significantly reduced
in the beginning of the crisis. According to a survey by the SNIER, 12 percent of Swedish
businesses thought it was “considerably more difficult” to receive financing by the end of 2008
compared to the period prior to the crisis, whereas 22 percent of businesses though it was “more
difficult” (SNIER, 2008). Of these businesses, 65 percent stated that the primary reason for the
increased difficulty was either higher costs associated with receiving a bank loan, or restricted
access to bank loans. The Central Bank of Sweden (CBS) also launched so-called
“extraordinary measures” in an attempt to, among other things, provide the economy and the
financial system with stability and liquidity. For instance, CBS lowered the policy rate by 4.5
percentage points between October 2008 and July 2009, and offered Swedish banks loans of

                                        13
MSEK 1,000. As these measures were successful, the CBS could end their package of
“extraordinary measures” early, compared to other countries. In mid 2010, only 5 percent of
businesses thought it was “considerably more difficult” to receive financing compared to pre-
crisis years, although 14 percent still thought it was “more difficult”. 78 percent of business
thought it was “as normal” (SNIER, 2010). To summarise, the financial crisis had a substantial
negative effect on both the real economy and the financial system in Sweden. However,
concerning the financial system, the negative effects were short-lived, while the effects on the
real economy still were salient until 2011.

2.3.2 The Swedish Private Equity market
The effects of the crisis on the Swedish PE market were salient in several ways. Firstly, the
amount of capital raised by Swedish PE firms was significantly reduced at the height of the
crisis years; Fundraising peaked during 2008, totalling MSEK 76,494 (32,792 in 2007) and hit
the bottom in 2009 and 2010 with MSEK 1,728 and 7,150, respectively (SVCA 2010). Raised
capital returned to pre-crisis levels in 2011 (SVCA, 2019). Secondly, so-called initial
investments, i.e. investments in new portfolio companies, were down by 42 and 80 percent in
2008 and 2009, respectively, compared to 2007. During the same time, so-called follow-on
investments, in other words investments in already existing portfolio companies, increased with
268 and 147 percent in 2008 and 2009, respectively (SCVA, 2009) (SVCA 2010). However, it
should be noted that follow-on investments were increased from particularly low levels. In
2007, follow-on investments constituted 9 percent of total invested capital, whereas they
constituted 38 and 54 percent in 2008 and 2009, respectively. In 2010, initial investments were
back at pre-crisis levels, and follow-up investments were still up 79 percent compared to 2007.

2.3.3 Conclusion
To summarise, the financial crisis had a substantial negative effect on both the real economy
and the financial system in Sweden. However, concerning the financial system, the negative
effects were short-lived, while the effects on the real economy prevailed for a longer time
period. The effects were clearly reflected in the Private Equity market as well, as both
fundraising and initial investments heavily dropped during the height of the crisis, before
quickly returning to pre-crisis levels. Follow-on investments increased substantially during the
crisis, indicating that the focus on portfolio firms increased during the crisis years.

                                        14
3 Hypotheses

3.1 Operating Performance
The empirical research on non-crisis periods indicates that PE ownership should have a
significantly positive effect on portfolio firms’ operating performance. For instance, in the
Swedish market, Bergström et al. (2007) obtain results that buyouts had a significantly positive
impact on EBITDA margin, with a mean increase of 3.07 percentage points, as well as a
significantly positive effect on ROIC, with a median increase 4.01 percentage points. The study
does not find differences in sales growth between PE-backed and non PE-backed firms.
However, the authors conclude that their results seem to suggest that buyouts have a positive
impact on the operating performance of target firms. These results are in line with those
obtained on the French market. Boucly et al. (2011) study LBO firms during 1994 to 2004, and
find that PE-backed firms outperformed non PE-backed firms in the three years following the
buyout by (in percent): EBITDA +18, ROA +4.4, sales +12, and capital expenditures +24.
Turning to the empirical findings in periods of crises, only one study could be identified.
Bernstein et al., (2019) study the U.K. market during the financial crisis of 2008, and obtain
results indicating that PE-backed firms experienced an 8 percent increase in market share and
a significantly larger asset growth than non PE-backed peers. They find no evidence suggesting
that PE-backed companies performed differently than non PE-backed peers with regards to
EBITDA margin or ROA. Their results indicate that the increase in asset growth and market
share was a result of superior access to financing during the crisis years for PE-backed firms,
relative non PE-backed firms. Note that there are empirical findings indicating that PE-backed
firms’ superior access to financing is not limited to crisis periods (Ivashina and Kovner, 2011).
However, the potential positive effects of having superior access to financing are arguably
amplified during periods, when financing opportunities are generally limited, such as during
the crisis years. Since financing opportunities were reduced in Sweden during the height of the
crisis, it is possible that Swedish PE-backed firms turned to a strategy of investing and
increasing their market share. However, it should be noted that financing opportunities were
not as severely reduced in Sweden as they were in the U.K., which might make potential effects
smaller. Lastly, Bernstein et al., (2019) find that the crisis led to an increased focus from PE
firms in the U.K. to assists their portfolio firms in strategic and operating matters. It is likely
that such an effect would be mirrored in Sweden, considering the shift in investment focus from
initial investment toward follow-on investments among Swedish PE firms.

                                        15
        Weighing all of these factors together, PE-backed firms should have been more resilient
in terms of operating performance during the financial crisis, compared to non PE-backed firms.
We therefore hypothesise the following:

Hypothesis 1: PE-backed firms were less negatively influenced by the crisis in terms of
operating performance than non PE-backed peers. In other words, PE firms were more resilient
during the crisis in terms of operating performance than their peers.

3.2 Additional analysis
Our review of literature within the field of Private Equity has given a clear indication that the
effects of PE ownership can be observed through a multitude of accounting metrics apart from
those which are directly associated with operating performance. Studying such metrics can be
valuable, as they can give an indication as to what strategies PE sponsors implement in their
portfolio companies in order to achieve higher operating performance. Another reason to extend
the analysis is that many of the metrics directly related to operating performance might be slow
to respond to changes in strategy, meaning that even if PE-backed firms are more skilled in
their choice of strategy during a crisis, the performance gains associated with these choices may
be delayed in time and therefore have not adequately developed during the time interval that
we study.
       Some of the accounting metrics which are commonly discussed in the literature
regarding how Private Equity influences the operations in their portfolio companies are
employment growth, labour productivity, and net working capital (NWC). We expand on each
of these and report on how previous findings influence our hypotheses in Sections 3.2.1, 3.2.2,
and 3.2.3, respectively. Additionally, to include changes related to employment growth could
also be of particular interest, as it is a commonly held view by labour unions and media that PE
ownership is associated with a reduction in the work force as a strategy to reduce costs (Olsson
and Tåg, 2012). If this is indeed true, a financial crisis would be a good opportunity to observe
this behaviour, in part due to the more urgent need for cost reduction, and also due to the fact
that they might receive less public criticism for laying off employees in times of crisis compared
to non-crisis periods.

3.2.1 Employment growth
The empirical research on non-crisis periods is conflicting, depending on which geographical
market that is considered. One explanation for the origin of these differences, according to

                                        16
Olsson and Tåg (2012), is that employment protection regulations differ among countries.
Concerning this, Sweden had the seventh strongest protection among 30 OECD countries in
2004, which can be compared with the U.S., that scored lowest of all 30 countries (OECD,
2004). For this paper, studies on the Swedish market will first and foremost be relevant. Olsson
and Tåg (2012) examine, among other things, the effects of Private Equity on labour growth in
Swedish target firms during the period 2002 to 2008. They find that “consistent with the existing
evidence of modest net employment effects, we find little evidence of average changes in
unemployment incidence after buyouts”. These results are in line with those of Bergström et al.
(2007), who find that “employment and wage levels in buyout companies have developed in
line with the peer groups”. To the best of our knowledge, no previous empirical studies have
been conducted on this topic specifically in relation to a crisis period on the Swedish market.
However, Davis et al. (2019), studying the U.S. market, find that “a unit standard deviation rise
in the post-buyout GDP growth rate raises employment growth at targets relative to controls by
3.3 percent of base employment […]. A rise in credit spreads after buyouts brings slower post-
buyout employment growth at targets relative to controls […]”. These results are statistically
significant and indicate that the employment growth should be lower for PE-backed firms
relative non PE-backed firms in times of economic downturns. However, it should also be noted
that the effects of the financial crisis on unemployment levels were substantially more severe
in the U.S. compared to Sweden. In the U.S., unemployment levels rose from 5.0 percent in
December 2007, and peaked at 10.0 during the height of the crisis (U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics, 2012), while they rose from 6.1 percent in Sweden and peaked at 8.6 percent (SCB,
2021). This should not, of course, have an effect on the relative difference between PE-backed
and non PE-backed firms within the same country, but it still provides an indication that the
Swedish and the U.S. labour markets were affected differently. Turning to the potential effects
of the financial crisis discussed in Section 2.2.2, superior access to financing could mean that
PE-backed firms are, to a less extent, forced to lay off employees as a result of the financial
crisis, compared to non PE-backed firms.
       Weighing these factors together, we conclude that the literature provides conflicting
evidence on how labour growth should develop in periods of crisis. We therefore choose to
investigate the following hypothesis:

Hypothesis 2: PE-backed firms were influenced in the same way as non PE-backed peers in
terms of employment growth.

                                        17
3.2.2 Labour productivity

The empirical research on non-crisis periods indicates that PE ownership should have a positive
effect on portfolio firms’ labour productivity in general. In the U.S. market, Davis et al. (2019)
find that labour productivity in PE-backed firms increased by 8 percent in the two years
following the buyout, relative to non PE-backed firms. The study defines labour productivity
as real revenue per employee. In another study on non-crisis periods, Davis et al. (2014)
examine, among other things, how the buyout event influences job reallocation within the target
firm. The authors conclude that target firms more aggressively close plants with low total
factors productivity (TFP), and they more aggressively open new plants with high TFP. Hence,
target firms reallocate their employees within the firm in a way that increases TFP for the firm
(+ 2.1 log points increase in TFP compared to peers). Turning to empirical findings on crisis
periods, Davis et al (2019) find that labour productivity rises and falls with the credit spread;
during periods of high credit spread, such as those experienced during the financial crisis, the
relative labour productivity of target firms increased compared to the peer group. To clarify:
average labour productivity in PE-backed firms always increased compared to non PE-backed
firms, but this outperformance was especially great during times of high credit spreads. The
authors state that a possible explanation could be that “[…] when credit is costly and tight,
financial engineering is less feasible and PE groups may generate returns through operational
improvements that raise productivity in portfolio firms”. When it comes to the effects of the
financial crisis, a potential increase in focus from PE companies in assisting their portfolio firms
with operational and financial issues could have a positive effect on labour productivity.
Furthermore, superior access to financing could expand revenue growth, as suggested by the
results of Bernstein et al., (2019). However, this potential effect could also expand the
employment growth at PE-backed firms, and the result of this potential effect is thus not clear.
       Weighing these factors together, one may expect that PE-backed firms should not have
been as strongly influenced in terms of labour productivity as non PE-backed peers during the
financial. We therefore hypothesise the following:

Hypothesis 3: PE-backed firms were less negatively influenced by the crisis than non PE-
backed peers in terms of labour productivity.

3.2.3 Net Working Capital
The empirical research on non-crisis periods indicates that PE ownership should reduce NWC
in portfolio firms. Berg and Gottschlag (2003) assert that one common practice by PE owners

                                        18
to increase the operational effectiveness in portfolio firms is to reduce capital requirements. The
authors refer to several studies that document results indicating that PE portfolio firms
significantly reduce working capital following the buyout event. Such studies include
Holthausen and Larcker (1996) and Singh (1990). However, Boucly et al. (2011), find that LBO
targets and control firms exhibit a similar working capital development following the buyout.
No studies have, to the best of our knowledge, been conducted on this topic specifically in
relation to a crisis period.
       In spite of the findings of Boucly et al. (2011), most literature seems to indicate that PE-
backed firms reduce their NWC significantly, and we may therefore expect that PE-backed
firms should have reduced their NWC more during the financial crisis, compared to non PE-
backed peers. We thus propose the following hypothesis:

Hypothesis 4: PE-backed firms decreased their normalised NWC more during the crisis than
non PE-backed peers.

4 Data and Sample

In order to be able to perform an analysis which investigates our hypotheses, we need two
samples across which we can compare performance: one which is PE-backed and one which is
not PE-backed. It is important to recognise that a group of PE-backed firms is not an accurate
representation of a random sample from the population of Swedish firms. On the contrary,
private equity firms tend to have high demands on their acquisition targets in terms of historic
revenue growth, profitability, and market positioning. Given these common traits among PE-
backed firms, it is important that the control group is constructed in such a way that its
companies share these traits to the greatest possible extent. Failing to achieve similarity between
the PE-backed group and the peer group would make it impossible to distinguish PE ownership
as an explanatory variable with regards to company performance during a crisis. In this study,
we use data gathered from Serrano. Serrano is a database which contains the financial history
of Swedish legal entities from the year 1997 and onwards. Its data is adjusted to account for
broken accounting periods, short or long accounting periods, and several other phenomena
which could otherwise interfere with statistical analyses on the financial data of groups of
companies. The matching procedure is based on the one conducted by Bernstein et al., (2019)
and will be described in detail in Section 4.1.

                                        19
4.1 Construction of target sample

The target sample should consist of Swedish firms which were PE-owned during the financial
crisis. The first step was to extract from Capital IQ a list of private equity transactions in Sweden
between January 1st 2000 and December 31st 2007. This was done by searching for transactions
for which the description of the acquirer contained the terms “Private Equity” or “Leveraged
Buyout”. These were then screened individually to make sure that the acquirer fit our
requirements. Examples of typical transactions which needed to be excluded in this phase were
such transactions in which the acquirer was an investment company that does not fall within
our distinction of private equity, such as venture capital firms, pension funds or investment
companies with a long-term investment horizon. Additionally, it had to be verified that each
acquired company was PE-owned throughout crisis years. Specifically, this meant that all
companies which had been sold by a private equity fund to a strategic acquirer or to the public
via an IPO were removed. Any company which appeared in the list more than once as an
acquisition target, but was sold from a PE firm to another PE firm was kept. This screening
resulted in a list of companies, rather than a list of transactions. After this screening, 149
companies remained.
       The second step was to associate a Swedish organisation number to each company in
the list. This was done by searching for the company name using the service Retriever Business,
which is a database for Swedish company information. The organisation number would then be
used as the company identifier when extracting the financial data of each firm from Serrano.
        Lastly, the data of the companies in question was extracted from Serrano based on the
organisation number and it was verified that no data was missing for the years of interest. After
this step, the data sample consisted of 96 companies and their respective financial data for the
years 2005 to 2012.

4.2 Constructing a matched control group
The procedure of matching followed the same principle used by Bernstein et al., (2019),
however with a few adjustments where it was deemed appropriate. The matching proceeded as
follows: Firstly, for each PE-backed company, all companies in the Serrano database which had

                                             5
the same first two digits of their SNI code  and for which financial data was available for the
entire period of analysis were extracted. Then, the squared distance of these companies to the
PE-backed company in question was calculated based on the following equation:

5
  SNI (Standard för svensk näringsgrensindelning) is a Swedish code standard for industry classification.
                                        20
                                           2                         2                     2
          1   2    (𝑅𝑂𝐴𝑖 − 𝑅𝑂𝐴𝑗)     (𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑖 − 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑗)     (𝐷𝑒𝑏𝑡𝑖 − 𝐷𝑒𝑏𝑡𝑗)
                𝑑𝑖𝑗 =               +                   +
                                                      𝜎𝑅𝑂𝐴                             𝜎𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠                             𝜎𝐷𝑒𝑏𝑡
                                                   2                                              (1)
                                             (𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑖 − 𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑗)
                         +
                                                                                𝜎𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠

         2
Where 𝑑𝑖𝑗 denotes the squared distance between firm 𝑖 and firm 𝑗. Each accounting metric

belonging to firm 𝑖 or firm 𝑗 is subscripted with 𝑖 and 𝑗, respectively. 𝜎 denotes the sample
standard deviation with regards to the subscripted accounting metric, with the sample in
question being the entire Serrano dataset belonging to the two-digit SNI code of firm 𝑖 and 𝑗.
𝑅𝑂𝐴 denotes return on assets, calculated as operating profit after financial income divided by
total assets, 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠 denotes total assets, 𝐷𝑒𝑏𝑡 denotes total debt, and 𝑅𝑒𝑣 denotes total revenue.
By scaling the distance measure in each dimension by the sample standard deviation with
regards to that variable, we make sure that variables which are large in absolute value (such as
total assets) do not influence the distance measure more than variables which are small in
absolute value (such as return on assets). That company which had the smallest squared distance
to a specific PE-backed firm was chosen to be its peer. To reduce the effects of outliers, the
data of both PE sample and peer sample was winsorised at 1 percent.

4.3 Observed firm characteristics

Table 1 reports the distribution of our PE sample and our matched peer sample across industries.
The segmentation of industries follows the broad structure of NACE Rev. 2 defined in Eurostat
(2008). By design, the matched sample has the exact same industry distribution as the PE
sample. We note that almost all of the companies operate within either Manufacturing,
Wholesale and retail trade, or Professional and technical activities.

Table 1

 Industry distribution
                                     PE sample Matched sample
                                 N rel. N rel.
Manufacturing 45 47% 45 47%
Construction 3 3% 3 3%
Wholesale and retail trade 28 29% 28 29%
Transportation and storage 1 1% 1 1%
Professional and technical activities 16 17% 16 17%
Education 1 1% 1 1%
Health and social work activities 2 2% 2 2%
 This table reports the absolute and relative distributions of the PE sample and the matched
 sample at the broad industry level, as defined by the firms' NACE section codes.

                                        21
To study the accuracy of the matching procedure, we present firm characteristics for the PE
sample and the matched sample in Table 2. We note that none of the characteristics are
statistically significant between the two groups. The matching variables ROA, total assets, debt,
and revenue have particularly small and insignificant differences across the two groups. This
indicates a successful matching procedure. Additionally, as a result of the matching procedure,
the peer sample has the same number of firms as the PE sample, as well as similar standard
deviations of the matching variables.

Table 2

 Firm's characteristics in 2007
                                   PE sample Matched sample
                       N Mean Median SD N Mean Median SD Mean diff. p-value
Revenue (kSEK) 96 758 423 224 232 1 527 353 96 794 969 222 906 1 728 103 -36 547 0.8768
Total Assets (kSEK) 96 623 267 129 880 1 575 365 96 590 379 119 029 1 736 959 32 888 0.8908
ROA 96 10.95% 12.66% 17.63% 96 12.69% 11.16% 14.66% -1.74% 0.4586
Asset growth 96 16.51% 15.72% 22.49% 96 14.11% 10.00% 25.42% 2.40% 0.4892
Debt/assets 96 61.86% 63.27% 20.07% 96 60.49% 63.91% 20.78% 1.37% 0.6424
Employees 96 290 79 805 96 303 83 699 -14 0.9004
Employment growth 96 8.72% 6.67% 21.17% 96 9.05% 4.00% 25.87% -0.33% 0.9239
Labour productivity (kSEK) 96 3 960 2 555 4 610 96 4 297 2 439 6 444 -337 0.6770
 This table reports the summary statistics of PE sample and matched sample firms in the year 2007, which was the basis for the matching
 procedure. The second to last column reports the mean difference across the groups, and the last reports the corresponding p-value, based on a
 paired t-test.

4.4 Observed firm trends
Since this analysis will rely on a difference in differences approach, where changes in firm
performance before the crisis and during the crisis years will be compared across two groups,
we need to make the assumption that the PE group and the matched group have parallel trends
in terms of their characteristics. In other words, we make the assumption that the two groups
would have developed identically if the crisis had not occurred. Clearly, this assumption cannot
be proven, however it can be justified through an examination of the pre-crisis trends of the two
groups. In Table 3, the 1-year and 2-year relative mean growth trends of the two groups are
presented and compared. The 1-year trend refers to the growth in the period 2006 to 2007 and
the 2-year trend refers to the growth in the period 2005 to 2007. We find that the differences
across the two groups are small and not statistically significant, indicating that they experienced
very similar developments in the years leading up to the crisis. It is therefore reasonable to
assume that they would have continued to experience similar development had the crisis not
occurred. We therefore consider the condition of parallel trends to be satisfied.

                                        22
Table 3
 Firm's trends in 2007
                              PE sample Matched sample
                  N Mean Median SD N Mean Median SD Mean diff. p-value
 1-year growth
Revenue 96 11.41% 2.71% 37.88% 96 15.35% 3.47% 49.67% -3.94% 0.5372
Total Assets 96 15.89% 1.54% 113.03% 96 14.54% 1.47% 77.97% 1.35% 0.9236
ROA 96 11.73% 4.23% 107.61% 96 10.06% 11.79% 101.79% 1.67% 0.9122
Debt/assets 96 2.53% 3.57% 18.96% 96 0.68% 0.63% 14.82% 1.84% 0.4538
Employees 96 -2.43% 1.33% 56.78% 96 -0.53% 0.66% 45.70% -1.90% 0.7989
Labour productivity 96 9.28% 1.69% 55.40% 96 14.23% 3.20% 100.40% -4.95% 0.6727
 2-year growth
Revenue 96 24.70% 6.63% 69.89% 96 28.75% 6.53% 82.38% -4.05% 0.7135
Total Assets 96 22.02% 3.43% 152.85% 96 21.96% 2.97% 112.94% 0.06% 0.9974
ROA 96 -0.15% 8.08% 134.73% 96 -3.50% 3.99% 107.18% 3.35% 0.8490
Debt/assets 96 2.66% 3.66% 28.64% 96 2.68% 1.65% 19.54% -0.03% 0.9940
Employees 96 13.08% 2.20% 126.22% 96 3.86% 1.83% 56.30% 9.22% 0.5142
Labour productivity 96 14.69% 6.10% 63.08% 96 16.62% 6.05% 102.29% -1.93% 0.8748
 This table reports the 1-year and 2-year mean growth trend for the PE sample and the matched sample. Mean diff. refers to the difference of
 the PE mean growth and the matched sample mean growth. For each metric, p-values of the mean differences based on a paired t-test are
 presented.

5 Empirical Strategy

Our analysis is divided into two parts: Operating performance analysis, which is detailed in
Section 5.2, and additional analysis, detailed in Section 5.3. The aim of the operating
performance analysis is to provide an answer to Hypothesis 1, while the additional analysis
aims to answer Hypotheses 2 to 4. In both cases, a regression model is estimated, and based on
the results of this regression, conclusions can be drawn regarding the hypotheses. The overall
framework of the regression model is detailed in Section 5.1.

5.1 Regression model
Since this study aims to analyse the difference in a set of outcome variables as a result of the
crisis for two groups and compare these differences across the groups, the most suitable
approach is through a difference in differences analysis. This approach entails running the
following regression:

           2                                              𝑻
                         𝑦𝑖𝑡 = 𝛼𝑡 + 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽1(𝑃𝐸𝑖 ∗ 𝐶𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑡) + 𝜽 𝒙𝒊 + 𝜖𝑖𝑡 (2)

Where 𝑦𝑖𝑡 is an outcome variable for firm 𝑖 at time 𝑡, 𝛼𝑡 is a year fixed effect, 𝛼𝑖 is a firm fixed
effect, 𝑃𝐸𝑖 is a dummy variable indicating whether firm 𝑖 is PE-owned, 𝐶𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑡 is a dummy
variable indicating whether year 𝑡 is a crisis year and 𝜖𝑖𝑡 are standard errors clustered at firm
level. The regression is run over the years 2005 to 2011. The vectors 𝒙𝒊 and 𝜽 represent our
control variables and their regression coefficients, respectively. When performing any
regression analysis, it is important to include control variables to separate out confounding
                                        23
factors, however such control variables should always be theoretically relevant. The control
variables that we use are log of revenue, revenue growth, normalised cash flow, ROA, and
leverage ratio. These controls are the same as those used by Bernstein et al., (2019). The control
variables are calculated in the following way:

         3
                                𝐿𝑜𝑔 𝑜𝑓 𝑟𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒 = 𝑙𝑛(𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒) (3)

          4                                      𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒  − 𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒
                                                                   𝑡               𝑡−1
                       𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒 𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑡ℎ𝑡 =                                              (4)
                                                                 𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒𝑡−1

         5
                                                           𝐶𝑎𝑠ℎ 𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤
                          𝑁𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑒𝑑 𝑐𝑎𝑠ℎ 𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤 =                                   (5)
                                                                   𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠

         6
                                          𝑜𝑝. 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑓𝑖𝑡 𝑎𝑓𝑡𝑒𝑟 𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒
                       𝑅𝑂𝐴 =                                                      (6)
                                                        𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠

         7
                                                                     𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑑𝑒𝑏𝑡
                              𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 =                                        (7)
                                                              𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠

Where the subscript 𝑡 signifies that the quantity in question belongs to year 𝑡. In such cases
where the calculation only involves quantities from the same year, such a subscript is omitted.
This will be the case throughout this section.
       The year fixed effects will capture systematic differences in the output variable for
different years. As such, they will capture the effect of the crisis itself, regardless of whether
the company in question is PE-owned or not. The firm fixed effects on the other hand will
capture systematic differences in the output variable for different firms, regardless of the time
period. Having isolated these effects, we can isolate the effect of PE ownership during a crisis
by interacting the variables 𝑃𝐸𝑖 and 𝐶𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑡 through multiplication. The coefficient 𝛽1 in
Equation 2 represents the effect that the interaction of 𝑃𝐸𝑖 and 𝐶𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑡 has on the outcome
variable 𝑦𝑖𝑡. In other words, it indicates how much the outcome variable changes from the fact
that it belongs to a firm which is PE-owned and to a year which is a crisis year, which is exactly
the effect that we intend to study.

5.2 Operating performance analysis
This analysis aims to answer the question whether PE-backed firms were more resilient in terms
of operating performance during the crisis. As there is no single measure or metric that fully
captures the operating performance of a firm, it is necessary to include a variety of metrics that,
                                        24
when studied together, give an indication of a firm’s operating performance. The following
metrics are used as proxies for operating performance in our study, and each will act as the
dependent variable in a regression:
      • Revenue growth
      • EBITDA margin
      • Return on assets (ROA)
      • Asset growth
Naturally, if applicable, the dependent variable is omitted from the set of control variables.
There are two reasons as to why we have chosen the above accounting metrics as proxies for
operating performance. First, all of these metrics are commonly used in the empirical literature
that examines the operating performance of firms. For instance, Bergström et al. (2007), Boucly
et al. (2011) and Bernstein et al., (2019) all use revenue growth, EBITDA margin and variations
of ROA to proxy for operating performance. Bergström et al. (2007) argue that EBITDA margin
is the main indicator of operating profitability, and that this metric is particularly relevant within
the buyout universe as price and leverage often are quoted in terms of EBITDA multiples. The
chosen accounting metrics are therefore supported by the literature as being suitable indicators
of operating performance. Secondly, choosing similar metrics as Bergström et al. (2007) and
Bernstein et al., (2019) will facilitate the comparison of the results of our study with theirs. As
two of the main purposes of this study are to compare our results with earlier findings on the
Swedish market in non-crisis periods (Bergström et al., 2007) and with the U.K. market during
the same crisis period (Bernstein et al., 2019), it is preferable to use similar metrics as proxies
for operating performance.
       The formulae for calculating revenue growth and ROA are already presented in
Equations 4 and 6. Furthermore, EBITDA margin and asset growth are calculated as:

        8
                                   𝑂𝑝. 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑓𝑖𝑡 + 𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 + 𝐴𝑚𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑠𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑛
             𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑇𝐷𝐴 𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑖𝑛 =                                                        (8)
                                                              𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒

          9                                   𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠  − 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠
                                                                𝑡                    𝑡−1
                    𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡 𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑡ℎ𝑡 =                                                     (9)
                                                             𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑡−1

                                        25
5.3 Additional analysis

The additional analysis aims to answer Hypotheses 2 to 4 and thereby provide insight in the
effect of some of the strategic changes implemented by PE sponsors on their portfolio
companies. In contrast to the operating performance analysis, there is no ambiguity regarding
which accounting metrics should be analysed. In this part of the analysis, we study the following
metrics as the dependent variables:
      • Employment growth
      • Labour productivity
      • Normalised Net Working Capital (NWC)
In a similar fashion to the operating performance analysis detailed in Section 5.2, each of these
will be regressed according to Equation 2. The dependent variables are calculated as:

         10                                     𝐸𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑜𝑦𝑒𝑒𝑠  − 𝐸𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑜𝑦𝑒𝑒𝑠
                                                                     𝑡                   𝑡−1
                 𝐸𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑜𝑦𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑡ℎ𝑡 =                                               (10)
                                                                  𝐸𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑜𝑦𝑒𝑒𝑠𝑡−1

         11                                                   𝑅𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒
                     𝐿𝑎𝑏𝑜𝑟 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦 =                                     (11)
                                                      𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑜𝑦𝑒𝑒𝑠

        12
                                        𝑇𝑜𝑡. 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠 − 𝑇𝑜𝑡. 𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑙𝑖𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑒𝑠
          𝑁𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑒𝑑 𝑁𝑊𝐶 =                                                       (12)
                                                               𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠

5.4 Robustness
Any econometric study should be accompanied by a test of its robustness to changes in the
ingoing variables in order to assess its validity. Specifically, any significant results which are
obtained should persist if the ingoing variables are changed in a way which is not theoretically
relevant to the outcome variable. Conversely, one should expect significant results to vanish if
the ingoing variables are changed sufficiently, and in a way which is theoretically relevant. To
further augment the robustness that our analysis already obtains from the inclusion of firm fixed
effects, year fixed effects, and our selection of control variables, we also perform an analysis in
which we change the time period of analysis. In both the operating performance analysis and
the additional analysis, the pre-crisis period (2005 to 2007) is compared to the crisis period
(2008 to 2011). If any findings that we obtain are truly a result of the crisis, then they should
not be expected to persist if we instead compare the pre-crisis period to the year 2012, which
we consider the first post-crisis year. We therefore run the same regression specified in
Equation 2, but replace the variable 𝐶𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑡 with a dummy variable 𝑌𝑒𝑎𝑟2012, which takes on
the value one for observations belonging to the year 2012, and zero otherwise. We also omit
                                        26
any observations belonging to the crisis period. By doing this, we change the difference in
differences model to only compare the pre-crisis years with the year 2012. Of course, it should
be noted that this alteration reduces the number of observations included in the regression,
however a comparison of this kind still provides valuable information on the robustness of the
analysis.

6 Results

6.1 Results of operating performance analysis
Given our review of previous findings, we expect PE-backed firms to be more resilient in terms
of operating performance during a crisis. Specifically, we expect PE-backed firms to experience
a lesser decrease in revenue growth, EBITDA margin, ROA, and asset growth than non PE-
backed peers. The results of the primary analysis are presented in Table 4. The quantity of
interest is the value of the 𝛽1 coefficient from Equation 2, which is represented by the values
on the row denoted PExCrisis.

6.1.1 Revenue growth
We start by studying the effect of PE ownership on companies’ revenue growth during the
crisis. Columns 1 and 2 of Table 4 relate to revenue growth. Even though we expect PE-backed
firms to be able to maintain the strong revenue growth which otherwise tends to characterise
PE ownership, we find no significant evidence that PE firms aren’t influenced by the crisis in
the same way as their non PE-backed peers. This fails to provide any evidence in favour of our
hypothesis, namely that PE were more resilient in terms of operating performance during the
crisis.

6.1.2 EBITDA margin
The results which relate to EBITDA margin are presented in Columns 3 and 4 of Table 4. We
find that PE ownership during the crisis is positively related with EBITDA margin at a 5 percent
significance level. Controlling for revenue, revenue growth, cash flow, ROA, and leverage
ratio, we find that the average effect of PE ownership during the crisis is an increase in EBITDA
margin of 2.85 percentage points. This implies that for any given revenue, PE firms were able
to keep their operating costs lower than their peers could during the crisis years. This provides
evidence in favour of Hypothesis 1.

                                        27
Table 4

 Operating performance analysis
                                             (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
                                            Revenue growth EBITDA margin Return on assets (ROA)          Asset growth

PExCrisis 0.225 0.119 0.0677*** 0.0285** 0.0644*** 0.0470** 0.0351 -0.000226
                                         (0.241) (0.215) (0.0207) (0.0137) (0.0209) (0.0214) (0.0298) (0.0283)
Log(revenue) 0.414** 0.0439 0.0990*** 0.0336
                                                       (0.205) (0.0276) (0.0221) (0.0214)
Revenue growth 1.11e-05 0.00358** 0.0255**
                                                                               (0.00142) (0.00178) (0.0109)
 Normalised cash flow 0.531 0.0653 0.146*** 0.532***
                                                       (0.390) (0.0598) (0.0468) (0.0834)
 Return on assets (ROA) 0.539 0.566*** 0.236***
                                                       (0.374) (0.0633) (0.0786)
 Leverage ratio 0.295* 0.00457 -0.278*** 0.395***
                                                       (0.171) (0.0583) (0.0635) (0.0852)
Constant 0.222*** -5.037** 0.0637*** -0.526 0.120*** -0.929*** 0.143*** -0.537**
                                         (0.0561) (2.519) (0.00700) (0.338) (0.00774) (0.267) (0.0151) (0.251)

 Observations 1,147 1,144 1,337 1,144 1,342 1,144 1,149 1,143
 Adjusted R-squared 0.013 0.029 0.422 0.691 0.545 0.626 0.111 0.241
Firm controls NO YES NO YES NO YES NO YES
Year fixed effects YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
Firm fixed effects YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
 This table reports the results of the difference in differences model for the performance measures revenue growth, EBITDA-margin, return on assets, and asset
 growth. Both year and firm fixed effects are included in all specifications. For each outcome variable, the first column excludes firm controls, and the second
 includes firm controls. Standard errors are clustered on firm level. Robust standard errors are given in parentheses. In columns 1 and 2 the outcome variable is
 revenue growth, in columns 3 and 4 EBITDA margin, in columns 5 and 6 return on assets, and in columns 7 and 8 asset growth. *** denotes significance at the 1%
 level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.

                                                            28
6.1.3 Return on assets

By studying Columns 5 and 6 of Table 4. we find that there is a positive relationship between
PE ownership during the crisis and ROA at a significance level of 5 percent. Controlling for
revenue, revenue growth, cash flow, and leverage ratio, we find that the average effect of PE
ownership during the crisis is an increase in ROA of 4.70 percentage points. In other words, PE
firms were able to deliver higher returns to on debt and equity, providing evidence in favour of
our hypothesis that PE firms were more resilient in face of the crisis.

6.1.4 Asset growth
Lastly, we explore how PE ownership affected asset growth in the crisis. Columns 7 and 8 of
Table 4. show that the regression does not yield significant results for the effect of PE ownership
during the crisis when it comes to asset growth. PE firms experienced similar asset growth to
their peers during the crisis. The analysis of asset growth thus fails to provide evidence in favour
of our hypothesis.

6.2 Results of additional analysis
When it comes to labour and capital efficiency, previous findings provide no conclusive
evidence to indicate that PE firms should experience a different effect of the crisis in terms of
labour growth. We therefore expect labour growth to be equal across PE firms and non PE-
backed firms. Given the lack of effect of PE ownership on revenue growth, which we present
in 6.1.1, this should also imply that labour productivity is equal across the two groups. Lastly,
we expect PE ownership to have a negative effect on normalised in NWC. The results of the
additional analysis are presented in Table 5. Once again, the quantity of interest is the value of
the 𝛽1 coefficient from Equation 2, represented by the values on the row denoted PExCrisis.

                                        29
Table 5

 Additional analysis
                             (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
                          Employment growth Labor productivity Normalised NWC

PExCrisis 0.00456 -0.0240 252.1 -31.56 -0.0461* -0.0491**
                         (0.0316) (0.0297) (360.3) (362.5) (0.0271) (0.0215)
Log(revenue) 0.0697*** 1,628** 0.0222
                                      (0.0232) (700.5) (0.0266)
Revenue growth 0.0475*** -54.23* -0.000804
                                      (0.0171) (27.83) (0.00195)
Normalised cash flow 0.0685 67.72 0.108**
                                      (0.115) (575.8) (0.0434)
Return on assets (ROA) 0.0485 723.5 0.0480
                                      (0.0657) (636.2) (0.0493)
 Leverage ratio 0.128 -525.0 -0.731***
                                      (0.0793) (837.5) (0.0704)
Constant 0.104*** -0.835*** 3,577*** -15,805* 0.251*** 0.412
                         (0.0173) (0.266) (130.9) (8,280) (0.0118) (0.313)

Observations 1,151 1,144 1,341 1,144 1,342 1,144
Adjusted R-squared 0.079 0.169 0.842 0.849 0.682 0.804
Firm controls NO YES NO YES NO YES
Year fixed effects YES YES YES YES YES YES
Firm fixed effects YES YES YES YES YES YES
 This table reports the results of the difference in differences model for employment growth, labor
 productivity, and change in NWC. Both year and firm fixed effects are included in all specifications. For each
 outcome variable, the first column excludes firm controls, and the second includes firm controls. Standard
 errors are clustered on firm level. Robust standard errors are given in parentheses. In columns 1 and 2 the
 outcome variable is 1-year employment growth, in columns 3 and 4 labour productivity, and in columns 5 and 6
 normalised NWC. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.

6.2.1 Employment growth

As shown by Columns 1 and 2 of Table 5, The regression yields no significant results for the
effect of PE ownership during the crisis with regards to employment growth. Employment in
PE firms thus followed the same trend as in non PE-backed peers. This gives no indication that
PE firms were able to grow their labour force to a greater extent during the crisis than the peer
group, nor does it indicate that PE firms were more likely to lay off employees in an effort to
reduce costs during the crisis.

6.2.2 Labour productivity
We now investigate the effect of PE ownership on labour productivity. From Columns 3 and 4
of Table 5, we observe that there is no significant effect of PE ownership on labour productivity
during the crisis. This fails to provide evidence in support of our hypothesis.

                                        30
6.2.3 Normalised NWC

Lastly, Normalised NWC is investigated. Columns 5 and 6 of Table 5 show that there is a
negative relationship between PE ownership and normalised NWC during the crisis at a 5
percent significance level. On average, PE ownership during the crisis had the effect of
decreasing the normalised NWC by 4.91 percentage points. This means that PE firms were able
to tie up less capital in current assets and finance their operations using current liabilities to a
greater extent than their peers. This provides evidence supporting the hypothesis that PE-firms
were able to maintain a lower normalised NWC during the crisis to a greater extent than non
PE-backed peers.

6.3 Results of robustness test
The results of the robustness test are presented in Table 6. In this analysis, each of the dependent
variables of the operating performance analysis and the additional analysis is analysed for the
pre-crisis period and the year 2012. In line with our expectations, we find that the results are
insignificant for revenue growth, EBITDA margin, ROA, asset growth, employment growth,
and labour productivity. However, we still obtain significant results for normalised NWC.
Specifically, PE ownership still had a negative impact of 8.60 percentage points during the year
2012 relative to non PE-backed peers, indicating a lack of robustness of our findings relating to
normalised NWC.

                                        31
Table 6

 Robustness test
                        (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14)
                        Revenue growth EBITDA margin Return on assets (ROA) Asset growth Employment growth Labour productivity       Normalised NWC

PExYear2012 0.209 0.0726 0.0388 0.0194 0.0546* 0.0352 0.0326 0.00673 0.0121 -0.0310 129.2 -172.6 -0.0804** -0.0860**
                      (0.279) (0.232) (0.0241) (0.0163) (0.0321) (0.0350) (0.0396) (0.0389) (0.0444) (0.0379) (764.3) (782.2) (0.0389) (0.0353)
Log(revenue) 0.994 -0.0193 0.0636** 0.0142 0.0397 1,761** 0.0401
                                 (0.854) (0.0283) (0.0316) (0.0272) (0.0316) (865.2) (0.0347)
Revenue growth 0.00411** -0.000176 0.0191*** 0.0446*** -120.2** -0.00327
                                                     (0.00195) (0.00251) (0.00668) (0.0131) (60.70) (0.00635)
Normalised cash flow 1.454 0.0648 0.0723 0.513*** -0.0432 -1,184 0.116
                                 (0.984) (0.0868) (0.121) (0.173) (0.239) (2,263) (0.105)
Return on assets (ROA) -0.0342 0.533*** 0.299*** 0.215* 1,006 0.0144
                                 (0.503) (0.0645) (0.105) (0.128) (913.9) (0.0690)
Leverage ratio -0.561 -0.0334 -0.158** 0.190* 0.220** -1,365 -0.681***
                                 (0.991) (0.0404) (0.0774) (0.113) (0.105) (2,112) (0.111)
Constant 0.221** -11.50 0.0630*** 0.266 0.120*** -0.571 0.143*** -0.182 0.104*** -0.544 3,582*** -16,905* 0.251*** 0.168
                      (0.0935) (9.905) (0.00560) (0.347) (0.00704) (0.372) (0.0143) (0.324) (0.0174) (0.370) (128.6) (10,088) (0.00949) (0.423)

Observations 572 572 763 571 766 572 574 572 574 572 765 572 766 572
Adjusted R-squared 0.002 0.049 0.551 0.758 0.505 0.514 0.101 0.204 0.045 0.200 0.768 0.731 0.630 0.724
Firm controls NO YES NO YES NO YES NO YES NO YES NO YES NO YES
Year fixed effects YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
Firm fixed effects YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
 This table reports the results of the robustness test, which involves a difference in differences model based on the years 2007 and 20012. The outcome variables are revenue growth, EBITDA-margin, return on assets, asset
 growth, employment growth, labour productivity, and normalised NWC. Both year and firm fixed effects are included in all specifications. For each outcome variable, the first column excludes firm controls, and the second
 includes firm controls. Standard errors are clustered on firm level. Robust standard errors are given in parentheses. In columns 1 and 2 the outcome variable is revenue growth, in columns 3 and 4 EBITDA margin, in columns 5
 and 6 return on assets, in columns 7 and 8 asset growth, in columns 9 and 11 employment growth, in columns 11 and 12 labour productivity, and in columns 13 and 14 normalised NWC *** denotes significance at the 1%
 level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.

                                                            32
7 Discussion

Section 7.1 is devoted to interpreting and discussing the results of the operating performance
analysis, while Section 7.2 relates to the additional analysis. Both analyses will be discussed in
light of the findings of the robustness test. Lastly, in Section 7.3 we discuss some limitations of
this study.

7.1 Discussion of operating performance analysis
The purpose of the operating performance analysis is to provide evidence in support of
Hypothesis 1, which states that PE-backed firms were more resilient during the crisis in terms
of operating performance, compared to non PE-backed peers. In order to operationalise the
concept of operating performance, the accounting metrics revenue growth, EBITDA margin,
ROA, and asset growth were analysed. Our results indicate that PE ownership during the crisis
positively affected EBITDA margin and ROA, whereas it had no significant effect on revenue
growth or asset growth.
       It is important to recognise the relationship between EBITDA margin and ROA. Since
ROA is proportional to the sum of operating profit and financial income, and EBITDA margin
is proportional to the sum of operating profit and depreciation/amortisation, it is clear that ROA
and EBITDA margin are positively correlated. The two metrics do however use different bases
for normalisation; EBITDA margin involves division by revenue, while ROA involves division
by total assets. Given the result that neither revenue growth nor asset growth differed
significantly between the PE-backed sample and the peer sample, it should be expected that
significance in either one of ROA and EBITDA margin should lead to significance in the other,
although this connection is not guaranteed, as it can of course be influenced by
depreciation/amortisation, financial income and slight differences in revenue growth and asset
growth.
        The findings that neither revenue growth nor asset growth were significantly different
between PE sample and peer sample indicate that PE firms were not able to maintain growth
any more successfully than peers during the crisis. Our results do however indicate that PE
firms were more successful in maintaining profitability during the crisis, which could be
explained by the increase in attention that PE portfolio companies received from the PE
professionals during the crisis.

                                        33
       Our results are similar to those of Bergström et al. (2007), who study the Swedish
market between 1993 and 2005. Their results suggest that PE-backed firms outperformed peers
in terms of EBITDA margin and return on invested capital (ROIC) by 3.07 and 4.01 percentage
points, respectively. It should be noted however, that their study does not investigate the effect
of PE ownership during an economic crisis, but instead looks at its general effect during the
holding period. One interpretation of our results is therefore that the outperformance of PE-
backed firms relative to their peers which Bergström et al. (2007) document becomes even
stronger during a period of crisis, when the rest of the market is struggling, and PE firms’
industry expertise may be even more critical. In addition to the significant results for EBITDA
margin and ROA, our findings echo those of Bergström et al. (2007) in that no significant results
were obtained for revenue growth.
       Comparing our results with the findings on the U.K. market in times of crisis, our study
obtains significant results which – to some extent – stand in direct opposition to the findings of
Bernstein et al., (2019). Their study indicates that PE-backed firms experienced an 8 percent
increase in market share (which can qualitatively be compared to revenue growth) and that PE
ownership positively influenced asset growth during the crisis, while they did not find evidence
suggesting that PE-backed firms were influenced differently in terms of EBTIDA margin or
ROA. There could be several explanations contributing to the differences in results. Firstly, it
is worth pointing out that data consisting of companies’ financial reporting tends to be quite
noisy, which could pose problems if sample sizes are not very large. Limitations in our study
are further discussed in Section 7.3. Secondly, Secondly, Bernstein et al., (2019) provide
evidence suggesting that U.K. portfolio firms could maintain higher levels of investments and
increase their market share as a result of superior access to financing during the crisis years,
relative non PE-backed firms. It could be the case the Swedish PE-backed firms did not have,
to the same extent as U.K. firms, superior access to financing thanks to PE firms’ favourable
relationships to banks. However, this is unlikely to have had a significant impact considering
that the Swedish PE market is also very well-developed, and Sweden had e.g., the world’s third
highest PE investments as a percentage of GDP in 2007 (Bergström et al., 2007). Instead, it is
more plausible that the effect of having superior access to financing was greater for U.K.
portfolio firms because the access to financing was more severely restricted in the U.K.,
compared to Sweden.
       Bernstein et al., (2019) suggest that their findings indicate that PE-backed firms
prioritise a strategy of channelling their investment towards increasing their market share during

                                        34
periods of limited access to capital. The authors also reason that this strategy might be
prioritised over increasing short-term profitability, given the economic environment. The
results of our study seem to suggest that such a shift in strategy requires that the access to
financing is restricted to a certain extent before it is employed. However, it should be noted that
PE firms normally employ strategies aimed at increasing both profitability and growth
(Biesinger et al., 2020). To which extent one strategy is prioritised over the other is arguably
dependent on other factors as well, such as industry-specific outlooks. Relating growth and
profitability to operating performance, Bergström et al. (2007) argue that sales growth is a “less
clear-cut measure of value creation”, and consider profitability to be more relevant. However,
the authors also reason that operating performance is a “complex process that is poorly proxied
by a few variables”.
       In summary, we find evidence to support Hypothesis 1 in two of our four proxies for
operating performance, namely EBITDA margin and ROA. For the other two, revenue growth
and asset growth, the result is insignificant, and thus neither positive nor negative. This means
that the operating performance analysis does provide support for the hypothesis that PE firms
were more resilient during the crisis in terms of operating performance than their peers,
however that this resilience does not generalise to all proxies of operating performance.

7.2 Discussion of additional analysis
The purpose of the additional analysis is to provide evidence to support Hypotheses 2 to 4,
which relate to employment growth, labour productivity, and normalised NWC. Our results
indicate that PE ownership during the crisis had no significant effect on employment growth or
labour productivity. On the other hand, we do find that PE ownership had a significant negative
effect on normalised NWC during the crisis, however this effect was not found to be unique to
the crisis period, but persisted in the year 2012 as well.
       When it comes to employment growth and labour productivity, our results echo the
results obtained on the Swedish market during non-crisis periods, such as Olsson and Tåg
(2012) and Bergström et al. (2007). However, they are different from the results obtained by
Davis et al. (2019) on the U.S. market during crisis periods. One possible explanation for this
ostensible conflict could be differences in employment protection regulation between the two
countries. While Sweden placed on the seventh strongest protection among 30 OECD countries

                                         th
in 2004, the US placed on the 30  place and was thus considered to have the least strong
protection of all countries. It could therefore be argued that the differences in employment

                                        35
protection between Sweden and the U.S. are sufficiently great that a generalisation of the results
of Davis et al. (2019) to the Swedish employment market is not valid. In summary, our results
provide evidence in support of Hypothesis 2, which states that PE-backed firms were influenced
in the same way as non PE-backed peers in terms of employment growth. When it comes to
labour productivity, our results provide evidence against Hypothesis 3, which states that PE-
backed firms were less negatively influenced by the crisis than non PE-backed peers in terms
of labour productivity. It can be noted that this result is consistent with the lack of significant
results for both revenue growth and employment growth. The reason for this is that labour
productivity is calculated as revenue divided by the number of employees. Since neither
numerator nor denominator changed significantly, the resulting quantity is therefore not likely
to change significantly either.
       One aim of the additional analysis was to provide some insight into how PE firms might
increase the operating performance of their portfolio companies. If we relate the findings on
employment growth and labour productivity to the operating performance of firms, it seems
like the outperformance by PE-backed firms in terms of EBITDA margin and ROA did not
come as a result of changes to the labour force, neither in terms of employment growth nor
labour productivity. Investigating the measures that give rise to the observed effects on
operating performance could thus be subject to further studies.
       Our results indicate that PE ownership had a negative effect on normalised NWC during
the crisis. However, this result was not found to be robust to changes in time period of analysis.
Specifically, PE ownership had a significant negative effect on normalised NWC during 2012
as well. As discussed in Section 3.2.3, several studies have concluded that the reduction of
capital requirements is a common measure for PE-backed firms to take in order to increase
operating performance. It may be the case that PE firms deployed a strategy of focusing even
more on optimising working capital during the crisis, to maintain profitability in an otherwise
uncertain period. A reduction of NWC involves faster collection of receivables, extension of
payment terms to suppliers, and optimisation of inventory cycles, the first two of which require
significant bargaining power to achieve. It not unlikely that PE portfolio firms were able to
leverage their strong position in negotiations with both suppliers and customers, who were also
experiencing the effects of the crisis, but may have had no financial sponsor to support them.
Regarding optimisation of inventory cycles, it can be noted that this is something that Private
Equity professionals often have significant experience of. If indeed PE firms were more likely
to assist their portfolio companies in operating matters during the crisis, then it is very possible

                                        36
that inventory optimisation is just such an operating matter. The fact that the effect of PE
ownership on NWC is still significant in 2012 could perhaps be the result of a NWC-reducing
strategy being implemented during the crisis, and then maintained in the following years as
well. In other words, having optimised NWC in their portfolio firms during the crisis, PE firms
should have seen no reason to forgo this optimisation only because the crisis had ended. All in
all, we find evidence to support the hypothesis that PE-backed firms decreased their normalised
NWC more during the crisis than non PE-backed peers, however the causality of the crisis with
regards to the decrease in NWC can hardly be established, due to the lack of robustness in terms
of time period.

7.3 Limitations of this study
One limitation of this study is the relatively small sample size. After having screened relevant
PE transactions, filtered away such firms which do not fit our criteria, and retrieved the financial
data from the database Serrano, we were left with a group of 96 PE-backed firms. By
comparison, Bernstein et al. (2019) included 434 PE-backed firms in their study. Naturally, this
is a consequence of the fact that the U.K. PE market is considerably larger than the Swedish,
owing to both a substantially larger GDP as well as a higher value of PE deals relative to GDP.
However valid the reason for a small sample size may be, it is still a fact that a small sample
size will be detrimental to the robustness of a study, especially if the data is noisy. When it
comes to the financial data of private companies, it is fair to say that such data is indeed quite
noisy, which makes it important to gather enough data.
        Although the robustness test presented in this study is valid in principle, it does not fully
test the robustness of our analysis, since it only compares the pre-crisis period to the year 2012,
which may result in an exaggerated effect of the year 2012. As previously stated, financial data
is rather noisy, so it is not unlikely that one particular year may have somewhat extreme values
for some accounting metric, given our sample size. Optimally, one would like to compare the
pre-crisis period with a lengthy post-crisis period, however the limited holding period of PE
firms means that such an analysis would be less and less relevant as the comparison years stretch
further beyond 2012 and more and more firms in the PE sample undergo an exit.
       It should also be recognised that the notion of operating performance is difficult to
characterise using only a few accounting metrics. It is thus important to remember that the
results from the study are only indicators of operating performance.

                                        37
8 Conclusion

There is a wide body of research indicating that PE-backed firms tend to outperform non PE-
backed firms in terms of operating performance. However, few studies have specifically
examined this topic in relation to a crisis period. The aim of this paper was therefore to
investigate if PE-backed firms were more resilient in face of a financial crisis than non PE-
backed firms based on company performance. In addition to looking specifically on metrics
directly related to performance, the paper also examined if Private Equity influences labour
growth and how efficiently labour and capital is managed within firms.
       The study used a sample of 96 Swedish firms which were PE-backed during the
financial crisis of 2008. To investigate the effects of PE ownership, a matching sample of 96
non PE-backed firms was gathered to allow for a difference in differences analysis between the
two samples. Operating performance was proxied using four accounting metrics, namely:
revenue growth, EBITDA margin, return on assets and asset growth.
        The results of the study indicate that PE ownership during the crisis positively affected
EBITDA margin and ROA, whereas no significant effects on revenue growth or asset growth
were identified. The results indicate that PE firms were more successful in maintaining
profitability during the crisis, but were not able to maintain growth any more successfully than
peers. These findings are consistent with earlier empirical findings on the Swedish market in
non-crisis periods (Bergström et al., 2007). However, the results stand – to some extent – in
direct opposition to the findings on the U.K. market in times of crisis. Bernstein et al., (2019)
obtain results indicating that U.K. portfolio firms could maintain growth more successfully than
peers as a result of superior access to financing, whereas the authors do not identify any
significant effect on profitability. One possible explanation to the differences in results could
be that financing opportunities were more severely restricted in the U.K. than in Sweden during
the crisis years, making the effect of having superior financing opportunities larger. Turning to
the additional analysis, the results of this study indicate that PE ownership during the crisis had
no significant effect on employment growth or labour productivity, but a significant negative
effect on normalised NWC during the crisis years. However, this effect was not found to be
unique to the crisis period, but persisted in the year 2012 as well. The results from the additional
analysis suggest that the outperformance by PE-backed firms in terms of EBITDA margin and
ROA did not come as a result of changes to the labour force, neither in terms of employment
growth nor labour productivity. Investigating the measures that give rise to the observed effects
on operating performance could thus be subject to further studies. Not only would it be helpful
                                        38
with empirical findings on this topic, but it would also be valuable to conduct qualitative studies
that contribute to the understanding of the measures and strategies PE firms normally employ
to improve operating performance in their portfolio firms.
       In summary, earlier empirical research indicates that PE-backed firms generally tend to
outperform non PE-backed firms in terms of operating performance. The results of our study
seem to suggest that this outperformance prevails during periods of economic crises.
Comparing with empirical findings on the Swedish market during non-crisis periods, our results
indicate that the outperformance may become even stronger in times of crises, suggesting that
PE firms’ industry expertise may be even more critical during these periods.

                                        39
References

Axelson, U., Jenkinson, T., Strömberg, P. and Weisbach, M.S. (2013). Borrow Cheap, Buy High? The
Determinants of Leverage and Pricing in Buyouts. The Journal of Finance. Vol. LXVIII, NO. 6,
December 2013.

Berg, A. and Gottschlag, O. (2003). Understanding Value Generation in Buyuts. Working paper,
INSEAD, 2003.

Bergström, C. Grubb, M. and Jonsson, S. (2007). The Operating Impact of Buyouts in Sweden: A Study
of Value Creation. The journal of private equity, 11(1), pp. 22-39.

Bernstein, S., Lerner, J. and Mezzanotti, F. (2019). Private equity and financial fragility during the crisis.
Oxford University Press (OUP).

Biesinger, M., Bircan,  Ç  ., and Ljungqvist, A. (2020). Value Creation in Private Equity. EBRD Working
Paper No. 242, Swedish House of Finance Research Paper No. 20-17, Available at SSRN:
[https://ssrn.com/abstract=3607996 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3607996]. Accessed April 25,
2021.

Boucly, Q., Sraer, D. and Thesmar, D. (2011). Growth LBOs. Journal of Financial Economics, 102
(2011) 432–453.

Brown, G.W., Harris, R.S., Jenkinson, T., Kaplan, S.N. and Robinson, D.T. (2015). What Do Different
Commercial Data Sets Tell Us About Private Equity Performance? Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2701317

Bäckström, H. (2014). Svenska finanskriser – förutsä ttningar, förlopp och hantering.
Nationalekonomiska föreningen. Ekonomisk Debatt (årgång 42).

Council of the European Union. (2011). Recommendation for a Council Recommendation on the
National Reform Programme 2011 of the United Kingdom and delivering a Council opinion on the
updated Convergence Programme of the United Kingdom, 2011-2014. Official Journal of the European
Union. Available at: [https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/economic-and-fiscal-policy-
coordination/eu-economic-governance-monitoring-prevention-correction/european-
semester/european-semester-timeline/spring-package_en]. Accessed April 25, 2021.

Council of the European Union. (2012). Recommendation for a Council Recommendation on the
National Reform Programme 2012 of the United Kingdom and delivering a Council opinion on the
updated Convergence Programme of the United Kingdom, 2012-2017. Official Journal of the European
Union. Available at: [https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/economic-and-fiscal-policy-
coordination/eu-economic-governance-monitoring-prevention-correction/european-
semester/european-semester-timeline/spring-package_en]. Accessed April 25, 2021.

Council of the European Union. (2013). Recommendation for a Council Recommendation on the United
Kingdom’s 2013 national reform programme and delivering a Council opinion on the United Kingdom’s
convergence programme for 2012-2017. Official Journal of the European Union. Available at:
[https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/economic-and-fiscal-policy-coordination/eu-
economic-governance-monitoring-prevention-correction/european-semester/european-semester-
timeline/spring-package_en]. Accessed April 25, 2021.

Council of the European Union. (2014). Recommendation for a Council Recommendation on the United
Kingdom's 2014 national reform programme and de live ring a Council opinion on the United Kingdom's
2014 convergence programme. Official Journal of the European Union. Available at:
                                        40
[https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/economic-and-fiscal-policy-coordination/eu-
economic-governance-monitoring-prevention-correction/european-semester/european-semester-
timeline/spring-package_en]. Accessed April 25, 2021.

Cumming, D., Siegel, D.S., and Wright, M. (2007). Private equity, leveraged buyouts and governance.
Journal of Corporate Finance 13 (2007) 439–460

Davis, J.S., Haltiwanger, J., Handley, K., Jarmin, R., Lerner, J. and Miranda, J. (2014). Private Equity,
Jobs, and Productivity. American Economic Review, 104 (12): 3956-90.

Davis, S.J., Haltiwanger, J.C., Handley, K., Lipsius, B., Lerner, J., Miranda, J., Caracuzzo, A., Moon,
S., Khansarinia, C., Opeyemi, A., Rivera, C., Ryan, K. and Zeitler, J. (2019). THE ECONOMIC
EFFECTS OF PRIVATE EQUITY BUYOUTS. National Bureau of Economic Research. Working
Paper 26370. Available at SSRN: [http://www.nber.org/papers/w26370]

Eurostat. (2008). NACE Rev.2, Statistical classification of economic activities in the European
Community. ISSN 1997-0375

Elmé r, H., Guibourg, G., Kjellberg, D., and Ness é n, M. (2012). Riksbankens penningpolitiska  å tgä rder
under finanskrisen – utvä rdering och l ä rdomar.Sveriges Riksbank, Penning- och valutapolitik. Volume
3, 2012.

Giroud, X. and Mueller, H.M. (2015). Firm Leverage and Unemployment during the Great Recession.
NBER Working Papers 21076, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Gregory, D. (2013). Private equity and financial stability. Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Bank of
England. vol. 53(1), pages 38-47.

Harris, R.S., Jenkinson, T. and Kaplan, S.N. (2014). Private Equity Performance: What Do We Know?
The Journal of finance (New York). 69(5), pp. 1851-1882.

Holthausen, R.W., and Larcker, D.F. (1996). The financial performance of reverse leveraged buyouts.
Journal of Financial Economics. vol. 42, issue 3, 293-332.

Hotchkiss, E.S., Smith, D.C. and Strömberg, P. (2020). Private Equity and the Resolution of Financial
Distress. ECGI Working Paper Series in Finance. Working Paper N 331/2012. Available at SSRN:
[http://ssrn.com/abstract_id=1787446]

European Private Equity and Venture Capital Association, EVCA. (2014). 2013 European Private
Equity Activity, Statistics on Fundraising, Investments & Divestments. Available at:
[https://www.investeurope.eu/]. Accessed April 6, 2021.

European Private Equity and Venture Capital Association, EVCA. (2019). Investing in Europe: Private
Equity Activity 2019, Statistics on Fundraising, Investments & Divestments. Available at:
[https://www.investeurope.eu/]. Accessed April 6, 2021.

Ivashina, V. and Kovner, A. (2011). The Private Equity Advantage: Leveraged Buyout Firms and
Relationship Banking. Oxford University Press.

Jensen, M.C., (1989). Eclipse of the Public Corporation Harvard Business Review.

Kaplan, S. (1989). The effects of management buyouts on operating performance and value. Journal of
Financial Economics, Volume 23, Issue 2.

                                        41
Kaplan, S.N. and Strömberg, P. (2009). Leveraged Buyouts and Private Equity. Journal of Economic
Perspectives—Volume 23, Number 1.

Kaplan, S.N. and Sensoy, B.A. (2015). Private Equity Performance: A Survey. Annual review of
Financial Economics. vol 7(1), pp. 597-614.

Montiero, D. (2013). The flow of credit in the UK economy and the availability of financing to the
corporate sector. European Commission. Economic Papers 509.

Næss-Schmidt, H.S., Heebøll, C. and Karlsson, H. (2017). Swedish Private Equity Market: A footprint
analysis. Copenhagen Economics (commissioned by Swedish Private Equity & Venture Capital
Association). Available at: [https://www.copenhageneconomics.com/publications/publication/swedish-
private-equity-market-a-footprint-analysis]. Accessed April 15, 2021.

OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development). (2004). OECD employment
outlook, 2004. OECD, Paris.

Olsson, M. and Tåg, J. (2012). Private Equity, Layoffs, and Job Polarization. Journal of Labor
Economics, 2017, vol. 35, no. 3.

Piroli, G. (2015). Are we richer or poorer than before the onset of the crisis? European commission.
Available at:
[https://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?langId=en&catId=1196&newsId=2412&furtherNews=yes].
Accessed April 14, 2021.

Singh, H. (1990). Management Buyouts: Distinguishing Characteristics and Operating Changes Prior to
Public Offering. Strategic Management Journal. Vol. 11, 111-129.

Statista. (2017). Annual value of venture capital investments on the UK market from 2007 to 2016.
Available at: [https://www-statista-com.ez.hhs.se/statistics/438743/venture-capital-investments-value-
united-kingdom-uk/]

Statista. (2020). Total investment of private equity firms on the British market 2007-2016. Available at:
[https://www.statista.com/statistics/428154/total-investment-private-equity-markets-uk/]. Accessed
April 14, 2021.

Statistiska centralbyrån. (2021). Arbetslöshet per år från år 2001. Available at:
[https://www.scb.se/hitta-statistik/sverige-i-siffror/samhallets-ekonomi/arbetsloshet-i-sverige/].
Accessed April 24, 2021.

Swedish National Institute of Economic Research, (NIER). (2008). Konjunkturbarometern, Företag och
hushåll. National Institute of Economic Research. Volume 12 (December). Available at:
[https://www.konj.se/publikationer/konjunkturbarometern/aldre-utgavor-av-
konjunkturbarometern.html]. Accessed April 14, 2021.

Swedish National Institute of Economic Research, (NIER). (2010). Konjunkturbarometern, Företag och
hushåll. National Institute of Economic Research. Volume 10 (October). Available at:
[https://www.konj.se/publikationer/konjunkturbarometern/aldre-utgavor-av-
konjunkturbarometern.html]. Accessed April 14, 2021.

Swedish National Institute of Economic Research, (NIER). (2011). Konjunkturl ä get, Juni 2011.
Available at: [https://www.konj.se/publikationer/konjunkturlaget/aldre-utgavor-av-
konjunkturlaget.html]. Accessed April 14, 2021.

                                        42
Strömberg, P. and Døskeland, T. M. (2018). EVALUATING INVESTMENTS IN UNLISTED
EQUITY FOR THE NORWEGIAN GOVERNMENT PENSION FUND GLOBAL (GPFG).

Swedish Private Equity & Venture Capital Association, SVCA. (2009). RISKKAPITALÅRET 2009,
Med statistik om riskkapitalbolagens aktiviteter.

Swedish Private Equity & Venture Capital Association, SVCA. (2010). RISKKAPITALÅRET 2010,
med analys och statistik om riskkapitalbolagens aktiviteter. Available at: [https://www.menon.no/wp-
content/uploads/04svcariskkapitalret2010.pdf]. Accessed April 14, 2021.

Swedish Private Equity & Venture Capital Association, SVCA. (2019). 2019 Swedish Private Equity
Activity, Fundraising, Investments, Divestments, Industry Significance & Performance. Available at:
[https://www.svca.se/rapporter/2019-swedish-private-equity-activity/]. Accessed April 10, 2021.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2012). The Recession of 2007–2009. Available at:
[https://www.bls.gov/spotlight/2012/recession/]. Accessed April 24, 2021.

UK Office for National Statistics. (2021). Statistics available at:
https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/grossdomesticproductgdp. Accessed April 14, 2021.

Yahoo Finance. (2021) Indexes available at: [https://finance.yahoo.com/]. Accessed April 21, 2021.

                                        43