        Information Consumption and
             Price Informativeness

      THE LINK BETWEEN BEHAVIOR AND PRICE DISCOVERY

Renjo Gabro

Samuel Svensson

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of  Economics

2021
Information Consumption and Price Informativeness: The Link Between Behavior
and Price Discovery

Abstract:

       As technologies to share and consume information become more efficient and the
       information available to investors grow exponentially, the relationship between
       information consumption and price discovery becomes increasingly important to
       understand. We study the relationship between information consumption and
         price informativeness. In particular, our paper seeks to investigate abnormal
        institutional attention and its relation to price non-synchronicity. We find that
        abnormal institutional attention affects price non-synchronicity positively. This
        effect is persistent over at least a week of trading. We also show that our results
        are robust to other proxies of price informativeness, as well as a placebo test. We
        find no economically significant effect on price non-synchronicity by retail
       investors. These findings are consistent with previous literature, while also
       pointing out the importance of considering investor behavior when studying price
       informativeness.

Keywords:

       Price informativeness, information consumption, institutional investors

Authors:

       Renjo Gabro, 24454
       Samuel Svensson, 24517

Tutor:

       Marieke Bos, Deputy  Director, Swedish House of Finance

Examiner:

       Adrien  d’Avernas,  Assistant  Professor,  Department  of  Finance,  Stockholm
       School of Economics

Acknowledgements:

       We are thankful to Marieke Bos for very helpful input and general guidance. We
       also want to extend our thanks to Bo Frantzén, Hugo Holmberg, and Magnus
       Fromin for helping us get the data we needed.

Bachelor Thesis

Bachelor Program in Business and Economics Stockholm School of Economics

© Renjo Gabro and Samuel Svensson, 2021
1         Introduction

A financial market has many purposes, effects, and interactions with us, the agents within
that market. One of its roles is to consolidate and convey information. This is done in
many ways, and we do not yet fully understand them. One of the rather fundamental
questions in finance is how information is incorporated into prices. This paper focuses on
this topic, and more specifically on how and whether investors’ information consumption
affects stocks and their prices, as suggested by Ben-Rephael, Carlin, Da, and Israelsen
(2021). This paper aims to extend this research by exploring how and whether information
consumption affects  stock price informativeness.
       One of the instruments through which we gather information about our society
and, more importantly, the real economy is through the prices of stocks (Bond, Edmans,
Goldstein, 2012). The aggregate private and public information has a striking way of
becoming incorporated into stock prices (Gyntelberg, Loretan, Subhanij, Chan, 2009;
Fama, 1970). A noteworthy  instance is found in the paper of Roll (1984), where it is
demonstrated that private information regarding weather conditions by citrus-specific
traders is incorporated in the financial market prices of citrus firms. This, then, improved
the public's knowledge of weather conditions, showing that information can be accessed
from financial market prices themselves. Another case is Dr. Alchian (1954)’s discovery
of the fissile fuel used for the creation of hydrogen bombs by the U.S. in 1954. It was
discovered  by observing the stock prices, and inferred, even though the operations were
highly secret. In fact, Alchian’s original paper was confiscated and destroyed due to the
sensitive nature of the subject (Newhard, 2014).
        An interesting point of research is then the price informativeness of stocks (Chen,
Goldstein, Jiang, 2007), and how investors behave when it comes to new information
disclosed within the market, more specifically, the investor's information consumption
and cross-learning behaviors (Ben-Rephael, Da, Israelsen, 2017).
       Price informativeness is a concept that in its essence is a measure of how much
information is contained within the price of a stock, implying that an informative stock
price should reflect the fundamental value of that stock, and,  thus, firm-specific
information (Durnev, Morck, Yeung, and Zarowin, 2003). For this reason, within the
scope of this paper, we define stock price informativeness as the amount of firm-specific
information conveyed in the price of a given stock.
       When new  information surfaces the area, whether it is in the form of macro-
economic announcements or a firm's earnings and forecast announcements, a Bayesian
investor faces a "signal extraction problem". Bayesian investors are investors that renew
their assigned probabilities of events  -  such as cash flows of an individual firm or related
firms  -  based on new information. The signal extraction problem that the investors face,
is then to determine to what extent the news announcement is firm-specific, and to what
extent it is systemic, meaning it will affect other, related firms as well, and, effectively,
their price informativeness (Savor and Wilson, 2016; Chan and Chan, 2014).
       Given the background above, this paper builds upon two strands of literature: (1)
the relationship between investor information consumption and stocks (Ben-Rephael et
al., 2017, 2021) and, simultaneously, exploration of the possible venues of usage of ex
post measures of investor attention; and (2) the drivers of price informativeness in stocks
(Chen, Goldstein, Jiang, 2007). To contribute to the existing literature, this paper aspires

                                   1
to contribute to the bridging of the gap between these two strands of literature, by
investigating the following research questions:

     HYPOTHESES:
       Hypothesis I:  Individual firms’ earnings announcements and non-earnings
scheduled events, related firms’ earnings announcements and non-earnings scheduled
events, and macro announcements, are determinants of institutional attention.
       Hypothesis II:  Investors’ information  consumption of an individual stock will
positively affect the price non-synchronicity of that stock, for institutional investors.
       Hypothesis III:  Investors’ information consumption of an individual stock will
positively affect the price non-synchronicity  of that stock, for retail investors.

       In order to investigate the research questions provided above, this paper will
firstly conduct Logit panel regressions to confirm whether information consumption, in
conjunction with news announcements released by firms or institutions, is a suitable
proxy for institutional investor attention and investors’ cross-learning, as suggested by
Ben-Rephael et al. (2017, 2021). A detailed description of how this test is constructed,
will be provided in the upcoming section “Data and Sample Construction” under
Abnormal Institutional Attention  (AIA).
       Further, to examine whether price informativeness is positively influenced by the
information consumption of a stock, this paper uses  price non-synchronicity  as a proxy
for price informativeness, as previously demonstrated by Chen, Goldstein, Jiang (2007).
Price non-synchronicity has wide theoretical foundations as a measure of private
information in a stock’s price. In accordance with Kan and Gong (2018) and Ferreira,
Ferreira, and Raposo (2011), this paper uses the Fama-French three factor model to
compute price non-synchronicity.
       To  determine  whether  there  is  an  influence  on  price  informativeness  by
information consumption, this paper uses similar regressions specifications as Ben-
Rephael et al. (2021), with the exception of exchanging stock price returns with price
non-synchronicity as the dependent variable. The usage of price non-synchronicity as a
dependent variable is motivated through well-adopted use in previous research papers,
such as Kan and Gong (2018). To assist the interpretations of our findings, this paper
includes a placebo test as a robustness check, to see if our results are robust or  noise
driven. We also include collinearity checks and double clustered standard errors to
strengthen our choices of regression variables.
       The results of this study suggest a positive correlation between information
consumption,   through   the   proxy   abnormal   institutional   attention,   and   price
informativeness, through the proxy  price non-synchronicity. Additionally, the results
suggest a persistence of the effect of institutional attention on price non-synchronicity,
over a period of time, at least a trading week. The results also indicate that earnings
announcements and non-earnings scheduled events are determinants of institutional
attention as well as related firms’ news announcements, which is in line with Ben-Rephael
et al. (2021). However, the results do not indicate macro announcement as a determinant
of institutional attention, which is not in line with Ben-Rephael et al. (2021). We find that
for retail investors, there is no economically significant effect on price non-synchronicity.
       Our findings provide a new context to the novel usage of abnormal institutional
attention as a proxy to  institutional information consumption, as well as a foundation for

                                   2
further research on the relationship between investor information consumption and price
informativeness, or, in more general terms, the relationship between investor behavior
and price discovery.

1.1         Literary Review

The main strands of literature in this paper are, as previously mentioned, that of the
relationship between investor information consumption and stocks—with a basis on Ben-
Rephael et al. (2021)—and  that of price informativeness. A literary review is presented
below, as a necessity and useful background to gain understanding of how this paper
aspires to contribute to the literature.

  I.     Information consumption
Historically, a multitude of papers have covered investor information consumption in
many different ways, and with different proxies. Sanders and Zdanowicz (1992) were
early with using abnormal returns, trading volumes and  Wall Street Journal  stories as a
proxy for investor attention. Barber and Odean (2008) developed this method, using
abnormal trading volume, previous day’s returns and news coverage as a proxy for
attention. Barber and Odean (2008) found evidence for higher trading volumes for stocks
of firms with higher news coverage, indicating investor attention also affects prices.
Engelberg and Parsons (2011) and Engelberg, Sasseville, and Williams (2011) found that
investor attention, and trading volume, increases depending on the extent of a firm’s
coverage in local newspapers as well as on television shows, respectively.
             Ben-Rephael, Da, and Israelsen (2017) presented a new, ground-breaking
contribution to the literature of investor attention, with a measure of  institutional  investor
attention called  Abnormal Institutional Attention  (AIA). In their paper, they propose AIA
has  advantages  as  a  proxy  of  institutional  investor  attention,  intuitive  with  the
characteristics of institutional investors. The reason for this is that AIA is constructed
using Bloomberg data on activity in its terminals. These terminals are expensive and have
an expected annual cost of $20,000-$24,000 per machine, meaning they are likely to be
used by institutional investors.
             Da, Engelberg, and Gao (2011) presented a new, modern-day-adjusted
measure as a proxy for  retail  investor attention, namely  Google Search  frequency. This
proxy has been subject to numerous studies, investigating its legitimacy. Chae, Kim, and
Han (2020) developed this measure, by using Google  Search frequency and confining it
to trading volume by individual investors. In Ben-Rephael et al. (2021), Google Search
Volume Index (DSVI) is used, and further developed to match and gain the ability to be
compared with AIA, by constructing it in a similar way, turning it into a dummy variable
for each day depending on its relative volume compared with the previous 30-trading-day
average volume.
        The distinction between retail and institutional investors is important, and based
on the recent literature, also measurable. Retail investors are characterized in different
ways, with different resources and incentives. Retail investors are also likely to be more
limited by time and attention constraints (Liu and Peng, 2015). Further, Ben-Rephael et.
al (2017) finds that, on major news events, institutional investors lead retail attention, but

                                   3
not vice versa. This has implications in the field of information consumption, encouraging
the distinction of institutional and retail investors.

 II.    Price informativeness
Stock price informativeness as a concept is well-studied, while there remains debate on
the proxies for measuring price informativeness. Durnev, Morck, Yeung, and Zarowin
(2003)  suggested,  early,  that  price  informativeness  should  be  a  measure  of  the
fundamental value of a stock, and, thus, firm-specific information.
            Gelb and Zarowin (2002) laid the modern groundwork of studying price
informativeness by presenting a definition for price informativeness as: “the association
between current stock returns and future earnings changes: more informative stock price
changes contain more information about future earnings changes”.
            A   widely   used   proxy   to   measure   price   informativeness   is   price
synchronicity  or, respectively,  price non-synchronicity. Roll (1988) suggested that the
degree of which stocks’ returns are positively correlated, is related to amounts of market-
specific or firm-specific information reflected within the price of a stock. Notably, Roll
admitted this finding lacked substance, due to the possibility of it being a consequence of
noise, rather than the amount of firm-specific information.
            Morck, Yeung, and Yu (2000), Wurgler (2000), Durnev, Morck, Yeung,
Zarowin (2003), Durnev et al. (2004), and An and Zhang (2013) pioneered the use of
price synchronicity as a proxy for price informativeness, by providing evidence that price
synchronicity relationship with stock returns were, in fact, correlated, and not merely the
product of noise trading, and, thus, building their various studies upon this finding.
             Jan and Myers (2006) and Dasgupta, Gan, and Gao (2010), on the contrary,
suggested   that   price   synchronicity   is   rather   negatively   correlated   with   price
informativeness. Theoretically, when operating in efficient markets, where transparency
is ubiquitous, then more firm-specific information is already available to the market.
Dasgupta et al. (2010) argue that, in this case, firms with more transparent environments
should have more informative stocks, and have a  higher  price synchronicity, since the
market  has already factored in much of firm-specific information, and should not be
“shocked” by earnings announcements. This view is further developed by, amongst
others, Hou, Peng, and Xiong (2013), and Kan and Gong (2018) which further cast doubt
on the common view that price synchronicity is negatively correlated with price
informativeness.

1.2         Structure of paper
        The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: in section 2, we explain our
ideal experiment, our data, variables, and sample construction;  in section 3, we further
develop our research questions, and discuss the methodology to answer these questions;
in section 4, we present the results of our main analyses and provide a discussion of their
implications; in section 5, we present robustness checks conducted to support our results;
in section 6, we conclude; and in section 7, we give an account of all references used in
this paper.

                                   4
2.        Data,   Sample   Construction,   and   Summary
Statistics

In this section, we provide development of our data,  sample, and variable construction,
as well as summary statistics. The section starts with a description of an ideal experiment,
followed by an account of the data sources and sample construction, and, finally, a
presentation of the summary statistics.

2.1         Ideal Experiment

There are multiple factors that impact our results and the interpretation thereof, due to a
deviation from an ideal dataset, as a consequence of a lack of access to said dataset. We
investigate the major implications below.

I.            Omitted variables
Bhushan (1989) and Gompers and Metrick (2001) argued that a set of firms might have
certain characteristics which influences the ability of an investor, or analyst, to interpret
new information regarding them. An ideal experiment, to investigate information
consumption of institutional investors, would then include making previously unknown
information for a random set of firms, accessible to investors, and learn from their trading
behavior. Further, the experiment would include a control group of  investors trading
without the released information, and learn from their trading activity.
             As such an experiment is out of the scope of this paper, we are humble of
this weakness in our results, and understand that the results might be explained to some
extent by omitted variables. To negate some of this bias, we introduce a fixed effects
analysis, which makes these variables constants.

II.           Lack of access to PIN data
Due to the criticism of price synchronicity as a proxy for information consumption,
introduced by Jan and Myers (2006), Dasgupta et al. (2010), Hou et al. (2013), and Kan
and Gong (2018), an ideal experiment would resort to an additional measure of price
informativeness as a comparison and robustness check. One such measure, with strong
theoretical foundations and wide use, is  Probability of Informed Trading  (PIN), which is
regarded to convey the portion of private information reflected in the price of a stock.
       In this paper, however, we lack access to the NYSE Trade and Quote (TAQ)
database,  which renders us unable to include this analysis. Therefore, we remain humble
of an implied weakness in our results and conclusions, due to a lack of this robustness
check. To account for some of this weakness, we introduce a placebo test to check if our
results are driven by noise. Further, we introduce an alternative measure of price
informativeness, Amihud (2002)’s illiquidity ratio. This lets us triangulate our  results and
produce more robust interpretations. The usage of Amihud’s illiquidity ratio as  a
robustness check is motivated through wide usage in prior literature (Kelly, 2014; Li,
Rajgopal, and Venkatachalam, 2014; Kan and Gong, 2018; Gassen, Skaife, Veenman,
2020).

                                   5
III.          Google Search Volume Data
An ideal experiment would include daily  search volume data for all tickers of stocks
included within our experiment for the entire time period, in accordance with Ben-
Rephael et al. (2017, 2021). Due to complications in Google Trends API scraping, only
daily data for the period 2012-12-31 to 2017-12-31 was obtained for this paper, which
means that we are missing data from more than two years compared to our main dataset.
This is a deviation from the dataset of Ben-Rephael et al. (2021).
              This has significant potential implications on this paper’s  ability to answer
how retail investors’ information consumption affects the price non-synchronicity of
stocks. Our foundations for testing Hypothesis III will, therefore, be weakened. We are
humble for this lack of robustness, and emphasize that our results and conclusions,
especially for Hypothesis III, should be interpreted as indications and a point of interest
for further study, rather than truths about the financial markets.

IV.          Other factors
Other factors affecting our results include the issue of  reverse causality. We understand
that   previous   price   informativeness   of   a   firm   might   influence   the   information
consumption  by  investors.  Due  to  difficulties  in  investigating  this  problem,  the
implication  on our results is a weakness in the identification of the drivers of price
informativeness.
              As this paper largely follows the methodology of Ben-Rephael et al. (2021),
an ideal experiment would have the exact same sources of information. However, our
firm data have small deviations, even after following the same time intervals and being
downloaded from the same source  -  Bloomberg  -  and following the same criteria. This
might be attributed to being downloaded from Bloomberg at different times, which might
have influenced the data. Further, this paper lacks access to news coverage data of
RavenPack. We remain humble that this implies a weakness in our  regression’s
coefficients due to the problem of omitted variables.

2.2         Sample Construction and Data Sources

Following the dataset of Ben-Rephael et al.  (2021), this paper bases its analyses on the
firms included in the Russell 3000 Index in the Bloomberg terminal, for the period Feb
2010  -  Dec 2017. This time period corresponds to that of Ben-Rephael et al. (2021). The
sample is delimited by data availability for the AIA variable  -  AIA data is only available
from the 17th of February 2010, and there are a few periods in-between the  timeframe, in
which some data is missing.
              Further, in correspondence with Ben-Rephael et al. (2021), this paper
obtains data on stock prices, trading volumes, shares outstanding, and the like from the
CRSP database. Fundamentals such as assets, book values, debt are obtained from the
Compustat database. Data of information events, such as earnings announcement days, is
gathered from I/B/E/S, while data on macroeconomic announcements is gathered from
Bloomberg.
       Following Ben-Rephael et al. (2021) and Da, Engelberg, and Gao (2011), our
sample includes stocks that satisfy the following criteria: 1) have nonmissing values on
Bloomberg terminals and Google Search Volume Index; 2) have a share code of 10 or 11
in the CRSP database; 3) have a stock price which is greater or equal to $5 at the end of

                                   6
the previous month; and 4) have nonmissing book-to-market values. After applying these
criteria, our sample includes 2,464 unique stocks and 3,624,621 observations.
        Since the dataset is downloaded several months apart in this paper and Ben-
Rephael et al. (2021), there is a small risk of unaccounted changes in Bloomberg terminals
(as well as  in CRSP, Compustat, and I/B/E/S). This implies a small inconsistency in the
results. However, due to the large number of observations, this risk is significantly
reduced.
        For a complete list of all variables used in our regressions, see Appendix A.

I.           Abnormal Institutional Attention (AIA)
Our main independent variable used in the analysis is the measure for abnormal
institutional attention, AIA. The sample construction for this variable follows Ben-
Rephael et al. (2021). The variable captures investor attention ex post by using data from
Bloomberg.
       Bloomberg themselves construct a measure of attention by recording the number
of times news for a specific firm is read and researched. In Bloomberg, one can read news
from a specific firm by searching for the  firm combined with the function “CN”, for
“Company News”. However, readers can also read an article without explicitly searching
for a specific firm. To differentiate between these two situations, Bloomberg assigns a
score of ten when a user explicitly searches for firm-specific news, and they assign a score
of one when the user just reads a news article.
             Bloomberg then aggregates these scores into hourly counts. Using these
hourly scores, Bloomberg creates a numerical attention measure by comparing the
average hourly count for the last eight hours with the hourly counts for the past 30 days
for that specific stock. This  eight-hour  rolling average is then assigned a score of 0 if the
average is in the lowest 80% of all hourly counts the last 30 days. In a  similar fashion, if
the rolling average is between 80% and 90%, 90% and 94%, 94% and 96%, or larger than
96% of the previous 30 days’ average, then Bloomberg assigns it a score  of 1, 2, 3, or 4,
respectively. Then Bloomberg takes a maximum of all scores from the calendar day, to
aggregate the data up to a daily frequency. Bloomberg does not provide the hourly scores
or the raw data, they only provide the aggregated data.
             From the data provided by Bloomberg we follow Ben-Rephael, Da, &
Israelsen (2017, 2021) and create a dummy variable  AIA  that is equal to one when the
Bloomberg data is 3 or 4 and equal to zero otherwise. In other words, the dummy variable
AIA  is equal to one when institutional investor attention during one day is greater than
94% of all hourly counts in the past 30 days. This ensures that the focus of this paper is
on days when investor attention is abnormal.
             Since Bloomberg is a private firm, and does not provide information about
their user base, we stay humble for concerns regarding the veracity of their measure of
institutional attention. However, Ben-Rephael et al. (2017), conduct an extensive review
of Bloomberg user profiles. They find that over 80% of the users work in financial
industries, around 7% work in tech (of which, almost  80% are Bloomberg employees),
and 1% of the users have academic email addresses linked to their profiles. These findings
indicate that the Bloomberg users are likely to be, or work for, institutional investors that
have the incentives and resources to react to news and incorporate information into prices.
Furthermore, since Bloomberg terminals are expensive and have an expected annual cost
of $20,000-$24,000 per machine, this too indicates a user base mainly of resourceful,
institutional investors. With this research in mind, we find it substantiated that the

                                   7
measure of institutional attention is attributed to institutional investors, and, therefore,
that the AIA variable measures what we intend it to—abnormal institutional investor
attention.

II.          Abnormal Retail Attention (ARA)
The second main independent variable, used as a control variable in this paper, is
Abnormal Retail Attention (ARA). The construction of ARA is derived from Ben-Rephael
et al. (2021) and Da, Engelberg, and Gao (2011). Its data source is Daily Google Search
Volume Index, and measures ex post spikes in retail attention.
            Following the framework provided by Da et al. (2011), we define the
Abnormal Daily Google Search Volume Index  variable as follows:

                                                                𝐷𝑆𝑉𝐼!,#
                𝐴𝐷𝑆𝑉𝐼!,#  =  ln  [                               ]          (Eq.  1)
                                     𝑚𝑜𝑛𝑡ℎ𝑙𝑦  𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒  𝐷𝑆𝑉𝐼!

To ensure the ability of ARA to be compared to AIA, we follow the methodology
provided by Ben-Rephael et al. (2021), and first assign a score of 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 to ADSVI,
according to the same rules used in the construction of the AIA measure; rolling average
intervals of the previous 30 days’ average as a base: below 80%, 80% and 90%, 90% and
94%, 94% and 96%, or larger than 96%, respectively. We then compute the dummy
variable ARA, so that it has a value of zero when ADSVI has an assigned score of 0, 1, or
2; and a value of one when ADSVI has an assigned score of 3 or 4. As per the reasoning
for AIA, this ensures that ARA encompasses days when the ADSVI is greater than 94%
of the previous month’s values, and can, thus, be regarded as abnormal retail attention.

III.          Information Events
Abnormal attention, from both retail and institutional investors, can arise in many
contexts. These contexts include rumors or important news about firm-specific events,
firm announcements, or macroeconomic announcements. Due  to the variety of contexts
for abnormal investor attention, we follow Ben-Rephael et al. (2021), and construct three
proxies for events that are believed to influence abnormal investor attention: (1) firm
earnings  announcements;  (2)  other  firm  non-earnings  scheduled  events;  and  (3)
macroeconomic announcements.
             Earnings announcement dates are retrieved from the I/B/E/S database. Out
of these dates, we construct a dummy variable  EDAY, which is equal to one on earnings
announcement dates for firm  i, otherwise zero.
            Non-earnings scheduled events are retrieved from the Bloomberg Corporate
Events Calendar. Most common non-scheduled events include investor conferences,
shareholder meetings, and corporate access (Ben-Rephael et al., 2021). Out of these dates,
we  construct a dummy variable  NESEDAY, which is equal to one on non-earnings
scheduled events dates for firm  i, otherwise zero.
               Additionally, in line with Ben-Rephael et al. (2021), we construct value-
weighted averages of EDAY and NESEDAY for a given date using all firms in our sample,
into the variables AGG_EDAY and AGG_NESEDAY, respectively.
            Macroeconomic  announcement  dates  are  retrieved  from  Bloomberg.
Following Ben-Rephael et al. (2021), we consider the five macro announcement events

                                   8
that garner most attention from Bloomberg users. Bloomberg assigns a  relevance score
based on the number of alerts for an announcement added by users. The five macro
announcement events with highest relevance scores are: (1) Federal Market Committee
rate  decisions (FOMC); (2) nonfarm payrolls (NFP); (3) the “advance” forecast of the
U.S. Gross Domestic Product (GDP); (4) the Producer Price Index (PPI); and (5) the
Institute for Supply Management Manufacturing Index (ISM). For each of these
announcement events, we construct a dummy variable, which is equal to one on
announcement dates, and zero otherwise. We then construct a summary dummy variable
MACRO, which is equal to one if any of the five dummy variables for each announcement
event is equal to one, otherwise zero.

IV.          Stock Price Non-Synchronicity
In this paper, the main dependent variable is  stock price non-synchronicity  (NS).
Following the intuition in Morck, Yeung, and Yu (2000), the construction of NS is a
                            !
logistic transformation of  𝑅 . The transformation ensures that we obtain a continuous
variable that roughly follows a normal distribution, see Appendix B for a visual
representation of the measure. The formal definition of  NS  for security  i  is given as:

                                               $
                                             (%&'!,#)
                            𝑁𝑆!,#  =  ln  [    $    ]                       (Eq.  2)
                                                       '!,#

                                                      !
We transform the inverse coefficint of determination  𝑅  for a given firm, by the natural
logarithm. To understand how this measure captures non-synchronicity, consider the
                       !
relationship between  𝑅"  and the idiosyncratic risk, as given by firm-specific volatility.
Ri2depends on both the standard deviation of the error term of stock  i,  𝜎#,", as well as the
total volatility of stock returns,  𝜎%,":
                                        )            𝜎*,!
                             𝑅!,# =  1  −                            (Eq. 3)
                                                           𝜎+,!

Modifying   the   relationship   in   Equation   2   then   gives   the   relationship   between
idiosyncratic risk and price non-synchronicity:

                                                             𝜎*,!
                            𝑁𝑆!,#  =  ln  [            ]                    (Eq.  4)
                                             𝜎+,!  −  𝜎*,!

As  Equations 2-4  show,  NS  can be regarded as a modification of absolute idiosyncratic
volatility. In other words, an increase in idiosyncratic volatility also entails an increase in
the non-synchronicity of security  i.

                                   9
In correspondence to prior studies (Dasgupta et al., 2010; Ferreira, Ferreira, and Raposo,
2011; Kan and Gong, 2018), this paper uses the Fama-French three factor model to
          !
estimate  𝑅 .  We obtain the following model from Fama and French (1993):

            𝑅"&  =  𝑅'  +  𝛽()*,"𝑀𝐾𝑇*  +  𝛽+(,,"𝑆𝑀𝐵*  +  𝛽-(.,"𝐻𝑀𝐿*  +  𝜀"&      (Eq.  5)

In this model, the following notations and variables are included: the firm-specific return
(Ri), the risk-free rate (Rf), the market return premium (MKTT), the small-minus-big
company factor (SMBT), and the  high-minus-low book-to-market ratio factor (HMLT). For
each of these variables, there is a corresponding beta  β, which measures the exposure for
each of the factors.
             As per the framework provided by Fama and French (1993),  MKTT  factors
systemic exposure  to the market,  SMBT factors the performance of small versus big firms,
and  HMLT factors the performance of high versus low book-to-market firms.

2.3         Summary Statistics

The basic properties of the main variables used in this paper are reported in Table I. It
shows that an average firm in our sample experiences a factor increase of 1.178 in  non-
                                         !
synchronicity.  Backtracking  the mean  𝑅 , this means that  non-synchronicity  explains
roughly 23.54% of an average firm’s returns.
       The average firm in our sample experiences an information consumption shock,
AIA, from  institutional investors on 6.9% of all trading days. For retail investors, the
average information consumption shock, ARA, corresponds to 4.2% of all trading days.
       For  information events variables, the average stock in our sample has an earnings
announcement event,  EDAY, on 1.8% of all trading days, or roughly 4.5 times per year.
Non-scheduled event days,  NESEDAY, are more frequent, 2.6% of all trading days or
roughly 6.5 times per year. The mean for the value-weighted average of earnings
announcement days, AGG_EDAY, in our sample, is 2%, meaning that 2% of the combined
market value in our sample has earnings announcements on a given day. Similarly, the
mean   of   the   value-weighted   average   of   non-earnings   scheduled   events   days,
AGG_NESEDAY, is 5.9%, meaning that, on a given day, 5.9% of the combined market
value has a non-earnings scheduled event.  Further, we see an average of macroeconomic
announcement days, MACRO, on 16.7% of all trading days, or roughly 42 times per year.
       The average (median) firm in our sample has a size of $1.47 ($1.3) billion. On
average, $57.8 million worth of shares is traded per day, for a given stock. The mean
(median) return for a given stock  in our sample is 12.18 (7.72) bps. Finally, the average
firm in our sample has a leverage ratio of 0.205.

                            Table I. Summary Statistics
This table reports summary statistics for our main independent variable, abnormal institutional attention (AIA), and our
main dependent variable, non-synchronicity (NS). Other selected variables are also reported. All variables are from the
period, February 2010 to December 2017. The full sample includes stocks that appeared in the Russell 3000 index over
our sample period, we also require the stock to have nonmissing AIA, book-to-market ratio, and a price of at least $5.
These filters combined with the original sample gives us a sample of 3,624,621 observations across 2464 unique stocks.
For variable definitions, see Appendix A. Firms refer to the number of unique firms in our sample. The mean, median
and SD refer to the cross-sectional average, median, and standard deviation of the firms’ time-series averages.

                                  10
 Variable             Mean       Median         SD           N              n

 Dependent variables

 NS                  1.178        0.968         1.104          2464           3,624,621

 ILLIQ                2.876        0.191         15.316          2464           3,624,621

 AIA                  0.069        0.045         0.077          2464           3,624,621

 Independent variables

 ARA                  0.042        0.042          0.014           2464           1,612,689

 EDAY                0.018        0.019         0.005          2464            68,143

 NESEDAY             0.026        0.022         0.023          2464            97,981

 AGG_EDAY            0.020        0.006         0.004          2464           3,624,621

 AGG_NESEDAY         0.059        0.040         0.007          2464           3,624,621

 MACRO              0.167        0.176         0.019          2464           625,561

 Leverage              0.205        0.148          0.213          2464            78,156

 lnSize                21.110        20.992         1.666           2464           3,624,621

 BM                 0.669        0.468         9.743          2464            78,156

 Ret (bps)              12.182        7.721         46.217          2464           3,624,621

 DVOL ($mn)           57.774       11.960        191.985         2464           3,624,621

3.         Research Questions and Methodology

In the section below, we aim to develop the hypotheses and the methodology for
answering  the  research  questions,  with  a  basis  on  the  data  sources  and  sample
construction provided in the previous section.

3.1          Research Questions
As the main investigation of this paper  -  the relationship between investor information
consumption and stock price informativeness  -  is based on the paper of Ben-Rephael et
al. (2021), this paper must first test whether AIA is a suitable proxy for investor
consumption. For this purpose, this paper includes the following research question:

Hypothesis I:  Individual firms’ earnings announcements and non-earnings scheduled
events, related firms’ earnings announcements and non-earnings scheduled events, and
macro announcements, are determinants of institutional attention.

                                  11
This hypothesis states that the components of the AIA variable are significant, and, thus,
strong enough to be determinants of institutional attention. More specifically, these
components are:  individual firms’ earnings announcements,  related firms’ earnings
announcements, and macro announcements. Since this paper aims to strengthen the novel
literature of investor information consumption, this hypothesis is a natural research
question to confirm whether Ben-Rephael et al. (2021)’s findings are replicable.

Hypothesis II:  Investors’ information consumption of an individual stock will positively
affect the price non-synchronicity of that stock, for institutional investors.

Our second hypothesis states that there is a positive correlation between the institutional
information consumption of a stock, and its  price non-synchronicity, or, in other words,
a negative correlation between the institutional information consumption of a stock and
its  price synchronicity. This hypothesis is concerned with the relationship between
investor information consumption and stock price  informativeness. Using price non-
synchronicity as a proxy for price informativeness, and AIA as a proxy for institutional
investor information consumption, this hypothesis tests whether there is a correlation
between AIA and price non-synchronicity, and,  if applicable, the sign of the correlation.

Hypothesis III:  Investors’ information consumption of an individual stock will positively
affect the price non-synchronicity of that stock, for retail investors.

The third hypothesis of this paper is similar to its second, with the exchange of
institutional investors for retail investors. It states that there is a positive correlation
between the retail information consumption of a stock, and its  price non-synchronicity,
or, in other words, a negative correlation between the retail information consumption of
a stock and  price synchronicity. Using price non-synchronicity as a proxy for price
informativeness, and ARA (an account of this variable construction is provided above) as
a proxy for retail investor consumption, this hypothesis tests whether there is a correlation
between ARA and price non-synchronicity, and, if applicable, the sign of the correlation.

3.2          Methodology
To investigate and test the research questions provided above, this paper uses a variety of
methods to produce robust results and interpretations, with a basis on the paper of Ben-
Rephael et al. (2021). This section aims to describe the methodology used to test the
hypotheses.
              This natural first  step of this paper is to follow the methodology provided
by Ben-Rephael et al. (2021) to compute for AIA, whilst answering Hypothesis I. To
examine the drivers of institutional information consumption, we conduct Logit panel
regressions, where AIA is regressed on variables constructed of news releases on firm,
market, and macroeconomic levels. Similar to Ben-Rephael et al. (2021), we include day-
of-week dummy effects, control variables such as firm characteristics (absolute returns,
size, book-to-market,  firm beta, leverage ratio, etc.), and double clustered standard errors
at the firm level and date level. Day-of-week fixed effects is used to capture eventual
seasonality in attention (DellaVigna and Pollet, 2009; Liu and Peng, 2015). Double
clustered standard errors  negate  the issue of correlated residuals over time  -  and allows
for consideration of only the significant variables.

                                  12
       However, this paper lacks the news coverage provided by RavenPack, which is
used in Ben-Rephael et al. (2021), due to a lack of access to this database. This entails a
minor weakness in the regression coefficients, and, subsequently, the results and
interpretations thereof, as a consequence of potential omitted variables.
       For Hypothesis II and Hypothesis III, this paper uses the Fama-French three factor
                    !
model to estimate  𝑅  to compute price non-synchronicity, as per the methodology used
in prior studies (Dasgupta et al., 2010; Ferreira, Ferreira, and Raposo, 2011; Kan and
Gong, 2018). Further, we use the methodology developed by  Morck et al. (2000), to
define our dependent variable NS for price non-synchronicity, as a logistic transformation
    !
of  𝑅 .
       Further, to test for Hypothesis II and Hypothesis III, this paper uses similar
regressions specifications as Ben-Rephael et al. (2021). These similarities include the
same usage of AIA (for Hypothesis II), information events, and control variables, with
the   exception   of   the   data   extracted   from   RavenPack.   However,   following   the
methodology in Kan and Gong (2018), this paper uses NS as a dependent variable, instead
of stock price returns as used in Ben-Rephael et al. (2021).
       To answer Hypothesis III, this paper uses Daily Google Search Volume Index
data (DSVI). Following Da, Engelberg, and Gao (2011), a logarithmic transformation is
made by taking the natural log of the ratio of DSVI, and the average DSVI from the past
month. This allows for capturing abnormal retail attention. In accordance with Ben-
Rephael et al. (2021), ARA is then constructed using this data, and in the same way as
AIA is constructed. This ensures comparison capabilities between ARA and AIA. To
answer Hypothesis III, this paper regresses for non-synchronicity, with ARA as the main
independent variable.
       Further,   to   account   for   eventual   “lags”   of   significant   effects   on   price
informativeness, due to information inertia (Illeditsch, Ganguli, and Condie, 2021), this
paper conducts secondary panel regressions with an artificial “lag” to the AIA variable.
This takes into account information inertia as well as the possibility  of a “lag” between
information consumption and price reaction.
       To produce robust results and interpretations, this paper includes robustness
checks.  In  accordance  with  Li,  Rajgopal,  and  Venkatachalam  (2014),  this  paper
introduces  Amihud  (2002)’s  illiquidity  ratio  as  an  alternative  measure  of  price
informativeness. In Amihud’s illiquidity ratio, we construct time intervals of two trading
weeks, or ten days. This balance ensures that not too many observations per firm are lost,
while some stability is still inferred. The inclusion of this analysis and comparison with
price non-synchronicity is warranted through a wide usage in prior literature (Kelly, 2014;
Li et al., 2014; Kan and Gong, 2018; Gassen, Skaife, Veenman, 2020).
              Further, this paper includes a placebo test, to examine whether the results
are robust or driven by noise. The placebo test is constructed as follows: a random dummy
variable is created, which follows a binomial distribution and is equal to one with a similar
probability to that of AIA being equal to one. This test checks if the relation of AIA to
non-synchronicity is of mere chance and in favor of the null hypothesis  -  no connection
between AIA and non-synchronicity. A further development on this test is by creating a
completely random variable with the same distribution as news readership data in
Bloomberg. Unfortunately, that data is out of the scope of access of this paper, and we
rely on this rudimentary randomization for this particular analysis.
             To    address    multicollinearity    concerns,    this    paper    includes    a
multicollinearity analysis. A correlation matrix is constructed, containing the main

                                  13
variables used in this paper. This matrix discloses if there are strong correlations that
might imply statistical errors or paradoxes (such as Simpson’s paradox). Additionally,
this paper includes a tolerance test and variance inflation factor test,  VIF. These tests
provide indicators of whether multicollinearity is an issue in our specifications and
results.

4.         Results and Analysis
In this section, we present the results of this paper, as well as interpretations of the results.
We offer discussion on the implications on our hypotheses, and give an indication on how
robust our results and interpretations are.
             The section is structured as per the manner in the methodology section.
First, an account of the  Determinant of Institutional Attention  is given. This is followed
by  Non-Synchronicity and Information Consumption, the latter being subdivided into
terms of institutional investors and terms of  retail investors.

4.1          Determinants of Institutional Attention
The effort to answer Hypothesis I, proceeds by determining the drivers of institutional
attention. For a complete breakdown of the construction of the variables used in the
regressions specifications, see  Sample Construction and Data Sources.
             Our main analysis follows the following logistic panel regression model:

       𝐴𝐼𝐴"&  =  𝛽/𝐸𝐷𝐴𝑌"&  +  𝛽!𝑁𝐸𝑆𝐸𝐷𝐴𝑌"&  +  𝛽0𝐴𝐺𝐺_𝐸𝐷𝐴𝑌"&  +  𝛽0𝐴𝐺𝐺_𝑁𝐸𝑆𝐸𝐷𝐴𝑌"&
                                                                                        (Eq.  6)
                    + 𝛽1𝑀𝐴𝐶𝑅𝑂"&  + 𝛽2𝑋"&  +  𝛼&  + 𝜀"&

The model uses three proxies for information events, following Ben-Rephael et al. (2021).
The variable  X  is a vector of control variables. Day-of-week fixed effects are used to
capture eventual seasonality in attention.
       The results from the Logit panel regressions are presented in  Table II. We can
observe a high explanatory value of the firm-specific information events,  EDAY  and
NESEDAY. Of these two,  EDAY  has the highest coefficient for all models. We cannot
observe a significant effect of  MACRO  as a driver for institutional attention. We find a
significant  effect  of  AGG_EDAY  and  AGG_NESEDAY  as  drivers  of  institutional
attention.
             Our   results   infer   roughly   similar   interpretations   of   the   drivers   of
institutional  attention,  as  in  Ben-Rephael  et  al.  (2021).  However,  one  point  of
differentiation is that we, in contrast to Ben-Rephael et al. (2021), do not find an effect of
macro announcements on institutional attention. Even in Ben-Rephael et al. (2021), the
effect of macro announcement is only captured at the lowest significance level,  p<0.05,
which suggests that the evidence was low for this effect. Our results indicate that firm-
specific information events drive institutional information consumption. Of the two firm-
specific information events, earnings announcements and non-earnings scheduled events,
the former drives institutional attention to a larger extent. Further, we find that other
firms’ information events also have a significant effect for the institutional attention of a
given firm, both for other firms’ earnings announcements and non-earnings scheduled

                                  14
                                                   Table II. Determinants of Institutional Attention
            This  table  reports  results  from  the  Logit  panel  regressions  of  the  institutional attention variable (AIA) measure that we obtained from Bloomberg on measures of scheduled information events,
            both  from  firm-specific  information  events,  macroeconomic  information  events,  and  other  firms’  scheduled  events.  For  variable  definitions,  see  Appendix  A.  Model  1  includes  firm-specific
            scheduled  events,  through  dummies  for  earnings  announcements,  EDAY,  and  non-earnings  scheduled  events,  NESEDAY.  Model  2  includes  the  summary  variable  for  macroeconomic
            announcements,  MACRO,  which  is  equal  to  one  if  any  of  the  five  major  macroeconomics  announcements  have  been  made  on  that  day.  For model 3, we add the market level value-weighted
            average  of  both  non-earnings  scheduled  events,  AGG_NESEDAY,  and  earnings  announcements,  AGG_EDAY.  For  model  4,  5,  and  7 we also introduce separate dummies for each of the five
            major  macroeconomic  announcements:  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  rate  decisions,  Nonfarm  payrolls  (NFP),  Producer  Price  Index  (PPI),  ISM  manufacturing  index  (ISM),  and
            advance  estimate  for  GDP,  (GDP).  In the last two models, 6-7, we also include control variables. These are: the natural logarithm of firm market capitalization (lnSize), the natural logarithm of
             the  firm’s  book-to-market  ratio  (lnBM),  the  absolute  returns  for  a firm (abs_ret), the firm’s CAPM beta (b_mkt), as well as the firm’s leverage ratio (Leverage), i.e., the ratio between the firm’s
             long-term  debt  and  its  total  assets.  All  specifications include day-of-week fixed effects. The sample includes 3,624,261 observations. Additionally, the standard errors are clustered by both firm
               and date.

                       VARIABLES           Model 1          Model 2           Model 3          Model 4          Model 5          Model 6          Model 7

                              EDAY          0.3938 ***         0.3937 ***          0.3914 ***        0.3936 ***         0.3913 ***         0.3536 ***         0.3537 ***
                                                        (0.0077)             (0.0077)              (0.0075)            (0.0077)             (0.0075)             (0.0071)             (0.0071)

15
                          NESEDAY          0.1230 ***         0.1231 ***          0.1235 ***        0.1231 ***         0.1235 ***         0.0873 ***         0.0872 ***
                                                        (0.0053)             (0.0053)              (0.0052)            (0.0053)             (0.0052)             (0.0039)             (0.0039)

                           MACRO                           0.0029             0.0027                                             0.0009
                                                                             (0.0018)              (0.0018)                                                       (0.0021)

                       AGG_EDAY                                         0.0765 **                          0.0755 **        0.1628 ***         0.1643 ***
                                                                                                   (0.0287)                                  (0.0288)             (0.0280)             (0.0280)

                    AGG_NESEDAY                                           0.0006                            -0.0002        0.0543 ***         0.0525 ***
                                                                                                   (0.0155)                                  (0.0155)             (0.0157)             (0.0158)

                            FOMC                                                          0.0073            0.0062                             0.0014
                                                                                                                       (0.0040)             (0.0040)                                  (0.0048)
                                  PPI                                                               0.0010             0.0011                                0.0026
                                                                                                                       (0.0035)             (0.0034)                                  (0.0038)

                               NFP                                                            0.0037            0.0042                              0.0044
                                                                                                                       (0.0043)             (0.0043)                                  (0.0047)

                                ISM                                                             0.0031             0.0030                              -0.0022
                                                                                                                       (0.0035)             (0.0035)                                  (0.0040)

                               GDP                                                           -0.0012            -0.0015                             -0.0028
                                                                                                                       (0.0031)             (0.0031)                                  (0.0037)

                              2                 0.0480            0.0480             0.0484            0.0480            0.0484            0.1124            0.1124
                        Adjusted  𝑅

16
                       N                     2464            2464             2464            2464             2464            2464             2464

                         n                   3,624,621          3,624,621           3,624,621         3,624,621          3,624,621          3,624,621          3,624,621

                Day-of-week FE?               YES            YES            YES           YES            YES            YES            YES

                  Other controls?                                                                                           YES             YES

              Standard errors are double-clustered at the firm and date level. *** p < 0.001, ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.0
events. This suggests information spillover effects on specific firms. It  is in line with
intuition, considering that firm announcements can reveal clues about entire industries.
There is academic support (Berman and Pfleeger, 1997; Fort, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and
Miranda, 2013) for our results in that some  firms  are sensitive to  cyclicality of the
economy, while others are secular from the wider economy, which explains some of the
variation captured in  Table II.
            This analysis provides evidence in part in favor of Hypothesis I, by
confirming that individual firms’ earnings announcements and non-earnings scheduled
events, as well as related firms’ earnings announcements and non-earnings scheduled
events are determinants of institutional attention. However, our findings do not support
that macro announcements are determinants of institutional attention, which is in contrast
to Hypothesis I. This analysis also tells us that we have similar characteristics as the
dataset in Ben-Rephael et al. (2021), albeit the difference in significance of the
macroeconomic announcement variable.
           The limitations of our results should be noted, and are mainly attributed to
our lack of access to RavenPack news coverage data. Compared to Ben-Rephael et al.
(2021), we lack a variable for newsdays. They base this variable on news from the Dow
Jones Newswire, and find a significant positive effect on institutional attention. Failing
to include this variable, therefore implies omitted variable bias into our model-estimation.
Even though a full analysis for this bias should be based on on the correlation between
newsdays and other firm-specific information events (earnings announcements or non-
earnings scheduled events), the need of this analysis is drastically reduced since Ben-
Rephael et al. (2021) constructed the news variables as dummy variables, and excluded
any news released on earnings announcement days or non-earnings scheduled event days.
By doing this, the correlation between the news variables and information event variables
is heavily reduced. Still, the estimated coefficients in our regressions are higher than those
of Ben-Rephael et al. (2021), which is likely attributed to the omitted variable bias.

4.2          Non-Synchronicity and Information Consumption

A.           Non-Synchronicity and Institutional Information Consumption
The effort to answer Hypothesis II,  proceeds by investigating the relation between
institutional investor information consumption and stock price non-synchronicity. A
complete  breakdown  of  the  construction  of  the  variables  used  in  the  regression
specifications are given in  Sample Construction and Data Sources.
Our main analysis follows the following panel regression model:

    𝑁𝑆"&  =  𝛽/𝐴𝐼𝐴"&  + 𝛽!𝐸𝐷𝐴𝑌"&  + 𝛽0𝐴𝐼𝐴  ∗ 𝐸𝐷𝐴𝑌  + 𝛽3𝑁𝐸𝑆𝐸𝐷𝐴𝑌"&  + 𝛽2𝑋"&  +  𝛼&  + 𝜀"&    (Eq.  7)

The model uses three proxies for information events, following Ben-Rephael et al. (2021).
The variable  X  is a vector of control variables. Date fixed effects are used to account for
eventual  development  of  information  consumption  over  time.  In  the  last  model
specification  Model 8, we also include sector fixed effects.
       The results from the panel regressions are reported in  Table III. While regressing
for non-synchronicity, we observe a high explanatory value of  AIA. A spike in AIA
increases non-synchronicity  by more than 0.23 with significance levels robust over all

                                  17
models. Further, we find a significant, negative correlation of earnings announcement
days on price non-synchronicity. The observations of the interaction term  AIAxEDAY  are
not economically nor statistically significant for any of the regression models. We also
observe a statistically significant positive correlation between non-synchronicity and
NESEDAY.
       Our results infer several interpretations. First,  AIA  does economically and
statistically  significantly  affect  non-synchronicity,  meaning  spikes  in  institutional
investor consumption of a firm, increases its price non-synchronicity, and, thus, price
informativeness. Although not completely comparable, this result is in line with Ben-
Rephael et al. (2021), which finds a positive correlation between AIA and a firm’s returns.
The intuition is that an immediate increase in returns of a firm might entail an increase of
firm-specific (private) information in its price composition. This holds under the
assumption that a market model cannot explain the firm-specific return spikes in
conjunction with  AIA  spikes.
       Second, we take notice of the negative correlation of earnings announcement days
on non-synchronicity, and we compare these observations with those  of the interaction
term. We infer from the results of  Model 8  that the net effect on non-synchronicity, on
days when a given firm  i  experiences both abnormal institutional attention and earnings
announcement, is then 0.125, all other things equal. For the other regressions in the model,
this effect is even higher. This suggests that when other information events than earnings
announcements trigger abnormal institutional attention, this entails a stronger effect on
non-synchronicity. This finding has some support from both Roll (1988) and Dasgupta et
al. (2010), who both suggest that earnings announcement events have no significant effect
on price informativeness.
        Third, the statistically significant effect of non-earnings scheduled events imply a
driver for  non-synchronicity. However, in comparison with abnormal institutional
attention, the effect is of drastically less economic significance, rendering the implication
of low significance. The effect is shaped as a positive correlation. This follows intuition,
as  the  most  common  categories  of  non-earnings  scheduled  events  are  investor
conferences, shareholder meetings, and corporate access, all of which may reveal
significant information to the participants and market. This view has support from
Brickley (1986), who showed that abnormal returns can arise around proxy statements
due to the potential information such events produce. Intuitively, one might speculate that
this type of informative events might educate investors to consume information in
conjunction  with non-earnings scheduled events.
       Moreover, the specification Model 8 in our regressions reveals the effect of sector
fixed effects. The results suggest that different sectors experience different effects in
terms  of  non-synchronicity,  and  that  some  sectors  are  more  prone  to  abnormal
institutional information consumption, and some less. This interpretation is supported by
both Bhushan (1989) and Gompers and Metrick (2001).
       This analysis provides evidence in favor of Hypothesis II, by confirming that
institutional investors’ information consumption of a given stock positively affects the
price non-synchronicity, and, thus, price informativeness of that particular stock. There
are both economical and statistical significance to the rejection of the null hypothesis,
which states that there is no correlation between price institutional investor information
consumption and price non-synchronicity. Further, we learn that earnings announcement
events negate the effect of institutional investor information consumption on price non-
synchronicity.

                                  18
                                            Table III. Abnormal Institutional Attention and Non-Synchronicity

            This  table  reports  results  from  the  panel  regression  of  non-synchronicity  (NS)  on  abnormal  institutional  attention  (AIA),  as  well  as  other  informational  events,  both  firm-specific  and
            non-firm-specific.  For  variable  definitions,  see  Appendix  A.  Model  1  uses  only  the  institutional  investor  attention  measure  (AIA).  Models  2  and  3  introduce  firm  earnings  announcements
            (EDAY)  and  non-earnings  scheduled  events  (NESEDAY),  respectively.  Models  4  and  5  both  include the market wide value-weighted averages of earnings announcements (AGG_EDAY) and,
            similarly,  for  the  non-earnings  scheduled  events  (AGG_NESEDAY).  To  facilitate  comparison,  the  value-weighted  variables  are  multiplied  by 100. All specifications include control variables.
             These  are:  the  natural  logarithm  of  firm  market  capitalization  (lnSize),  the  natural  logarithm of firm book-to-market ratio (lnBM), the firm leverage ratio (Leverage), i.e., the ratio of long-term
            debt  to  total  assets,  the  percentage  of  shares  outstanding  held  by  institutions  (inshtold),  and  the  market  beta  from  the  CAPM  (b_mkt).  All  specifications  include  date  fixed  effects  and
             specification 7 also includes sector fixed effects, there are 11 sectors.  The sample includes 3,624,261  observations. Additionally, all standard errors are  clustered by both firm and date.

                   VARIABLES            Model 1         Model 2        Model 3         Model 4         Model 5         Model 6         Model 7         Model 8

               AIA                           0.2724 ***       0.2845 ***      0.2850 ***        0.2810 ***       0.2800 ***        0.2801 ***       0.2806 ***        0.2345 ***
                                                       (0.0111)          (0.0115)          (0.0118)           (0.0117)          (0.0114)           (0.0114)          (0.0116)           (0.0105)

19            EDAY                                      -0.1144 ***      -0.1107 ***       -0.1107 ***      -0.1289 ***       -0.1109 ***      -0.1196 ***       -0.1004 ***
                                                                          (0.0076)          (0.0098)            (0.0098)          (0.0089)           (0.0098)          (0.0100)           (0.0077)

              AIA x EDAY                                               -0.0085          -0.0043         -0.0221          -0.0033         -0.0204          -0.0091
                                                                                           (0.0121)            (0.0121)          (0.0135)           (0.0120)          (0.0132)           (0.0122)

              NESEDAY                                                            0.0945 ***      0.0942 ***       0.0744 ***      0.0747 ***       0.0502 ***
                                                                                                               (0.0092)          (0.0092)           (0.0102)          (0.0101)           (0.0092)

             AGG_EDAY                                                                    -0.2882 ***                    -0.2757 ***       -0.1574 **
                                                                                                                                 (0.0583)                             (0.0544)           (0.0555)

             AGG_NESEDAY                                                                              -0.1682 ***     -0.1628 ***         -0.0752
                                                                                                                                                    (0.0494)          (0.0482)           (0.0499)
                       2                 0.4798          0.4800          0.4800          0.4802           0.4802          0.4803          0.4803          0.5367
                Adjusted  𝑅

              N (Sectors)                  2464            2464           2464           2464            2464           2464            2464           2464 (11)

              n                        3,624,621        3,624,621        3,624,621       3,624,621         3,624,621        3,624,621        3,624,621        3,624,621

            Day FE? (Sector FE?)         YES           YES          YES          YES           YES          YES           YES          YES (YES)

             Other controls?             YES           YES          YES          YES           YES          YES           YES          YES

20            Standard errors are double-clustered by firm and date.  *** p < 0.001; ** p < 0.01; * p < 0.05.
       Even though this analysis provides evidence in favour of our hypothesis, it is
important to remember that the interpretation of the results is limited by potential
limitations. It is mainly the potential of omitted variables and us not using firm fixed
effects that is cause for concern. (We wanted to include firm fixed effects, but the size of
the dataset made it too computationally intense.) It may therefore be that there are some
constant firm characteristics that we are not taking into account into our analysis that
biases our results. Still, the tests we conduct below tries to remedy this problem
somewhat.

B.           Time-lagged Abnormal Institutional Attention (AIA)
In a continued effort to answer Hypothesis II, this paper proceeds by investigating the
relation between institutional investor information consumption and stock price non-
synchronicity, in a setting with a post-earnings announcement drift.
             As  post-earnings  announcement  drifts  have  implied  effects  on  price
informativeness, due to an inertia following news announcements, we introduce artificial
“lags” to our panel regressions, to test for this factor.
             Our analysis follows the following panel regression model:

              𝑁𝑆"&  =  𝛽/𝐴𝐼𝐴"(&5(/:1))  +  𝛽!𝐸𝐷𝐴𝑌"(&5(/:1))  +  𝛽3𝑁𝐸𝑆𝐸𝐷𝐴𝑌"(&5(/:1))
                                                                                        (Eq.  8)
                           + 𝛽1𝐴𝐺𝐺_𝐸𝐷𝐴𝑌"&  + 𝛽2𝑋"&  +  𝛼&  + 𝜀"&

The model uses three proxies for information events, following Ben-Rephael et al. (2021).
The variable  X  is a vector of control variables. Date fixed effects are used to account for
eventual development of information consumption over time. This model differs from the
model underlying  Table III, by including “lags” of the  AIA  variable of one up to five
days.
             The results from the panel regressions with the “lagged”  AIA  are presented
in  Table IV. Similar to  Table III, we observe a high explanatory value of  AIA  for all
                                                                            !
models in our regressions. We can also observe a decrease of the adjusted  𝑅  for each
additional lag.
             These results imply that the effect of  AIA, and, thus, a shock in institutional
attention, is persistent over a trading week. Simultaneously, our results imply that changes
in price non-synchronicity, and, thus, price informativeness are persistent over time. We
show, then, that Illeditsch, Ganguli, and Condie (2021)’s suggestions that risk and
ambiguity lead to inefficiency in information processing, and thus, an inertia or “lag” are
two-fold. Our results do not indicate any delays in the effect of AIA on non-synchronicity,
suggesting information inefficiency or inertia does not influence the delay of  the effect
significantly. However, we can observe that the effect of  AIA  is persistent over a longer
period of time, suggesting that information inefficiency or inertia are influencing factors
in slowing the non-synchronicity in resetting from the effect of the information
consumption shock. This finding is in accordance with related literature on post-earnings
announcement   drifts,   which   show   that   abnormal   returns   can   follow   earnings
announcements for an extended period of time.
             The explanations for this effect are debated. Liang (2003) attributes this
effect to market participant bias. Following the explanation offered by Liang (2003), we

                                  21
                                       Table IV. Time-lagged Abnormal Institutional Attention  and Non-Synchronicity

             This  table  reports  results  from  the  panel  regression  of  non-synchronicity  (NS)  on  lagged  abnormal  institutional  attention  (AIA),  as  well  as  other  lagged  informational  events.
            For  variable  definitions,  see  Appendix  A.  Model  1  is the same model as Model 7 in Table III, it is intended to work as a comparison. From Model 2 and onward to Model 6,
            the  attention  variable  (AIA)  and  the  other  firm-specific  information  event  variables  (EDAY  and  NESEDAY)  are  lagged  by  one  additional  day  for  each  Model. This means
             that  Model  6  reports  the  results  from  the  panel  regression  of  non-synchronicity  (NS)  on  a  five-day  lagged  consortium  of  information  events  and  attention.  To  facilitate
            comparison,  the  value-weighted  average  of  earnings  announcing  firms,  AGG_EDAY,  har  been  multiplied  by  100,  as  we  did  in  Table  III.  The  same  is  done  for  the
            value-weighted  average  of  firms  with  non-earnings  scheduled  events,  AGG_NESEDAY.  All  specifications  include  control  variables.  These  are:  the  natural  logarithm  of  firm
             market  capitalization  (lnSize),  the  natural  logarithm  of  firm  book-to-market  ratio  (lnBM),  the  firm  leverage  ratio  (Leverage),  i.e.,  the  ratio  of  long-term  debt  to  total  assets,  the
            percentage  of  shares  outstanding  held  by  institutions  (insthold),  and  the  market  beta  from  the  CAPM  (b_mkt).  All  specifications  include  date  fixed  effects.  The  sample
             includes  3,624,261  observations. Additionally,  the  standard  errors  are  clustered  by  firm  and  date.

                                      Variables            Model 1          Model 2         Model 3         Model 4         Model 5          Model 6

                                    AIA                       0.2792 ***        0.2702 ***      0.2698 ***        0.2703 ***        0.2705 ***          0.2711 ***
                                                                          (0.0113)           (0.0113)          (0.0113)           (0.0113)           (0.0113)             (0.0113)
22

                                    EDAY                    -0.1279 ***       -0.1213 ***      -0.1196 ***       -0.1184 ***       -0.1156 ***         -0.1149 ***
                                                                          (0.0087)           (0.0075)          (0.0075)           (0.0075)           (0.0075)             (0.0075)

                                  NESEDAY                0.0748 ***       0.0893 ***      0.0904 ***       0.0903 ***       0.0898 ***         0.0889 ***
                                                                          (0.0101)           (0.0090)          (0.0091)           (0.0091)           (0.0091)             (0.0091)

                                  AGG_EDAY              -0.2673 ***      -0.1707 ***     -0.2672 ***       -0.2958 ***       -0.2962 ***         -0.2978 ***
                                                                          (0.0516)           (0.0422)          (0.0504)           (0.0535)           (0.0542)             (0.0539)

                                  AGG_NESEDAY           -0.1631 ***      -0.2695 ***     -0.2812 ***       -0.2805 ***       -0.2778 ***         -0.2776 ***
                                                                          (0.0483)           (0.0495)          (0.0504)           (0.0503)           (0.0501)             (0.0502)

                                            2               0.4803            0.4801          0.4801          0.4801           0.4799            0.4802
                                        Adjusted  𝑅
                                N                      2464            2464           2464           2464           2464            2464

                                   n                     3,624,621         3,624,620        3,624,619        3,624,618        3,624,617         3,624,616

                              Date FE?               YES           YES          YES          YES           YES           YES

                               Other controls?            YES            YES          YES          YES           YES            YES

                                      Standard errors are double clustered by firm and date.  *** p < 0.001; ** p < 0.01; * p < 0.05.

23
can infer that this effect on non-synchronicity is attributed to investors’ overconfidence
in their own private information, or a general asymmetry between confidence and reliable
information within the market. Similarly, Bernard and Thomas (1989) find evidence that
the price-earnings announcement drift is a delayed price response to information, and an
inefficiency in the  inference of future earnings from current earnings announcements.
Both of these papers argue for hypotheses that are reconcilable with our results. However,
we remain humble that our results are merely indications, and more robust tests and
experiments have to be conducted to reach a conclusion on the nature of the persistence
of the information consumption effect on price non-synchronicity.

C.           Retail Attention as an Explanation  for  Non-Synchronicity
The effort to answer Hypothesis III, proceeds by investigating the relation between retail
investor  information  consumption  and  stock  price  non-synchronicity.  A  complete
breakdown of the construction of the variables used in the regression specifications are
given in  Sample Construction and Data Sources.
             Our main analysis is based on the following panel regression model:

 𝑁𝑆"&  =  𝛽/𝐴𝑅𝐴"&  + 𝛽!𝐸𝐷𝐴𝑌"&  + 𝛽0𝐴𝑅𝐴  ∗ 𝐸𝐷𝐴𝑌  + 𝛽3𝑁𝐸𝑆𝐸𝐷𝐴𝑌"&  + 𝛽2𝑋"&  +  𝛼&  + 𝜀"&     (Eq.  9)

The model uses three proxies for information events, following Ben-Rephael et al. (2021).
The variable  X  is a vector of control variables. Date fixed effects are used to account for
eventual development of information consumption over time. The panel regressions run
are similar to those underlying  Table III, however, with exchanging  AIA  for  ARA  -
abnormal retail attention. In the last model specification  Model 8, we also include sector
fixed effects. The results of the panel regressions are presented in  Table V. We can
observe a none or statistical significance at the lowest level,  p<0.05, for  ARA  after
including other information event variables. For Models 3-8, ARA does not surpass 0.008.
            We can interpret from the results that abnormal retail attention has no
economic, and no or low statistical significance as an explanatory variable for non-
synchronicity. Therefore, we find no support for Hypothesis III, in that retail investor
information consumption of a stock will positively affect the non-synchronicity of that
particular stock. We can therefore not reject the null hypothesis, that there is no effect on
price non-synchronicity by retail investor attention. This is in line with Ben-Rephael et
al. (2021), who find no systematic implications whatsoever of  retail information
consumption. We can, however, draw weak inferences about the relation between retail
information consumption and price non-synchronicity  -  retail investors are unlikely to
increase price informativeness, compared to institutional investors. This, too, is in line
with previous literature (Ben-Rephael, Da, and Israelsen, 2017).
              It should be noted that our results are limited by data coverage, which is less
than that of Ben-Rephael et al. (2021). This entails less robust results and interpretations,
thereof. It does, however, indicate similar interpretations as prior studies, and is not in
contrast to them.

                                  24
                                                Table V. Retail attention and Non-Synchronicity
            This table reports results from the panel regression of non-synchronicity (NS) on abnormal retail attention (ARA), as well as other informational events, both firm-specific and non-firm-specific.
            For  variable  definitions,  see  Appendix  A.  Model  1  uses  only  the  retail  investor  attention  measure  (ARA).  Models  2  and  3  introduce  firm  earnings announcements (EDAY) and non-earnings
            scheduled  events  (NESEDAY),  respectively.  Models  4  and  5  both  include  the  market  wide  value-weighted  averages  of  earnings  announcements  (AGG_EDAY)  and,  similarly,  for  the
            non-earnings  scheduled  events  (AGG_NESEDAY).  To  facilitate  comparison,  the  value-weighted  variables  are  multiplied  by  100.  All  specifications  include  control  variables.  These  are:  the
             natural  logarithm  of  firm  market  capitalization  (lnSize),  the  natural  logarithm  of  firm  book-to-market  ratio  (lnBM),  the  firm  leverage  ratio  (Leverage),  i.e.,  the  ratio of long-term debt to total
            assets,  the  percentage  of  shares  outstanding  held  by  institutions  (insthold),  and  the  firm’s  CAPM  market  beta  (b_mkt).  All  specifications  include  date  fixed  effects  and Model 8 also includes
             sector fixed effects. Additionally, all standard errors  are double clustered by firm and date. Due to data coverage, the sample only includes 1,612,689 daily observations.

               VARIABLES           Model 1         Model 2        Model 3         Model 4          Model 5          Model 6          Model 7         Model 8

                           ARA          0.0156 ***      0.0155 ***         0.0080 *           0.0078 *         0.0078 **            0.0077 *          0.0077 *           0.0049
                                                 (0.0032)         (0.0032)          (0.0032)            (0.0032)            (0.0032)             (0.0032)            (0.0032)           (0.0029)

                        EDAY                          0.0050         -0.0146           -0.0142        -0.0290 **            -0.0142        -0.0283 **       -0.0226 ***
                                                                  (0.0082)          (0.0088)            (0.0088)            (0.0098)             (0.0088)            (0.0097)           (0.0066)
25

                    AIAxEDAY                                    0.2334 ***        0.2332 ***        0.2003 ***         0.2317 ***        0.2003 ***       0.1671 ***
                                                                                     (0.0235)            (0.0235)            (0.0237)             (0.0234)            (0.0238)           (0.0208)

                    NESEDAY                                                  0.1056 ***        0.1053 ***         0.0858 ***       0.0862 ***       0.0533 ***
                                                                                                         (0.0109)            (0.0109)             (0.0121)            (0.0121)           (0.0102)

                  AGG_EDAY                                                             -0.2888 ***                       -0.2757 ***      -0.1519 ***
                                                                                                                             (0.0511)                                 (0.0478)           (0.0444)

              AGG_NESEDAY                                                                              -0.1858 **       -0.1800 **        -0.1324 *
                                                                                                                                                  (0.0664)            (0.0655)           (0.0538)

                     2                   0.4087         0.4087          0.4088           0.4088           0.4091            0.4091           0.4092           0.5006
              Adjusted  𝑅
         N

                                          1,612,689       1,612,689        1,612,689         1,612,689         1,612,689          1,612,689         1,612,689        1,612,689
           n

           Date   FE?   (Sector             YES          YES          YES           YES           YES            YES           YES      YES (YES)
            FE?)

           Other controls?                 YES          YES          YES           YES           YES            YES           YES           YES

                               Standard errors are double clustered by firm and date. *** p < 0.001; ** p < 0.01; * p < 0.0

26
5.         Robustness
In this paper, several robustness checks are conducted in order to produce robust results
and interpretations. In the section below, we give account for some of the tests and checks
conducted in this paper. It describes the construction of the robustness checks, the results,
and the interpretations on our results and conclusions.

5.1          Alternative Proxy of Price Informativeness: Amihud’s Illiquidity Ratio
As an alternative measure of prince informativeness, this section presents Amihud
(2002)’s illiquidity measure. In this section, the construction and results of this test are
provided, as well as discussion of the implied results.
            Amihud’s illiquidity ratio follows Amihud (2002), and is given by the
following model:

                                       ,!#
                                     1       |𝑅!#|
                   𝐼𝐿𝐿𝐼𝑄  =     ?                             (Eq. 10)
                                           𝐷!#      𝐷𝑉𝑂𝐿!#
                                     !-%

       Where  Dit  is the number of days in the time interval, and for which data are
available for firm  i  in time  t,  DVOLit  is the trading volume in dollars for firm  i  in time  t,
and  RETit  is the return for firm  i  in time  t. In our regressions, we use intervals of  two
trading weeks, or  ten  days.
       The results are presented in  Table VI. Regressing for  ILLIQ, we observe a
statistically significant increase of 1.2017 of AIA in Model 8, and observe similar positive
numbers for all models, controlling for different  variables as in previous regressions. Our
results show a positive correlation between AIA and Amihud’s illiquidity ratio.
       These regression results act as a robustness check and in support of previous
results of a positive correlation between price non-synchronicity and AIA. It is also in
line with prior literature by Li, Rajgopal, and Venkatachalam (2014), as they conclude
that a higher  liquidity  ratio implies less informative prices, and, thus, higher  illiquidity
ratio implies more informative prices. Since we observe similar effects of AIA on two
proxies of price informativeness  -  illiquidity and non-synchronicity  -  this analysis renders
our interpretations more robust.

5.2          Placebo Test: Random Variable
This section describes the placebo test  performed in order to examine whether the results
are  robust,  or  noise driven. In this section, the construction and results of this test are
provided, as well as discussion of the implied results.
             The placebo test is constructed as follows: a random dummy variable is
created, which follows a binomial distribution and is equal to one with a probability of
0.0765, which corresponds to the average (mean) of AIA, without the time-average
dimension for each firm as presented in  Table I: Summary Statistics. The  regressions in
Table III  are then recreated, with this random variable as a substitute to AIA, and
presented in  Table VII. The regressions are otherwise made using the same specifications
as in  Table III.
            Looking at  Table VII, we can observe similar results for all model
specifications. The random variable has no significant effect on the non-synchronicity for

                                  27
a given firm. Notably, we can also observe from  Table VII  that earnings announcement
days have negligent effects on non-synchronicity for a given  firm, when AIA is not
accounted for. We can observe that the signs of the information events variables remain
unchanged in this test.
              Firstly, these results support our previous results of a positive correlation
between AIA and price non-synchronicity. This test provides robustness by confirming
that non-synchronicity is driven by AIA and not by noise. Therefore, the probability that
the observed relationship between AIA and price non-synchronicity is a product of mere
chance, is radically diminished. For  this reason, we can interpret this check as supporting
the  rejection  of  the  null  hypothesis,  based  on  the  previous  regressions  of  non-
synchronicity with AIA as the main independent variable.
            Also, this test lets us examine closer the relationship between  AIA and
EDAY. We see a non-significant or negligent effect of EDAY, when the variable of AIA
is not taken into account. However, when both variables are included in the regressions,
we see a stronger negative tendency of EDAY. This implies that the effect  of earnings
announcements is dependent on the variables omitted. Similarly, it implies that earnings
announcements often do not surprise investors with unexpected information and when
they   do,   investors   tend   to   consume   that   information   and   increase   the   price
informativeness of the stock.
            We remain humble of the fact that, even though this test supports the
proposition of AIA as a driver for price informativeness, Hypothesis II, it does not negate
the potential issues of omitted variables. It does neither  provide evidence to reject the
possibility  of  reverse  causality,  and  these  two  factors  should  still  influence  the
interpretation of the results.

5.3          Multicollinearity Checks
To address any multicollinearity concerns, this section describes the multicollinearity
checks  performed  in  order  to  determine  whether  there  remain  issues  regarding
multicollinearity. In this section, the construction and results of these tests are provided,
as well as discussion of the implied results.
            The first check includes a correlation matrix. The correlation matrix
contains the main variables used in the different regressions in this paper. Further, we test
for tolerance and for variance inflation factor (VIF), for  Table II. Moreover, we test for
eigenvalues and Condition Index for  Table II. We also test for VIF for  Table III.
             The results of the correlation matrix can be seen in Appendix C. Among the
strongest correlations, we find the market beta and non-synchronicity, with a correlation
of  -0.48. We also find a correlation between the natural logarithm of market size and
trading volume in dollars, of 0.44. The results of the tolerance test and VIF for  Table II
can be seen in Appendix D,  Table D.1. The results of VIF for  Table III  can be seen in
Appendix E. The tolerance test indicates tolerance scores of above 0.7934 for all variables
in  Table II. VIF have scores of below 1.2603 and 1.6064, for  Table II  and  Table III,
respectively. The results of the eigenvalues and Condition Index can be seen in Appendix
D, Table D.2. We can observe scores of above 0.0541 and below 10.1233 for eigenvalues
and Condition Index, respectively.
            We   understand   from   the   various   multicollinearity   checks   that
multicollinearity is not a major issue in our regressions, which renders them more reliable
and                                                                  robust.

                                  28
                                                     Table VI. Institutional Attention and Illiquidity
            This  table  reports  results  from  the  panel  regression  of  illiquidity  measure  (ILLIQ)  on  abnormal  institutional  attention  (AIA),  as  well  as  other  informational  events,  both  firm-specific  and
            non-firm-specific.  For  variable  definitions,  see  Appendix  I.  Model  1  uses  only  the  institutional  investor  attention  measure  (AIA).  Models  2  and  3  introduce  firm  earnings  announcements
            (EDAY)  and  non-earnings  scheduled  events  (NESEDAY),  respectively.  Models  4  and  5  both  include the market wide value-weighted averages of earnings announcements (AGG_EDAY) and,
            similarly,  for  the  non-earnings  scheduled  events  (AGG_NESEDAY).  To  facilitate  comparison,  the  value-weighted  variables  are  multiplied  by 100. All specifications include control variables.
             These  are:  the  natural  logarithm  of  firm  market  capitalization  (lnSize),  the  natural  logarithm of firm book-to-market ratio (lnBM), the firm leverage ratio (Leverage), i.e., the ratio of long-term
            debt  to  total  assets,  the  percentage  of  shares  outstanding  held  by  institutions  (insthold),  and  the  firm’s  market  beta  from  the  CAPM  (b_mkt).  All  specifications  include  date  fixed  effects and
            Model  6  includes  sector  fixed  effects  as  well,  there  are  11  sectors.  By  creating  the  illiquidity  measure,  we  lose  some  observations,  the  regressions  are  thus  based  on  3,602,471  observations.
              Additionally, all standard errors are double clustered  by firm and date.

           VARIABLES
                                 Model 1          Model 2           Model 3           Model 4           Model 5           Model 6           Model 7           Model 8

                       AIA         1.2277 ***         1.3214. ***          1.2930 ***         1.2789 ***          1.2930 ***         1.2606 ***          1.2692 ***          1.2017 ***
                                          (0.1416)             (0.1524)             (0.1482)             (0.1467)               (0.300)             (0.1447)              (0.1456)             (0.1407)

                    EDAY                       -0.8916 ***        -1.0693 ***        -1.0695 ***         -1.2103 ***        -1.0722 ***         -1.2051 ***        -1.1702 ***
29                                                       (0.1295)            (0.1885)            (0.1885)             (0.1885)            (0.1887)             (0.2003)            (0.1959)

               AIAxEDAY                                         0.4083 *          0.4229 *             0.1478            0.4414             0.1812            0.2036
                                                                                   (0.1690)             (0.1692)             (0.1692)             (0.1697)             (0.1697)             (0.1591)

               NESEDAY                                                      0.3271 ***         0.3212 ***           -0.0716            -0.0671           -0.0650
                                                                                                        (0.0685)             (0.0685)             (0.0698)             (0.0697)             (0.0687)

             AGG_EDAY                                                                  -4.4447 ***                        -4.1959 ***        -3.9302 ***
                                                                                                                              (0.8315)                                  (0.8123)             (0.7901)

             AGG_NESED                                                                                                  -3.3231 ***         -3.2394 ***        -2.8040 ***
                     AY                                                                                            (0.6077)           (0.5958)          (0.5574)

                       2            0.1069            0.1070            0.1070            0.1070            0.1070            0.1070            0.1071            0.1105
                Adjusted  𝑅
                 N                 2464            2464             2464            2464             2464            2464             2464             2464

                  n              3,602,471          3,602,471          3,602,471          3,602,471          3,602,471          3,602,471          3,602,471          3,602,471

          Date FE? (Sector           YES            YES            YES            YES            YES            YES            YES        YES (YES)
                FE?)

           Other controls?           YES            YES            YES            YES            YES            YES            YES            YES

              Standard errors are double clustered by both firm and date. *** p < 0.001; ** p < 0.01; * p < 0.05.

30
                                             Table VII. Random Variable and Non-Synchronicity

            This table reports results from the panel regression of non-synchronicity (NS) on a random variable (random), as well as other informational events, both firm-specific and non-firm-specific. For
            variable  definitions,  see  Appendix  A.  Model  1  uses  only  the  random  variable  measure (random). Models 2 and 3 introduce firm earnings announcements (EDAY) and non-earnings scheduled
            events  (NESEDAY),  respectively.  Models  4  and  5  both  include  the  market  wide  value-weighted  averages  of  earnings  announcements  (AGG_EDAY)  and,  similarly,  for  the  non-earnings
            scheduled  events  (AGG_NESEDAY).  To  facilitate  comparison,  the  value-weighted variables are multiplied by 100. All specifications include control variables. These are: the natural logarithm
             of  firm market capitalization (lnSize), the natural logarithm of firm book-to-market ratio (lnBM), the firm leverage ratio (Leverage), i.e., the ratio of long-term debt to total assets, the percentage
            of  shares  outstanding  held  by  institutions  (insthold),  and  the  firm’s  market  beta  from the CAPM (b_mkt). All specifications include date fixed effects. Specification 7 also includes sector fixed
              effects, there are 11 sectors.  The sample includes  3,624,261 observations.  Additionally, all standard  errors are double clustered by firm and date.

                     VARIABLES          Model 1        Model 2        Model 3       Model 4        Model 5         Model 6         Model 7         Model 8

                                  random          -0.0010           -0.0012         -0.0012         -0.0012           -0.0012           -0.0012           -0.0012           -0.0001
                                                      (0.0015)           (0.0015)        (0.0015)         (0.0015)           (0.0015)           (0.0015)           (0.0015)           (0.0014)

                                EDAY                       -0.0045        -0.0052        -0.0047      -0.0252 ***          -0.0048       -0.0244 ***       -0.0175 **
31
                                                                         (0.0057)        (0.0057)         (0.0058)           (0.0097)           (0.0072)           (0.0072)           (0.0059)

                        randomxEDAY                                    0.0096         0.0096          0.0102          0.0096           0.0102          0.0106
                                                                                        (0.0112)         (0.0112)           (0.0112)           (0.0112)           (0.0112)           (0.0105)

                           NESEDAY                                            0.1223 ***       0.1219 ***       0.0976 ***       0.0980 ***       0.0694 ***
                                                                                                          (0.0097)           (0.0097)           (0.0105)           (0.0104)           (0.0094)

                         AGG_EDAY                                                       -0.3441 ***                     -0.3295 ***      -0.2042 ***
                                                                                                                             (0.0649)                              (0.0611)           (0.0595)

                     AGG_NESEDAY                                                                    -0.2051 ***      -0.1986 ***        -0.1037 *
                                                                                                                                               (0.0519)           (0.0507)           (0.0519)
                               2              0.4754          0.4754                     0.4758          0.4759          0.4759           0.4759          0.5337
                          Adjusted  𝑅

                      N (Sectors)               2464            2464          2464          2464           2464           2464            2464        2464 (11)

                           n                3,624,621        3,624,621      3,624,621       3,624,621        3,624,621        3,624,621         3,624,621        3,624,621

                Date FE? (Sector FE?)          YES           YES         YES         YES          YES          YES           YES      YES (YES)

                   Other controls?              YES           YES         YES          YES           YES           YES           YES           YES

                      Standard errors are double clustered by both firm and date. *** p < 0.001; ** p < 0.01; * p < 0.05.
32
6.         Conclusions

In this paper, we have investigated the relationship between information consumption and
price informativeness, as well as delved into the foundations of these two strands of
literature. We contribute to the literature by using a behavioral approach in investigating
price informativeness, as well as exploring the foundations of information consumption.
This background is the basis for the research questions, which are set to seek the sign and
characteristics   of   the   relationship   between   information   consumption   and   price
informativeness. They are then supported by various robustness checks, to ensure as
robust conclusions as possible, within the scope of this paper.
             Our measure of information consumption has been largely based on Ben-
Rephael et al. (2021), and our results indicate similar interpretations. Similar to Ben-
Rephael et al. (2021), we find that the main drivers for abnormal institutional investor
consumption are earnings announcements and non-earnings scheduled events,  and  we
too, find that the effect of earnings announcements is of higher economic significance. In
alliance with Ben-Rephael et al. (2021), we find an information spillover effect, as related
firms engage in information events. In contrast to Ben-Rephael  et al. (2021), we do not
find   an   effect   of   statistical   significance   on   institutional   attention   by   macro
announcements. This finding is not in fundamental conflict with the findings of Ben-
Rephael et al. (2021), though, as they only find support for macro announcement as a
determinant of institutional attention at the lowest possible significance,  p<0.05. Due to
omitted variable bias in our sample, we conclude that further research is warranted to
form a meaning on whether macro announcement is a determinant  of institutional
attention.
             We  find  a  positive  correlation  between  our  proxy  for  institutional
information consumption  -  abnormal institutional attention  -  and our proxy for price
informativeness  -  price non-synchronicity. Our evidence suggests that institutional
attention has both economic and statistically significant, positive effects on price
informativeness. This finding is robust for two different proxies of price informativeness.
We also perform a placebo test and find strong evidence that the effect is robust and
derived from our proxy of institutional attention. Moreover, we find indications that the
events that have the largest effects on price informativeness are the unanticipated events.
Even after introducing a post-earnings announcement drift, to account for eventual inertia
in price informativeness, we find robust evidence that indicates an effect on price non-
synchronicity by abnormal institutional attention.
              For retail investors, we find no economic or significant correlation between
retail investor attention and price non-synchronicity, indicating that retail information
consumption has little or no effect on price informativeness, and should not be considered
a driver of price informativeness. This finding is in line with prior studies (Ben-Rephael
et al., 2021, 2017).
             Limits to our study are mainly in direct consequence of lack of access to
data, such as the NYSE Trade and Quote (TAQ) database and RavenPack. This entails an
omitted robustness check in the shape of a  triangulation effort through a third proxy for
price informativeness; as well as an omitted variable bias in our evidence regarding
information consumption. Our findings are furthermore vulnerable to possible reverse
causality, possibly rendering them misleading. This warrants further research on the
foundations of this paper.

                                  33
7.         References

Alin, A., 2010. Multicollinearity.  WIREs Comp Stat, 2: 370-374.

An, H. and Zhang, T., 2013. Stock price synchronicity, crash risk, and institutional investors,
Journal of Corporate Finance, Volume 21, Pages 1-15.

Ball, R., and Brown, P., 1968. An empirical evaluation of accounting numbers. Journal of
Accounting Research 6: 159–78.

Barber, M.B. and Odean, T., 2008,. All That Glitters: The Effect of Attention and News on the
Buying Behavior of Individual and Institutional Investors,  The Review of Financial Studies,
Volume 21, Issue 2, Pages 785–818.

Basak, S. and Pavlova, A.,. 2013. "Asset Prices and Institutional Investors."  American
Economic Review,103 (5): 1728-58.

Ben-Rephael, A., Da, Z, Israelsen, D.R,. 2017. It Depends on Where You Search: Institutional
Investor Attention and Underreaction to News,  The Review of Financial Studies, Volume 30,
Issue 9, Pages 3009–3047

Ben-Rephael, Carlin, Da, and Israelsen., 2021.  “Information Consumption and Asset Pricing.”
The Journal of finance  (New York) 76.1: 357–394.

Bond, P., Edmans, A. and Goldstein, I., 2012. The Real Effects of Financial Markets. Annual
Review of Financial Economics,  4(1), pp. 339-360.

Bernard, V.L., and Thomas, J.K., 1989. "Post-earnings-announcement drift: delayed price
response or risk premium?."  Journal of Accounting research  27: 1-36.

Beuselinck, C., et al., 2010. Mandatory IFRS reporting and stock price informativeness. Center
for Economic Research.

Bhushan, R., 1989. Firm characteristics and analyst following,  Journal of Accounting and
Economics, Volume 11, Issues 2–3, Pages 255-274.

Bonsall,B.S., Green, J., and Muller, K.A., 2020. Market uncertainty and the importance of
media coverage at earnings announcements,  Journal of Accounting and Economics, Volume 69,
Issue 1, 101264.

Brickley, J.A., 1986. Interpreting Common Stock Returns around Proxy Statement Disclosures
and Annual Shareholder Meetings.”The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, vol. 21,
no. 3, pp. 343–349.

Chae J, Kim R, and Han J., 2020. Investor Attention from Internet Search Volume and
Underreaction to Earnings Announcements in Korea.  Sustainability. 12(22):9358.

Chen, Q., Goldstein, I., and Jiang, W., 2007. Price Informativeness and Investment Sensitivity
to Stock Price,  The Review of Financial Studies, Volume 20, Issue 3, Pages 619–650

                                  34
Condie, S., Ganguli, J., & Illeditsch, P. K., 2013. Information Inertia. Working paper. Retrieved
from:  https://repository.upenn.edu/fnce_papers/25

Da, Z., Engelberg, J. and Gao, P., 2011.  In Search of Attention.  The Journal of Finance, 66:
1461-1499.

Dasgupta, S., Gan, J., and Gao, N., 2010. Transparency, Price Informativeness, and Stock
Return Synchronicity: Theory and Evidence. The Journal of  Financial and Quantitative
Analysis,  45(5), 1189-1220.

Dellavigna, S. and Pollet, J.M., 2009. Investor Inattention and Friday Earnings Announcements.
The Journal of Finance, 64: 709-749.

Durnev, A., Morck, R., Yeung, B. and Zarowin, P., 2003 Does Greater Firm‐Specific Return
Variation Mean More or Less Informed Stock Pricing?.  Journal of Accounting Research, 41:
797-836.

Durnev, A., Li, K., Mørck, R. and Yeung, B., 2004. Capital markets and capital allocation:
Implications for economies in transition*.  Economics of Transition, 12: 593-634.

Engelberg, J.E. and Parsonos, C.A., 2011. The Causal Impact of Media in Financial Markets.
The Journal of Finance, 66: 67-97.

Engelberg, J., Sasseville, C. and Williams, J., 2012. Market Madness? The Case of Mad Money.
Management Science,  58(2), pp. 351-364.

Fama, E.F., 1970. Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work. The
Journal of Finance, vol. 25, no. 2, 1970, pp. 383–417.

Ferreira, D., Ferreira, M.A., and Raposo, C.C, 2011. Board structure and price informativeness,
Journal of Financial Economics, Volume 99, Issue 3, Pages 523-545.

Fort, T., Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R.  et al.,  2013.  How Firms Respond to Business Cycles: The
Role of Firm Age and Firm Size. IMF Econ Rev 61, 520–559.

Foster, G., et al., 1984. “Earnings Releases, Anomalies, and the Behavior of Security Returns.”
The Accounting Review, vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 574–603.

Gabaix, X., et al., 2006. Institutional Investors and Stock Market Volatility, The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Volume 121, Issue 2, Pages 461–504.

Gelb, D.S., Zarowin, P., 2002. Corporate Disclosure Policy and the Informativeness of Stock
Prices.  Review of Accounting Studies  7,  33–52.

Gyntelberg, J., et al., 2009., Private Information, Stock Markets, and Exchange Rates (February
1, 2009). BIS Working Paper No. 271.

Hou, K., Xiong, W., Peng, L., 2009. A tale of two anomalies: The implications of investor
attention for price and earnings momentum. Working paper, available at SSRN 976394.

Illeditsch, P.K., 2011. Ambiguous Information, Portfolio Inertia, and Excess Volatility.  The
Journal of Finance, 66: 2213-2247.

                                  35
Jin, L., and Myers, S.C., 2006. R2 around the world: New theory and new tests,  Journal of
Financial Economics, Volume 79, Issue 2, Pages 257-292.

Kan, S. and Gong, S., 2018. Does High Stock Return Synchronicity Indicate High or Low Price
Informativeness? Evidence from  a Regulatory Experiment.  International Review of Finance, 18:
523-546.

Kim, J.H., 2019.. “Multicollinearity and misleading statistical results.”  Korean journal of
anesthesiology  vol. 72,6: 558-569.
Liang, L., 2003. Post-Earnings Announcement Drift and Market Participants' Information
Processing Biases.  Review of Accounting Studies 8,  321–345.
Morck, R., Yeung, B., and Yu, W., 2000. The information content of stock markets: why do
emerging markets have synchronous stock price  movements?,  Journal of Financial Economics,
Volume 58, Issues 1–2, Pages 215-260.

Newhard, J.M, 2014.The stock market speaks: How Dr. Alchian learned to build the bomb,
Journal of Corporate Finance, Volume 27, Pages 116-132,

Roll, R., 1984. Orange Juice and Weather.  The American Economic Review,  74(5), 861-880.

Roll, R., 1988.  R2.  The Journal of Finance, 43: 541-566.

Sadka, R., 2006. Momentum and post-earnings-announcement drift anomalies: The role of
liquidity risk,  Journal of Financial Economics, Volume 80, Issue 2, Pages 309-349.

Sanders, R., & Zdanowicz, J., 1992. Target Firm Abnormal Returns and Trading Volume
Around the Initiation of Change in Control Transactions.  The Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis,27(1), 109-129.

Savor, P. and Wilson, M., 2016. Earnings Announcements and Systematic Risk.  The Journal of
Finance, 71: 83-138.

Stoll, H.R, and  Whaley, R.E., 1990.  Stock Market Structure and Volatility,  The Review of
Financial Studies, Volume 3, Issue 1, Pages 37–71.

Wurgler, J., 2000. Financial markets and the allocation of capital,  Journal of Financial
Economics, Volume 58, Issues 1–2, Pages 187-214.

                                  36
Appendix A.      Variable Definitions

Table A.1    Variable Definitions

 Variable           Definition

 Dependent
 variables

                                                                  !
 NS                Non-synchronicity, calculated daily, based on the 𝑅  from the Fama-French three
                      factor model with data from the previous 252 trading days. Defined as the
                                                              !    !
                         logarithmic transformation of: (1-𝑅 )/ 𝑅 . A higher NS indicates higher price
                      informativeness, since less of the firm-specific returns can be explained  by the
                     Fama-French three factor model. Data for this variable is obtained from CRSP.

 ILLIQ            Amihud (2002)’s illiquidity ratio. Defined as the average of the past 10 days’
                       absolute returns divided by the dollar trading volume, DVOL. A higher illiquidity
                       ratio indicates higher price informativeness. Data for this variable is obtained
                   from CRSP.

 AIA             Bloomberg records the number of times the news articles on a particular stock are
                     read by its terminal users and the number of times the users actively search for
                       news for a particular stock. Bloomberg then assigns a score of one to each article
                      read and 10 for each news search. These scores are aggregated by Bloomberg into
                      hourly counts. Using the hourly counts, Bloomberg creates a numerical attention
                       score for each stock by comparing the past eight-hour average count to all hourly
                       counts the past month for the same stock. Then, they assign a value of 1, 2, 3, or 4
                     if the average is between 80% and 90%, 90% and 94%, 94% and 96%, or greater
                     than 96% of the  previous 30 days’ hourly counts, respectively. Finally,
                      Bloomberg aggregates up to the daily frequency by taking a maximum of all
                       hourly scores throughout the day. We are interested in abnormal attention, and
                     thus we create AIA, defined as to be equal to  one when Bloomberg’s score is 3 or
                       4, and zero otherwise.

 Independent
 variables

 ARA            A dummy variable created in a similar way to AIA. Based on Google Search
                     Volume data, we create a measure called Abnormal Daily Search Volume Index
                       (ADSVI), which is defined as the logarithmic transformation of the daily search
                      volume index for firm  i  divided by the monthly average daily search volumes.
                       Then, we assign a value to each ADSVI-value based on how it compares to the
                      previous month’s ADSVIs. As in the creation of AIA, if the ADSVI is larger than
                    94% of the previous month’s values, we assign ARA a  value of one. Otherwise
                        the variable is zero. This is intended to capture abnormal attention from retail
                        investors.

 random            A random dummy variable, created by a binomial distribution with a 0.0765
                       probability of being equal to one. This is done to create a random variable that is
                      similar to AIA.

 EDAY           A dummy variable that is equal to one on earnings announcement days for firm i
                      and zero otherwise. Earnings announcements data are from I/B/E/S.

                                  37
NESEDAY         A dummy variable that is equal to one on days with non-earnings scheduled
                     events and zero otherwise. Corporate events data are from Bloomberg’s event
                   calendar, (Bloomberg command “EVTS”).

AGG_EDAY       A value-weighted average of all, except firm i, earnings announcing firms in the
                     sample for a particular day. The value weights come from the combined market
                      values in the sample.

AGG_NESEDAY    A value-weighted average of all, except firm i, firms with non-earnings scheduled
                     events for a particular day. The value weights come from the combined market
                     values in the sample.

GDP            A dummy variable equal to one on days with an announcement of the “advance”
                    estimate of quarterly U.S. Gross Domestic Product by the Bureau of Economic
                    Analysis, and zero otherwise. Announcement dates come from Bloomberg.

NFP             A dummy variable equal to one on days with an announcement of the U.S.
                     nonfarm payroll statistics by the Department of Labor, and zero otherwise.
                   Announcement dates come from Bloomberg.

PPI               A dummy variable equal to one on days with an announcement of the U.S. Producer
                   Price Index numbers by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and zero otherwise.
                   Announcement dates come from Bloomberg.

FOMC           A dummy variable equal to one on days with an announcement of the Federal Open
                   Market Committee rate decision, and zero  otherwise. Announcement dates come
                   from Bloomberg.

ISM             A dummy variable equal to one on days with an announcement of the Institute for
                    Supply Management Manufacturing statistics by Bureau of Labor Statistics, and
                   zero otherwise. Announcement dates come from Bloomberg.

MACRO         A dummy variable equal to one if at least one of NFP, PPI, FOMC, GDP, and ISM
                      is equal to one, and zero otherwise.

Leverage            The firm’s leverage, calculated as the ratio between long-term debt and total assets,
                    using Compustat data.

DVOL           The firm’s daily dollar trading volume in millions of dollars.

abs_ret             The absolute value of the firm’s daily total return. Data for daily returns are from
                CRSP.

b_mkt             The firm’s CAPM beta, calculated for each day based on the previous 252  trading
                     days.

lnSize              The natural logarithm of the stock’s market capitalization.

LnBM             The natural logarithm of the firm’s book-to-market ratio.

insthold            The percentage of shares held by institutional investors. Data on institutional
                   ownership are from Bloomberg.

                                  38
Appendix B.      Histogram of Non-Synchronicity

Figure B.1   Histogram of Non-Synchronicity

                                  39
Appendix C.      Correlation Matrix

                    Figure C.1 Correlation matrix

Appendix D.      Multicollinearity tests for Table II

A variance inflation factor is an indicator of multicollinearity in OLS-models. It is
calculated for each explanatory variable by running a regression of the explanatory
variable Xi on all other explanatory variables, the coefficient of determination, Rsq, is
then used to calculate the VIF. (Alin, 2010) Traditionally, values larger than 10, some
also use 5, indicate problems with multicollinearity. In the table below, we see that all
VIF-values are  just above 1, which implies that we have no serious problem with
multicollinearity.

Table D.1    Variance Inflation Factors for Model 6 in Table II.

 Variables          Tolerance   Variation Inflation Factor

 EDAY           0.9692     1.0318

 NESEDAY       0.9722     1.0286

 MACRO         0.9853     1.0149

                                  40
 AGG_EDAY      0.9203     1.0866

 AGG_NESEDAY   0.7934     1.2603

 lnBM            0.9628     1.0387

 abs_ret            0.9652      1.0360

 DVOL           0.9858     1.0144

 Leverage          0.9752      1.0255

 b_mkt            0.9705      1.0304

Another method to investigate the potential of multicollinearity is to  calculate the
eigenvalues from a matrix composed of standardized explanatory variables. From the
eigenvalues, it is possible to calculate a condition index. The largest condition index is
the condition number, bold in the table below, and a condition number larger than 30
indicates strong multicollinearity. (Kim, 2019)

Table D.2    Eigenvalues and Condition index for Model 6 in Table II

 Eigenval  Conditi   EDA   NESED   MACR  AGG_ED   AGG_NESED  lnB    abs_r  DVO  Levera   b_m
 ue       on      Y     AY      O      AY       AY         M    et     L     ge     kt
            Index

 5.5524     1.0000    0.00   0.0015     0.0065   0.0082      0.0073         0.00   0.009   0.00   0.0090    0.00
                    15                                                 92     0      31              39

 1.1586     2.1891    0.00   0.1246     0.0148   0.0024      0.0339         0.00   0.001   0.00   0.0043    0.00
                    03                                                 42     7      07              06

 1.0714     2.2765    0.29   0.0617     0.0012   0.0585      0.0039         0.00   0.000   0.00   0.0017    0.00
                    62                                                 24     8      27              02

 1.0163     2.3374    0.01   0.0000     0.0433   0.0001      0.0001         0.00   0.000   0.00   0.0009    0.00
                    35                                                 13     1      30              01

 0.9743     2.3872    0.05   0.3392     0.0035   0.0053      0.0022         0.00   0.001   0.23   0.0001    0.00
                    21                                                 20     3      55              01

 0.9648     2.3989    0.43   0.0280     0.0081   0.0008      0.0034         0.00   0.001   0.23   0.0026    0.00
                    70                                                 00     8      70              04

 0.8696     2.5268    0.07   0.3972     0.0078   0.0004      0.0006         0.00   0.003   0.46   0.0000    0.00
                    40                                                 39     4      36              01

 0.7678     2.6891    0.00   0.0015     0.8348   0.0026      0.0001         0.02   0.009   0.02   0.0309    0.00
                    02                                                 68     0      76              14

 0.6193     2.9942    0.01   0.0050     0.0048   0.0422      0.0057         0.12   0.578   0.00   0.1301    0.00
                    24                                                 76     6      35              21

 0.6108     3.0150    0.09   0.0169     0.0352   0.6980      0.0130         0.05   0.001   0.00   0.0594    0.00
                    01                                                 37     9      29              00

 0.4692     3.4400    0.01   0.0105     0.0227   0.0273      0.1944         0.45   0.201   0.01   0.0078    0.00
                    04                                                 85     5      14              30

 0.4562     3.4889    0.00   0.0063     0.0065   0.0104      0.0708         0.23   0.075   0.00   0.6737    0.00
                    45                                                 37     0      65              32

                                  41
 0.2561     4.6563    0.00   0.0068     0.0051   0.1154      0.6067         0.05   0.086   0.00   0.0424    0.12
                    36                                                 68     0      00              22

 0.1590     5.9089    0.00   0.0000     0.0038   0.02134     0.0285         0.00   0.027   0.00   0.0003    0.34
                    00                                                 71     6      03              64

 0.0541     10.123   0.00   0.0008     0.0019    0.0072      0.0300         0.01   0.002   0.00   0.0367    0.51
           3        00                                                 28     5      21              61

Appendix E.       Multicollinearity tests for Table III

Similar to Appendix D, we calculate the variation inflation factors for the explanatory
variables in Model 6 in Table III. Unfortunately, we found no, simple enough, way to
calculate the Eigenvalues and Condition Index for panel models. The results are seen in
the table below and they indicate that multicollinearity does not pose a large problem in
our analysis.

Table E.1    Variance Inflation Factor for Model 6 in Table III.

 Variable                         Tolerance                  Variance Inflation Factor

 AIA                          0.8680                   1.1520

 EDAY                       0.6431                  1.5550

 AIAxEDAY                    0.6232                   1.6047

 NESEDAY                    0.8617                  1.1605

 AGG_EDAY                   0.8808                  1.1354

 AGG_NESEDAY               0.8476                  1.1798

 Leverage                       0.9535                    1.0487

 insthold                         0.8197                    1.2199

 lnSize                          0.7487                    1.3356

 lnBM                         0.8967                   1.1152

 b_mkt                         0.9345                    1.0700

                                  42