Cryptos Left on the Table?

Underpricing in Initial Exchange Offerings

ELSA PERSSON

MAX DOUGLY

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2021
Cryptos Left on the Table? Underpricing in Initial Exchange Offerings.
Abstract:
   This study empirically examines underpricing in the newest phenomenon of
   cryptocurrency fundraising: initial exchange offerings (IEO). Drawing from the well-
   supplied initial public offering (IPO) literature, we study the existence and level of
   underpricing in IEOs and whether theories on asymmetric information and behavior
   can help explain it. In a dataset of 186 manually collected IEOs conducted between
   January 2019 and April 2021, we find an average underpricing of 412.02 percent and
   a median of 90.49 percent. Regression results show that some attempts at mitigating
   information asymmetry might decrease underpricing, such as having a pre-sale prior
   to the IEO, having a longer whitepaper, and a larger issue size. Conversely, conducting
   an IEO on a trusted and reputable cryptocurrency exchange and during high
   cryptocurrency market sentiment is positively correlated with underpricing. We
   suggest that IEOs are subject to severe underpricing and that theories from IPO
   literature can provide explanations to help understand underpricing in an IEO context.

Keywords:
   Initial exchange offering, Underpricing, Cryptocurrency, Tokens, Initial coin
   offering

Authors:
   Elsa Persson (24519)
   Max Dougly (24510)
Tutors:
   Olga Obizhaeva, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance
Examiner:
   Adrien d´Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Elsa Persson and Max Dougly, 2021

                                   1
1. Introduction

New ventures often need external financing to further develop and launch their business
ideas. For start-up companies operating on blockchain technology, recent advances give
companies new opportunities to raise capital in suggestively convenient and cheap ways.
In what is known as an initial coin offering (ICO), companies raise capital by creating
and issuing coins or tokens to investors in what is similar to a type of crowdfunding
(Catalini & Gans, 2019). Most of the ventures conducting ICOs have the goal of
launching online platforms on which the tokens can be used in a variety of ways, i.e.
purchasing services or products, or receiving specific benefits. ICOs have several
advantages over traditional financing methods, such as initial public offering (IPO),
venture capital, angel investment or debt instruments, in that ICOs have close-to-zero
transaction costs. In addition, ICOs are highly unregulated and documentation
requirements are kept at a minimum (Momtaz, 2020).
Despite its advantages, the ICO market has been criticized for the presence of scams and
frauds, due to lack of regulation and absence of functioning institutions. In fact, there has
been a sharp decline in the number of ICOs in recent years (Haffke & Fromberger, 2020).
The fall of ICOs has been countered with the rise of a new form of cryptocurrency
crowdfunding during 2019: initial exchange offering (IEO). An IEO is similar to an ICO,
with the distinguishing difference that the fundraising is administered by a cryptocurrency
exchange instead of by the fundraisers themselves.
This paper aims at exploring the existence and possible explanations of underpricing in
IEOs. The phenomenon of “underpricing” refers to when new shares issued through an
initial public offering (IPO) experience a price jump on the first day of trading. This
ultimately leaves issuers with less capital than if shares would not have been underpriced,
or as commonly said, “leaves money on the table”. IPO underpricing is a well-
documented phenomenon in research. Recent studies have also shown the existence of
severe underpricing in ICOs (Felix & von Eije, 2019; Benedetti & Kostovetsky, 2018;
Momtaz 2020). However, there is yet no published research regarding the existence or
level of underpricing in IEOs. This gives this study scientific value as it will be first to
examine this relationship. Therefore, this study has two main purposes. First, to explore
if and to what extent underpricing exists in IEOs. Second, seek to provide a set of possible
explanations to underpricing using theories from IPO literature, which would constitute
a basis from which future research can benefit from.
The results show that underpricing does exist in IEO at a 0.01 percent significance level.
In a sample of 186 IEOs, the average level of underpricing is 412.02 percent, and the
median is 90.49 percent, suggesting that the level of underpricing in IEOs is significantly
higher than in IPOs, and within the range of ICO underpricing levels. Moreover, the
regression results show that there is significant correlation between IEO underpricing and
the following proxies drawn from the IPO underpricing theories: issue size, whitepaper
pages, market sentiment, crowdedness, exchange trustfulness, and pre-sale. This indicates
that IPO underpricing theories are in fact relevant in an IEO context.

                                   2
The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 reviews the related literature; section 3 presents
the hypotheses; section 4 describes the research design; section 5 describes the data;
section 6 presents the empirical results; section 7 discusses the results, and section 8
concludes.

                                   3
2. Literature Review

2.1. Cryptocurrency as a way of financing

   2.1.1. Blockchain, Bitcoin and Altcoins
As of April 30, 2021, the global market cap of cryptocurrencies amounts to 2.1 trillion
USD, with almost 50 percent being made up by Bitcoin. On the same day five years prior,
cryptocurrency had a market cap of 8.4 billion USD, representing an approximate of 25
thousand percent increase in only five years (CoinMarketCap, 2021). Nevertheless,
Bitcoin has been characterized as a speculative bubble by eight winners of the Nobel
                                         1
Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences (Krugman, 2018; Shiller, 2014; Costelloe, 2017;
ECO News, 2018; Wolff-Mann, 2018).
Cryptocurrency is a subset of the class of digital currency with the distinctive
characteristic of being built on blockchain technology. Iansiti and Lakhani (2017) define
a blockchain as “an open, distributed ledger that can record transactions between two
parties efficiently and in a verifiable and permanent way”. They suggest that if adopted
effectively, blockchain may cause transaction intermediaries to no longer be necessary,
and could allow for the “free interaction between individuals, organizations, machines,
and algorithms”.
Bitcoin tries at implementing this technology. Introduced in 2008 by Satoshi Nakamoto,
Bitcoin aimed at providing an answer to the lack of confidence in the financial system
after the global financial crisis. By using blockchain as the public ledger, Bitcoin
transactions are operated by a decentralized authority, are flexible, transparent, fast, and
promise low transaction fees (Chuen, 2018).
Because Bitcoin is not perfect, the invention of new coins is constantly incentivized to
address specific issues and explore new purposes. Examples could be the invention of
new coins to further lower costs, increase speed, and alter transparency on the Bitcoin
blockchain. Recent years have also seen the creation of more sophisticated blockchains,
which enable a wide range of applications, such as insurance contracts, voting schemes,
and contingent investment products. Ethereum is an example of such a blockchain. This
has spurred the invention of new coins to explore completely new purposes, for example
to be used on a specific platform such as a phone application or provide other unique
features. These additional cryptocurrencies are referred to as alternative cryptocurrencies
or altcoins (Chuen, 2018).

   2.1.2. Token Sales and the ICO
The creation and emission of altcoins is known as token
sales or initial coin offerings (ICO). Tokens and coins are as concepts often used
interchangeably. By selling tokens, new and early-stage blockchain ventures can raise
capital from external sources to fund further development and launch expenses.
Conceptually, tokens represent “entries” or transactions on a blockchain. The owner of

1
 Namely Paul Krugman, Robert J. Shiller, Joseph Stiglitz, Richard Thaler, James Heckman, Thomas
Sargent, Angus Deaton, and Oliver Hart.

                                   4
the token has a key that lets him create new entries on the blockchain on which the token
functions on and can thus reassign the token ownership to someone else and conduct a
transaction.
Tokens can be divided into three different types: security tokens, utility tokens
and cryptocurrency tokens. Security tokens represent security against an underlying
asset exchanged on a blockchain. This to reduce transaction costs and create a record of
ownership. Security tokens are comparable to equity shares. The second type, utility
tokens, equip the owner with rights to consume utility from the issuer’s products or
service. Utility tokens may be comparable to vouchers. The last type, known as
cryptocurrency tokens, are general purpose medium of exchange and store-of-value
tokens. Bitcoin is an example of such a token. Most tokens are issued and designed as
utility tokens. Until the end of 2019, over 5,600 ICOs had collectively raised more than
27 billion USD (Momtaz, 2020).
There are certain advantages to ICOs in comparison to more traditional financing methods
such as an initial public offering (IPO), venture capital, angel investment or debt
instruments. In terms of deal characteristics, a major reason for the high popularity of
ICOs is close-to-zero transaction costs. ICOs are highly unregulated and documentation
needs are kept at a minimum. This way, start-ups can raise large external funding without
the need of costly and highly regulated venture capital transactions or IPOs. In addition,
post-deal characteristics offer major incentives for investors to invest in ICOs. Within
three months after the token sale ends, many tokens get the opportunity of being listed on
a 24/7 online trading token exchange platform. This aspect provides investors with added
value in the form of substantial market liquidity.
Despite these advantages, investing in cryptocurrency projects brings certain risks and
challenges. Firstly, the ICO market has been criticized for the existence of scams and
frauds. Due to its unregulated nature and absence of functioning institutions, asymmetric
information is a major challenge (Momtaz, 2020). Howell, Niessner, and Yermack (2020)
provide a thorough mapping of which issuer and ICO characteristics predict successful
real outcomes. They conclude that variables that predict future ICO operational success
are largely related to mitigating information asymmetry, such as certification, voluntary
disclosure, bonding, social media presence and displaying code development publicly on
platforms such as GitHub.

2.2. IPO vs ICO vs IEO

As we attempt at bridging the gap between well supplied initial public offering (IPO)
literature, and mechanisms in the initial coin offering (ICO) and initial exchange offering
(IEO), we provide a distinction on the differences between the three. The main differences
are summarized in Table I.

   2.2.1. Initial Public Offering (IPO) vs. Initial Coin Offering (ICO)
There are significant differences between an initial public offering (IPO) and an initial
coin offering (ICO). In an initial public offering, shares are issued which represent a
fraction of a real business with ownership, cash flows, valuable assets and voting rights.
In an ICO, the business issuing the tokens may not even yet exist. An IPO often represents

                                   5
an exit strategy for the original shareholders of a more mature company, whereas an ICO
is a mean of raising capital to further launch a business. The rights granted to token
holders in an ICO may differ, but typically represent access and right-of-use to a digital
product or service. Furthermore, IPOs require significant preparations in terms of legal
backing, reporting, book building and other requirements. ICOs however, require
considerably less preparations. In addition, in an IPO, the underwriter handles the
administers the share issuance, whereas in an ICO the token sale is completely handled
by the fundraising company (Sánchez, 2017).
Lack of regulation and lower participation of reputable external parties might result in
ICO investors to become victims of fraudulent behavior. Many token issuers do not
provide core information related to initiators and backers, applicable law, segregation or
pooling of client funds, or the existence of an external auditor (Zetzsche et al., 2017). This
causes large information asymmetry between investors and the issuing company, making
ICOs substantially riskier than IPOs.

   2.2.2. Initial Coin Offering (ICO) vs. Initial Exchange Offering (IEO)
Recent years have seen a decline in the amount of ICOs. According to Haffke &
Fromberger’s ICO Market Report 2018/2019, more than $14 billion was collected via
ICO in 2018. However, according to the same report 2019/2020, this number shrunk to
$3 billion in 2019. Haffke & Fromberger state that it is likely that the number of ICOs
will continue to decrease in the future, and that 2018 was a record year in terms of ICO
activity and the market has now become more mature (Haffke & Fromberger, 2020).
The downturn of the ICO market has been countered with the rise of a new form
of cryptocurrency crowdfunding during 2019: initial exchange offering (IEO). An IEO is
similar to an ICO, with the distinguishing difference that the fundraising is administered
by a cryptocurrency exchange instead of by the fundraisers themselves. Through an
exchange’s fundraising platform, commonly referred to as a launchpad, users who are
registered on the exchange can purchase issued tokens and thus participate in the token
sale. The exchange also handles aspects such as KYC checks on buyers, listing, reporting
and other related functions.
The distinct difference between IEOs and ICOs gives issuers several benefits to conduct
an IEO. Firstly, for a project looking to raise funds, an IEO offers exposure to an
immediate userbase. The venture could therefore reduce their marketing costs. Secondly,
since users participate completely through the exchange’s fundraising interface, they do
not need to manage different wallets on different blockchains. This significantly
simplifies the user experience of participating in the token issuance. Lastly, the exchange
is staking its reputation behind the projects it lists on its platform, offering a higher degree
of trust to investors by assessing the quality of the project. This increased level of due
diligence also increases token fundraising success (Binance Academy, 2021).

                                   6
Table I

IPO vs ICO vs IEO

                          IPO ICO IEO

 What is issued? Shares Tokens Tokens

 Company development stage Mature Start-up Start-up

                                  Rights such as           Usually provides    Usually provides
 Utility from participation          dividends and voting     access to services   access to services or
                                    rights                    or products         products

 Legal backing and regulation High Low/none Low/none

 Amount of preparations High Low Low

                                                           The fundraisers
 Issuance handled by Underwriter                   Crypto exchange
                                                    themselves

                                  Done by underwriters,
 Assessment of issuer                      None Done by Exchange
                                 auditors etc.

 Risk Lower Higher Lower than ICOs

 Table I outlines an overview of the fundamental differences between an initial public offering (IPO), an initial coin
 offering (ICO), and an initial exchange offering (IEO). An IPO is significantly different from both an ICO and an IEO
  on most aspects. The most fundamental difference between an ICO and an IEO is then that the issuance of tokens is
  handled by a cryptocurrency exchange, as opposed to the fundraisers themselves.

2.3. Initial Exchange Offering (IEO)

There is currently little to no published research on IEOs. Anson (2021) presents the only
currently published paper focusing on IEOs “Initial Exchange Offering: The Next
Evolution in Cryptocurrencies”. He demonstrates how the increased due diligence in an
IEO increases token fundraising success. His empirical results show that firms are more
successful in raising money through an IEO than in an ICO due to the less risky nature
and advantages of the tokens being sold on an exchange (Anson, 2021).
Examples of successful IEOs are BitTorrent, which raised more than 7.2 million USD in
just 18 minutes, and Fetch.ai, which raised 6 million USD in 22 seconds. The more well-
known and reliable exchanges and launchpads are for example Binance, Huobi, OKEx,
Bittrex, and Kucoin. In 2019, IEOs are most popular by number of projects in Singapore,
South Korea, Estonia, USA, and Hong Kong (Myalo, 2019).

                                   7
2.4. Theories of Underpricing

When firms decide to go public, issued shares tend to experience a price jump on the first
day of trading, indicating that the shares are “underpriced”. Ritter (2020) shows that IPOs
experience a mean underpricing of 18.4 percent. This causes firm to essentially “leave
money on the table” since they sell shares at a seemingly lower price than the true value.
Ljungqvist (2007) groups theories of causes of IPO underpricing under
four broad headings: asymmetric information, institutional, control and behavioral.
Since this study aims to relate these theories to underpricing in IEOs, it focuses on
information asymmetry models and behavioral explanations of underpricing. This is
because since token offerings are still largely unregulated, institutional theories of
underpricing don’t apply to the same extent as in IPOs. In addition, since token holders
are not granted extra control in the company as compared to shareholders, theories of
underpricing related to control are also not as relevant. In contrast, due to the large
information asymmetry in token offerings, these models become highly relevant in
explaining potential underpricing (Momtaz, 2020). Because of largely fluctuating market
sentiment and investor behavior in the cryptocurrency market (Drobetz et al. 2019), we
want to also attempt at incorporating and relating theories of behavior to IEO
underpricing.

   2.4.1. Information Asymmetry
The most significant theories used to explain underpricing is asymmetric information
models. These models assume that one or more of the key parties in an IPO transaction,
the issuing firm, the underwriter, and the investors, have more information about the
transaction than the other parties. When the buyers have less information about the
product than the sellers, IPOs become subject to the “lemon problem”. This problem, as
described by Akerlof (1970), causes buyer’s average willingness-to-pay to decrease when
they cannot distinguish been goods of high and low value. Sellers of high-quality goods
will eventually leave the market when they do not receive the correct price, leaving behind
only a market of low-quality goods, or “lemons”. IPOs are subject to this problem in the
sense that when buyers struggle to recognize true firm value, they require shares to be
underpriced.
An application of the lemon problem is Rock’s (1986) winner’s curse, which follows
information asymmetry between informed and uninformed investors. Uninformed
investors may be reluctant to participate in an IPO since their demand might partly
be crowded out by more informed investors. Since an underwriter wants to avoid the
failure of an IPO, he would lower the price to attract not only informed but also
uninformed investors. The firm seeking to go public therefore also benefit from
underpricing even though money is left on the table.
To mitigate this information asymmetry, evidence suggests that firms can hire reputable
underwriters. When prestigious intermediaries “confirm” the quality of the issuance, the
information asymmetry between informed and uninformed investors is relaxed and
underpricing reduced. Underwriters which value their reputation will be reluctant to
underwrite low-quality firms (Booth & Smith, 1986; Carter & Manaster,
1990; Michaely & Shaw, 1994). However, the empirical evidence on this point is mixed.
Betty and Welch (1996) use data from the early 1990s, and instead suggest that more

                                   8
prestigious underwriters are correlated with higher underpricing. Loughra and Ritter
(2004) hypothesize that this is because underwriters strategically underprice IPOs to
increase their own or their client’s wealth. Megginson and Weiss (1991) also show that
the certification of IPOs by venture capitalists results in less initial return and gross
spreads. This is consistent with the certification hypothesis, in that information
asymmetry between inside and outside investors may be mitigated when third party
specialists “certify” the value of securities issued by relatively unknown firms.
Furthermore, other models assuming information asymmetry
are signaling theories. These theories once again assume firms have more information
about the present value or risk of future cash flows than do investors. To signal their true
value, firms of high quality can benefit by underpricing in its IPO and then
recouping these costs later through a seasoned issue. A low-quality firm would be
reluctant to underprice due to the risk of being detected and thus not being able to recoup
the cost of underpricing at a later date (Allen & Faulhaber, 1989). If shares are then sold
sequentially, investors can also learn by the decision of early investors and the
information asymmetry may be mitigated by the next share issuance (Welch, 1992).

   2.4.2. Behavioral Explanations
Besides information asymmetry, evidence suggests behavioral theories also explain
underpricing. These suggests that “irrational” investors bid up market prices beyond their
true value when market sentiment is high. Excessive optimism of companies’ earnings
potential results in higher-than-average IPO underpricing (Ritter, 1991; Derrien, 2005;
Ibbotson et al. 1994). According to Ibbotsson et a. (1994) “hot” markets and excessive
optimism can cause a high concentration of sentiment investors who follow a certain
positive feedback or “trend” chasing strategy. If recent issues have risen in price,
sentiment investors are willing to bid up the price of new issues as well, causing positive
autocorrelation of initial returns. For example, during the “dot-com bubble”, U.S. issuers
left an aggregate of $62 billion on the table, and IPO underpricing was measured to an
average of 71 percent in 1999 (Ljungqvist, 2007). Additionally, these periods of high
initial returns in IPOs, known as “hot issue” markets, have been documented to be
correlated with higher IPO volume. Firms find “windows of opportunities” to go public
when investor sentiment is high even though they underperform in the long run (Ritter,
1991; Ibbotson et al. 1994).
Additionally, Ljungqvist, Nanda and Singh (2004) model an IPO company’s optimal
response to the presence of “irrational” or “sentiment” investors. They show that from the
point of the issuer, the optimal share selling strategy usually involves staggered sales.
Such sales can be implemented by allocating the IPO to cooperative, “regular”
institutional investors for subsequent resale to overoptimistic sentiment investors. Since
this overoptimism or hot market can end abruptly and prematurely, carrying IPO stock in
inventory is risky. To break even, regular investors require the IPO to be underpriced.
The issuer would benefit from this mechanism since the offer price of the IPO still
exceeds fundamental value, as it includes the regulars’ expected gain from trading with
sentiment investors. This would help explain why underpricing is high in the presence of
overly optimistic sentiment investors such as in the dot-com bubble.

                                   9
   2.4.3. Strategic Explanations
There are research suggesting that firms underprice to generate information momentum
in terms of research coverage, which leads to increased demand for the stock. Aqqarwal,
Krigman and Womack (2002) show that if managers underprice, they can generate
attraction from investors due to information momentum, and thus increase demand.
Therefore, they can sell their shares at a higher price than they otherwise could, and thus
recoup the losses caused by strategically offering shares at a price below their true value.
In a test on a sample of IPOs in the 1990s, they find positive correlation between
underpricing and research coverage as well as positive correlation between research
coverage and stock returns. In addition, in the theoretical model
of Grinblatt and Hwang (1989), IPO issuers can attract more investors to their share
issuance by underpricing it below its true value and thus eventually reaching a higher
market price than without initial underpricing.

2.5. Underpricing in ICOs

There are previous papers published which have studied underpricing in ICOs. Adhami
et al (2018) find that success of ICOs is more probable when investors can access the
source code and when issuers conduct a pre-ICO (issuing a limited number of tokens to
a restricted group of investors before the actual ICO). They also find an average ICO
underpricing of 929.9 percent and a median value of 24.7 percent in a sample of 140
ICOs.
Felix and von Eije (2019) attempt to bridge the gap between IPO underpricing literature
and ICO underpricing. They find an average level of ICO underpricing of 123 percent in
the US and 97 percent in other countries when studying a sample of 247 ICOs.
Additionally, trading volume and good market sentiment in the ICO market cause more
underpricing in ICOs. Also, they find that firms which conduct a pre-ICO and have a
large issue size experience less underpricing.
Benedetti and Kostovetsky (2018) also find significant evidence of underpricing in ICOs,
with average first trading day returns of 179 percent in their sample of 416 ICOs of
exchange listed tokens. Furthermore, they find that underpricing is reduced when the
initial offer price is higher and when there is a pre-ICO before the main offering. In the
view of the authors, this is because a low ICO price attracts higher demand from investors,
which results in higher performance directly after the ICO.
Momtaz (2020) finds positive first day initial returns in ICOs, however not at the same
level of other findings with an average underpricing of 8.2 percent. He continues to argue
that token issuers underprice strategically to attract additional market liquidity and thus
signal firm growth prospects, in accordance with the model of Aqqarwal, Krigman &
Womack (2002) and the signaling model of Grinblatt and Hwang (1989), as described
above. In addition, Drobetz et al. (2019) conjecture that investor sentiment plays a crucial
role in ICOs in that the ICO market is only affected by sentiment in the crypto-market
and not by the broader capital market. They also find evidence suggesting that first-day
returns are lower during periods of negative sentiment, in line with above mentioned
research.
There are yet to be any published research on the underpricing of IEOs.

                                  10
3. Hypothesis

3.1. Level of IEO Underpricing

There is a large body of literature supporting the existence of underpricing in IPOs, and
the most significant cause of underpricing is information asymmetry between
actors. Research done on ICOs provide evidence of large amounts of underpricing. Even
though IEOs function to minimize risks and information asymmetry between issuers and
investors, conducting an IEO is a relatively new and unregulated form of financing.
Therefore, few investors are expected to know the true characteristics of the
issuer. Substantial information asymmetry is thus still expected to exist. Consequently,
this paper also hypothesizes that underpricing will also be present in IEOs.
               𝐻1: 𝑇ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒 𝑖𝑠 𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑖𝑛 𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑒𝑥𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒 𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠

3.2. Correlated Variables

Next, the theories in IPO literature related to the causes of underpricing stated in section
2.4 are translated into proxies to test if the same theories also hold for IEOs. As
mentioned, some of the theories aiming at explaining underpricing are theories of
information asymmetry and behavioral explanations. This paper will attempt at
translating these theories into variables, which potentially increase or decrease
underpricing. Additionally, we also add some variables which have been found to
correlate with underpricing in the ICO literature. Each variable is presented below, along
with a hypothesis of how it should correlate with the level of underpricing. The
hypothesized expected correlations with underpricing are summarized in Table II.

   3.2.1. Offer Price
Benedetti and Kostovetsky (2018) find that underpricing is reduced when the initial offer
price is higher. They argue that a lower price increases demand from investors and thus
increases underpricing. We hypothesize that the same theory will hold for IEOs, which
leads to the following hypothesis:
𝐻2: 𝐴 ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑖𝑠 𝑛𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑙𝑦 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑙 𝑜𝑓 𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔

   3.2.2. Issue Size
Felix and von Eije (2019) find that firms which have a large issue size in terms of
monetary value experience less underpricing in ICOs. It can be argued that issue size is
viewed as a proxy for ex-ante uncertainty, since larger and more established companies
will tend to have larger issues. More established firms, in turn, tend to have more
information available about the issue than smaller firms. Less ex-ante uncertainty has
been showed to decrease underpricing in the IPO literature (Ritter, 1991). Consequently,
less underpricing is expected to exist in a larger token issuance. We also expect this to be
true for IEOs, which leads to the following hypothesis:
 𝐻3: 𝐴 𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑟 𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑒 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 𝑖𝑠 𝑛𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑙𝑦 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑙 𝑜𝑓 𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔

                                  11
   3.2.3. Whitepaper number of pages
As mentioned, the most significant cause of underpricing is information asymmetry
between actors. The whitepaper of an IEO is similar to the prospectus in an IPO.
Prospectus disclosure is a widely used proxy for ex-ante uncertainty. A whitepaper often
provides information about the project in general, its underlying technology, and
prospects. One key difference between a prospectus and a whitepaper, however, is that
whitepapers currently do not require adherence to any regulatory framework, resulting in
vast differences in content and length. Thus, it is expected that longer whitepapers are
correlated with less information asymmetry, resulting in the following hypothesis:
 𝐻4: 𝑇ℎ𝑒 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑝𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑠 𝑖𝑛 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑤ℎ𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑝𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑟 𝑖𝑠 𝑛𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑙𝑦 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑡ℎ𝑒
                                          𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑙 𝑜𝑓 𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔

   3.2.4. External Rating
Prior to an IEO, it is common for potential investors to use several third-party websites
to look for external ratings of an IEO, to gauge the true value of a firm. Megginson and
Weiss (1991) propose that experts can reduce information asymmetry by issuing their
evaluation of an IPO. Thus, it is expected that having a rating prior to the IEO will reduce
information asymmetry, resulting in the following hypothesis:
       𝐻5: 𝐻𝑎𝑣𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑎𝑛 𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑎𝑣𝑎𝑖𝑏𝑙𝑒 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟 𝑡𝑜 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝐼𝐸𝑂 𝑖𝑠 𝑛𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑙𝑦
                        𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑙 𝑜𝑓 𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔

   3.2.5. Market Sentiment
It has been found that IPO underpricing increases in times of “hot” markets and when
investors optimism is high. In times of high market sentiment and investor demand,
investors are overly optimistic about future returns and thus bid up IPO prices (Derrien,
2005; Ibbotson et al. 1994). Firms take advantage of these opportunities and increase
underpricing, as suggested by Ljungqvist et al. (2004). Additionally, high sentiment in
the crypto market has been shown to correlate with higher returns in ICOs (Drobetz et al.,
2019; Felix & von Eije, 2019). We expect the same to hold for IEOs, which leads to the
following hypothesis:
𝐻6: 𝐴 ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ 𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑖𝑠 𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑙𝑦 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑙 𝑜𝑓 𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔

   3.2.6. Crowdedness
IPO literature has thoroughly documented that “hot issue” markets are accompanied by
high initial returns to investors and increased volume of IPOs (Ritter, 1991. Ibbotson et
al. 1994). We thus expect underpricing to increase when IEO activity is high, which we
define as the number of IEOs that have been conducted 30 days before the listing date.
We call this variable “crowdedness” and hypothesize:
  𝐻7: 𝐼𝐸𝑂 𝑐𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑑𝑒𝑑𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠 𝑖𝑠 𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑙𝑦 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑙 𝑜𝑓 𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔

                                  12
   3.2.7. Pre-Sale
Firms issuing tokens may conduct a pre-sale, in which they sell a limited number of
tokens before the actual IEO. We assume that by having a pre-sale, firms may attract early
knowledgeable investors and thus mitigate information asymmetry by signaling firm
value and reduce underpricing, in line with the theory Welch (1992). In addition, previous
underpricing research on ICOs have found that having a pre-sale is negatively correlated
with underpricing. This leads to the following hypothesis:
           𝐻8: 𝐻𝑎𝑣𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑎 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑒 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟 𝑡𝑜 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝐼𝐸𝑂 𝑖𝑠 𝑛𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝑙𝑦
                        𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑙 𝑜𝑓 𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔

   3.2.8. Trusted Exchange
In addition, previous studies in IPO literature suggest that the reputation of the
underwriter correlates with the level of underpricing. Some suggest that reputable
underwriters “confirm” the quality of the firm and that asymmetric information is thus
relaxed, causing less underpricing (Booth & Smith, 1986; Carter & Manaster,
1990; Michaely & Shaw, 1994). However, data from the 1990s suggest the sign is flipped,
that highly regarded underwriters cause increased underpricing, as underwriters
strategically underprice to benefit themselves (Betty & Welch, 1996; Loughra & Ritter,
2004). We also expect that the reputation of the exchange conducting the token sale is
correlated with the amount of underpricing but refrain from hypothesizing on whether the
correlation is positive or negative:
     𝐻9: 𝑇ℎ𝑒 𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑜𝑓 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑒𝑥𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝐼𝐸𝑂 𝑖𝑠 𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑖𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑙𝑦
                        𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑙 𝑜𝑓 𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔.

                                  13
Table II

Hypothesis Overview

 Variable Expected Sign

 Issue size -

 Whitepaper number of pages -

 External Rating -

 Crowdedness +

 Market sentiment +

 Pre-sale -

 Trusted Exchange +/-

Table II provides an overview of the hypothesized expected sign of correlation between variables
drawn from IPO and ICO literature and level of underpricing in initial exchange offerings. For a
thorough overview of the definition and construction of each variable, see Table III.

                              14
4. Methodology and Research Design

The following section describes the three main stages of the methodology. First, we define
formulas used to measure the level of underpricing. Second, we test the existence and
level of underpricing. Third, we conduct a regression model and analysis to show the
possible correlation between underpricing and possible correlated variables. The
programming language R is used to conduct all statistical analyses.

4.1. Measuring Underpricing

   4.1.1. Underpricing
The standard method in IPO literature of computing underpricing in the IPO Literature
(Ljungqvist, 2007) is used to measure the first day returns in IEOs:

                                           (𝑃𝑖,1 − 𝑃𝑖,0)
                               𝑈𝑃𝑖 =                (𝐸𝑞. 1)
                                                                  𝑃𝑖,0

𝑈𝑃𝑖 : 𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔

𝑃𝑖,1: 𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑜𝑛 𝑓𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡 𝑑𝑎𝑦 𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔

𝑃𝑖,0: 𝑂𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑖𝑛 𝐼𝐸𝑂
However, since cryptocurrency markets are traded continuously, no closing prices exist
by definition. In order to solve this issue, the “closing price” is defined as the last price
given on the listing day according to the exchange in charge of the IEO.

   4.1.2. Market-Corrected Underpricing
To capture the level of underpricing that is not influenced by an overall positive market
return on the listing day, the market return is subtracted from the level of underpricing.
This way of correcting underpricing is commonly used in both IPO and ICO literature
(Ritter, 1991; Felix & von Eije, 2019; Momtaz, 2020), resulting in the following formula:

                                 (𝑃𝑖,1 − 𝑃𝑖,0)   (𝑀𝑖,1 − 𝑀𝑖,0)
                   𝑀𝑈𝑃𝑖 =             −                 (𝐸𝑞. 2)
                                                   𝑃𝑖,0                  𝑀𝑖,0

𝑀𝑈𝑃𝑖 : 𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑎𝑑𝑗𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛𝑠

𝑃𝑖,1: 𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑜𝑛 𝑓𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡 𝑑𝑎𝑦 𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔

𝑃𝑖,0: 𝑂𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑖𝑛 𝐼𝐸𝑂

𝑀𝑖,1: 𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝐶𝐶𝑖30 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥 𝑜𝑛 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑓𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡 𝑑𝑎𝑦 𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔

𝑀𝑖,0: 𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝐶𝐶𝑖30 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥 𝑜𝑛 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑓𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡 𝑑𝑎𝑦 𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔

                                  15
The CCi30 cryptocurrency index is chosen as the market portfolio, as it is the most
thorough cryptocurrency index that tracks the top 30 cryptocurrencies with regards to
market capitalization. Historic price data on the index is publicly available at cci30.com.
The market-corrected version of underpricing will be used for all subsequent tests and
analyses in this paper.

4.2. Testing for the Existence of Underpricing

A one-tailed t-test is performed to test for the existence of underpricing. However, since
the t-test assumes data is normally distributed, the first step is to test the market-corrected
level of underpricing for normal-distribution using the Jarque-Bera test and the Shapiro-
Wilk test. Both tests reject the null hypothesis of a normal distribution (see Appendix I).
For this reason, the level of underpricing is transformed using the natural logarithm to
adjust for non-normality:
                 𝐿𝑜𝑔 − 𝑎𝑑𝑗𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑀𝑈𝑃𝑖 = ln(𝑀𝑈𝑃𝑖 + 1.01) (𝐸𝑞. 3)
The constant 1.01 is added to the level of underpricing before the log-transformation is
made, to ensure that all negative first-day returns are included in the analysis. More
specifically, the lowest market-adjusted underpricing in the dataset is -100.75 percent.
Thus, by adding 1.01 all data points are included in the analysis.
A one tailed t-test is then performed on the transformed level of underpricing. To add
more robustness, the t-test is complemented with a non-parametric sign-test on the
untransformed underpricing data.

4.3. Regression Analysis

An ordinary least squares (OLS) regression analysis is undertaken to show the possible
relationship between IEO underpricing and independent variables. The following
equation shows the original model of the regression:
𝑀𝑈𝑃𝑖 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1 × 𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑖 + 𝛽2 × 𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑒 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖 + 𝛽3 × 𝑤ℎ𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑝𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑟 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖
               + 𝛽4 × 𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 + 𝛽5 × 𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖
               + 𝛽6 × 𝑐𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑑𝑒𝑑𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑖 + 𝛽7 × 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑖 + 𝛽8 × 𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑒𝑥𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑖
                + 𝜖𝑖 (𝐸𝑞. 4)

We perform a log-transformation on the following variables: Underpricing, Offer price,
Issue size and Whitepaper pages. As Table IV shows, these variables show high skewness,
indicating a non-linear relationship between the independent and dependent variables, a
                                                                      2
log-transformation is conducted for highly skewed variables.  This results in the
following regression model:

2
  The constant 1.01 is added to underpricing before the log-transformation (see Eq. 3), to include negative
values. Since the definition of the variables offer price, issue size and whitepaper pages does not entail
any negative values, no constant is added.

                                  16
 𝐿𝑜𝑔 − 𝑎𝑑𝑗𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑀𝑈𝑃𝑖
                = 𝛼 + 𝛽1 × ln(𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑖) + 𝛽2 × ln(𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑒 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖)
                + 𝛽3 × ln(𝑤ℎ𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑝𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑟 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑝𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑠𝑖) + 𝛽4 × 𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑡 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖
                + 𝛽5 × 𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖 + 𝛽6 × 𝑐𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑑𝑒𝑑𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖 + 𝛽7 × 𝑝𝑟𝑒 𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑖
                + 𝛽8 × 𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑒𝑥𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑖 + 𝜖𝑖 (𝐸𝑞. 5)
Furthermore, influential points are identified using Cooks D approach with the criteria of
4/n, where n is the sample size. As a result, 10 observations are omitted to make the
                                                                                       3
regression more accurate, reducing the final dataset from 196 to 186 observations. Next,
we conduct a series of robustness tests. First, a White test and a Breusch–Pagan test are
conducted to check for heteroskedasticity. Second, a Variance Inflation Factor (VIF) test
is conducted to check for multicollinearity between independent variables. Lastly, a
Ramsey RESET test is performed to see whether non-linear combinations of the fitted
values help explain the response variable. The specified model passes all tests and is
therefore kept (see Appendix II).

3
 To be consistent, the same data of 186 observations is used throughout the paper.

                                  17
5. Data

The following section describe the data collection process, descriptive statistics and
construction of variables used in the study.

5.1. Data Collection

In the absence of one database containing all IEO-relevant data needed for this study, all
data was manually collected from various sources. Information regarding which IEOs that
had been announced within the time frame of this study was collected from
coincodex.com and icoholder.com, containing large datasets of IEOs. These websites
gather aggregated data on announced upcoming and ended IEOs from more than 300
cryptocurrency exchanges.
Further information regarding the specifics of each IEO, including the offer price, pre-
sales, issue size, first day closing price, expert rating and number of whitelist pages was
collected directly from the websites and communication channels of the issuer and
exchange conducting the IEO, since these sources presumably provide the most reliable
and accurate information. If information was missing on these websites, data was
supplemented from the information provided on the third-party websites stated above.
Furthermore, a non-probability-based sampling approach was used. More specifically, all
available data points from the selected sources have been collected. A probability-based
sampling approach was also considered, as it has several advantages over a non-
probability-based approach. However, due to the infancy of IEOs, entailing limited data
availability, a non-probability-based sampling approach was chosen to obtain an adequate
sample size.
The original data sample consisted of all announced IEOs listed on the above-mentioned
websites between January 1, 2019 and April 30, 2021, which amounted to 648 announced
IEOs. However, the collected sample size then amounted to a set of 196 IEOs. The main
reason for omitting projects were lack of information about the first day closing price,
indicating either (1) the token was never listed, or (2) the token had been delisted from
the exchange. If the token was never listed, the IEO must have most likely failed to raise
the required funds and can thus be regarded as incomplete. If the token had been delisted
from the initial exchange of the IEO, historic trading prices were unavailable. In addition,
data was not included if an issuer had already conducted prior IEOs or ICOs, or if the
IEO listed on the websites were in fact pre-sales. After collecting 196 observations, an
additional 10 influential data points were excluded in the analysis, as determined by
Cook’s D approach. The final data sample is thus comprised of 186 IEOs.

5.2. Construction of Variables

The below table presents a summary of the definitions of the independent variables.

                                  18
Table III

Construction and Definition of Variables

 Variable Definition

 Offer price The price at which the token is offered during the IEO in USD.

 Closing price The closing price as defined by the given exchange of the IEO in USD.

                            The number of tokens in millions offered in the IEO, multiplied with the
 Issue size
                           offer price in USD.

  Whitepaper number of   The total number of whitepaper pages available to the public before and
 pages                  during the IEO.

                            The value 1 is assigned if the IEO had received an external rating during the
 External rating
                             IEO, 0 if not.

                        The number of IEOs that had been conducted within 30 days of the listing
 Crowdedness
                             date.

                         The 30-day return of the CCi30 index measured at the listing day on the
 Market sentiment
                         exchange.

  Pre-sale The value 1 is assigned if the IEO had a pre-sale before the IEO, 0 if not.

                           The value 1 is assigned if the IEO was launched on a trusted exchange, 0 if
 Trusted exchange
                             not.
Table III overviews the definition of the dependent variables and how they are constructed. For exact definition
on the variable Trusted Exchange, see Appendix III.

The definition of a trusted exchange is given by coincodex.com. There are several
different criteria an exchange can meet in order to be regarded as a trusted exchange. This
either includes membership in certain organizations, holding certain licenses, or receiving
good scores in reports produced by cryptocurrency research firms. See Appendix III for
the exact definition.
External rating refers to a rating given by certain websites that cover IEO listings. These
websites are icoholder.com, icodrops.com, icomarks.com and icobench.com.

5.3. Summary Statistics

Table IV presents the summary statistics for market-corrected underpricing (without log-
transformation) and the independent variables.

                                   19
Table IV

Descriptive Statistics
                                                                     Standard
 Name Mean Median Min Max Skew Kurtosis            N
                                                                            dev.

 Offer price 0.95 0.05 2.8e-5 32 5.70 36.20 3.66 186

 Issue size 27.89 3.00 0.0017 1010.00 7.18 53.50 118.24 186

 Whitepaper pages 32.90 28.00 6.00 146.00 1.76 5.01 32.90 131

 External Rating 0.32 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.75 -1.44 0.47 186

 Crowdedness 25.99 22.00 1.00 56.00 0.20 -1.37 14.73 186

 Market sentiment 0.16 0.18 -0.27 0.93 0.34 -0.16 0.23 186

 Pre-sale 0.27 0.00 0.00 1.00 1.03 -0.93 0.44 186

 Trusted Exchange 0.52 1.00 0.00 1.00 -0.06 -2.01 0.50 186

 Underpricing
                     4.12 0.90 -0.93 64.25 3.85 16.77 9.50 186

  Table IV presents a summary of the descriptive statistics of the variables relating to the final sample of 186 initial
  exchange offerings (IEO) conducted between Jan 2019 and Apr 2021.

The average underpricing is 412.02 percent, meaning that the IEOs in the sample, on
average, trade for 412.02 percent higher at the end of the first trading day in comparison
to the offer price. As indicated by Figure I, most IEOs which offered substantial initial
returns have been conducted during 2021. The minimum and maximum values show a
wide range for several variables. The level of underpricing ranges from –92.96 percent to
6,424.88 percent. The lowest offer price was 0.0000028 USD whereas the most expensive
IEO had an offer price of 32 USD. The sample also shows substantial differences in the
size of IEOs with regards to issue size, with the smallest IEO issuing tokens worth 17
thousand USD and the largest issue size amounting to 1.01 billion USD. Furthermore, the
underpricing median of 90.49 percent is substantially lower than its mean of 412.02
percent, indicating a high right skewness. Indeed, as Figure II shows, underpricing has a
high right skewness. In addition, the variables offer price, issue size, and whitepaper
pages have a skewness above 1. As a rule of thumb, any value above 1 or below -1
indicates high skewness. For this reason, the variables underpricing, offer price, issue
size, and whitepaper pages are log-transformed in the regression analysis as described in
section 4.3.

                                  20
  Figure I

  Initial Exchange Offerings by Underpricing and Listing Date

Figure I provides a plotted overview of the initial exchange offerings (not log transformed) by listing day on the
x-axis and level of underpricing on the y-axis. The plotted data includes the final sample of 186 initial exchange
offerings.

 Figure II

 Distribution of Underpricing

Figure II shows a distribution of the level of underpricing in the collected sample of 186 initial exchange
offering (not log transformed).

                             21
        6. Empirical Results

        6.1. Level of Underpricing

          Table V shows the results of the t-test and non-parametric sign test. We find an average
         of 412.02 percent and a median of 90.49 percent on the market corrected level of
          underpricing. The t-test results in a rejection of the null hypothesis that underpricing is
          equal to or less than zero at a less than 0.1 percent significance level, and this goes for the
         non-parametric sign test as well. This implies that there is severe and significant
         underpricing in IEOs, in line with hypothesis H1.

      Table V

         T-test and Non-Parametric Sign Test Results

                                      T-test Non-parametric sign test

                                                      95% conf. interval**                               95% conf. interval
                                              Lower   Upper                           Lower   Upper
              N Mean* T p-value    bound    bound    N Median p-value    bound    bound

ln(MUP+1.01) 186 0.7958 8.7899 5.095e-16 0.6480 Inf

  MUP*** 186 1.2063 8.7899 5.095e-16 0.9018 Inf 186 0.9049 1.404e-14 0.5003 1.3296

               Table V presents the results of the t-test and non-parametric sign test. The t-test results in a rejection of the null hypothesis
             that the mean of the natural logarithm of underpricing adjustment for market returns plus a constant of 1.01 is equal to or
              less than zero. Additionally, the result of the non-parametric sign tests results in a rejection of the null hypothesis that the
             median of the non-log-transformed underpricing adjusted for market return is equal to or less than zero. *Mean refers to
             the geometric mean. **95% confidence interval around geometric mean. ***No t-test was conducted on MUP (market
               adjusted underpricing, not log transformed). Values stated are the inverse of the log transformed values / back transformed.

                                          22
 Table VI

 Regression Results

  Dependent variable: ln(MUPi+1.01)

  Predictive variables Estimate Std. Error T value p-value

      (Intercept) 2.9524346 0.4950472 5.9639 2.466e-08 ***

    ln (Offer price) 0.0042857 0.0322771 0.1328 0.8945866

     ln(Issue size) -0.1191769 0.0398111 -2.9936 0.0033388 **

 ln(Whitepaper pages) -0.5360103 0.1158770 -4.6257 9.373e-06 ***

   Market sentiment 1.0502583 0.3912705 2.6842 0.0082802 **

       Pre-sale -0.3755868 0.1502237 -2.5002 0.0137402 *

    External rating 0.0585216 0.1758646 0.3328 0.7398828

     Crowdedness -0.0207514 0.0053012 -3.9145 0.0001497 ***

   Trusted exchange 0.3370168 0.1666089 2.0228 0.0452796 *

   Significance levels 0 ‘***’ 0.001 ‘**’ 0.01 ‘*’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ‘ 1

                 2
      Multiple R             0.4141

                 2
      Adjusted R             0.3756

      F-Statistic 10.78 p-value: 2.187e-11

    Table VI presents estimated coefficients from regression using OLS. The dependent variable is the natural
     logarithm of underpricing as adjusted for market returns. For definition and construction on predictive variables,
    see Table II.

6.2. Regression Results

The regression results are presented in Table VI. First, we note that the pre-sale variable
is negatively correlated with underpricing at a 5 percent significance level. In addition,
we note that the number of pages in the white paper as released prior to the IEO has a less
than 1 percent significant negative coefficient. Furthermore, our results suggest the issue
size of the IEO is negatively correlated with underpricing at a 5 percent significance level.
The negative correlation of these variables is thus in line with hypothesis H3, H4 and H8.
Furthermore, Benedetti & Kostovetsky (2018) find that a low offer price causes increased
underpricing in ICOs. However, our results do not indicate that this holds true for IEOs
as the offer price is shown to have an insignificant correlation with underpricing. In
addition, the external rating variable is also not as expected, with an insignificant positive
correlation with underpricing. Consequently, both hypotheses H2 and H5 are not
supported by the results.
The results also show that the market sentiment variable is positively correlated with
underpricing at a 5 percent significance level. However, we cannot find any evidence that

                                  23
the amount of IEOs within 30 days before the token listing has a positive correlation with
underpricing. Instead, crowdedness is suggested to have negative correlation with the
amount of underpricing at a significant level of 1 percent, although at a small estimate.
As a consequence, we find evidence for H6 but fail to do so for H7.
Finally, our results suggest that IEOs which have been conducted on a reputable exchange
experience are correlated with underpricing at a 5 percent significance level, in
accordance with hypothesis H9. In fact, our data suggests that if the IEO has been
conducted on a trusted exchange, underpricing increases.

                                  24
7. Discussion

In this section we further discuss and interpret the results of our hypothesis testing and
regression model, in addition to discussing limitations and further research.

7.1. Interpretation and Analysis of Results

   7.1.1. Level of Underpricing
Our results indicate that initial exchange offerings are subject to significant and large
underpricing. The average underpricing of 412.02 percent is comparable to underpricing
levels in ICO research, in which studies have found average levels ranging from 8.2 to
929.9 percent (Adhami et al, 2018; Felix & von Eije, 2019; Benedetti & Kostovetsky,
2018; Momtaz, 2020). The downturn of the ICO market and the increased growth of IEOs
seem to have a positive effect on blockchain projects’ fundraising success, as suggested
by Anson (2021). However, the results from this study provide evidence that token issuers
still experience large levels of underpricing.
We conjecture that the previous fraudulent behavior of ICO issuers and the extreme levels
of information asymmetry (Momtaz, 2020) have caused the ICO market to become a
“market for lemons” (Akerlof, 1970), causing buyers and sellers to ultimately leave the
market. Consequently, the IEO market grew, promising to mitigate the information
asymmetry by certifying the quality of firms and lowering risks, and buyers and sellers
were thus able to participate in the market again. However, likely due to the lack of
regulation and the presence of reputable actors, the market is still subject to large
information asymmetry, and uninformed investors who are unable to distinct between
high- and low-quality firms still require large underpricing in order to participate in the
market, as suggested by Rock (1986). Also relating to this, some IEOs were announced
but never listed. This might also indicate that only firms who can afford to underprice are
able to successfully complete the IEO.

   7.1.2. Regression Results
In the still immature market of cryptocurrency, investor sentiment and some aspects of
information asymmetry mitigation seem to influence the amount of initial first day returns
issuers experience. From our results, we highlight three areas of discussion.
First, positive market sentiment of the cryptocurrency market is significantly and
positively correlated with IEO underpricing. As described in the IPO literature, sentiment
investors are willing bid up the price of the issue if other recent issues have also risen in
price, in a type of positive feedback or “trend” chasing strategy. If large enough number
of investors follow this strategy, they may end up causing a positive autocorrelation of
initial returns (Ibbotson el at. 1994). This could help explain the remarkable levels of
underpricing in the crypto market, which becomes increasingly reasonable when
considering its still young and immature nature. Aqqarwal, Krigman and Womack (2002)
suggest that managers underprice to generate increased research coverage and attract
more demand for the stock to then sell their shares at lock up expiration. If applied in an
IEO context, token issuers could underprice to attract attention from the high

                                  25
concentration of positive feedback investors, and thus bid up token prices even further.
Depending on to what extent they own the token themselves, they could make a large
enough return to benefit from underpricing. However, we cannot find a significant
positive relationship between underpricing and the amount of IEOs conducted 30 days
leading up to the listing day. The concept of more firms going public in “windows of
opportunity” during hot markets, as described by Ritter (1991) and Ibbotson et al. (1994),
does not seem to apply to IEOs in the same extent.
Second, the results suggest that mitigating information asymmetry to some extent may
lower underpricing. More specifically, firms looking to minimize underpricing might
want to conduct a pre-sale of tokens prior to the IEO. This way they can attract
knowledgeable investors and decrease the level of information asymmetry at the time of
the IEO, as suggested by Welch (1992). In addition, if firms release lengthy whitepapers
and have large issue sizes, the ex-ante uncertainty is suggestively reduced and thus also
underpricing. This is mainly in accordance with Ritter (1991). What surprised us was that
having an external rating prior to the IEO does not seem to significantly influence
underpricing, as suggested by the IPO literature (Megginson & Weiss, 1991). This result
could have many explanations. It could suggest that investors do not look to these sources
to certify the value of the firm. We also cannot verify to what extent the rating was
available to investors at the time of the IEO, or who took part of the rating, which might
help explain the insignificance of the variable. Nevertheless, it ultimately might suggest
that not all means of reducing information asymmetry may help in reducing underpricing.
Lastly, we discuss the implication of that underpricing is seemingly increased when
conducted on trusted exchanges. As mentioned, the IPO literature on this aspect is mixed.
Many studies find evidence for the certification hypothesis in that reputable underwriters
certify the value of the IPO and that underpricing is thus decreased (Booth & Smith, 1986;
Carter & Manaster, 1990; Michaely & Shaw, 1994). On the contrary, other studies have
found a negative correlation between underwriter reputation and underpricing, suggesting
that underwriters underprice to increase their own or their investor’s wealth (Betty &
Welch, 1996; Loughra & Ritter, 2004). Our results indicate that the latter explanation is
relevant in an IEO context. We conjecture that trusted exchanges can attract a larger
number of potential investors and liquidity on their platform since investors look to more
trusted exchanges to lower risks. Token issuers, in turn, find it preferable to sell their
tokens on these platforms since they get access to more liquidity and increase probability
of fundraising success. This puts the reputable exchange in a position of high negotiating
power. Exchanges may be looking to underprice to generate information momentum and
increase demand for the token, in line with the model of Aqqarwal, Krigman and Womack
(2002). When more investors are attracted to the exchange platform, the exchange’s
revenues increase in terms of trading fees. The exchange is then better off than if they
would have refrained from underpricing, although it is not in the interest of the issuer.
This explanation becomes increasingly plausible if we consider a high concentration of
sentiment investors pursuing a positive feedback strategy.

                                  26
7.2. Limitations and Restrictions

   7.2.1. Data Availability and Reliability
In our data collection process, we find restrictions on data availability and reliability.
There are still no information requirements for issuers, and the channels through which
firms communicated information about the IEO varied to a considerable extent.
Therefore, there was no single and reliable database containing all IEO-relevant
information. For this reason, all data had to be manually collected from various sources,
including third-part websites. This caused indirect restrictions in the data collection
process, as well as negative effects on data reliability.
In addition, many IEOs had missing data on closing prices on the first day of trading.
These IEOs must have been either (1) unable to complete the IEO due to not raising the
required funds and were thus never listed, or (2) had been delisted from the exchange they
were initially listed on. It is difficult to determine which group the IEO belonged to, due
to lack of information released by the firm and the exchange. Since there was no public
data on historic trading prices on delisted tokens, we were unable to measure underpricing
on these projects. Moreover, some data was excluded if an issuer had already conducted
prior IEOs or ICOs. Consequently, the data sample initially included all announced IEOs
according to the sources used in this study, but the final data sample include
approximately only 30 percent of these IEOs listed on the websites.

   7.2.2. Data Sampling Method
A further limitation to this paper is the data sampling method. Since the data collection
was subject to limitations of data availability as described above, we choose to collect
data solely based on availability instead of randomization. This was to ensure the most
adequate sample size and that all data which could be included in the sample ultimately
was included.

   7.2.3. Survivorship Bias
The data availability issue regarding delisted tokens causes the final data set to be subject
of survivorship bias, although we have tried to mitigate this bias by only including
datapoints from January 1, 2019 and onwards. We recognize this as perhaps the largest
limitation to this paper in the sense that the final data set to a large extent consists of
tokens which have performed well on the market and have thus not been delisted. Well
performing tokens might then experience increased underpricing initially due to being
more positively valued by the market.

7.3. Future Research

There is still little research done on underpricing in token offerings. This study provides
evidence for that IEOs experience large underpricing on average and suggests several
correlating variables. However, the IEO market is still in its infancy, and there is little
empirical documentation on market prices, market mechanisms, and the overall financial
environment. This study is still subject to large restrictions in terms of data availability.

                                  27
Replicating this study on a more comprehensive and reliable dataset is thus a suggested
topic for future research.
Moreover, in this study we find a significant correlation between the underpricing and the
reputation of the exchange. Another topic of interest for future research would thus be the
principal-agent relationship between the firm and the exchange, in which it could be
explored who ultimately is subject to the costs and benefits of underpricing. Essentially,
if underpricing in IEOs is as large as suggested in this study, why are issuers not more
concerned with decreasing underpricing? To what extent might cryptocurrency
exchanges benefit from underpricing issued tokens? As discussed, there might be a
possibility that the exchange benefits from strategic underpricing to generate large initial
returns and increased information momentum. The firm issuing the tokens would
rationally look to lower underpricing and sell tokens at their true value. Therefore, if the
exchange benefits from underpricing, a principal-agent relationship between the
exchange and the issuing firm arises. This point is of further curiosity when considering
the results of this study that token offerings listed on reputable exchanges are subject to
more underpricing, possibly indicating that exchanges with more negotiating power can
underprice more.

                                  28
8. Conclusion

This study is the first to focus on underpricing in IEOs, as previous studies on token
underpricing have focused solely on ICOs. The key difference between an IEO and an
ICO is the important role of the exchange conducting the token sale and listing. We study
if this difference influences the existence of underpricing in IEOs and if theories from the
IPO underpricing literature can help explain it.
The analysis of 186 IEOs conducted between January 2019 and April 2021 suggests that
IEOs do experience severe underpricing, with a mean and median of 412.02 percent and
90.49 percent, respectively. This is in line with previous research on the underpricing
levels in initial coin offerings (ICO).
We also perform a regression analysis, which shows that variables translated from IPO
underpricing literature may also be relevant in an IEO context. Our data suggests that
investors can earn increased initial returns if market sentiment in the cryptocurrency
market is high and if token sales are conducted on a trusted exchange. In contrast, results
show that firms can decrease underpricing by mitigating some aspects of asymmetric
information, such as conducting a pre-sale of tokens, releasing a lengthier whitepaper,
and if issue sizes are large. We hope that these results can provide a basis from which
future research can benefit from.
This study is subject to large limitations in terms of data availability. General availability
on firm characteristics and historic trading data is still limited in the cryptocurrency
market. We find that the most important consequence of this is survivorship bias since
tokens which have been delisted from exchanges lack data on trading prices. This causes
well performing tokens to be overrepresented in our data and underperforming tokens to
be unrecorded.
In conclusion, as token sales continue to revolutionize the way new ventures can finance
continued growth, cryptos are evidently often “left on the table”. Even though due
diligence is seemingly increased when token sales are conducted by an exchange,
investors still require large compensation in order to participate in the crypto market.

                                  29
9. References

Adhami, Saman, Giancarlo Giudici, and Stefano Martinazzi, 2018, Why do Businesses
Go Crypto? An Empirical Analysis of Initial Coin Offerings, Journal of Economics and
Businesses 100:64-75.

Aggarwal, Rajesh K., Laurie Krigman, and Kent L. Womack, 2002, Strategic IPO
underpricing, Information Momentum, and Lockup Expiration Selling, Journal of
Financial Economics 66(1):105-137.

Akerlof, George A., 1970, The Market for “Lemons”: Quality Uncertainty and the
Market Mechanism, The Quartely Journal of Economics 84(3):488-500.

Allen, Franklin, and Gerald R. Faulhaber, 1989, Signalling by underpricing in the IPO
Market, Journal of Financial Economics 23(2):303-323.

Anson, Mark, 2021, Initial Exchange Offerings: The Next Evolution in
Cryptocurrencies, The Journal of Alternative Investments 23(4):110-121.

Benedetti, Hugo E., and Leonard Kostovetsky, 2021, Digital Tulips? Returns to
Investors in Initial Coin Offerings, Journal of Corporate Finance 66, No. 101786.

Binance Academy, Initial Exchange Offering (IEO), retrieved 04-13-21, URL:
https://academy.binance.com/en/glossary/initial-exchange-offering.

Booth, James R., and Richard L. Smith, 1986, Capital Raising, Underwriting and the
Certification Hypothesis, Journal of Financial Economics 15(1):261-281.

Catalini, Christian, and Joshua S. Gans, 2019, Initial Coin Offerings and the Value of
Crypto Tokens, MIT Sloan Research Paper No. 5347-18, Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3137213 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3137213 .

Carter, Richard, and Steven Manaster, 1990, Initial Public Offerings and Underwriter
Reputation, The Journal of Finance 45(1):1045-1067.

CoinMarketCap, 2021, Global Cryptocurrency Charts, retrieved on 04-30-2021, URL:
https://coinmarketcap.com/charts/ .

Costelloe, Kevin, 2017, Bitcoin ‘Ought to Be Outlawed’, Nobel Prize Winner Stiglitz
Says, Bloomberg, Nov 29, URL: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-11-
29/bitcoin-ought-to-be-outlawed-nobel-prize-winner-stiglitz-says-jal10hxd .

Davies, Steve, Henri Arslanian, Kris Kersey, Günther Dobrauz, Jonas Heydasch, Henrik
Olsson, John Shipman, Raphael Ebeling, 2020, 6th ICO/STO Report: A Strategic
Perspective, Strategy& and PWC, URL:
https://www.pwc.com/ee/et/publications/pub/Strategy&_ICO_STO_Study_Version_Spr
ing_2020.pdf.

                                  30
Derrien, Francois, 2005, IPO Pricing in “Hot” Market Conditions: Who Leaves Money
on the Table?, The Journal of Finance 60(1):487-521.

Drobetz, Wolfgang, Paul P. Momtaz, and Henning Schröder, 2019, Investor Sentiment
and Initial Coin Offerings, The Journal of Alternative Investments 12(4): 41-55.

ECO News, 2018, Economics Nobel prize winner, Richard Thaler: “The market that
looks most like a bubble to me is Bitcoin and its brethren”, Jan 22, URL:
https://econews.pt/2018/01/22/economics-nobel-prize-winner-richard-thaler-the-market-
that-looks-most-like-a-bubble-to-me-is-bitcoin-and-its-brethren/ .

Felix, Thomas, and Henk von Eije, 2019, Underpricing in the cryptocurrency world:
evidence from initial coin offerings, Journal of Managerial Finance 45(4):563-578.

Grinblatt, Mark, and Chuan Yang Hwang, 1989, Signalling and the Pricing of New
Issues, The Journal of Finance 44(2):393-420.

Haffke, Lars, and Mathias Fromberger, 2020, ICO Market Report 2019/2020 –
Performance Analysis of 2019’s Initial Coin Offerings, Available at SSRN Electric
Journal: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3770793 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3770793.

Howell, Sabrina, Marina Niessner, and David Yermack, 2020, Initial Coin Offerings:
Financing Growth with Cryptocurrency Token Sales, The Review of Financial Studies
33(9):3925-3974.

Iansiti, Marco, and Karim R. Lakhani, 2017, The Truth About Blockchain, Harvard
Business Review, 95(1):118-127.

Ibbotson, Roger G., Jody L. Sindelar, and Jar R. Ritter, 1994, The Market’s Problems
with the Pricing of Initial Public Offerings, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance
7(1):66-74.

Krugman, Paul, 2018, Bubble, Bubble, Fraud and Trouble, The New York Times, Jan 29,
URL: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/29/opinion/bitcoin-bubble-fraud.html.

Lee, David Kuo Chuen, Li Guo, and Yu Wang, 2018, Cryptocurrency: A new
investment opportunity?, Journal of Alternative Investments 20(3):16-40.

Ljungqvist, Alexander, 2007, Cha 7: “IPO Underpricing”, Handbook of Corporate
Finances, Volume I, (Elsevier B.V., Amsterdam).

Ljungqvist, Alexander, and William J. Wilhelm Jr., 2003, IPO Pricing in the Dot-com
Bubble, The Journal of Finance 58(2):723-752.

Ljungqvist, Alexander, Vikram Nanda, and Rajdeep Singh, 2006, Hot Markets, Investor
Sentiment, and IPO Pricing, The Journal of Business 79(4):1667-1702.

Loughran, Tim, and Jay Ritter, 2004, Why Has IPO Underpricing Changed over Time?,
Financial Management 33(3):5-37.

                                  31
Megginson, William L., and Kathleen A. Weiss, 1991, Venture Capitalist Certification
in Initial Public Offerings, The Journal of Finance 46(3):879-903.

Michaely, Roni, and Wayne H. Shaw, 1994, The Pricing of Initial Public Offerings:
Tests of Adverse-Selection and Signaling Theories, The Review of Financial Studies
7(2):279-319.

Miglo, Anton, 2020, Choice Between IEO and ICO: Speed vs. Liquidity vs. Risk,
MPRA Paper 99600, University Library of Munich, Germany.

Momtaz, Paul P., 2020, Initial Coin Offerings, PLoS (Public Library of Science) ONE
15(5):1-30

Myalo, Alina, 2019, Comparative Analysis of ICO, DAOICO, IEO, STO. Case Study,
Finance Theory and Practice 23(6):6-25.

Ritter, Jay R., 1991, The Long-Run Performance of Initial Public Offerings, The
Journal of Finance 46(1):3-27.

Ritter, Jay R., 2020, Initial Public Offerings: Underpricing, IPO Data 2020, Warrington
College of Business, URL: https://site.warrington.ufl.edu/ritter/ipo-
data/?fbclid=IwAR0VMVXUzQ0KbTdxIafUPeRUzx-
wZMUGl2DEkpAY5IZEsqdNTRFZ_vqns70

Rock, Kevin, 1986, Why new issues are underpriced, Journal of Financial Economics
15(1):187-212.

Sánchez, David C., 2017, An Optimal ICO Mechanism, Available at SSRN Electric
Journal: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3040343 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3040343.

Shiller, Robert, 2014, In Search of a Stable Electronic Currency, The New York Times,
Mar 1, URL: https://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/02/business/in-search-of-a-stable-
electronic-currency.html?_r=0 .

Welch, Ivo, 1992, Sequential Sales, Learning, and Cascades, The Journal of Finance
47(2):695-732.

Wolff-Mann, Ethan, 2018, ‘Only good for drug dealers’: More Nobel prize winners
snub bitcoin, Yahoo Finance, Apr 27, URL: https://finance.yahoo.com/news/good-drug-
dealers-nobel-prize-winners-snub-bitcoin-184903784.html .

Zetsche, Dirk Andreas, Ross P. Buckley, Douglas W Arner, and Linus Föhr, 2019, The
ICO Gold Rush: It’s a Scam, It’s a Bubble, It’s a Super Challenge for Regulators,
Harvard International Law Journal 60(2):268-315.

                                  32
10. Appendix

10.1. Appendix I: Normality Tests

    Table A1

      Shapiro-Wilk Normality Test (Untransformed Data)
                                                            p-value
            W

                 0.49642 < 2.2e-16

         Table A1 shows Shapiro-Wilk W test on untransformed underpricing data (Market-corrected
          underpricing). Since the p-value for test statistic W is less than 0.05, the null hypothesis that the data
          is normally distributed is rejected.

 Table A2

  Jarque-Bera Test (Untransformed Data)

         X-squared df p-value

            2703.6 2 < 2.2e-16

  Table A2 shows Jarque–Bera test whether sample data have the skewness and kurtosis matching a normal
  distribution. Test on untransformed underpricing data (Market-corrected underpricing). Since the p-value is less
  than 0.05, the null hypothesis that the data is normally distributed is rejected.

                                  33
Figure A1

Normal Q-Q Plot on Untransformed Data

Figure A1 shows a normal quantile-quantile (Q-Q) on untransformed underpricing data (Market-
corrected underpricing). Normally distributed data should lie approximately on a straight line. Since the
observations fall outside of the reference lines, the untransformed data is not regarded as normally
distributed.

 Table A3

 Shapiro-Wilk Normality Test (Transformed Data)

           W p-value

           0.97189 0.0008389

  Table A3 shows Shapiro-Wilk W test on transformed underpricing data (ln(Market-corrected
  underpricing + 1.01)). Since the p-value for test statistic W is less than 0.05, the null hypothesis that
  the data is normally distributed is rejected.

                               34
Table A4

Jarque-Bera Test (Transformed Data)

         X-squared df p-value

           6.1376 2 0.04648

 Table A4 shows Jarque–Bera test whether sample data have the skewness and kurtosis matching a normal
 distribution. Test on transformed underpricing data (ln(Market-corrected underpricing + 1.01)). Since the p-value
 is less than 0.05, the null hypothesis that the data is normally distributed is rejected.

    Figure A2

      Normal Q-Q Plot on Transformed Data

           Figure A2 shows a normal quantile-quantile (Q-Q) on transformed underpricing data
           (ln(Market-corrected underpricing + 1.01)). Normally distributed data should lie
           approximately on a straight line. Since the observations fall approximately within the
           reference lines, the transformed data is assumed to be approximately normally distributed.

                                  35
10.2. Appendix II: Regression Robustness Tests

 Table A5

  Studentized Breusch-Pagan Test

             BP df p-value

           14.082 8 0.07966

   Table A5 shows Breusch–Pagan test for heteroskedasticity in the linear regression model. Since the p-
    value is above 0.05, the null hypothesis of homoskedasticity is not rejected.

 Table A6

 White's Test

      statistic p-value parameter alternative

                                           16
        18.5 0.295                       greater

  Table A6 shows White test for heteroskedasticity in the linear regression model. Since the p-value is
  above 0.05, the null hypothesis of homoskedasticity is not rejected.

Table A7

Variance Inflation Factor (VIF) Test

                                             ln(Whitepaper
    ln(Offer Price) ln(Issue Size)                     Market Sentiment
                                                 Pages)

       1.128468 1.132512 1.129884 1.222014

       Pre-sale External Rating Crowdedness Reputable Exchange

       1.098156 1.377222 1.356518 1.103533

  Table A7 shows Variance inflation factors (VIFs) to measure of the amount of multicollinearity in the
  linear regression model. The values for VIF indicate what percentage the variance is inflated for each
  coefficient. A VIF of 10 is usually regarded as a concern for multicollinearity. Since the highest value is
  1.377, no signs if multicollinearity are indicated.

                                   36
Table A8

Ramsey RESET Test

      RESET df1 df2 p-value

      1.9852 2 120 0.1418

  Table A8 shows Ramsey (RESET) test to test whether non-linear combinations of the fitted values help
  explain the response variable. Since the p-value is above 0.05, the null hypothesis of correct specification
  is not rejected. This indicates that the functional form is correct.

10.3. Appendix III: Definition of a Trusted Exchange

If a cryptocurrency exchange meets any of the following criteria, it is defined as a
trusted exchange:
    - The exchange holds a BitLicense with the NYDFS (New York State Department
        of Financial Services).
    - The exchange is a member of Japan’s JVCEA self-regulatory organization.
    - The exchange is listed as “BTI Verified” by the Blockchain Transparency
        Institute (BTI).
    - The exchange is one of the exchanges identified as having “real volume” by
       Bitwise Investments in their presentation to the Securities and Exchange
      Commission (SEC) from March 2019.
    - The exchange was included in Group 1 AND achieved a score of 4 or higher in
       Alameda Research’s cryptocurrency exchange volume report from July 2019.

                                  37