FOREIGN IPOS ON STAR
SPANGLED EXCHANGES

A STUDY OF IPO UNDERPRICING FROM 2005 TO 2020

ADELE SVEGER

JULIA HERLOGSSON

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2021
Foreign IPOs on star spangled exchanges: A study of IPO underpricing from 2005 to
2020

Abstract:

   The phenomenon of IPO underpricing has captured the interest of academics for decades
   and is, to date, continuing to be widely debated. However, little research has been carried
   out to ascertain whether companies going public in foreign markets are more likely to be
   underpriced compared to their domestic counterparts and, most importantly, the findings
   of the existing papers are inconsistent. This study examines US domestic and foreign IPOs
   on US stock exchanges from 2005 to 2020 and investigate which firm-specific factors that
   influence IPO initial returns. This study concludes that firms with larger size, older,
   operating in a high-tech industry and VC-backed have a positive relationship with mean
   and volatility of initial returns, whereas firms that opt to list on the NYSE are instead
   characterized by a negative relationship. We extend and complement existing research by
   investigating whether foreign firms that list on a US stock exchange experience more or
   less underpricing compared to US domestic firms. In the time period 2005 to 2012, we
   find equivalent degrees of IPO underpricing for foreign and US domestic IPOs. Whereas
   in the time period 2013 to 2020, we find that foreign firms experience less underpricing
   than domestic firms. We assume that the foreign firms may pick up even larger firm-and
   offer-specific characteristics effects with less information asymmetry than controlled for
   in our study.

Keywords:

IPO, Initial Public Offering, Information asymmetry, Underpricing, Foreign IPOs

Authors:

   Adele Sveger (24319)
   Julia Herlogsson (24483)

Tutors:

   Peter Aleksziev, Visiting Teacher, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d’ Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Adele Sveger and Julia Herlogsson, 2021

                                     1
1. Introduction

In 2010, in the aftermath of the financial crisis that led to a severe dip in financial activity,
more than a third of Initial Public Offerings (IPOs) in the US are performed by foreign
companies (Ritter, 2021). Such statistics supports a continued trend of an ever-increasing
number of non-US based companies wanting to list on “star spangled” exchanges. In the
period of 2005 to 2020 the ratio of foreign-to-domestic IPOs in the US has increased by
almost 50% (Ritter, 2021). The phenomenon is most visible in, but not limited to the US,
given its attractiveness for foreign firms. Indeed, past studies in the field of cross-border IPOs
have shown a growing tendency for companies turning to global markets to raise capital. For
instance, Henderson et al. (2006) estimated that between 1990 and 2001, a mere 12% of total
new capital raised through public equity offerings was conducted cross-border. Caglio et al.
(2016) estimated that this number increased to 20% in the period from 1995 to 2007.

Previous research (Pagano et al., 2002; Caglio et al., 2016) has focused on understanding
what incentivizes companies to prefer listing in foreign versus domestic markets and why
these reasons may vary depending on time period and geographies. Doidge et al. (2013)
points to financial globalization as the catalyst for the exodus. Our paper is however not
concerned with assessing the causes of such trends, but more to its consequences: do
companies effectively gain from performing IPOs in foreign markets?

One of the main possible costs a company can in incur as a result of performing an IPO is
“underpricing costs” (Rock, 1986; Beatty and Ritter, 1986; Lowry et al., 2010). A company
faces underpricing costs when the difference between the closing price of the first day of
trading and offer price is positive. For this reason, IPO underpricing is also commonly
referred to as “positive initial return” (Rock, 1986; Beatty and Ritter, 1986; Lowry et al.,
2010). Incurring underpricing costs implies that IPO underwriters have either deliberately or
accidentally, underestimated the value of the company.

A large extent of research shows that most IPOs are on average subject to underpricing
(Rock, 1986; Beatty and Ritter, 1986; Lowry et al., 2010). While most studies agree on this
conclusion, the causes leading to underpricing and possible predictors are largely ambiguous
and debated. Overall, it seems clear that asymmetry of information plays a determining role.
Although, limited amount of research has been carried out to ascertain whether companies
going public in foreign markets are more likely to be underpriced compared to their domestic
counterparts and, most importantly, the results of the existing papers are inconsistent (Francis
et al.,2001; Ejara and Ghosh, 2004; Bruner et al., 2004). The contradicting findings of these
papers call for further research on differences of IPO underpricing between US domestic and
foreign firms.

In 2010, Lowry et al.’s comprehensive and detailed study was published, outlining a thorough
methodology to predict IPO underpricing. The study accounts for firm- and offering-specific
factors to control for different levels of information asymmetry, time-patterns and market
volatility as variables to explain IPO underpricing for US domestic firms. The paper reveals
that, in the US, a high level of information asymmetry predicts a higher degree of IPO
underpricing. The results of the study proved to be more conclusive and accurate compared to
previous research in the field and the paper is thus considered a benchmark study in the field
of IPO literature. However, the study does not include foreign firms.

                                     2
The purpose of this paper is therefore to extend and complement previous research by
investigating which firm- and offer-specific factors influence IPO initial returns, and by
assessing whether the origination of a firm that list on a US stock exchange affects
information asymmetry and, consequently, underpricing to a statistically significant extent.
More specifically, the research questions that we aim to answer are the following:

What firm- and offer-specific characteristics determine underpricing on US stock exchanges?
Are foreign firms going public in the US more likely to be underpriced compared to US
domestic firms?

To answer these questions, we investigate initial returns and volatility of initial returns of
both foreign and US domestic IPOs performed on US stock exchanges, in the period between
2005 and 2020. We assess two different types of IPOs as specified by Caglio et al. (2013),
namely: domestic IPOs, defined by a company going public in its home country; foreign
IPOs, defined by a company going public outside its home market. Additionally, we exclude
firms that previously have been listed on any other stock exchange. As a result of a prior
listing process, there is generally a greater amount of information available for these firms
which could result in biased observations (Bruner et al., 2004). Lastly, US legislation allows
for different IPO procedures. For the purpose of our study, we exclusively evaluate
companies that underwent an IPO through either American Depositary Receipts (ADRs) level
3 procedure or issuing of ordinary shares.

We find that firms with the characteristics of being larger, older, in a high-tech industry and
VC-backed have a positive relationship with mean and volatility of initial returns whereas
firms that decide to list on the NYSE have a negative relationship. We extend and
complement existing research by investigating whether foreign firms that list on a US stock
exchange experience more or less underpricing than US domestic firms. In the time period
2005 to 2012, we find equivalent degrees of IPO underpricing for foreign and US domestic
IPOs. Whereas in the time period 2013 to 2020 we find that foreign firms experience less
underpricing than domestic firms. We assume that the foreign firms may pick up even larger
firm-and offer-specific characteristics effects with less information asymmetry than
controlled for in our study.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows, section two presents the existing
literature in the field of IPO underpricing and foreign IPOs, section three describes our data
and data collection process, section four demonstrates our used method, section five shows
the descriptive statistics of our data, section six shows our results and section seven
summarizes our final conclusions and further research.

                                     3
2. Literature review

This section provides a comprehensive overview of the existing literature for the two fields of
focus of the study: IPO underpricing and foreign IPOs. To begin with, we demonstrate the
fundamental theories and relevant research surrounding the phenomenon of IPO
underpricing. The focus narrows down to demonstrate the literature on the firm-specific
characteristics used as proxies to estimate the level of information asymmetry in our study.
Lastly, we define the research gap in the field of IPO underpricing and outline how our study
advances the already existing research on the topic.

2.1 The IPO underpricing phenomenon

The phenomenon of IPO underpricing has captured the interest of academics for decades and
is, to date, continuing to be widely debated. A firm undergoing an IPO mainly faces two
different types of transaction costs, namely: direct costs, including investment banking fees
and initial listing fees; indirect costs, including the cost of underpricing (Loughran and Ritter,
2002). Early studies in the field of IPO underpricing, focused on finding supporting evidence
for the existence of IPO underpricing. Reilly and Hatfield (1967)’s research on new equity
issues in the US during the 1960s is one of the first studies to provide evidence of the
existence of IPO underpricing. Later, both Ibbotson (1975) and McDonald and Fisher (1972)
provide similar evidence with data from the 1960s in the US, confirming that IPOs on
average experience positive initial returns. Additionally, Loughran et al. (1994) find support
for the existence of IPO underpricing worldwide, not merely on US exchanges. To date, the
existence of IPO underpricing globally and its persistence across time, have been broadly
documented and studied (Dong et al., 2011).

While most studies agree on the existence of IPO underpricing, the driving forces behind it
and its possible predictors are still largely ambiguous and debated, which resulted in the
formulation of multiple theoretical explanations. We only focus on summarizing the relevant
theories of underpricing that we use to derive our research hypothesis.

A majority of the existing literature argues that information asymmetry is the main cause of
underpricing, Baron (1982) and Rock (1986) among others. The theories that rely on
information asymmetry to explain IPO underpricing assume that one of the stakeholders
involved in an IPO process (i.e., issuers, underwriters and investors) obtain superior amount
of information compared to their counterparties. Information asymmetry can mainly be
identified in three different relations: information asymmetry among the issuer and the
underwriter; information asymmetry among the underwriter and investors (or different groups
of investors); information asymmetry among the issuer and investors.

Baron (1982) argue that information asymmetry occurs between the underwriter and the
issuer. The underwriter is assumed to have superior information regarding the aggregated
market demand and deliberately underprice an IPO in order to reduce the distribution efforts.
As the underwriter is compensated based on total proceeds, he is hence incentivized to set a
lower price to ensure full subscription. IPO underpricing is, in this case, induced by the
observed agency problem between the two stakeholders.

Contrarily to Baron (1982), Rock (1986) argues that information asymmetry exists between
investors. In the model of Rock (1986), there are two separate groups of investors, namely

                                     4
informed investors, holding superior information about an issuing firm and uninformed
investors. The informed investors will only choose to subscribe to issues when positive initial
return is expected and, hence, crowd out the uninformed investors. Consequently, the
uniformed investors only receive the remaining issues that are not yielding positive initial
returns and are therefore discouraged to subscribe to any issues. Rock (1986) refers to the
phenomenon as the “winner’s curse” and it affects the uninformed investors on the market.
According to the hypothesis of the winner’s curse, a rational issuer underprices an IPO in
order to attract both informed and uninformed investors to participate in an IPO. Ritter (1984)
similarly argue that investors need to be compensated for the winner’s curse problem by
receiving higher positive initial returns in an IPO with more information asymmetry.

In contrast to the theories of Rock (1986) and Baron (1982), the signaling theory provided by
for instance Allen and Faulhaber (1989) argue that an issuer holds the most information about
the firm and is deliberately underpricing its shares. According to this theory, IPO
underpricing is therefore a way to signal to investors that an issue is good, as it signals that
they are able to recoup the losses generated by the initial positive returns. Welch (1989) and
Grinblatt and Hwang (1989) similarly argue that underpricing signals to investors that it is a
high-quality firm going public. In general, the signaling theory proposes that a firm can
convey information to the investors through several types of variables including, for instance,
the choice of underwriter and auditor. In fact, it is not exclusively the offer price and offer
size that reveals information, but all types of firm- and offer-specific characteristics can
provide insights regarding the credibility of a firm to its investors prior to the IPO (Allen and
Faulhaber, 1989). Numerous researchers, suggest that firms that signal more information to
investors, can mitigate the information asymmetry and therefore generate less IPO
underpricing (Ritter, 1984; Beatty and Ritter, 1986; Michaely and Shaw, 1994).

Beatty and Ritter (1986) extend the earlier described winner’s curse theory, to additionally
include a so-called “ex-ante uncertainty” about the true value of the issuing firm. If ex-ante
information asymmetry is high, they assume that the problem of the winner’s curse becomes
even worse. Higher information asymmetry is shown to lower the incentives for investors to
participate in an issue and underpricing then becomes even more necessary in order to attract
uninformed investors. Beatty and Ritter (1986) went on to highlight how different firm-
characteristics, such as offer volume and firm age, are used as proxies to understand the level
of information asymmetry prior to an IPO. The modeling of firm- and offer-specific
characteristics in order to understand the degree of uncertainty surrounding an IPO, is also
consistent with an earlier study conducted by Ritter (1984).

Rock (1986) goes on to argue that both the underwriter and the issuer are assumed to attain
considerably more information about the issuing firm compared to any of the other single
market participants. Yet, they still lack key information about the aggregated market demand,
that is setting the final market price which determines the degree of underpricing. This
problem is the most prominent one facing both the underwriter and the issuer: what is the
actual aggregated market demand for an issue? The degree of underpricing resulting from
information asymmetry surrounding the aggregated market demand is shown to be affected
by time series, market volatility, and firm-specific characteristics (Ritter, 1984; Pastor and
Veronesi, 2005; Beatty and Ritter, 1986). These three factors are modelled together in the
study conducted by Lowry et al. (2010).

As previously discussed, there is large ambiguity between researchers on why IPOs on
average are underpriced and Lowry et al. (2010)’s study relies on the idea of information

                                     5
asymmetry between the underwriter and aggregated market participants (see Rock, 1986;
Beatty and Ritter,1986). The study of Lowry et al. (2010) examines US IPOs on US stock
exchanges from 1965 to 2005 and contributes to this field of research by not only estimating
average initial returns of IPOs, but to also by examining the volatility of initial returns. Their
results show strong correlation between average initial returns and standard deviation of
initial returns, indicating that a period of time with high average initial returns, will imply
high volatility. Lowry et al. (2010) also argue that their study includes more powerful
statistical tests than previous research on the topic to assess the dispersion of IPO
underpricing over time. They tested for different firm- and offer-specific characteristics that
were assumed to incorporate and signal different degrees of information asymmetry, namely
underwriter rank, firm age, number of issued shares, exchange location, if a firm’s core
business is in a high-tech industry or not, if a firm is venture capital backed or not and the
difference between offer price and middle of the range prices in prospectus. Consistent with
previous studies they find that initial returns and volatility of initial returns are higher for
firms with more information asymmetry. Thanks to their approach of modelling and the
comprehensiveness of the factors examined, Lowry et al. (2010)’s study is considered to be a
benchmark in the field of IPO underpricing research.

2.2 Firm-and offer-specific characteristics

2.2.1 Firm size

Offer size of an IPO, defined as the product of number of offered shares and offer price, is
commonly used as a proxy for firm size. Beatty and Ritter (1986) find that a smaller offering
size indicates higher risk and is hence expected to incorporate higher ex-ante uncertainty.
Later studies (Miller and Reilly, 1987; Ljungqvist, 1997) also find a negative relationship
between offer size and information asymmetry, the smaller the offer size the more
information asymmetry. Lowry et al. (2010) use number of shares offered as a proxy for firm
size instead of offer size.
2.2.2 Firm age

Numerous studies examine the relationship between firm age and information asymmetry.
Ritter (1984) argues that it is more costly to gather information about younger firms with
limited amount of historical data and consequently investors expect a higher level of positive
initial return for these types of issues. Later research (Beatty and Ritter,1986; Ljungqvist and
Wilhelm, 2003) also find that younger firms have higher levels of information asymmetry.
Lowry et al. (2010) find similar results.

2.2.3 Industry

Researchers find that the degree of IPO underpricing differ between industries (Ritter, 1984;
Loughran and Ritter, 2004). Hwang et al. (2012) find that high-tech firms are associated with
more information asymmetry compared to non-high-tech firms. Lowry et al. (2010) also find
a positive relationship between high-tech firms and IPO underpricing.

2.2.4 US stock exchange

Firm characteristics generally vary between different US stock exchanges. Larger and more
established firms usually opt to list on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), whereas

                                     6
smaller, younger and high-tech firms usually decide to list on Nasdaq (Loughran, 1993).
Loughran (1993) argues that firms deciding to list on the NYSE incorporate less information
asymmetry whereas firms on Nasdaq incorporate more information asymmetry. Lowry et al.
(2010) find similar results in their study.

2.2.5 Venture capital backing

Existing research is inconsistent as to whether firms with venture capital (VC) financing face
more or less underpricing. Megginson and Weiss (1991) and Barry et al. (1990) argue that the
VC firm can share information about the issuing firm to the underwriter and hence lower the
degree of information asymmetry. Contrarily, Lee and Wahal (2004) and Hasan and Francis
(2001) find that VC-backed firms experience more underpricing and argue that firms with
VC-backing usually are in more risky industries and pick up this effect. Lowry et al. (2010)
find that VC-backed firms experience more underpricing and speculate that it is due to the
fact that VC firms are in risky high-tech businesses. Kotnik and Tärning (2020) build on the
limitation of Lowry et al. (2010) and develop a model to capture the true effect of VC-
backing by constructing a non-high-tech VC variable.

2.2.6 Foreign

Early research on the topic of foreign listings on US stock exchanges, focuses on cross-
listings (i.e., the foreign firm is prior to going public in the US already listed on its home
market or the foreign firm list on the US market and home market simultaneously), with the
likes of Miller (1999), Ule (1937), Foerster and Karolyi (1999) and Karolyi (1998) among
others. Later studies focus on IPO underpricing among foreign firms going public for the first
time on a US stock exchange, either by issuing ADRs or ordinary shares (Francis et al., 2001;
Ejara and Ghosh, 2004; Bruner et al., 2004).

Pagano et al. (2002) and Saudagaran (1998) find that foreign firms issuing ADRs have
certain firm- and offer- specific characteristics, for instance being large, well-known and
mature. Blass and Yaleh (2000) find that many high-tech firms from Israel and the
Netherlands, decide to list on US stock exchanges as these exchanges have extensive analyst
coverage. Previous researchers also indicate that the level of underpricing of foreign firms
differ depending on if the foreign firm originates from an emerging or a developed country.
Ejara and Ghosh (2004) find that foreign firms from emerging countries are less underpriced
compared to firms from developed countries. Foreign firms from emerging countries are less
integrated with the US and are commonly more politically unstable and are therefore
associated with more information asymmetry (Harvey,1995; Comstock et al.,2003).

Existing research on underpricing of foreign firms going public for the first time on a US
stock exchange is contradicting. Firstly, Francis et al. (2001) concludes that, in the US,
foreign firms incorporate more information asymmetry than their domestic counterparts, as
foreign firms are, for instance exposed to currency conversion risk and political risks. Francis
et al. (2001)’s study includes ADRs from 1990 to 1993 and foreign firms going public for the
first time on any market or simultaneously on its home market. Secondly, Ejara and Ghosh
(2004) conclude that US domestic firms are more likely to be underpriced compared to
foreign firms, as foreign firms are larger and more mature, which allows for greater
availability of information. Ejara and Ghosh (2004)’s study includes ADRs from 1990 to
2001 going public for the first time. Lastly, Bruner et al. (2004) conclude that US domestic
and foreign firms experience equivalent levels of IPO underpricing, and argue that, on

                                     7
average, the potential uncertainty associated with foreign firms is largely offset by their larger
size. Bruner et al. (2004) include both ADRs and ordinary shares issued by a foreign firm
going public for the first time on a US stock exchange from 1991 to 1999.

Despite the fact that financial globalization has made it easier for foreign firms to list in the
US, Bruner et al. (2004) argue that entry into the US market is not frictionless, but rather
selective. Foreign firms that want to perform an IPO in the US, are required to fulfill strict
registration and reporting requirements and Bruner et al. (2004) therefore suggest that “only
the best come here”, referring to the exclusivity of raising capital in the US. Differences in
initial returns have been found depending on whether the firm originates from a developed or
an emerging country. Ejara and Ghosh (2004) found that foreign IPOs from developed
countries were more underpriced.

2.3 Research questions and hypothesis development

The US is an attractive market with a high number of IPOs each year and represents the
world’s deepest financial market, which makes it an interesting marketplace to study.

As presented in the literature review, voluminous research has been carried out on the topic
of IPO underpricing. The study by Lowry et al. (2010) published in The Journal of Finance,
investigate IPOs performed from 1965 to 2005 on US stock exchanges and introduce a new
powerful model to estimate the degree of IPO underpricing. Lowry et al. (2010)’s study does
not include foreign IPOs, which represent a large share of firms going public in the US. By
contrast, we include both foreign and US domestic firms with the aim to allow for a more
thorough analysis of IPO underpricing in the US. To receive a more recent perspective on the
topic, we examine all firms going public in the US from 2005 to 2020, a later time period
than Lowry et al. (2010). To ensure comparability with Lowry et. Al (2010), we also examine
US domestic and foreign IPOs separately.

We aim to follow the methodology of Lowry et al. (2010) yet our research differs in certain
ways. Firstly, we do not include the two explanatory variables, “Underwriter rank” and “Price
update” due to lack of information. Secondly, we do not adjust for potential autocorrelation
and heteroscedasticity in the residuals due to the fact that our time period of study does not
appear to include an IPO bubble. Lowry et al. (2010) distinguish the existence of an IPO
bubble period from 1998 to 2000, in which the mean and volatility of initial returns are high.
Consequently, Lowry el. al. (2010) adjust for autocorrelation and heteroscedasticity in the
residuals in order to mitigate the effect of the IPO bubble in their model. Lastly, we do not
include the level of market-wide volatility in the US, which is also used in Lowry et al.
(2010) to estimate IPO underpricing. We decide to not include market volatility as it is more
difficult to accurately measure since our study also includes foreign firms. Foreign firms are
shown to be affected by both their home equity market and the US equity market (Bruner et
al., 2004).

We examine whether foreign firms are subject to more or less underpricing, ceteris paribus,
than its US domestic counterparts. Although, a few researchers study the effect of
underpricing on foreign firms, the outcomes from these studies show contradicting results.
Additionally, the three studies Francis et al. (2001), Ejara and Ghosh (2004) and Bruner et al.
(2004), were conducted during the 1990s and both Francis et al. (2001) and Ejara and Ghosh
(2004) only include ADRs in their data sample. We include both foreign firms issuing ADRs

                                     8
and ordinary shares similar to Bruner et al. (2004) in order to analyze a broader spectrum of
foreign firms.

Similar to Lowry et al. (2010), we examine the effect that certain firm-and offer-specific
characteristics have on the level of information asymmetry. In the light of the information
presented above, our research questions are as follows:

What firm- and offer-specific characteristics determine underpricing on US stock exchanges?
Are foreign firms going public in the US more likely to be underpriced compared to US
domestic firms?

We derive the following hypothesis on the outcome of including foreign firms in our study,
on IPO underpricing on US stock exchanges:

We predict that the following firm-and offer-specific characteristics are associated with more
information asymmetry: smaller, younger, in a high-tech industry, on Nasdaq, not VC-backed
and foreign. Whereas the following firm-and offer-specific characteristics are associated
with less information asymmetry: larger, older, not in a high-tech industry, on NYSE, VC-
backed and being a US domestic firm.

                                     9
3. Data

3.1 Data sample construction

We gather data of IPOs from January 2005 to December 2020 on US stock exchanges, from
the following databases: Securities Data Company (SDC) Platinum, Capital IQ, and Thomson
Reuters Eikon.

As a first step in the sample construction, we collect a total sample of 3889 IPOs from the
SDC database. The information retrieved about each IPO include issue date, final offer price,
4 weeks after offer date closing price, nation, primary exchange location in the US, total
shares offered in the IPO, founding date, if the primary business of the firm is high-tech or
not and if the firm is venture capital backed or not. The data sample from the SDC database is
used as the initial source of data and is thereafter cleaned similar to Lowry et al. (2010). In
order for our results to not be disproportionately affected by the 252 very small IPO
offerings, the dataset is restricted to only include firms with an offer price of 5 US dollars or
above. Excluded from the initial sample are real estate-investment trusts (REITs), unit IPOs,
other types of securities including CAPS, JDR, Ltd Prtnr and Stp securities and firms not
primarily listed on a US stock exchange. To verify that a foreign IPO has not conducted an
IPO earlier and is not cross- listed, the foreign firms’ IPO characteristics have been studied
on Capital IQ and those foreign firms that have performed an IPO earlier are excluded from
our dataset. Additionally, in case of missing values for the four weeks after closing price or
firm age, data was retrieved from either Thomson Reuters Eikon or Capital IQ. Duplicates
and observations with missing crucial data points are omitted from the dataset. Extreme
values with an initial return exceeding the 99.5th percentile and the 0.5th percentile are excluded
from the dataset. In table one, the steps of the cleaning process are presented in detail. Our
final dataset consists of 1751 US domestic IPOs and 299 foreign IPOs, resulting in a total
sample of 2050 IPOs.

Compared to the data collection process of our benchmark study, Lowry et al. (2010), we
only use the SDC database to set up our initial dataset and we also include ADRs. We decide
to only use the SDC database as it is considered to be the most complete database for IPOs in
the recent decades. Additionally, the supplementary databases used by Lowry et al. (2010)
only cover a small share of their total sample and are primarily used to include the IPOs prior
to 1985. We include ADRs as it is one way for a foreign firm to go public on a US stock
exchange.

                                     10
                                              Table 1
                           The cleaning process of our data
In this table, the steps of the cleaning process of our data, are presented. Firstly, the total number of IPOs are
presented and then the removed IPOs are shown as negative values. Lastly, the splits between US domestic and
foreign IPOs are shown.
 Cleaning steps of IPO data sample
                                                                              Number of IPOs
 IPOs collected from SDC database 3889

                                      Offering price < 5 US dollars -252
                                   REITs -106
                                     Unit IPOs -600
                                      Other security types -72
                                      Not primarily listed in the US -159
                                       Historical IPO and cross-listing -97
                                      Missing values and duplicates -533
                                     Extreme values -20
 Total number of IPOs 2050
 US domestic IPOs 1751
 Foreign IPOs 299

3.2 Construction procedure of our matched sample

In order to estimate the isolated effect that the firm-specific characteristic foreign has on IPO
underpricing, we compare the sample of foreign IPOs with similar US domestic IPOs. The
constructing of the matched group is similar to the method used by Ejara and Ghosh (2004),
in which, issue date, issue size and SIC-code are used to match foreign and US domestic
IPOs. We only consider three matching criteria to increase the accuracy of the matching
procedure, as more matching variables could result in less accuracy. We match each foreign
firm with one US domestic firm based on the following three criteria:

  i. Issue date: The US domestic IPO occur at a similar time period as the foreign IPO. A
       matching criterion used to ensure that the matched sample is not influenced by any
       time variances.

  ii. Issue size: The US domestic IPO is of similar size as the foreign IPO. A matching
       criterion commonly used.

 iii. High-tech or not: The US domestic IPO belongs to the same cluster of industry as the
        foreign IPO. A broader matching criterion than SIC code is used, to ensure sufficient
       matchings.

                                     11
3.3 Data sample definitions

Our study examines different sub samples in order to answer our research question. Table 2
gives an overview of the different samples and their definitions.

                                              Table 2
                                   Data sample definitions
 Data sample Sub sample Number of                   Definition
                                    IPOs
 Total sample 2050 Includes IPOs on US stock exchange from 2005 to
                                                        2020, both US domestic IPOs and foreign IPOs.

                 US domestic IPO         1751 Includes only US domestic IPOs.
                  sample
                 Foreign IPO sample 299 Includes only foreign IPOs.

 Matched sample 598 Includes the foreign IPO sample and its constructed
                                                     matched US domestic IPOs.

                 Foreign IPO sample 299 Includes only foreign IPOs.
                   Matched US               299 Includes the matched US domestic IPOs,
                     domestic IPO sample                 constructed in part 3.2.

                                     12
4. Methodology

In the following section, we describe the method used in order to answer our research
questions. To begin with, we present our dependent and explanatory variables. Next, we
explain our cross-sectional regressions. Lastly, we explain our performed robustness tests and
our assessment of heteroscedasticity and multicollinearity.

4.1 Variable definitions and descriptive analysis

The dependent variable in our study is the initial return of an IPO, defined as the difference
between the offer price and the four-week closing price. The majority of researchers use first
day closing price to calculate IPO initial returns (see for example, Rock, 1986; Beatty and
Ritter, 1986). However, Ruud (1993) and Hanley et al. (1993) show that after the offer day of
an IPO, underwriters commonly engage in different price stabilization activities that
influences the market price. In order to receive the actual value of an IPO, the four-week
closing price should therefore be used. Consequently, we use the four-week closing price
similarly to the methodology of Lowry et al. (2010).

IPO initial returns are calculated either on a monthly basis or a firm-level basis. In line with
the method of Lowry et al. (2010), the monthly initial returns are calculated to allow for
analysis of the mean and standard deviation of initial returns and the correlation in between
the two. Monthly mean of initial returns is defined as the mean of all the IPOs’ initial returns
in a specific month. Monthly standard deviation of initial returns is defined as the standard
deviation of all the IPOs’ initial returns in a specific month. Aggregated data, for instance by
month, is required to calculate the standard deviation and we can therefore only estimate
monthly standard deviation when at least two IPOs, take place in a month. In our sample,
there are months with less than two IPOs, and as a result we have fewer monthly standard
deviations than monthly mean observations. This outcome could be avoided, for instance by
aggregating on years or quartiles yet it would decrease the number of observations and we
would not follow the methodology of Lowry et al. (2010). The consequence of aggregating
the data by month, is that we have fewer observations in our analysis, from 2050 observations
in our total sample to 186 monthly means of IPO initial returns and 175 monthly standard
deviations of IPO initial returns. Therefore, we also analysis IPO initial returns on a firm-
specific level, to allow for more precise estimates and significant results.

Monthly mean and standard deviation of IPO initial returns are used to present the underlying
characteristics of our total sample, presented in the first section of the descriptive statistics.
For the total sample’s monthly mean and standard deviation of IPO initial returns, we present
their six autocorrelation lags, in order to understand the time dependence of each monthly
datapoint. In the second part of the descriptive statistics the underlying characteristics of our
matched sample are presented on a firm-specific level. To understand the accuracy of our
matching procedure, we retrieve the p-values of the mean difference of the foreign IPOs and
their matched US domestic IPOs. The mean difference is calculated on the three matching
criteria: issue date, offer size and high-tech dummy. We retrieve the p-values for the two
continuous variables, issue date and offer size by using a paired t-test and for the binary
variable, tech dummy by using a McNemar test. High p-values indicate a successful matching
procedure.

                                     13
Equation (1) shows the calculation for the monthly mean of IPO initial returns.

                                    Equation (1)

Equation (2) shows the calculation for the monthly standard deviation of IPO initial returns.
                                    Equation (2)

Equation (3) shows the calculation for the firm-specific IPO initial returns.

                                    Equation (3)

 In the three equations above, z represents the month, n represents the number of IPOs in that
                    specific month and i represents each firm-specific IPO.

Our explanatory variables are used as proxies to estimate the level of information asymmetry
incorporated in an IPO. The explanatory variables are firm- and offer-specific characteristics.
We summarize all our variables in table 3.
                                              Table 3
                                  Variable definitions
 Variable Definition

 IPO initial returns Percent difference between offer price and the closing price 4-weeks after offer
                                  date.
 Log (offer size) Logarithm of the product of the number of shares (in millions) offered in an IPO
                              and its offer price. Offer size is a proxy for a firm’s size.
 Log (firm age +1) Logarithm of the years between founding date and offer date, plus one.
 VC dummy The dummy variable is equal to one if the firm undergoing an IPO receives
                                 financing from a venture capitalist and zero otherwise.
 NYSE dummy The dummy variable is equal to one if the firm lists on the NYSE and to zero if it
                                 lists on another exchange.
 Nasdaq dummy The dummy variable is equal to one if the firm lists on Nasdaq and to zero if it lists
                            on another exchange.
 Tech dummy The dummy variable is equal to one if the firm is classified as high-tech and zero if
                               not. We base high-tech industries on the classification given by the SDC database.
                                Firms in the following industries are most commonly considered as high tech:
                                biotech, electronics, communications, general technology and computer equipment.
 Foreign dummy The dummy variable is equal to one if the firm is foreign and to zero if the firm is
                             US domestic.
 Developed country dummy The dummy variable is equal to one if a foreign firm originates from a developed
                              country and to zero if the foreign firm originates from an emerging country. This
                                dummy is only included in table 11.

                                     14
4.2 Cross-sectional models

4.2.1 Cross-sectional regression model for our firm- and offer-specific characteristics

Our cross-sectional model is used to examine the descriptive statistics in more detail and to
truly understand the relationship between mean and volatility of IPO initial returns and our
firm- and offer-specific characteristics. The model described in this section, follows the
methodology of Lowry et al. (2010) and is used to model the total sample of IPOs and its two
subsamples, the US domestic IPO sample and the foreign IPO sample.

Firstly, a correlation matrix is constructed to understand the overall relationship between our
explanatory variables and the monthly mean and standard deviation of IPO initial returns.
Monthly firm- and offer-specific characteristics for the dummy variables are calculated by
taking the sum of the dummy variables in a month and to divide it by the total number of
IPOs in that specific month. Monthly firm- and offer-specific characteristics for the
continuous variables, offer size and firm age, are calculated by taking the average of the
logarithms in each month.

Secondly, to in more detail understand the relationships shown in the correlation matrix, an
ordinary least square (OLS) regression is modelled on a firm-specific level, by following
either equation (4) or (5). Equation (4) is set up for the total sample. Equation (5) is set up for
the US domestic IPO sample and the foreign IPO sample. The difference between equation
(4) and (5) is that equation (4) includes a foreign dummy variable.

                                       Equation (4)

                                       Equation (5)

Thirdly, we test for heterogenicity in our OLS regression. The OLS regression is found to
violate the assumption of heterogenicity and therefore maximum likelihood-estimations
(MLE) of the coefficients are modelled. However, we still show the results from the OLS
regression, in order to be able to understand if the MLE actually generate a better fitted
model or not. We compare the two models by calculating the loglikelihood for the OLS and
MLE model. The model with the highest log likelihood is considered to be the best fitted
model. In the MLE, we estimate the coefficients for both the mean and variance of initial
returns, in fact, the two are modelled as a function of our explanatory variables. In our MLE
model, the mean of initial return follows the same equation as the OLS regression, see
equation (4) and (5). The variance of the error term, shown in equation (6) and (7) are
according to Greene (1993, pp. 405-407) supposed to be related to the same explanatory
variables which influence the degree of initial returns. In our MLE model, the log of the
variance of the regression error is calculated according to equation (6) or (7), depending on if
the foreign dummy variable is included or not.

                                     15
                                       Equation (6)

                                       Equation (7)

The MLE of the mean and the log of the variance of the regression error, is, essentially the
weighted least squares estimation of the equation (4) or (5), with the standard deviation of
error terms as weights. Modelling of the MLE is in line with the methodology of Lowry et al.
(2010).

In following part of this section, we describe in more detail the construction of the MLE
model. In order to follow the Gaussian- noise simple linear regression in the set-up of the
MLE model, we make the following assumptions:
   i. The distribution of X is random.

 ii. If X = x, then our Y= β0 + β1x + ℇi. In this equation Y is initial returns, x is one of
       our explanatory variables and ℇi is some noise variable. This is a simplified equation,
       as our model has more explanatory variables and coefficients

                  2
 iii. ε ~ N (0, σ )

 iv. ε is independent across all the observations

Equation (8) shows our log-likelihood function that incorporates both the mean and variance
equation. This equation incorporates the foreign dummy; however, this dummy is dropped in
the MLE regression for the foreign and the US domestic sample.

                                       Equation (8)

In the MLE, the log likelihood function is maximized to receive the estimates of coefficients.
Common practice is to reject the null hypothesis when p-values are lower than 0.05, yet with
a bigger sample we argue for that the null hypothesis can be rejected at 0.1 instead. We reject
the null hypothesis when p-values are lower than 0.1 throughout our study.

                                     16
4.2.2 Cross-sectional model for our matched sample

In the second part of our study, we aim to examine whether foreign IPOs are facing more or
less underpricing compared to its US domestic counterparts and we therefore use the
constructed matched sample. Our methodology in this section is similar to Bruner et al.
(2004). We first set up a simple linear regression of the dependent variable, IPO initial
returns and the independent variable, the foreign dummy.

                                       Equation (9)

Although, the simple linear regression is assumed to have low explanatory power, it still
shows the isolated effect between the two variables. In the next model all the remaining
explanatory variables, shown in table 3 are included. This more sophisticated model is
assumed to increase the R-squared, as we include more explanatory variables. We thereafter
perform an OLS of the matched sample, that follows equation (4). Equation (4) is used to
ensure comparability with our cross-sectional regression in the section 6.2.

In this model, there are mainly two hypothesis that are tested for: the null hypothesis, 𝐻0, and
the alternative hypothesis, 𝐻1. We are primarily interested to test if the foreign variable has a
coefficient different from zero or not, in order to understand if the foreign variable has an
influence on initial returns or not. The two hypotheses are the following:

                                    𝐻0: 𝛽Foreign = 0

                                    𝐻1: 𝛽Foreign ≠ 0

In the cross-sectional regression, the p-values will show whether we can reject or accept the
null hypothesis. In our model, we reject the null hypothesis when the p-values are below 0.1
and can in that case conclude that the foreign variable has a significant effect on IPO initial
returns.

4.2.2.1 Robustness tests

We perform two types of robustness tests to ensure that our findings, from the cross-sectional
regression on the matched sample, hold.
In the first robustness test, we set up a random sample of US domestic IPOs. The random
sample is supposed to represent a smaller version of the total sample. An OLS regression is
performed on this sample in order to evaluate if the foreign dummy is significant or not with
a smaller sample. Consequently, we compare the results from the OLS regression of the
random and the matched sample. This test is performed in order to ensure that our findings
are not affected by differences in sample sizes.

In the second robustness test, we arrange the IPOs in the matched and total sample by date
and then divide the two samples into two new sub samples. For the matched sample, the first
sub sample includes 284 IPOs from 2005 to 2012 and the second one includes 314 IPOs from
2013 to 2020. For the total sample, the first sub sample includes 798 IPOs from 2005 to 2012
and the second one includes IPOs 1252 IPOs from 2013 to 2020.We then perform an OLS on
each sub sample to ensure that our findings hold over time.

                                     17
4.2.2.2 Cross-sectional regression model of foreign firms with the inclusion of a
developed country dummy

In order to understand whether the degree of IPO underpricing of foreign firms differ
between foreign firms from developed and emerging countries, we perform a cross-sectional
OLS regression on the foreign IPO sample and include our development country dummy.
Equation (10) shows how this OLS regression is set up.

                                      Equation (10)

4.3 Assessment of multicollinearity and heteroskedasticity
In an OLS, we have two implicit assumptions, for instance absence of multicollinearity and
heteroskedasticity.

If multicollinearity is shown in an OLS, there is a risk for biased results (Belsley et al., 1980;
Greene, 1993). To test for multicollinearity, we use variance inflation factors (VIF). The VIF
refers to the degree of which the variance of a certain explanatory variable is described by the
other explanatory variables in the OLS model. According to Kutner et al. (2004), a VIF value
above five indicates sever multicollinearity.

If heteroskedasticity is shown among the residuals in an OLS, there is a risk that the
statistical results are not accurate. A Breusch-Pagan test is used to test for heteroskedasticity
in an OLS. We adjust to a certain extent in each OLS for heteroskedasticity by using robust
standard errors, Whites’s (1980) heteroskedasticity-consistent errors.

                                     18
5. Descriptive statistics

In this this section, we present the summary statistics of our data. In the first section,
descriptive statistics of the total sample and its two sub samples, are shown. In the second
section, descriptive statistics of the matched sample, are shown.

5.1 Descriptive statistics for US domestic and foreign IPOs in the US

In figure 1, the distribution of IPO initial returns from 2005 to 2020 is shown. The IPO initial
returns of our total sample including 2050 IPOs, has a mean of 17.32% and a standard
deviation of 34.24%. These estimates are used to construct the normal distribution, also
plotted in figure 1. As shown in figure 1 and by the values for skewness (1.5848) and kurtosis
(6.7501), the distribution of initial return is positively skewed, and fat tailed. We observe a
lower skewness and kurtosis than Lowry et al. (2010) and assume that the explanation to this
is that we do not observe an IPO bubble.

                                        Share of IPOs Normal distribution

         25%

                                                                                 Total sample of IPOs
                                                                                Years: 2005- 2020

        20%                                              Mean 17.32%
                                                             Std.dev 34.24%
                                                             Skewness 1.5848
                                                                Kurtosis 6.7501
         15%                                                   Number of observations 2,050

         10%

         5%
           Percentage of IPO initial returns in each category

         0%

                           0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90%
             <-40%-30%-20%-10%                                    100%110%120%130%140%150%160%170%180%190%
                                                                                                 >200%
                                                              Four week IPO initial returns

Figure 1. A frequency distribution of the IPO initial returns of our total sample, from
2005 to 2020.
In the figure, the distribution of the IPO initial returns for the total sample is plotted. The black bars plot the
share of IPOs in each category. The grey bars plot the normal distribution.

In figure 2, the monthly mean of initial returns, cross-sectional standard deviation of initial
returns and IPO volume, are shown for the total sample. Our data shows that the number of
firms undergoing an IPO each month and that the dispersion of initial returns, follow cycles.
We find that months with a high number of IPOs have higher standard deviations and means.
Also, to be noted is that our data demonstrates that the mean and standard deviation of IPO
initial returns correlate with each other. These findings are also demonstrated in table 4 and

                                     19
are similar to the findings of Lowry et al. (2010). Figure 2 suggests that our data could be
auto-correlated and cross-correlated. We investigate these effects below, in table 4.

Figure 2. Mean and standard deviation of initial returns and the number of IPOs per
month, from 2005 to 2020.
The total sample of 2050 firms, is used to plot the graph. For every month, the average IPO initial return and
IPO standard deviation, are calculated. The mean is represented by the solid black line and the standard
deviation is represented by the dotted grey line. The number of IPOs each month is represented by the grey bars.

In table 4, the underlying descriptive statistics for figure 2 and the two subsamples of US
domestic IPOs and foreign IPOs are demonstrated. We estimate the mean and standard
deviation of initial returns for all IPOs in each specific month. For these monthly statistics,
we display mean, median, standard deviation and six autocorrelation lags. The correlation
between the monthly mean of initial returns and monthly cross-sectional standard deviation is
also shown.

For the total sample, mean of average monthly initial returns is estimated to 14.89% and
mean of cross-sectional regression standard deviation is estimated to 28.22%. The correlation
between the two time-series is high, a value of 0.7673, which supports the shown positive
skewness in figure 1. As assumed with data not including an IPO bubble period, the
autocorrelation lags for the prior six months are low and contain two insignificant values.

For the US domestic sample, we find a higher mean of average monthly initial returns of 16%
and a lower mean of cross-sectional regression standard deviation of 26.7% compared to the
total sample. The data of the US domestic sample is the most similar to the data of Lowry et
al. (2010), specifically their time period from 1991 to 2005 with exclusion of the bubble
period. We therefore compare the two to understand if mean of average monthly initial
returns and mean of cross-sectional regression standard deviation is higher in our more recent
time period or not. We find that the statistics are similar yet the correlation between mean of
average monthly initial returns and mean of cross-sectional regression standard deviation is
higher in our data, 0.7673 compared to 0.5 for the data of Lowry et al. (2010).

                                     20
For the foreign sample, mean of average monthly initial returns is estimated to 11.15% and
mean of cross-sectional regression standard deviation is estimated to 25.97%, lower than both
the other samples. The correlation between the two time-series is however strong, a value of
0.6755. Compared to the statistics of the US domestic IPO sample, the monthly estimates for
the foreign IPO sample are lower.
Overall, we find a high correlation of the mean of average monthly initial returns and the
mean of cross-sectional regression standard deviation, supporting the findings in figure 2.
The potential causes of this strong correlation are examined in our cross-sectional regression
model. Additionally, we have lower autocorrelation lags compared to Lowry et al. (2010),
implying that we do not have as high autocorrelation of the residuals.

                                              Table 4
      Descriptive statistics on monthly mean and volatility of IPO initial returns
In this table, the descriptive statistics of the average IPO initial returns and cross-sectional standard deviations of
IPO initial return by month for the total sample, foreign IPO sample and US domestic IPO sample, are shown.
Monthly mean cannot be calculated if not at least one IPO occur in that month and monthly standard deviation
can only be calculated if not at least two IPOs occur in a month. There are months with zero or only one
observation in our dataset resulting in a lower number of observations on a monthly basis, see the column
labeled N with the number of observations. Corr. is the correlation between the monthly mean and standard
deviation of IPO initial returns over time, using Pearson correlation coefficient. Autocorrelation for the prior six
months are also displayed.
                                                                                                 Autocorrelation: Lags
                       N Mean Median Std.dev Corr 1 2 3 4 5 6

  Total Sample
 Average IPO IR 186 0.1489 0.1311 0.1485 0.211* 0.194* 0.251* 0.113 0.132 0.148*
 Cross-sectional σ         175 0.2822 0.2515 0.1379 0.7583 0.259* 0.23* 0.277* 0.109* 0.139* 0.167*
  of IPO IRs

  US domestic IPO sample

 Average IPO IR 183 0.1600 0.1394 0.1656 0.155* 0.148* 0.205* 0.077 0.124 0.226*
 Cross-sectional σ         170 0.2670 0.2366 0.1365 0.7673 0.301* 0.331* 0.317* 0.259* 0.317* 0.309*
  of IPO IRs

  Foreign IPO sample

 Average IPO IR 132 0.1115 0.0335 0.2916 -0.025 -0.053 0.060 -0.052 0.074 0.060
 Cross-sectional σ          81 0.2597 0.2241 0.2063 0.6745 0.174* -0.072 0.102 -0.021 0.051 -0.057
  of IPO IRs

                                                                    Signif. codes: 0 ‘***’ 0.001 ‘**’ 0.01 ‘*’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ’ 1

5.2 Descriptive statistics for the matched sample

The method used for our matching procedure is the propensity score matching with nearest
neighbour. We match each foreign firm with a similar US domestic firm. We use different
statistical tests depending on whether the variable is continues or binary. In table 5, the
differences between issue date, offer size and the tech dummy for the foreign firms and the
matched US domestic firms are displayed. The p-value, the used statical test and the mean
differences between the foreign firms and US domestic firms in the matched sample are
shown. The high p-values indicate that our matching procedure is successful and that the two
samples are similar in terms of issue date, offer size and high-tech characteristic.

                                     21
                                              Table 5
                     Level of accuracy of our matching procedure
Table 5 shows the number of observations, p-values, used statistical test and the mean differences between the
foreign firms and the matched US domestic firms. The paired t-test is used to calculate the p-values for the
continuous variables, issue date and offer size. The McNemar test is used to calculate the p-value for the binary
variable, the tech dummy. In parenthesis, the t-values are showed for the paired t-tests, and the chi-squared is
shown for the McNemar’s test. No mean difference is retrieved in the McNemar test for a binary variable.

                               N P-values Statistical test Mean difference

 Issue Date 598 0.7332              Paired t-test -51 days
                                                         (-0.34115)
 Offer size 598 0.8055              Paired t-test 5 (million) US $
                                                    (0.24651)
 Tech dummy 598 0.5624           McNemar's test N. A
                                                      (0.33562)

In table 6, we show the statistics of the foreign and US domestic IPOs in the matched sample
on a firm-specific level. Additionally, we also show the statistics of foreign firms from
developed and emerging countries separately. Table 6 shows the mean of initial returns,
median of initial returns, average offer size in million US dollars, percentage of tech firms,
percentage of firms listed on the NYSE, percentage of firms that are VC-backed and average
firm age.

The mean of initial returns of all the US domestic IPOs in our data sample is calculated to
18.2% on a firm specific- level, while the US domestic matched IPOs has a lower mean of
16.7%. Compared to the US domestic IPOs, the mean and median of initial returns of the
foreign IPOs are lower. We also show that foreign firms from developed countries have a
lower mean of initial returns than foreign firms from emerging countries.

As for the characteristics of the two sub samples, there is not a large discrepancy for the
variables that are used as matching criteria, offer size and tech. Additionally, table 6 shows
that US domestic firms are older, have a smaller share of firms listed on the NYSE and are
financed by venture capitalists.

                                          Table 6
            Descriptive statistics of the matched sample on a firm-specific level
Table 6 shows, the number of IPOs, average of initial return, median of initial return, average offer size in
million US $, percentage of tech firms, percentage of firms listed on the NYSE, percentage of firms that are VC-
backed and average age for the US domestic and the foreign IPOs in our matched sample. The foreign IPOs are
additionally divided into two sub samples including firms from developed countries and firms from emerging
countries.

                   N Mean IR Median IR Mean offer     Percent     Percent      Percent      Average
                                                       size ($M)       tech        NYSE     VC-backed     firm age

 US domestic       299     16.7%       9.4%          187        50.8%      33.4%       42.5%        10.6
 matched IPOs

 Foreign IPOs       299     12.2%       2.0%          182        53.5%      40.8%       50.2%        8.6

     Developed      79     10.3%       2.1%          215        64.5%      41.8%       45.6%        10.4
      countries

     Emerging      220     12.9%       1.2%         170        49.5%      40.5%       51.8%        8.0
      countries

                                     22
6. Results

6.1 The impact of firm- and offer-specific characteristics on IPO initial
returns

In this section, we demonstrate our findings on the effect that certain firm-and offer-specific
characteristics have on the level of information asymmetry and consequently IPO
underpricing. Firms that are characterized to have a higher degree of information asymmetry,
are expected to have both greater mean of initial returns and volatility of initial returns
(Ritter, 1984). According to our hypothesis, IPO underpricing is predicted to be higher when
less amount of information is available about a specific IPO. The firm- and offer-specific
characteristics used as proxies to estimate the level of information asymmetry in IPOs are
summarized in table 3. In this section, we follow the methodology of Lowry et al. (2010), yet
the coefficients in our cross-sectional regression model might differ, as we do not include all
the explanatory variables used by Lowry et al. (2010) and we investigate another time period.
To begin with, we examine the relationship between monthly mean of IPO initial returns and
monthly cross-sectional standard deviation of IPO initial returns. Secondly, we study in detail
the extent to which the firm- and offer-specific characteristics affect IPO initial returns.

6.1.1 Correlation between the average firm-and offer- specific characteristics and IPO
underpricing

In table 7, we present the correlation that average firm- and offer- specific characteristics
have with monthly average of initial returns and monthly standard deviation of initial returns.
The correlation estimates show both the direction and level that firm- and offer- specific
characteristics have on IPO underpricing. The correlation matrix separately displays the
correlation for the total sample, the US domestic IPO sample and foreign IPO sample. We
only include the foreign dummy variable when examining the total sample. We expect that a
month with a high share of firms subject to greater levels of information asymmetry will
show higher mean and standard deviation of initial returns and vice versa.

For the total sample, we observe positive correlation between firms that are larger, older,
listed on Nasdaq, VC-backed and classified as high-tech and monthly average and standard
deviation of initial returns within months. While we observe a negative correlation between
firms listed on the NYSE and monthly average and standard deviation of initial returns.
Consistent with our predictions, are the findings of the three explanatory variables: tech,
NYSE and Nasdaq. While, inconsistent with our predictions are the findings of the three
explanatory variables: firm age, offer size and VC. Additionally, foreign firms are shown to
have a negative correlation with monthly average and standard deviation of initial returns.
This finding is not in accordance with our prediction, as we predicted that foreign firms
should be characterized by greater information asymmetry than US domestic firms.

For the sub sample of US domestic IPOs, the results point in the same direction as in the total
sample. However, the correlations estimates are smaller in magnitude except for the VC and
tech variable. For the sub sample of foreign IPOs the correlation estimates are not significant.
Overall, the correlation table, shows the suggestive evidence of the underlying dynamics
behind the positive mean and standard deviation of initial returns. In the following section,
we investigate these correlations more directly by constructing a cross-sectional regression
model.

                                     23
                                              Table 7
    Correlation between average firm-and offer-specific characteristics and monthly
                    average and standard deviation of initial returns
In this table, the correlations between the monthly mean and standard deviation of IPO initial returns and
monthly firm- and offer-specific characteristics are shown, calculated by using Pearson correlation test. In
parentheses are the asymptotic p-values. The definitions of the explanatory variables are summarized in table 3.
The monthly firm-and offer-specific characteristics for the dummy variables are calculated by taking the sum of
the dummy variables and divide it by the number of IPOs that specific month. The monthly firm-and offer-
specific characteristics for the continuous variables, offer size and firm age are calculated by taking the average
for each month.
                                      (a) (b) (c)

                               Total sample US domestic IPO sample Foreign IPO sample

                              Average    Std. dev. of        Average     Std. dev. of        Average     Std. dev.
                            IPO IR      IPO IR          IPO IR       IPO IR          IPO IR     of IPO IR

 Average log (Offer size) 0.29 0.15 0.14 0.14 0.13 -0.14
                           (0.0000) (0.0553) (0.0564) (0.0789) (0.1512) (0.2167)
 Average log (Firm age +1) 0.24 0.17 0.21 0.1 0.04 -0.08
                            (0.0012) (0.0246) (0.0041) (0.2009) (0.6444) (0.4711)
 Percent VC dummy 0.14 0.16 0.33 0.21 0.02 0.15
                           (0.0600) (0.0389) (0.0000) (0.067) (0.8109) (0.1803)
 Percent NYSE dummy -0.14 -0.13 -0.24 -0.21 0.02 -0.07
                           (0.0589) (0.0842) (0.0011) (0.0053) (0.8623) (0.5078)
 Percent Nasdaq dummy 0.18 0.19 0.3 0.3 -0.02 0.09
                            (0.0169) (0.0113) (0.0000) (0.0000) (0.8280) (0.4329)
 Percent tech dummy 0.19 0.19 0.19 0.07 0.09 0.14
                             (0.0103) (0.0123) (0.0122) (0.3789) (0.3284) (0.2161)
 Percent foreign dummy -0.12 0.04
                            (0.0999) (0.5798)

6.1.2 Cross-sectional analysis of US domestic and foreign firms going public in the US

Prior to running the cross-sectional regression model, we investigate whether the two
assumptions of the OLS are met, namely: multicollinearity and heteroskedasticity. To test for
multicollinearity, we perform a VIF test, and it shows that two of our explanatory variables
have a VIF degree above five, namely the Nasdaq and the NYSE variable. We therefore
decide to drop the Nasdaq variable and then our OLS regressions no longer have
multicollinearity. In our regression models, we only have the NYSE dummy variable as
proxy to estimate the information asymmetry associated with a specific exchange listing. In
our data, the majority of the firms that are not listed on the NYSE are, in fact, listed on
Nasdaq. To test for heteroskedasticity, we perform the Breusch-Pagan test and plot the
residuals against the fitted values to investigate if any pattern can be observed. The Breusch-
Pagan test shows that the null hypothesis of the homoscedastic error terms, is rejected at a
significance level of 1%. We can therefore conclude that heteroskedasticity is present in our
OLS for the total sample and its two sub samples. In figure 3, the residuals of the OLS
regression of the total sample are plotted against the fitted values. This figure also indicates
the presence of heteroskedasticity. A potential cause to the existence of heteroskedasticity in
our OLS, is omitted explanatory variables yet within the research field of IPO underpricing
there is not a complete set of variables mapped out to fully explain IPO initial returns.

                                     24
Figure 3. Residuals of the OLS on the total sample
In this figure, the residuals of the total sample from the OLS are plotted against its fitted values. The figure
indicates that there is a presence of heteroskedasticity.

The findings in table 7, indicate that the changes of the types of firms undergoing an IPO
both affect the level and volatility of monthly initial returns. We examine the results from
table 7 more directly in table 8, by modelling the firm- and offer-specific characteristics
jointly in both an OLS and a MLE regression model. We expect that the violation of the
assumption of no heteroskedasticity in the OLS, will generate a less suitable model compared
to the MLE of coefficients, which is heteroskedasticity consistent. In order to understand if
the MLE actually generates a better fitted model or not, we continue to demonstrate the
results of the OLS. In the MLE, we estimate the coefficients for both the mean and variance
of initial returns and the two are modelled as a function of our explanatory variables. We
show the results from the OLS and MLE for the total sample and its two sub samples.
To understand if the MLE model describes our data better than the OLS, we compare their
log-likelihoods. The log-likelihood is higher in the MLE, for all the three samples, which
indicates that the MLE is a superior cross-sectional regression model to explain the
underlying dynamics of IPO initial returns. The signs and magnitudes of the coefficients in
the OLS and MLE, are similar for the three samples. Overall, the significance of the
coefficients is similar for the MLE and the OLS. The total sample has the most significant
coefficients, while the US domestic IPO sample has less significant coefficients and the
foreign IPO sample has the least significant coefficients. We assume a possible explanation to
this finding is that the samples differ in size.
The statistically significant estimates indicate that our firm- and offer-specific characteristics
affect both the mean and the variance of initial returns. Lowry et al. (2010) shows that the
volatility of initial returns is higher than the mean of initial returns. By contrast, we find that
the magnitudes of the coefficients are similar in the MLE for the mean and variance. We
expect that this is driven by the fact that we do not have a bubble period in our data.
Consistent with our hypothesis, we find that high-tech firms experience a positive
relationship with mean and volatility of initial returns and that firms that decide to list on the
NYSE experience a negative relationship with mean and volatility of initial returns. However,
we also find that some of our results are contradicting to our hypothesis.

                                     25
Firstly, we find that firms receiving VC-backing have a higher degree of positive mean and
volatility coefficients of initial returns. These findings are similar to Lowry et al. (2010) and
they argue that the venture capital variable might pick up a risky-industry effect that is larger
than the expected reduction of information asymmetry that VC backing should imply. In our
data, we find that the majority of the VC backed firms are also classified as being in a high-
tech industry and we therefore also argue that these firms might pick up a risky industry
effect.
Secondly, we find that older and larger firms experience positive mean and volatility
coefficients of initial returns. These findings are contradicting to our predictions and to
Lowry et al. (2010)’s findings. In our study, we follow the IPO theories that argue for that the
level of information asymmetry drives the level of IPO underpricing. The findings that older
and larger firms have less available information is consequently puzzling. We therefore find
it necessary to turn to other theories behind IPO underpricing in order to understand this
relationship. A possible explanation could be that older and larger firms deliberately
underprice their shares in order to signal high-quality to the investors, in line with the
signalling theory proposed by Allen and Faulhaber (1989). Older and larger firms may be
more confident about their ability to recoup the losses of IPO underpricing compared to
younger firms. Another possible explanation could be that more investors want to participate
in an IPO of an older and more established firm and thereby bid up the price more than
expected by the underwriter.
Thirdly, we find a significant negative coefficient of the foreign dummy variable, which
indicates that foreign firms are less volatile and have lower level of initial returns than US
domestic firms. Contrarily, to our prediction that foreign firms would experience a higher
level and volatility of initial returns than US domestic IPOs. We suggest that the foreign
firms may pick up the effect of being larger and to list on the NYSE more than the effect of
being foreign, in line with the argumentation of Francis et al. (2001). In the next section, we
aim to investigate this suggestion further by comparing foreign firms with its US domestic
counterparts.

                                     26
                                                      Table 8
                  The relationship of mean and variance of IPO initial returns and
                               IPO firm- and offer-specific characteristics
          For the total sample and its two sub samples, an OLS and MLE regression is set up. The firm-and offer-specific
        characteristics used in the model are explained in table 3. In the parenthesis in the OLS regression columns, the
          t-statistics of the values are shown, calculated by using White’s (1980) heteroskedasticity- consistent standard
                    2
         errors. The 𝑅  is the adjusted R-squared. The MLE columns show the maximum likelihood estimates. In the
        parenthesis in the MLE regression columns, the z-statistics are shown. The log-likelihood estimates show the
        improvement of using a MLE model.
                                    (a) (b) (c)
                               Total sample US domestic IPO sample Foreign IPO sample

                              MLE MLE MLE
                 OLS Mean Variance OLS Mean Variance OLS Mean Variance

Intercept -0.9935         -0.7757         -0.1189              -1.0543         -0.7475         -0.2310              -0.8158         -1.0368          0.4459
                       (-6.6688)***    (-6.5727)***       (-1.6344)           (-6.5339) ***    (-5.9553)***      (-3.067)**           (-2.0144)***     (-3.3502)***      (2.1883)*
Log (Offer size) 0.0573         0.0458         0.0194              0.0608         0.0446         0.0262              0.0445         0.0563         -0.0158
                      (7.0873)***    (7.0847) ***     (4.7136)***          (6.9122)***     (6.4680)***     (6.0983)***          (2.0694)***     (3.4047)***      (-1.4326)
Log (Firm age +1) 0.0264         0.0252         0.0100             0.0249         0.0228         0.0079             0.0354         0.0458         0.0577
                     (4.6909)***    (4.5780) ***      (2.3049)*          (4.2228 )***     (3.9305)***      (1.6981).           (1.9516)***      (2.598)**      (3.7548)***
VC dummy 0.1179         0.1222         0.0913             0.1315         0.1326         0.0957             0.0463         0.0633         0.0941
                     (6.2137)***    (6.8619) ***     (7.9402)***         (6.3928 )***     (6.8619)***     (7.6763)***           (0.9810)*        (1.4076)       (3.2181)**
NYSE dummy -0.0312         -0.0323         -0.0533              -0.0450         -0.0369         -0.0652              0.0376          -0.0250         -0.0160
                          (-1.7464).        (-2.0862)*      (-4.9489)***           (-2.3443)*       (-2.2121)*      (-5.6393)***            (0.7973).         (-0.6739)         (-0.5401)
Tech dummy 0.0397         0.0329         0.0624             0.0368         0.0225         0.0479             0.0297         0.0356         0.1338
                       (2.1977)*       (1.9547) .      (5.5015)***           (1.8813 ).        (1.2384)       (3.9884)***            (0.6316)         (0.7975)       (0.0000)***
Foreign dummy -0.0587        -0.0554         0.0515
                      (-2.5474)**     (-2.6132) **     (3.2998)***

 2 0.07805 0.08768 0.02137
𝑅
Log-likelihood -624.4083 -516.1001 -487.7743 -400.2525 -126.7076 -103.8853
Sample Size 2050 1751 299

                                                                                 Signif. codes: 0 ‘***’ 0.001 ‘**’ 0.01 ‘*’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ’ 1

        Similar to Lowry et al. (2010), we plot the mean and standard deviation of initial returns on a
        monthly basis in figure 4 and 5, in order to understand the accuracy of our predicted values in
        the MLE model. We use the predicted values from MLE in column (a) which is for the total
       sample. Figure 4 suggests that our predicted values of the mean of initial returns are relatively
        similar to the actual values. Yet, the predicted standard deviations of initial returns are less
        accurate. Compared to Lowry et al. (2010) that have a peak of standard deviation of initial
       returns at merely 200 %, our data on volatility does not reach above 90%.

                                           27
      100%

                                           Mean Predicted mean
       80%

       60%

       40%

       20%

       0%
       Monthly average initial return

       -20%

       -40%

              2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016  2017  2018  2019  2020

Figure 4. The actual and predicted mean of monthly initial returns of IPOs, from 2005 to 2020.
The black line represents the actual monthly mean of IPO initial returns. The grey line represents the predicted
monthly mean of initial returns, from the MLE regression in table 5. The values are taken from the MLE in
column (a) with the total sample, including the dummy variable.

       150%
                          Std.dev Missing values Predicted std.dev Missing values
       130%

       110%

       90%

       70%

       50%

       30%
     Monthly average standard deviation
       10%

        -10%

               2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016  2017  2018  2019  2020

Figure 5. The actual and predicted standard deviation of monthly initial returns of IPOs, from 2005 to
2020.
The black line represents the actual monthly standard deviation of IPO initial returns. The grey line represents
the predicted monthly standard deviation of initial returns, from the MLE regression in table 5. The values are
taken from the MLE in column (a) with the total sample, including the dummy variable.

                                     28
6.2 The degree of information asymmetry of foreign IPOs

Our findings from cross-sectional regression in table 8, for the total sample, indicate a
statistically significant negative relationship between foreign firms and IPO initial returns.
We aim to investigate this relationship further and to examine whether this relationship holds
when comparing foreign firms with our matched US domestic firms. Previous researchers
(Saudagaran,1988; Francis et al.,2001; Blass and Yaleh, 2000) have shown that foreign firms
going public typically have different institutional characteristics compared to US domestic
firms. We predict that the negative relationship between foreign firms and IPO initial returns
will not hold in our cross-sectional regression with foreign firms and its US domestic
counterparts.

6.2.1 Cross-sectional regression of our matched sample

To begin with, we run a simple regression in order to understand the overall relationship
between the firm-characteristic of being foreign and IPO initial returns. We perform a simple
regression on both the total and matched sample, these estimates are shown in table 9. To be
noted, is that the foreign dummy is significant for the total sample, yet non-significant for the
matched sample. The non-significant coefficient of the foreign variable in the matched
sample, demonstrate that foreign firms do not experience more or less underpricing compared
to its US domestic counterparts. The simple regression model has a low R-square for both the
matched and the total sample, indicating that the model has a low explanatory power. We will
therefore set up a cross-sectional regression model controlling for other potential factors.

Prior to setting up the cross-sectional regression model, we control for heteroskedasticity in
the matched sample. In the Breusch-Pagan test, we fail to reject the null hypothesis and we
can therefore assume that heteroskedasticity in the matched sample is absent. Therefore, we
do not set up an MLE model in this section and instead perform an OLS regression. However,
our total sample contains heteroskedasticity and to control for a certain extent for
heteroskedasticity, we use White’s (1980) heteroskedasticity- consistent standard errors.

                                         Table 9
     A simple OLS regression between the foreign variable and IPO underpricing
Table 9 shows OLS regressions on the total and the matched sample. In the parenthesis, the t-statistics of the
                                                                                                            2
estimates are shown, calculated by using White’s (1980) heteroskedasticity- consistent standard errors. The 𝑅
is the adjusted R-squared.

                                              Total sample Matched sample

 Intercept 0.1819                              0.1666
                                                  (22.6985)***                          (8.8445)***
 Foreign dummy -0.0598                               -0.0446
                                                            (-2.5780)**                                 (-1.5472)

 R-squared 0.0033 0.0023
 Log-likelihood 1419.321 -224.1085
 Sample size 2050 598
                                  Signif. codes: 0 ‘***’ 0.001 ‘**’ 0.01 ‘*’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ’ 1

                                     29
In table 10, we show the OLS cross-sectional regression of the total and matched sample. The
first column shows the estimates of the OLS regression for the total sample, from table 8,
which is used to compare the findings of the matched sample. The second column shows the
OLS regression of the matched sample that includes 299 foreign firms and 299 US domestic
matched firms. Compared to the simple regression, the cross-sectional OLS regression with
more explanatory variables has a higher R-squared, indicating a better model and more solid
results can therefore be drawn.

In the OLS regression, for the matched sample, the coefficient of the foreign dummy is
negative, but not significant. The non-significant coefficient of the foreign dummy variable
indicates that foreign and US domestic firms experience equivalent degrees of IPO
underpricing. For the OLS regression of the matched sample, the sign of the coefficients is
similar to those in the total sample with the exception of the NYSE and tech dummy, yet not
significant.

                                          Table 10
       OLS regression to test for the significance of the foreign dummy variable
Table 10 shows OLS regressions on the total sample and the matched sample. In the parenthesis, the t-statistics
of the estimates are shown, calculated by using White’s (1980) heteroskedasticity- consistent standard errors.
     2
The 𝑅  is the adjusted R-squared.

                                              Total sample Matched sample

 Intercept -0.9922                                -0.9388
                                                          (-6.6604)***                              (-3.1167)**
 Log (Offer size) 0.0573                              0.0550
                                                   (7.0808)***                          (3.3931)***
 Log (Firm age +1) 0.0264                             0.0275
                                                    (4.6842)***                            (2.5022)*
 VC dummy 0.1179                           0.0795
                                                       (6.2139)***                              (2.2653)*
 NYSE dummy -0.0312                             0.0038
                                                             (-1.7448).                                  (0.1144)
 Tech Dummy 0.0397                             -0.0035
                                                            (2.1949)*                                 (-0.1025)
 Foreign Dummy -0.0587                               -0.0436
                                                             (-2.5791)**                                  (-1.5603)

 R-squared 0.07813 0.03911
 Log-likelihood -624.321 -210.3482
 Sample size 2050 598
                                   Signif. codes: 0 ‘***’ 0.001 ‘**’ 0.01 ‘*’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ’ 1

6.2.2 Robustness tests

We perform two different robustness tests to ensure that our finding of equivalent IPO initial
returns for foreign and domestic firms hold (results are shown in appendix).

Our first robustness test examines whether the sample size in the matched sample has an
effect on the insignificance of the foreign dummy variable. A random sample of US domestic
firms are therefore constructed, that represents a smaller version of the total sample. In the

                                     30
OLS regression of the random sample we find that the foreign dummy is significant, which
shows that our results are not sensitive to the sample size.

In our second robustness test, we examine if our findings hold over time by dividing our total
and matched sample into two time periods, 2005 to 2012 and 2013 to 2020. We perform an
OLS regression on each sample’s time period. We find that the foreign dummy is not
significant in the time period from 2005 to 2012 for neither the matched nor the total sample,
which indicates that foreign and domestic firms experience equivalent levels of IPO
underpricing. However, we find that the foreign dummy is statistically significant in the time
period 2013 to 2020 for both the matched and the total sample, indicating that foreign firms
experience less IPO underpricing than US domestic firms. In the second time period, the
explanatory power of the OLS regressions, for the matched and total sample, is higher than in
the first time period.

These results indicate that our findings are not consistent over time and an overall conclusion
on the effect of the foreign variable can therefore not be drawn. We conclude that in the first
time period IPO underpricing can be expected to be equivalent for foreign and US domestic
firms. Whereas in the second time period, foreign firms are less underpriced than US
domestic firms. One possible explanation to this finding is that information asymmetry across
boarders continues to diminish as a result of financial globalization.

6.2.2 Cross-sectional regression to account for the developed country dummy
In table 11, we show the cross-sectional regression of the foreign sample with the inclusion of
a developed country dummy variable. We aim to examine whether a difference in IPO
underpricing exists between foreign firms originating from emerging and developed
countries. Our cross-sectional OLS regression shows that foreign firms from developed
countries experience less underpricing yet we cannot draw any conclusion as the coefficient
is non-significant.

                                           Table 11
     Regression model on foreign firms including the developed country dummy
Table 11 shows OLS regression on the foreign sample with the inclusion of the developed country dummy. In
the parenthesis, the t-statistics of the estimates are shown, calculated by using White’s (1980)
                                              2
heteroskedasticity- consistent standard errors. The 𝑅  is the adjusted R-squared.
                                                                 Foreign IPO Sample
 Intercept -0.8862
                                                                                                (-2.1890)*
 Log (Offer size) 0.0489
                                                                                  (2.2740)*
 Log (Firm age +1) 0.0346
                                                                                           (1.9143) .
 VC dummy 0.0410
                                                                                    (0.8665)
 NYSE dummy 0.0351
                                                                                    (0.7453)
 Tech dummy 0.0379
                                                                                    (0.7603)
 Developed country dummy -0.0479
                                                                                                   (-1.0813)
 R-squared 0.02099
 Log-likelihood -126.2554
 Sample size 299
                                   Signif. codes: 0 ‘***’ 0.001 ‘**’ 0.01 ‘*’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ’ 1

                                     31
7. Conclusions

Despite the growing tendency for firms to turn to foreign markets in order to raise capital,
little research has been carried out to ascertain whether firms going public abroad are more
likely to be underpriced compared to their domestic counterparts. Such findings represents a
determining factor for firms evaluating whether to go public in their domestic market or
abroad, for instance on the ever most attractive US stock exchanges.

The purpose of this paper is therefore to build upon existing literature in the field of IPOs, by
thoroughly examining the discrepancies of IPO underpricing between US domestic and
foreign IPOs. While leveraging the methodology outlined from Lowry et al. (2010), we
expand past research mainly by: analyzing a more recent period, namely from 2005 to 2020;
bridging the gap between US-domestic IPOs and foreign IPOs in the US by comparing the
two simultaneously; assessing both mean and volatility of initial returns for foreign firms,
compared to previous studies assessing only mean initial returns.

Previous research in this field has shown inconsistent results when assessing the degree of
IPO underpricing for foreign firms. Amongst the various studies, our results are in line with
findings from both Ejara and Ghosh (2004) and Bruner et al. (2004).

In fact, our total sample of 2050 IPOs shows a strong relationship between the mean and
standard deviation of IPO initial returns. In both our correlation matrix and MLE model, we
find that all our explanatory variables have a significant impact on IPO underpricing and the
volatility of initial returns. Our findings from the total sample show that larger offerings,
older firms, firms with VC-backing, firms in a tech industry have positive mean and volatility
coefficients of initial returns. Whereas firms on the NYSE and foreign firms are found to
have negative mean and volatility coefficients of initial returns.

Contrarily to our original hypothesis, we find that the foreign variable is insignificant in the
matched sample, indicating that foreign and US domestic firms experience equivalent degrees
of IPO underpricing. Similar to previous researchers (Bruner et al., 2004), we expect that our
findings are a result of the foreign variable being outweighed by other firm-and offer-
characteristics that contribute to less information asymmetry.

We then perform two types of robustness tests to control if our findings hold. The first test
indicates that our results are not sensitive to the sample size. However, the second test
indicates that our results are not consistent in time. In the first time period, 2005 to 2012, the
foreign variable is insignificant for both the total and matched sample, whereas in the second
time period, 2013 to 2020, we find that the foreign variable is significant for both the total
and matched sample. This result indicates that foreign firms have become relatively less
underpriced compared to US domestic firms during the more recent time period.

Firms evaluating whether to go public in their domestic market or on one of the attractive
star-spangled exchanges, should not fear to experience higher IPO underpricing than its US
domestic counterparts.

                                     32
7.1 Limitations and further research
Our study provides valuable insight into how specific firm- and offer-specific characteristics
effect initial returns and volatility of initial returns, as well as advancing the research field of
underpricing for foreign firms. However, it is also subject to various limitations. In this
section, we present the main limitations of our work and suggestions for further research.

Firstly, a large extent of factors can impact IPO initial returns and volatility of initial returns.
This study mainly relies on the theories of information asymmetry to explain IPO
underpricing, as in Lowry et. Al. (2010). However, our findings highlight how larger and
more mature firms experience more underpricing, a result which seems to be in contrast with
the traditional theory of information asymmetry. Such contradiction suggests that other
driving forces that have not been assessed throughout this study might help explain further
the phenomenon of IPO underpricing.

Our cross-sectional regression model might not accurately fit all potential variables
explaining IPO underpricing. As a result of this, the explanatory power of our models never
exceeds an adjusted R-square of 10%. This indicates that our model can at most explain 10%
of the factors that contribute to underpricing. Since there are many other aspects that
influence underpricing, one should be cautious of drawing too strong conclusions from our
results. Lowry et al. (2010) have adjusted R-square values ranging from around 3% to 24%,
also indicating that there are important factors that their model does not explain.

Additionally, the results from this study seems to be different depending on the period
examined for foreign IPO underpricing. Indeed, we observe how foreign firms become
relatively less underpriced compared to US domestic firms as time passes, which calls for
additional research to explain the underlying factors contributing to this phenomenon. Why
are foreign firms becoming relatively less underpricing compared to US domestic firms?
Lastly, we have not looked into the effect that market volatility has on initial return,
something that Lowry et al. (2010) accounts for in their study. For foreign firms, market
volatility’s impact is more difficult to measure as they are impacted by both their home’s
equity market and the US equity market. This, in turn, calls for future research, to look into
how market volatility can affect underpricing of foreign firms.

In conclusion, to date, relatively little research has been conducted on the implications of
underpricing of foreign IPOs and initial conclusions are contradictory. In order to fully
understand how foreign IPOs and their domestic counterparts vary in regard to initial returns,
we call for further research to include and assess more possible driving factors, to consider
the evolution of foreign underpricing across time and to measure how market volatility
affects underpricing.

                                     33
                      References

Allen, F., & Faulhaber, G. (1989). Signaling by underpricing in the IPO market. Journal of
Financial Economics, 23, pp. 303-323.

Baron, D. P. (1982). A Model of the Demand for Investment Banking Advising and
Distribution Services for New Issues. The Journal of Finance,37, pp. 955-976.

Barry, C., Muscarella, C., Peavy III, J., & Vetsuypens, M. (1990). The role of venture capital
in the creation of public companies: Evidence from the going-public process. Journal of
Financial Economics, 27(2), pp. 447-471.

Beatty, R. P., & Ritter, J. (1986). Investment Banking, Reputation, and the Under-Pricing of
Initial Public Offerings. Journal of Financial Economics, 15, pp. 213-232.

Belsley, D. A., Kuh, E., & Welsch, R. E. (1980). Regression diagnostics: Identifying
influential data and sources of collinearity. New York, NY: Wiley.

Blass, A., & Yafeh, Y. (2000). Vagabond shoes longing to stray: Why foreign firms list in the
United States. Journal of Banking and Finance, 25, pp.555–572.

                                                                                     nd
Box, G., & Jenkins, G. (1984). Time series Analysis: Forecasting and control, 2  ed. San
Francisco: Holden Day, 1984.

Bruner, R., Chaplinksky, S., & Ramchand, L. (2004). U.S.-bound IPOs: issue costs and
market selectivity. Financial Management. 33, pp. 39–60.

Caglio, C., Weiss Hanley, K., & Marietta-Westberg, J. (2016). Going Public Abroad. Journal
of corporate finance, 41, pp. 103-122.

Comstock, A., Kish, R.J., & Vasconcellos, G.M. (2003). The post-privatization financial
performance of former state-owned enterprises. Journal of International Financial Markets,
Institutions and Money, 13(1), pp.19–37.

Doidge, C., Karolyi, G.A., & Stulz, R. (2013). The U.S. left behind? Financial globalization
and the rise of IPOS outside the U.S. Journal of Financial Economics,110, pp. 546–573.

Dong, M., Michel, J.-S., & Pandes, A. J. (2011). Underwriter Quality and Long-Run IPO
Performance. Financial Management, 40(1), pp. 219-251.

Ejara, D. D., & Ghosh, C. (2004). Underpricing and aftermarket performance of American
depositary receipts (ADR) IPOs. Journal of Banking and Finance, 28, pp. 3151–3186.

Errunza, V., & Miller D.P. (2000). Market Segmentation and the Cost of Capital in
International Markets. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 35, pp. 577-600.

                                     34
Foerster, S., & Karolyi GA. (1999). The Effects of Market Segmentation and Investor
Recognition on Asset Prices: Evidence of Foreign Stock Listings in the US. Journal of
Finance 54, pp. 981-1014.

Francis, B., Hasan, I., & Li, F. (2001). Underpricing of foreign and domestic IPOs in the US
market: Empirical evidence. Financial Markets, Institutions & Instruments, 10, pp. 1–18.

Greene, William H. (1993). Econometric Analysis, Second edition, Prentice Hall, New York

Grinblatt, M., & Hwang, C.Y. (1989). Signalling and the Pricing of Unseasoned New Issues.
Journal of Finance, 44, pp. 393-420.

Hanley, K.W., Kumar, A., & Seguin, P. (1993). Price stabilization in the market for new
issues. Journal of Financial Economics 34, pp.177-197

Harvey, C.R., 1995. Predictable risk and returns in emerging markets. Review of Financial
Studies, 773–816.

Henderson, B., Jegadeesh, N., & Weisbach, M. S. (2006). World markets for raising new
capital. Journal of Financial Economics, 82, pp.63–101.

Hwang, C.Y., & Clarysse, B. (2012). Endorsing Legitimacy To Avoid Ipo Underpricing
When Markets For Technology Fail, Academy of Management Proceedings, Vol 2012 (1), pp.
17168

Ibbotson, R.G. (1975). Price performance of common stock new issues. The Journal of
Financial Economics, 2(3), pp. 235-272.

Judge, G., Hill, C., Griffiths, W., & Lee, T. (1985) The Theory and Practice of Econometrics.
New York: John Wikley and Sons

Karolyi, A.G. (1998). What Happens to Stocks that List Shares Abroad? A Survey of
Evidence and Its Managerial Implications, NYU Salomon Brothers Center Monograph, 7, pp.
1-60.

Kotnik, A., & Tärning, J. (2020). The Role of Venture Capital Funding on IPO Underpricing:
A Study on U.S. IPOs Between 1985 and 2020., Stockholm School of Economics, Bachelor
Thesis

Kutner, M., Nachtsheim, C., & Neter, J. (2004). Applied linear regression models (4th ed.).
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill/Irwin

Lee, P. M., & Wahal, S. (2004). Grandstanding, certification and the underpricing of venture
capital backed IPOs. Journal of Financial Economics, 73(2), pp. 375-407.

Ljung, G. M., & Box, G. E. (1978). On a measure of lack of fit in time series models.
Biometrika, 65(2), pp. 297-303.

Ljungqvist, A. P. (1997). Pricing Initial Public Offerings: Further Evidence from Germany.
European Economic Review, 41(7), pp. 1309-1320.

                                     35
Ljungqvist, A. P. & Wilhelm, W. J. (2003). IPO Pricing in the Dot-Com Bubble, Journal of
Finance, 58, pp.723-752.
Loughran, T. (1993) NYSE vs NASDAQ Returns - Market Microstructure or the Poor
Performance of Initial Public Offerings? Journal of Financial Economics, 33, pp. 241- 260.

Loughran, T., Ritter, J. R. & Rydqvist, K. (1994). Initial Public Offering: International
Insights, Pacific-Basin Finance Journal, 2, pp. 165-199.

Loughran, T. & Ritter, J. R. (2002). Why Don't Issuers Get Upset About Leaving Money on
the Table in IPOs? Review of Financial Studies,15 (2), pp. 413-443.

Loughran, T., & Ritter, J. R. (2004). Why has IPO underpricing changed over time?.
Financial Management, 33 (3), pp. 5-37.

Lowry, M., Officer, M. S., & Schwert, G.W. (2010). The variability of IPO initial returns.
The Journal of Finance, 65, pp. 425-465.

Megginson, W., & Weiss, K. (1991). Venture capitalist certification in initial public
offerings. Journal of Finance, 46, pp. 879-903.

McDonald, J. G., & Fisher, A. K. (1972). New Issue Stock Price Behavior. Journal of
Finance, 27, pp.165-177.

Miller, D.P. (1999). The Market Reaction to International Cross-Listing: Evidence from
Depositary Receipts. Journal of Financial Economics, 51, pp.103-124.

Miller, R. E., & Reilly, F. (1987). An Examination of Mispricing, Returns, and Uncertainty
for Initial Public Offerings. Financial Management,16, pp. 33-38.

Michaely, R., & Shaw, W. H. (1994). The Pricing of Initial Public Offerings: Tests of
Adverse Selection and Signalling Theories. Review of Financial Studies,7(2), pp. 279-319.

Nelson, D.B. (1991). Conditional heteroskedasticity in asset returns: A new approach,
Econometrica, 59, 347-370.

Pagano, M., Röell, A. A., & Zechner, J. (2002). The geography of equity listing: Why do
companies list abroad?. Journal of Finance, 57, pp. 2651–2694.

Pastor, L., & Veronesi, P. (2005). Rational IPO waves. Journal of Finance,60 (4), pp.1713-
1757.

Reilly, F. K. & Hatfield, K. (1969). Investor Experience with New Stock Issues. Financial
Analysts Journal, 25(5), pp. 73-80.

Ritter, J. (1984). The “Hot Issue” Market of 1980. Journal of Business, 57 (2), pp. 215- 240.

                                     36
Ritter, J. (2021). Initial Public Offerings: Foreign Companies Going Public in the U.S., 1980-
2020. University of Florida, Available Online: https://site.warrington.ufl.edu/ritter/ipo-data/
[Accessed 10 May 2021]

Rock, K. (1986). Why New Issues are Underpriced. Journal of Financial Economics, 15, pp.
177–212.
Ruud, J., (1993). Underwriter price support and the IPO underpricing puzzle. Journal of
Financial Economics, 34, pp. 135-151.

Saudagaran, S. M. (1988). An empirical study of selected factors influencing the decision to
list on foreign stock exchanges. Journal of International Business Studies, 19, pp. 101–127.

Ule, G. M. (1937). Price Movements of Newly Listed Common Stocks. The Journal of
business of the University of Chicago, 10.4, pp. 346–369.

Welch, I. (1992). Sequential Sales, Learning, and Cascades. Journal of Finance, 47 (2), pp.
695-732.

White, H. (1980). A heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance matrix estimator and a direct
test for heteroskedasticity, Econometrica, 48, pp. 817-838.

                                     37
                       Appendix

A. Figure of the accuracy of the matching procedure
The figures above show the Propensity Score distribution. The raw treated consist of the 299 foreign IPOs and
raw control consist the 1751 domestic IPOs. Matched treated consist of the same foreign IPO sample as the raw
treated and the matched control consist of the matched US domestic IPOs, consisting of 299 IPOs.

B. Number of IPOs by country for the foreign IPO sample
In the table below the foreign listings have been separated into two subgroups, developed markets and emerging
markets. Presented is number of IPOs performed in each country.

 Country N Country N

 Developed Markets                                          Emerging Markets

   Australia                                        1          Argentina                                        3
   Austria                                       1         Bermuda                                      11
   Belgium                                       1          Brazil                                          3
   British Virgin                                   2          Cayman Islands                                   1
   Canada                                       8         China                                        140
   Denmark                                    2         Cyprus                                       1
   France                                        3         Greece                                        11
   Germany                                    5         Hong Kong                                  10
    Ireland-Rep                                      8          India                                             2
    Italy                                             1          Indonesia                                         1
    Jersey                                            2          Israel                                             31
   Luxembourg                                  6         Jordan                                        1
   Monaco                                      2         Malaysia                                      1
   Netherlands                                  12         Panama                                       1
   Singapore                                      2          Russian Fed                                     1
   South Korea                                   4         Taiwan                                        2
   Switzerland                                     6        Total Emerging markets                            220
   United Kingdom                               12
   Utd Arab Em                                 1
 Total Developed markets                           79

                                     38
C. Variance inflation factors (VIF)

                                                    Variance inflation factor (VIF)

                   Log (Offer     Log (Firm age +1) VC dummy NYSE dummy Nasdaq dummy Tech Dummy Foreign

                             size)                                                                                                        dummy

 OLS total sample 1.279127 1.052421 1.437292 5.667038 5.445444 1.459951 1.020177

 OLS US domestic    1.298180 1.051040 1.513162 5.104878 4.927370 1.539833

 IPO sample

 OLS foreign IPO     1.185438 1.051214 1.162069 15.768903 15.422899 1.164124

 sample

D. Variance inflation factors (VIF) without the Nasdaq variable

                                                     Variance inflation factor (VIF)

                      Log (Offer size) Log (Firm age +1) VC dummy NYSE dummy Tech Dummy Foreign dummy

 OLS total sample 1.256274 1.048414 1.405468 1.314002 1.445995 1.017693

 OLS US domestic IPO     1.272905 1.045998 1.477075 1.522291 1.339995

 sample

 OLS foreign IPO         1.177701 1.051213 1.145043 1.164016 1.173399

 sample

                                     39
E. Robustness tests for our finding of equivalent IPO underpricing for foreign and US
domestic IPOs
Table E shows the results of our robustness tests. Column (a) and (e) shows the results from the OLS regression
in table 10. Column (b) shows the OLS regression of our random sample. Column (c) shows the OLS regression
for the matched sample in the time period 2005-2012 whereas column (d) shows for the time period 2013-2020.
Column (f) shows the OLS regression for the total sample in the time period 2005-2012 whereas column (g)
shows for the time period 2013-2020. In the parentheses, the t-statistics of the values are shown, calculated by
using White’s standard errors. Adjusted R-squared and log-likelihood is shown.

                                (a)               (b)             (c)               (d)                (e)               (f)                (g)
                   Matched sample   Random      Matched    Matched sample     Total       Total sample   Total sample
                                    sample       sample    time period 2013-    sample       time period     time period
                                                 time period       2020                       2005-2012     2013-2020
                                                    2005-2012

Intercept -0.9388         -0.8004        -0.5675         -1.0118          -0.9922         -0.5060         -1.1405
                           (-3.1162)**     (-3.1547)**     (-1.6734) .       (-2.4029)*      (-6.6604)***     (-2.7537)**     (-5.9932)***
Log (Offer size) 0.0550        0.0477        0.0317         0.0619          0.0573         0.0267         0.0679
                       (3.3923)***    (3.5230)***    (1.7153) .      (2.7448)**      (7.0808)***     (2.6828)**     (6.5673)***
Log (Firm age +1) 0.0275        0.0190       0.0236         0.0284         0.0264         0.0379         0.0188
                        (2.5038)*      (1.6484) .     (2.0158)*       (1.5722)       (4.6842)***    (5.7620)***      (2.3248)*
VC dummy 0.0795        0.0631       0.0793        0.0647         0.1179        0.1136        0.1196
                        (2.2657)*      (1.8541) .     (1.7765) .        (1.244)        (6.2139)***     (4.6035)***     (4.6472)***
NYSE dummy 0.00389        -0.0043       0.01562        0.0063         -0.0312         0.0227         -0.0524
                            (0.1152)        (-0.1338)       (0.3531)         (0.1217)         (-1.7448).        (0.9804)        (-2.0832)*
Tech Dummy -0.0035        0.0444       -0.0175         0.0156          0.0397         -0.0212         0.0630
                           (-0.1018)        (1.3310)       (-0.3865)        (0.3114)         (2.1949)*        (-0.8636)        (2.5662)*
Foreign Dummy          -0.0436         -0.0466        -0.0008         -0.0784          -0.0587         -0.0143         -0.0745
                             (-1.5603)       (-1.6859) .      (-0.0249)        (-1.8037) .       (-2.5791)**       (-0.4819)        (-2.2236)*

R-squared              0.03911       0.03493       0.0115        0.04374        0.07813        0.07345        0.08326
Log-likelihood           -210.3482      -200.0335      46.5239        -144.2222        -624.321         -2.4833         -513.58

Sample Size             598          598          284           314           2050          798          1252

                                           Signif. codes: 0 ‘***’ 0.001 ‘**’ 0.01 ‘*’ 0.05 ‘.’ 0.1 ‘ ’ 1

                                     40