DO BUYOUTS STILL HAVE AN
OPERATING IMPACT?

AN EVENT STUDY OF SWEDISH POST-GLOBAL FINANCIAL
CRISIS LEVERAGED BUYOUTS

OSKAR KOCKUM

CARL JOHAN PRIOSET

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2021
DO BUYOUTS STILL HAVE AN OPERATING IMPACT? AN EVENT STUDY
OF SWEDISH POST-GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS LEVERAGED BUYOUTS

Abstract:

Using a dataset of 55 Swedish leveraged buyouts, we examine the change in operating
performance relative to appropriate control groups in the decade following the financial
crisis of 2008. Considering the differentia of this decade, the aim of this paper is to
evaluate whether the value generating mechanisms of the private equity industry have
changed and serve as reference point in the discussion about the societal role of the
industry. Controlling for pre-event performances, we find a relative improvement in the
return on assets but not in the EBITDA-margin, and that both operating statistics
deteriorated for the control groups. We conclude that the leveraged buyouts of this decade
still have an operating impact, outweighing a decline in industry operating performance.

Keywords:

Private Equity, Leveraged Buyouts, Abnormal Operating Performance

Authors:

Oskar Kockum (24120)
Carl Johan Prioset (24126)

Tutor:

Ran Guo, Visiting Teacher, Department of Finance

Examiner:

Adrien d'Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis

Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics

© Oskar Kockum and Carl Johan Prioset, 2021

Acknowledgments: We would like to express our gratitude to Ran Guo for his guidance
and input throughout the writing of our thesis.

                                   1
1. Introduction
The leverage buyout is an elusive and widely debated economic phenomenon, by some
considered an abuse of capitalism and by others the best it has to offer. The financial crisis
of 2008 put private equity under the spotlight, raising the contentious question of whether
private equity contributes to the economy or simply its fragility.
         In this thesis, we examine the operating impact of Swedish leveraged buyouts in
the decade following the global financial crisis. With an event study of 55 such
transactions, we test whether the operating performances of buyout companies change
over the holding period, relative to those of their peers. We complement the analysis of
operating impact with an analysis of industry market timing.
         The early literature on this subject is close to unanimous in that the buyout
private equity sponsors improve the operating performance of target firms while the
results of recent studies are more diverse. Conspicuously, this question has, to our
knowledge, not been examined since the financial crisis. Without a doubt, this economic
upheaval had a major impact on the buyout industry, both at the very time of the crisis
and the years that followed. Considering that the decade following the financial crisis has
displayed historically unique dovish economic policy, build-up of corporate leverage, and
equity market appreciations, it is possible that the value generating mechanisms of
buyouts have changed.
         There are several reasons for conducting this study on the Swedish market. First,
over this decade, Swedish private equity has come to make an important pillar in the
Swedish economy. Relative to GDP, the amount of capital raised in Swedish private
equity is the second highest in the European Union, surpassed only by the that in
Luxembourg, and account for around three percent of all the employees in Sweden
(SVCA, 2020). Only once has the value generation of buyouts been studied in Sweden
(Bergström et al, 2007).
         The importance of analyzing whether the value creation of leveraged buyouts in
Sweden persists is evident, and the purpose of this paper is to answer the following
research question:

Do private equity sponsors, through leveraged buyouts, have an operating impact on
Swedish target firms in the decade following the financial crisis?

Our contribution to the literature is twofold. First, with this study, we shed light on an,
with respect to the above stressed societal relevance, disproportionally understudied
subject. Second, we devise this event study from the findings of Barber and Lyon (1996),
who comprehensively researched the specification and empirical power of event studies
on operating performance using accounting-based measures. In doing so, and in detail
accounting for considerations intrinsic to an application to the Swedish market, we add
to the scarce documentation of accounting-based event studies of small populations.
        To isolate the operating impact of the buyout, we benchmark the change in
operating performance of the buyout companies against those of respective peer groups

                                   2
constructed to control for pre-event performances. An abnormal change in performance,
is one where difference between these two changes is different from zero, estimating the
impact of the buyout. As a measure operating performance, we turn to return on assets
and the EBITDA-margin, together providing a comprehensive picture. The analysis of
industry market timing is made on a subset of data that the analysis of operating impact
uses, namely the absolute change in operating performance of the assigned peer groups.
To account for the considerations that go into devising a well-specified model, we add to
the main line of analysis of operating impact three complementary lines.
         Running non-parametric non-directional tests on the operating impact and
market timing, we find both results in line with and contrarian to those of most existing
literature. We find support for that the buyout has a positive relative impact on the return
on assets of the buyout company, but no support for a positive impact on the EBITDA-
margin. Amongst the peer groups, we find support for that both operating statistics
deteriorated over the event period. We consider these mixed results a strong indicator of
the differentia of the decade following the financial crisis, but conclude, with reference
to the relative improvement of ROA, that the buyouts of the period have had an operating
impact.
         The paper is structured in the following way. In section two we review the related
literature. In section three we identify the value generating mechanisms of private equity.
In the section four, we develop our hypotheses. In section five we present our empirical
methodology. In section six we summarise the data. In section seven, we present the
results, and in section eight follows a discussion. Finally, in section nine we conclude the
paper.

                                   3
2. Literature review
Since the 1980s, the leveraged buyout has been a topic of interest for both the financial
sector and academia (Wright & Robbie 1998). The most closely related research to our
study includes the studies by Kaplan (1989), Muscarella and Vetsuypens (1990),
Bergström et al. (2007), Boucley, Sraer and Thesmar (2011), and Barber and Lyon
(1996). The first mentioned paper studied U.S. public-to-private management buyouts in
the 1980’s and found a positive impact on the operating income of buyout companies.
Muscarella and Vetsuypens (1990), examined U.S. reverse leverage buyouts of the same
decade, concluding on significant improvements in operating profitability which resulted
mainly from the sponsors’ capabilities of reducing costs. The third line of research,
Bergström et al, (2007), found a similar result when studying Swedish buyout companies
between 1993 and 2006. Further, Boucley et al. (2011) studied French leveraged buyouts
between 1994 and 2004 and found increases in the profitability of the buyout companies
but also that value stems from relaxing credit constraints. Lastly, Barber and Lyon (1996)
examined the empirical power and specification of accounting-based event studies, from
which they formulated an archetypical set of methodological recommendations and
considerations. It is upon their findings we construct this analysis, which in turn is an
extension of the study of operating impact in Sweden in the two decades leading up to the
financial crisis of Bergström et al. (2007).
         Our thesis differs from previous work in the following way. First, the study is,
to the best of our knowledge, by any geographical application, the first analysis of its kind
in the decade following the financial crisis. It is by any measurement a novel landscape
in which the private equity buyout fund managers operate. Never in history has liquidity
been so strong, equity markets so bullish, the competition for deals so high, and the global
financial markets so interconnected. Since the financial crisis, the European economy has
become increasingly levered, culminating a corporate debt over EBITDA in 2019
exceeding those in 2008/09 (S&P Global Ratings, 2020). With low interest rates,
corporate debt is overall serviceable, but the affordability would rapidly deteriorate
should operating performance fall. Against this backdrop, the importance of studying the
value generation and operating impact of the buyout – which with abnormal leverage is a
driver of this development – is evident. Second, we revisit the findings of Barber and
Lyon (1996) and work out a methodology with detailed accounts for considerations that
pertain to an event study of operating impact in a small population such as Sweden,
adding to a scarcely studied application.

                                   4
3. Private equity value generation

Buyout proponents, such as Jensen (1989), claim that private equity sponsors raise firms’
operating performance and generate economic value. Sceptics, on the other hand, argue
that private equity firms do not enhance operating performances and that their returns
stem from taking advantage of tax breaks and superior information (Kaplan, 2009). In
this section, we briefly identify the different levers of value generation using the
framework by Berg and Gottschalg (2003). Breaking down the different levers of value
generation discerns the determinants of operating impact. In connection, we expand on
the empirical findings in previous literature on both operating performance and market
timing.

3.1. Value creation and value capturing
Berg and Gottschalg (2004) break down buyout value generation into two sources: value
creation and value capturing. The first, value creation, refers to factors that have a direct
effect on the financial performance of the business. Improvements in operating
performance and reduced cost of capital are such examples. The second, value capturing,
refers to factors that lead to improvements in the valuation of a company over time, but
without necessarily changing the underlying financial performance of the business.
Examples of such factors are industry multiple expansions and elevated expectations on
financial performance.

3.2. Value creation through operating impact
Value creating activities can then be subdivided into primary and secondary levers (Porter
1985, Stabell & Fjaelstad, 1998). Primary levers refer to improvements in operational
effectiveness, strategic distinctiveness, as well as financial engineering. These have a
direct impact on value generation. The secondary levers are different in that they do not
have a direct effect on the financial performance of a company. However, they do enhance
the effect of the primary levers. An example of a secondary lever would be an alignment
of incentives between the management team of the target company and new shareholders.
Even though the increased incentive alignment does not have a direct effect on profits it
may have it indirectly by, for example, taking out operational inefficiencies.
        Both primary and secondary levers can improve the operating performance of
firms. The empirical evidence on the operating impact of leveraged buyouts is strong but
not very recent. Kaplan (1986) suggested that increases in operating income, decreases in
capital expenditures, and increases in net cash flow stemmed mainly from improved
incentives rather than large employment cuts. His study observed U.S. management
buyouts of public companies three years after the transaction. In the same decade,
Muscarella and Vetsuypens (1990), found that amongst reverse leveraged buyouts, cost
reductions made possible by changes to the buyout companies’ governance structures was
the main source of improvement to their operating performance. More recently,
Bergström et al. (2007) found that Swedish buyouts, irrespective of exit type, have a
significant positive operating impact. Boucly, Sraer and Thesmar (2011) found that
alleviating credit constraints provided growth opportunities for buyouts firms.

                                   5
        Though the majority of the empirical evidence speaks for buyouts having an
operating impact, there are exceptions (Kaplan, 2009) such as Guo et al. (2007), who
studied U.S. public-to-private transactions between 1990 and 2006. Contrary to the
findings from the 1980s, the authors found only modest increases in the operating
performance. Still, they found at the portfolio company level, high investor returns. Other
authors that show a similar result are Acharya and Kehoe (2008) and Weir, Jones and
Wright (2007), studying public-to-private deals in the United Kingdom over roughly the
same period. This change in results might suggest that the impact of public to private
transactions after the 1980s differ from those prior (Kaplan, 2009). Boucly et al. (2011)
raises the same issue in their paper and make the argument that the transactions predating
the new millennium may not be fully representative of today’s leverage buyouts.

3.3. Value capturing through industry market timing
The other way a private equity sponsor can capture an improvement in operating
performance is market timing. That is, identifying an industry or market with an operating
performance below steady state. Bergström et al. (2007) are the first to evaluate such a
component to the value generation of Swedish pre-financial crisis buyouts. By assuming
that industries operate at steady state, they test for changes to industry operating
performances, but find no support for private equity sponsors timing the market.

                                   6
4. Hypothesis development

Between 2005 and 2006, the private equity industry experienced a period of major growth
(Lelelux et al., 2015). Often referred as the “Golden Age”, the industry saw the number
of buyouts rise to new heights and deals struck at record sums. Globally, this amounted
to a total of 5,188 buyout transactions at a combined enterprise value of roughly $1.6
trillion (Kaplan, 2009). However, the growth story of private equity would end in 2008.
When the financial crisis hit the economy, it suddenly became difficult for private equity
firms to obtain funding. Investors became reluctant and banks less eager to lend money.
As a result, the deal value of global buyouts fell from $665 billion in 2007 to $71 billion
in 2009. Capital raised by private equity sponsors followed, falling from $666 billion in
2008 to $228 billion in 2010 (Bain & Company, 2011).

         In the wake of the financial crisis, new regulatory measures that concerned many
market participants, private equity included, were introduced. In the U.S, the Dodd-Frank
Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act was signed into federal law in 2010,
including stricter requirements on disclosure and transparency of the private equity
industry (Toyou, 2018). In Europe, a law with similar purpose was passed in July 2011.
Unlike the Dodd-Frank act, the AIFMD contained rules of capital requirements,
independent valuation providers and depositaries. Further, regulators had the possibility
to set certain limits on the leverage levels of private equity funds (Khort, 2014). Many
private equity funds were sceptical about these developments. Prior to the financial crisis,
the private equity industry had operated largely unregulated. Now, they had to conduct
business in line with a new regulatory framework. Despite these changes, there is no
evidence, given the high growth of the industry, that these laws have had a negative
impact on the aggregated fundraising or investing, as some had feared at first (MJ
Hudson, 2020). What is certain though is that the industry is under more scrutiny
following the financial crisis and that it is likely to increase going forward as this asset
class grows in importance.

        Aside regulatory changes, the decade following the GFC has seen some
historically low interest rates and dovish economic policy. With an ever-growing stock
of liquidity chasing returns, the capital flow toward the buyout private equity industry has
accelerated, and its levels of dry powder had accumulated to a global excess of $1.1tn by
2018 (Mergermarkets, 2018). Thereto, the private equity industry has enjoyed an era of
cheap debt deal financing, and the prospects for leveraged buyouts have been uniquely
ample. Concurrently, the public markets and other competing sources of financing have
pushed up valuations, with, for example, the European median EV/EBITDA multiple
expanding from 5.4 in 2009 to 8.9 in 2019 (Pitchbook, 2019). Taken together, the
competition amongst the buyout private equity sponsors has rapidly increased, in turn
increasing the pressure on generating value. While private equity firms used to rely a lot
on financial engineering as a lever to create value (Indahl and Zinterhofer, 1998), this
decade of cheap external financing, also available to non-financial firms, has put greater

                                   7
pressure on private equity sponsors to find new ways to add value to their portfolio
companies. This manifests itself in a survey of 100 senior-level executives across North
America, EMEA, and Asia-Pacific, which found that niching, bringing forth creative deal
structures, and geographic expansions are the key characteristics of the late 2010s private
equity buyout value generation (Mergermarkets, 2018). Conversely, an increased
pressure on novel value creation could also be a result of non-private equity backed firms
catching up with the sponsors’ practices.

         The last decade has seen private equity firms improve their portfolio companies’
operating capabilities by expanding on operating partners and developing functional
expertise. Thereto, the sponsors have invested heavily into data analytics, geographical
reach, sector expertise and local market intelligence (EY, 2020). Possibly, this has
improved investment decision makings and operating capabilities.

        Amongst non-financial firms, the characteristics of the decade following the
financial crisis are manifested differently. Notably, when external funds are easily
available, corporate leverage has been found to increase over-investing, overriding its
otherwise managerial control mechanism of leverage (López-de-Foronda et al., 2019).
All else equal, the high liquidity and escalating corporate debt of the 2010s could increase
overinvesting amongst non-financial firms, potentially enhancing the returns to value
levers available to private equity sponsors, such as aligning managerial incentives through
changes to corporate governance and the firm’s financial structure. Such successfully
exploited opportunities would primarily result in an increased efficiency of capital, and
less in pure income efficiencies.

      With basis in the strong support for buyouts having an operating impact in the
existing literature and that most of the characteristics of the last decade speak for value
creation being essential to generate competitive returns, we hypothesize that the buyout
still results in a relative improvement in operating performance of the buyout company.
Among the characteristics of the decade following the financial crisis, we consider the
following the main drivers. The increased competition amongst private equity sponsors
increases the pressure on value creation and in turn relative operating impact on the
buyout firm. A telling example of this is the private equity sponsors’ investing into
improving and widening value levers with data analytics and sector expertise. A
mitigating factor to this hypothesized impact is that non-financial firms might have caught
up with value creating practices of private equity, as would be predicted by conventional
theory on information diffusion and market efficiency.

𝐻0: The ROA and the EBITDA-margin, respectively, have not increased relative to the
peer group over the holding period.

                                   8
𝐻1: The ROA and EBITDA-margin, respectively, have increased relative to the peer
group over the holding period.

Market timing with respect to industry is a scarcely studied subject, with Bergström et al.
(2007) being the first test for it. We expect to find a similar result as they – private equity
funds have no market timing abilities with respect to industry.

𝐻0: Private equity funds do not have market timing abilities with respect to industry.

𝐻1: Private equity funds do have market timing abilities with respect to industry.

                                   9
5. Methodology

5.1. Operating impact
We devise this event study of operating impact drawing on the findings on specification
and empirical power of operating performance event studies by Barber and Lyon (1996).
We adapt the following expected performance model, under which the null hypothesis of
buyouts not having an operating impact is true, illustrating the assumptions of the
analysis.

                                            𝑛             𝑛                𝑛
                               𝐸(𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑖,𝑡) = 𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑖,𝑡−1 + ∆𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑃𝐺𝑖,𝑡

                 𝑛
where 𝐸(𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑖,𝑡) is the expected value of the operating statistic 𝑛 of buyout company 𝑖 in
                   𝑛
period 𝑡, 𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑖,𝑡−1 is the same operating statistic of the same firm in time 𝑡 − 1,
            𝑛
∆𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑃𝐺𝑖,𝑡 is the difference between the corresponding operating statistic of the peer
group to buyout company 𝑖 in time 𝑡 and 𝑡 − 1.
        To determine whether the buyout has an operating impact, we examine whether
there is a systematic abnormal change in operating performance amongst the buyout
companies over the holding period. Let 𝑡 denote the time of exit and 𝑡 − 1 the time of
                                                         1
buyout. The relative change in operating performance of buyout company 𝑖 is abnormal
when:

                                              𝑛                𝑛
                                  ∆𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑖,𝑡 − ∆𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑃𝐺𝑖,𝑡 ≠ 0

For devising an operating performance event study, Barber and Lyon (1996) outline three
main considerations. First, amongst a palette of accounting statistics that describe
                                                                                                         2
operating performance, we choose post-tax operating income over book value of assets
(ROA) and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization over total
revenues (EBITDA-margin). Second, as benchmark to the buyout companies, we
construct peer groups considering industry classification and pre-event performance.
Third, for the statistical test, we identify the appropriate statistical test as the non-
parametric Wilcoxon’s signed rank test, found to be uniformly more powerful in this
setting.

5.1.1 Operating statistics
We choose ROA and EBITDA-margin as subjects for this analysis, for both fundamental
and methodological reasons. An advantage over accounting statistics derived from net
income is that these two are unaffected by interest expenses and in turn unaffected by
increases in firm leverage, a frequent result of buyouts. Moreover, to allow for cross-firm
comparisons, the operating metrics must be scaled, which is why we study two ratios
rather than level post-tax operating income and EBITDA. We recognise that specific
statistical considerations follow from studying changes in ratios; see section 5.2. for a
discussion about this.
        ROA is an extensively studied operating statistic in the existing literature and
analysing it facilitates making comparisons. This measure of asset productivity better

1
 The difference between the change in operating performance of the buyout company and the change in operating performance of
the median of its assigned peer group over the holding period. Here and hereafter referred to as “relative change”
2
 The average of total assets the current and preceding year
                                  10
accounts for changes to the balance sheet than do pure income statement-ratios. A
drawback to ROA is that it approximates the ideal metric of return on operating assets
and might understate the true productivity of operating assets. Operating assets are
however not reported in the consolidated financial statements we use.
             Several variants of asset productivity are used in the literature, and each
comes with its own considerations. In Boucly et al. (2011), EBITDA over total assets is
analysed and asset write-ups in connection with the buyout and ensuing increased
depreciations are identified as potential distortive factors. We find a ROA with EBIT in
the numerator, taking depreciation into account, less of a subject to this distortion. On the
other hand, EBIT has a lower expected cross-firm comparability when depreciation and
amortisation vary idiosyncratically.
         We consider the EBITDA-margin, a pure income statement ratio, to together
with the ROA, a measure of asset productivity, to provide a comprehensive picture of
operating performance. Thereto, an analysis of the EBITDA-margin facilitates making
comparisons within the realm of private equity as transaction metrics such as leverage,
interest coverage, and enterprise value multiples are most frequently based on EBITDA.
In the literature, the EBITDA-margin is less extensively studied, not covered in
archetypical papers such as Kaplan (1989), Muscarella and Vetsuypens (1990), Barber
and Lyon (1996), but in more recent studies such as Bergström et al. (2007).
         Because we analyse the change in operating performance over a holding period,
we wish to compare operating statistics that are as close as possible to the buyout and the
exit. While transactions occur throughout the year, the data we use is reported annually.
From this discrepancy, a trade-off between capturing as much as possible of the event
period and including as little as possible of periods before and after arises. We choose to
apply an approach inspired by Bergström et. al (2007) where we consider a buyout or exit
that took place in the second half of the calendar year to have occurred in the following
calendar year, and otherwise in the same calendar year.
        We then use the operating statistics of the years prior to the assigned year of
buyout and exit. We refer to these two as “ex-buyout” and “ex-exit” operating statistics
from here on. With this method, the analysis captures only the impact of years in which
the majority of months are part of the event period. We identify that the inevitable
imprecision resulting from this is that for buyouts and exits that occurred in the first half
of the year, the analysis would omit part of the of impact of the buyout. This is turn is a
source of impairment to the power of our test. However, because those omitted months is
a small amount relative to the length of most holding periods, we deem this a minor
imperfection. For how we adjust for data where fiscal years differ from calendar years,
see section 6.

5.1.2 Benchmarking
We assign each buyout company a peer group consisting of five peers considering the
two digit SIC-codes (industry), ex-buyout performance, geographic location (Sweden),
and a non-private equity ownership during the event period. The change in the peer group
                   3
operating statistic  is then defined as the median of the group. A two-digit SIC criteria
generates a seemingly diverse set of companies but Barber and Lyon (1996) shows that a
four-, in place of two-, digit SIC criteria, all else equal, provides no improvement in
explanatory power (Barber and Lyon, 1996).

3            𝑛
  ∆𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑃𝐺𝑖,𝑡
                                  11
        A relatively frequently used alternative to peer matching by pre-event
performance, is to match by firm-size. While this methodology too, in general, generates
well-specified models, Barber and Lyon (1996) show that for ROA, peer matching
without a pre-event performance criterion generates models with large misspecifications
for samples with performance-based biases, even when biases are small. By matching on
ex-buyout EBITDA-margin and ROA, for the two analyses respectively, we effectively
control for mean-reversions of the operating metrics over the ownership period.
        While Barber and Lyon (1996) considered a combination of size and
performance matching on bandwidths as narrow as 30% and 10%, respectively, the most
robust criterion, archetypical recent event studies of operating performance, on
populations considerably larger than the Swedish one, use less strict ones. Boucly et. al
(2009) apply a 50% bandwidth on ROA and Bernstein et al. (2017) apply bandwidths of
30% on both size and on ROA but note that their results are unaffected by broadening the
bandwidth to 50%. Applying a criterion of bandwidths of pre-performance comes with a
cost that is especially significant in event studies on small populations. If the number of
peers meeting the criterion are fewer than five, the data point must either be excluded, or
the other screening criteria loosened when.
         With reference to this, Bergström et al. (2007) abandon pre-performance
matching altogether and argue that the 20 largest firms in the same industry peers make
adequate peer groups, effectively matching by size. We find this an opportunity to add to
the subject of event studies using pre-event matching by applying the methodology
suggested by Barber and Lyon (1996) on a, scarcely studied, small population. With basis
in the above considerations, we choose to devise our analysis using ex-buyout bandwidths
of 50%.
        For robustness, we also present the equivalent tests on samples from three
additional peer group generating methods. Our main line of analysis assumes that the
matching buyout companies with peer groups using pre-performance bandwidths of 50%
generates a well-specified model. If the model is mis specified, the null-hypothesis
rejection rates are misleading. It is possible that the model of our main analysis is mis
                                    4
specified because it imperfectly  eliminates observations from the full sample and
generates observations with peer groups less alike the buyout companies than does a
stricter bandwidth.
        We run the same Wilcoxon signed rank tests on (1) the full sample, (2) a sample
excluding buyout companies with negative ex-buyout operating statistics, and (3) a
sample generated using a 30% bandwidth. Grossly differing results could be an
implication of the model being mis specified. Would that be the case, we would
reconsider the validity of the analysis. The reason for conducting the analysis on a sample
solely excluding buyout companies with negative ex-buyout operating statistics is a result
of a caveat to the database we use, outlined in section 6.

5.1.3 Statistical test
To test whether a median abnormal performance exists, the Wilcoxon signed rank test
statistic, 𝑊 follows as:

4
 See section 6 for an account of a caveat to the database causing this.
                                  12
                                                          𝑁𝑟
                                           ∆𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑖,𝑡 − ∆𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑃𝐺𝑖,𝑡
                   𝑊 = ∑                  × 𝑅𝑖
                                          |∆𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑖,𝑡 − ∆𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑃𝐺𝑖,𝑡|
                                   𝑖=1

Where 𝑅𝑖 denotes the rank of the absolute value of relative change in an operating statistic
of buyout company 𝑖 when ordered ascendingly and the other terms are defined as
previously.
        It is worth noting that each data point has been based relative to the buyout and
exit. Interested in examining the effect of the buyout as binary event, we consider it
economically meaningful to treat holding periods of different lengths as observations of
one type.
         While scaled accounting statistics allow for cross-firm comparisons, an analysis
of change in ratios carries important considerations that one of level statistics do not. To
analyse the change in ROA and EBITDA-margin, there are two options at hand.
We either test the relative or absolute change. Testing relative change requires excluding
observations yielding illogical comparisons. This includes observations for which the
sign of the operating statistic switches or with has an initial value of zero. Naturally, this
systematic exclusion could constitute a bias, and our samples contain four such
observations each. Testing absolute change does not entail this problem, but it effectively
assumes that all absolute changes are equate. Returns to investments in operational
performance might be marginally decreasing, which would make absolute changes less
economically comparable, a valid objection to the aforementioned assumption. We
consider an analysis of absolute change adequate for our purposes, and it allows for wide
comparisons as that appears to be most frequently used in the literature.

5.2 Market timing
We complement the analysis of operational impact with a test of market timing, applying
the methodology of Bergström et al. (2007). Assuming that the industry operating
statistics are at steady-state, equally likely to increase or decrease, we use a sign test to
determine whether the private equity sponsors have timed their investments with regards
to industry. For this, we use the respective median changes in ROA and EBITDA-margin
of the peer groups assigned to the buyout companies. Notably, a macroeconomic
development would violate the steady state assumption. In the results section, we report
the p-values of the sign test based on the binomial distribution.
         To conduct this analysis on the sample of peers implicitly defines the industry
that the private equity sponsor has invested in as that of the performance matching subset
of the entire industry as classified by the SIC-code.

                                  13
6. Data description
We construct our test group of buyout companies by screening for buyouts closed
between the year start of 2010 and first half of 2020 in Sweden in the Capital IQ database.
We choose this end of the sample period because the availability of 2020-data is scarce.
For this list of buyout companies, we extract data on the two operating statistics over the
fiscal years from 2009 to 2019, transaction close dates, and two-digit SIC codes. Because
the operating statistics are generated on a fiscal basis, we adjust the assigned years of
buyout and exit where needed by considering them in relation to the fiscal year end. Two
of the buyout companies’ fiscal years differ from the calendar years. This first round of
screening generates 624 transactions, of which a significant portion are irrelevant to the
analysis. Of these 624 transactions, 596 are non-buyouts (growth equity and venture
capital), do not include necessary data (and cannot be completed using Refinitiv Eikon),
have not yet been exited, or was exited in the same year as the buyout. and these are
excluded. The full remaining samples consist of 55 observations each. We look up the
     5
dates of transaction exits manually in press releases and private equity sponsor websites.
After applying the semi-annual cut-off and pre-performance bandwidth of 50%, the two
samples of the main analysis of 50 and 47 buyout companies are distributed as in table 1
below.

Table 1. Buyout company samples

The table reports the number of buyouts and exits by year of the two samples on
EBITDA-margin and ROA and the distribution of operating statistics from the years
preceding the respective buyouts.

                                            EBITDA-margin (%),                 ROA (%),
      Number of LBOs Number of exits
                                          year preceding LBO                  year preceding LBO
        EBITDA-         EBITDA-                   25th           75th   Std             25th           75th   Std
 Year         ROA         ROA Mean      Median            Mean      Median
         margin         margin                 pct.          pct.  dev.        pct.          pct.  dev.
 2009 0 0 0 0 - - - - - - - - - -
 2010 4 4 0 0 31.4 11.4 22.7 51.4 27.5 15.9 8.8 14.8 23.0 8.6
 2011 15 15 0 0 10.6 6.7 11.0 14.8 4.9 9.6 3.3 7.4 12.6 7.0
 2012 12 10 0 0 19.4 9.1 16.6 29.4 13.1 18.8 10.7 19.9 23.1 7.0
 2013 7 7 1 2 14.6 11.4 15.7 19.5 5.6 11.9 1.9 12.5 16.7 8.5
 2014 2 1 1 1 4.7 4.2 4.7 5.2 0.7 8.8 8.8 8.8 8.8 -
 2015 4 4 3 2 11.5 4.5 10.8 18.4 8.1 6.2 5.0 6.6 7.4 1.7
 2016 2 2 9 9 20.7 7.1 20.7 34.3 19.3 27.6 16.5 27.6 38.7 15.7
 2017 3 3 14 12 6.2 5.3 6.7 6.7 0.9 11.0 1.1 7.9 23.8 11.7
 2018 1 1 7 7 9.6 9.6 9.6 9.6 - 3.3 3.3 3.3 3.3 -
 2019 0 0 7 6 - - - - - - - - - -
 2020 0 0 8 8 - - - - - - - - - -
 Total 50 47 50 47 14.9 6.7 12.1 18.8 12.3 12.8 6.3 10.3 19.8 8.8
Note: Buyouts in Sweden with close date between 2010-01-01 and 2020-06-30 having a recorded transaction exit,
holding period exceeding one year, and data on operating statistics. Listed EBITDA-margins and ROAs adhere to the
semi-annually cut-off calendar year adjusted for potential fiscal differences. The two samples of buyout companies

5
 For one observation, GPP Perimeter Protection, we find no exact transaction date. Because we have
more observations with exit in the first half of the calendar year, we consider it having occurred in the
first half.
                                  14
represent the full samples less the buyout companies with less than five peers within a 50% ex-LBO operating
performance bandwidth. LBO: leveraged buyout, buyout.

The sample buyouts are concentrated around the early years of the observed period, to
which the fact that the buyouts must have been exited to qualify is likely a significant
cause. Within these three years with the largest number of observations, 2011-2013,
means and median values differ by little, implying symmetric distributions. Buyouts in
2011 have lower median pre-buyout operating statistics, and the cross-year variability is
quite high for both operating statistics. For reference, a corresponding summary of the
full samples is found in the appendix, table 8.
        For each of the 55 buyout companies of the full sample, we screen for non-
private equity backed peers with the same two-digit SIC-codes and operations in Sweden
using the S&P Capital IQ database. We consider the automatically generated list of
buyout company SIC-codes imperfect, and when screening, we manually assess the
fairness of the classifications with regards to which industry classification the buyout
company fits. For buyout companies with several autogenerated SIC-codes, we use the
intersect of those where we consider it appropriate. The SIC-codes could be an inferior to
classification systems such as the NACE 1.1 or possibly the Swedish SNI. The latter two
are however not tabulated in the database we use, and we consider the SIC classification
adequate for our purposes.
         We construct two sets of this data base, one in which we match on pre-buyout
EBITDA-margin and one in which we match on pre-buyout ROA. Amongst the buyout
companies, the number of industry peers returned prior to applying the bandwidth vary
from the low tens to several thousands.
        The data from Capital IQ is imperfect, and for both cohorts, we complete missing
values for the buyout companies with information from consolidated financial statements
from the Refinitiv Eikon database where possible. Thereto, the Capital IQ strictly
generates negative margins as not meaningful (NM). For the buyout companies, we
simply complete with Refinitiv Eikon data. However, the sets of industry peers contain
up to several thousand peers, and we cannot complete all of these. This mainly poses a
problem for the screenings on buyout companies with negative ex-ante margins, of which
there are 3 EBITDA-margins and 6 ROAs. The outcome for those screenings is that only
industry peers with positive margins make it to the matching.
        To apply our method of pre-performance matching, we compute each difference
between each buyout company’s ex-buyout operating statistics and those of their
respective industry peers. We then rank and order the industry peers by those differences
and select the closest five with data available for the year preceding exit. We aggregate
all changes to the operating statistics for the buyout companies and the median of
respective peer groups, resulting two main data sets, one for EBITDA-margin and one for
ROA.
        Then, look up buyout companies with negative ex-buyout operating statistics,
remove these and construct the samples without buyout companies with negative ex-
buyout operating statistics. In parallel, we compute the bandwidths of 30% and 50%
around each buyout company ex-buyout operating statistic, from which we construct the
two last samples.
         No observation with negative ex-buyout operating statistic remains in the two
bandwidth samples. For the EBITDA-margin sample, there are 5 buyout companies
without peers within a 50% bandwidth and 7 without peers within a 30% bandwidth. The
two corresponding numbers for ROA are 7 and 9 (summarized in table 9 in the appendix).

                                  15
         It follows that the ex-buyout operating statistics of peers to buyout companies
with negative ex-buyout operating statistics are skewed in the positive direction. Because
improving operating performance might scale (supposedly inversely) to the level of ex-
buyout operating performance, this could make up a bias to the selection of peers,
magnifying the impact of the buyout. It should be noted however that removing buyout
companies with negative ex-buyout operating statistics results in a non-random sample.
As a result, the findings of our analysis apply to a (large) subset of all buyouts, that of
buyouts with positive ex-buyout operating statistics. Within the sample, the ex-buyout
operating statistics of the sample of the main analysis and the full sample compare as
shown in table 2 below.

Table 2. Buyout company sample relative to full sample

The table reports the number of buyout companies and the distribution of ex-LBO
EBITDA-margin and ROA for the sample of the main analysis and the full sample.

         Number of          EBITDA-margin (%),                        LBO ROA (%),
         observations         year preceding LBO                            year preceding LBO
          EBITDA-                        25th            75th    Std                  25th            75th   Std
                ROA Mean      Median               Mean      Median
           margin                      pct.          pct.    dev.           pct.          pct.   dev.
Samples
of main    50 47 14.9 6.7 12.1 18.8 12.3 12.8 6.3 10.3 19.8 8.8
analysis
Full
          55 55 14.4 5.9 12.0 18.8 12.8 10.3 3.2 8.8 18.6 10.5
samples
Note: LBOs in Sweden with close date between 2010-01-01 and 2020-06-30 having a recorded transaction exit, holding
period exceeding one year, and data on operating statistics. “Sample of main analysis” is that of the full samples less
the buyout companies with less than five peers within a 50% ex-LBO operating performance bandwidth.

A similar, though much less significant caveat to the data is that operating statistics are
generated by fiscal year, and ideally, one should adjust for this relative to the event period
of each transaction for all peers before benchmarking and applying the strict bandwidth.
Moreover, we try to manually control for that no peer was private equity backed during
the event period in question, but it is possible than we fail to account for this. The risk of
failing to do so is small however, considering that only a small fraction of firms is private
equity backed in a certain period of time.
       For the automatically generated ROAs, a transformation is needed. The ROA
from Capital IQ is calculated using a static, and irrelevant, tax-rate of 37.5% for the
computation of post-tax EBIT. We remove this factor for each observation and then
remultiply each ex-buyout and ex-exit ROA with the Swedish corporate tax rate of the
year preceding that with the highest number of buyouts in the sample, 26.3%. The ROA
should reflect the tax-rate of the actual environment in the firm, which is why we consider
appropriate to remove the automatically generated one of 37.5%. In the market timing
                                                                     6
analysis, we simply use the tax-rate of the ex-buyout year .
        The changes in the two operating statistics for the buyout companies, the peer
groups, and the relative changes between the two groups are summarized in table 3 below.

6
  The level of tax-rate is irrelevant for the purpose of performing a sign test.
                                  16
Table 3. Absolute changes in EBITDA-margin and ROA over the event period.

The table reports the distributions of absolute changes in operating statistics from LBO
to exit for the buyout companies and peer groups, and the relative change between the
two groups.

                                Min (p.p.) Max (p.p.) Mean (p.p.) Median (p.p.) Std. Dev. (p.p.)
 EBITDA-margin (BOC) -27.40 13.50 -0.91 0.63 8.61
 ROA (BOC) -20.26 19.34 -0.27 0.20 7.12
 EBITDA-margin (PG) -34.70 3.98 -2.82 -1.91 5.69
 ROA (PG) -16.79 6.34 -3.89 -3.40 5.95
 EBITDA-margin (relative) -27.40 32.70 1.91 1.17 10.33
 ROA (relative) -19.78 28.88 3.61 3.70 9.27

 NEBITDA-margin = 50

 NROA = 47
Note: LBOs in Sweden with close date between 2010-01-01 and 2020-06-30 having a recorded transaction exit, holding period
exceeding one year, and data on operating statistics. “BOC” is for buyout company, “PG” is for the median of peer group, “relative”
is for the difference between BOC and PG.

The most notable takeaways from the summary above are that the variability in changes
in operating statistics is high, and the buyout company statistics are asymmetrically
distributed while the those of the peer group and the relative are symmetrical, with means
and median values approximately coinciding. The dispersion and asymmetry of the
buyout company absolute changes could be an indicator of the presence of outliers in our
sample. The proper definition of outliers in this study would be observations that divert
                                                                                  7
from the criteria of the population, post financial buyouts in Sweden . Of these, the most
salient criterion is that of the transaction being a buyout. As mentioned previously, we
remove transactions by non-private equity sponsors in the first round of manual
adjustments to the automatically generated sample, but growth equity and venture capital
transactions may exist among the remaining. Controlling the sample for such transactions,
we do not find any however, and no other fundamental reason for excluding the buyout
                                      8
companies with extreme values .
         The data for testing market timing, number of positive and negative changes in
operating statistics over the event period of the peer group are as follows in table 4 below.

Table 4. Signs of peer group changes in EBITDA-margin and ROA

The table reports the number of negative and positive changes in operating statistics
from LBO to exit of the median of the peer groups to the buyout companies.

                            Negative Positive
 EBITDA-margin 39 16
 ROA 38 17
Note: LBOs in Sweden with close date between 2010-01-01 and 2020-06-30 having a recorded transaction exit, holding period
exceeding one year, and data on operating statistics. Negative: 𝑂𝑃𝑆𝐼𝑖,𝑡 < 𝑂𝑃𝑆𝐼𝑖,𝑡−1; positive 𝑂𝑃𝑆𝐼𝑖,𝑡 > 𝑂𝑃𝑆𝐼𝑖,𝑡−1

7
 Our sample includes one Norwegian company (Hansen Protection AS) with main operations in Sweden.
8
 These are CCS Healthcare by Segulah Advisors (EBITDA-margin and ROA), Biolin Scientific Holding by Ratos (EBITDA-
margin), Aditro Logistics by Valedo Partners (EBITDA-margin), GPP Perimeter Protection by Procuritas Capital (EBITDA-
margin), Car-O-Liner Group by Polaris Management (EBITDA-margin), Bambora by Nordic Capital (EBITDA-margin), Scanacon
by Capilon (EBITDA-margin), Bellbox by Fidelio Capital (ROA), Hansen Protection by Montagu Private Equity (ROA).
                                  17
7. Results

7.1. Buyout operating impact

Table 5. Sample medians and non-directional Wilcoxon signed rank test of buyout
operating impact

The table reports the sample medians of the differences in EBITDA-margin and ROA
between the year preceding buyout and the year preceding the exit and the test ranks and
test statistics of a non-directional Wilcoxon signed rank test performed to determine
whether this median difference of buyout companies is statistically different from that of
their assigned peer groups.
                                 d)               e)                e)
                       Median Δ         Positive ranks             Negative ranks             Test statistics
                                  Mean   Sum of         Mean   Sum of
                  BOC PG n   rank    ranks n   rank    ranks Ties Z p
EBITDA-margin (p.p.)
  Full sample 0.76 -1.90 33 30.6 1009.50 20 26.4 527.5 2 2.019 0.0435

                      a)
  Neg. ex-LBO OPS  0.65 -1.93 31 28.7 890.50 18 26.8 481.5 3 1.863 0.0625

                  b)
  50% bandwidth     0.63 -1.91 30 27.6 827.50 18 24.7 444.5 2 1.849 0.0645

                  c)
  30% bandwidth     0.78 -1.91 29 26.7 773.50 17 23.5 399.5 2 1.918 0.0551

ROA (p.p)
  Full sample 0.54 -2.72 34 31.7 1078 20 23.1 461.0 1 2.585 0.0097

                      a)
  Neg. ex-LBO OPS  0.20 -3.03 30 27.8 835 18 21.6 389.0 1 2.218 0.0265

                  b)
  50% bandwidth     0.20 -3.39 30 27.0 810 16 19.8 317.0 1 2.609 0.0091

                  c)
  30% bandwidth     0.37 -3.21 29 26.6 771 16 19.3 309.0 1 2.524 0.0116
Note: Buyouts in Sweden with close date between 2010-01-01 and 2020-06-30 having a recorded transaction exit, holding period
exceeding one year, and data on operating statistics. “BOC” is for buyout company, “PG” is for the median of peer group. The four
                                                                                                                                                                    𝑁𝑟   ∆𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑖,𝑡−∆𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑃𝐺𝑖,𝑡
samples are ordered in descending order of number of observations. The test statistic 𝑊 = ∑ 𝑖=1 × 𝑅𝑖 converges to a
                                                                                                                                                      |∆𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑖,𝑡−∆𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑃𝐺𝑖,𝑡|
normal distribution for 𝑛 ≥ 20, from which z-scores and p-values are calculated. P-values below 0.05 are in bold.
     a) Excluding observations with negative buyout ex-LBO operating statistics
     b) Excluding observations with any peers outside a 50% bandwidth
    c) Excluding observations with any peers outside a 30% bandwidth
     d) For BOC: median value of 𝛥𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑖 = 𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑖,𝑡−1; PG: median value of 𝛥𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑃𝐺𝑖 = 𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑃𝐺𝑖,𝑡 − 𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑃𝐺𝑖,𝑡−1
     e) Positive: 𝛥𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑖 > 𝛥𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑃𝐺𝑖; Negative: 𝛥𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑖 < 𝛥𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑃𝐺𝑖
In our main line of analysis, that of the sample generated with a pre-performance
matching bandwidth of 50%, the median buyout company absolute change in ROA (0.2)
is notably lower that in EBITDA-margin (0.63), and the median peer group absolute
change in ROA (−3.39) is larger than that in the EBITDA-margin (−1.91). Moreover, a
Wilcoxon signed rank test did not reveal a significant difference in the median change of
EBITDA-margin for the buyout companies and respective peer groups over the holding
        9
period . There were two pairs of observations with no difference. The result of the
corresponding test for the ROAs was significant, 𝑛 = 47, 𝑍 = 2.609, 𝑝 < 0.05. There
was one pair of observations with no difference.
         In the three supplementary lines of analysis, conducted for robustness, the results
are mixed. Notably, the median value of buyout company absolute change in ROA drops

9
 Hereafter referred to as “Relative change”
                                  18
significantly from the full sample to that excluding observations with negative ex-buyout
ROAs and is more uniform amongst the other three.

7.2. Market timing

Table 6. Non-directional sign test of market timing

The table reports the number of negative and positive changes of peer groups’ EBITDA-
margin and ROA over the holding period and the p-values from the binomial distribution
of a non-directional sign-test from a sign test. The test was performed to determine
whether the difference in the number of positive and negative changes in peer group
EBITDA-margin and ROA, respectively, are significantly different from zero.

                                 Negative Positive p

 EBITDA-margin 39 16 0.0027
 ROA 38 17 0.0065
Note: LBOs in Sweden with close date between 2010-01-01 and 2020-06-30 having a recorded transaction exit,
holding period exceeding one year, and data on operating statistics. P-values below 0.05 are in bold. Negative:
𝑂𝑃𝑆𝐼𝑖,𝑡 < 𝑂𝑃𝑆𝐼𝑖,𝑡−1; positive 𝑂𝑃𝑆𝐼𝑖,𝑡 > 𝑂𝑃𝑆𝐼𝑖,𝑡−1

For both the EBITDA-margin and ROA, the sign test reveals that the number of
decreases in median peer group operating performance significantly exceeds the number
of increases in the median peer group operating performance on a significance, 𝑛 = 55,
𝑝 < 0.05, implying that the operating performance of the industries deteriorated over
the holding period.

                                  19
8. Discussion

For both operating statistics, the results from the Wilcoxon signed rank test are relatively
uniform across the three non-full sample groups. The median change in ROA for buyout
companies in the full sample differ from the rest. Considering the caveat to the database
where industry peers with negative ex-buyout operating statistics do not make it to the
peer matching (see section 6), we consider it possible that the full sample yields a mis
specified model. No such observations remain in the sample of the main analysis. The
findings are therefore only applicable to buyouts where the buyout company had a
positive ex-buyout operating statistic. For this subgroup of buyouts, we see no implication
for questioning the validity of the analysis. In our full samples, this subgroup of buyouts
makes up 52 (EBITDA-margin) and 49 (ROA) out of 55 observations. Likely, the
findings of this paper are still widely applicable.
         In our main line of analysis, we did not find a significant relative change in
EBITDA-margin (𝑝 > 0.05). This is contrarian to what Bergström et al. (2007) found
and does not support our hypothesis of a relative change in the EBITDA-margin. We did
find a significant relative change in ROA, which is line with the findings of the
aforementioned authors and Boucley, et al. (2011), and supports our hypothesis. Notably,
both median absolute changes in the buyout EBITDA-margin and ROA, are small relative
to the deterioration of the peer groups’ operating statistics, from which the relative change
mainly stems from. Nevertheless, the relative improvement is the correct measure to
evaluate the operating impact of the buyout by.
        A possible explanation to buyouts improving the ROA but not the EBITDA-
margin could lie in the combination of the historically unique high liquidity of the 2010s
and non-private equity backed firms catching up with the practices of private equity. First,
when external financing is easily accessed, the risk of non-financial firms over-investing
could increase, something López-de-Foronda et al. (2018) find support for. Over-
investing expands the balance sheet disproportionally to profits and would affect the ROA
more than it would the EBITDA-margin. It could be so that the expertise of private equity
sponsors allows for avoiding a benchmarked over-investing to some degree. Second, just
as the value generation from the financial engineering of the 1980s was gradually phased
out as firms caught up with these practices and capital markets became more
sophisticated, it could be that the room for operating impact is diminishing over time.
This study does not provide insight into whether this is the case.
        In our analysis of market timing, we found support for that the industry
EBITDA-margins and ROAs deteriorated over the holding periods. These results are
contrarian to those of Bergström et al. (2007), who observed no significant direction of
change in industry operating performance. Moreover, assuming that industry operating
performances are at a steady state, our results would indicate that the private equity
sponsors did the opposite of timing the industries, investing in those with operating
statistics above steady state. Whether this is the case, or the steady state assumption does
not hold, we cannot determine from the results obtained. One violation of this assumption
is a change in the macroeconomic environment. For the deteriorating industry ROAs, one
such overarching change, could also stem from the above-mentioned increased risk of
firm overinvestments of the 2010s. Accelerating competition could be another possible
explanation to both deteriorations. Following financial crisis, firms around the globe
found themselves facing an unprecedented exogenous adverse demand shock in 2008.
With a negative real GDP growth in 2009 (World Bank, 2019), it could be that operating

                                  20
                                                                                10
performances in many instances dropped to levels below steady state  . However, because
there was a significant increase in default rates and the recovery from the financial crisis
was swift, largely driven by exogenous monetary and fiscal stimuli, the surviving firms
might have found themselves facing competition below the market equilibrium in the
years immediately following the financial crisis, enjoying operating performance above
steady state. Because operating performance has been shown to mean revert over time,
an example being the analysis of returns on equity by Pennman (1991), it could be that
the observed deterioration in operating performances is a general downward mean-
reversion. This effect would be amplified by the fact that our sample is concentrated
around the years immediately following the financial crisis. This study does not provide
insight into whether this is the case.
        Why we obtain results different from those of Bergström et al. (2007) can,
beyond that discussed above, be a result of that we apply a pre-performance peer
matching, the method advocated by Barber and Lyon (1996), whereas they construct peer
groups consisting of the twenty largest corporations within the same industry, as well as
that our findings solely apply to buyouts with positive ex-buyout operating performances.
The difference in the method of peer matching affects the analysis of operating impact,
in terms of the specificity of the model, and market timing, in terms of the definition of
industries.

10
  Precise geographically aggregated data on operating performances over time are scare, but the EBITDA-
margin in Europe showed a significant drop from 2008 to 2009, a recovery between 2009 and 2010, a
continuous fall from 2010 to 2015, and a continuous increase thereafter (Lazard, 2019). The continuous fall
from 2010 to 2015 covers the years in which the majority of the LBOs in the period of this study takes
place, to some degree supporting that industry EBITDA-margins deteriorated.

                                  21
9. Conclusion

In this thesis we analysed whether buyouts in the decade following the financial crisis in
Sweden have an operating impact and whether private equity sponsors time their
investments with respect to industry. We did this by applying methodologies of Barber
and Lyon (1996) and Bergström et al. (2007), with considerations to the event period and
population in question.
        Our results indicate that buyouts improve the ROA but not the EBITDA-margin
relative to non-private equity backed firms and that both operating statistics deteriorated
over time for the industries invested in. The first of these four findings is in line with
those of Bergström et al. (2007), who studied the operating impact of buyouts and
industry market timing in Sweden prior to the financial crisis.
        We consider our findings to be valuable considerations to the contemporary
discussion of private equity and its societal role. The fact that we did not find support for
an improvement in the EBITDA-margin could be a first indicator on non-private equity
backed firms catching up with the value creating practices of the private equity industry.
With reference to the relative improvement in ROA, we conclude however that the
buyouts of this decade do have an operating impact. Thereto, we believe our detailed
account of methodological considerations makes a valuable contribution to future event
studies of operating performance in Sweden and other small populations.
        We identified key characteristics of the decade following the financial crisis such
as ample liquidity, lagged post-crisis competition, and increasing competition amongst
private equity sponsors, as possible explanations to why our findings differ from those of
Bergström et al. (2007). This study does not give insight into the likelihood of those
possible explanations causing this result. We consider our study to highlight the
importance of two areas of further research.
         First, it would be interesting to see the study replicated on additional populations
in the under-studied 2010s to strengthen the implication of this decade’s characteristics
affecting the buyout operating impact and development of industry operating
performance. Second, our findings call for further research on contemporary drivers of
the operating impact of leveraged buyouts.

                                  22
References
Acharya, Viral, and Conor Kehoe, 2008, Corporate Governance and Value Creation
Evidence from Private Equity,
http://www.ecgi.org/competitions/rof/files/Acharya_Kehoe_v5.pdf.
Accessed: 2021-04-10.

Bain & Company, 2011, Global Private Equity Report 2011,
https://media.bain.com/Images/2011-02-
24%20REPORT%20Global%20Private%20Equity%20report%202011%20-
%20MEDIA.pdf. Accessed: 2021-04-25.

Barber, Brad M., and John D. Lyon, 1996, Detecting Abnormal Operating Performance:
The Empirical Power and Specification of Test Statistics, Journal of Financial
Economics, Vol 41 (3), Pages 359-399

Barnfather, Aron, 2019, Recovery, Value, and Opportunity: The Case for European
Equities, Lazard Asset Management, https://www.lazardassetmanagement.com/docs/-
m0-/88931/recoveryvalueandopportunity-thecasefor_lazardinsights_201908_en.pdf.
Accessed: 2021-04-17.

Berg, Achim, and Oliver Gottschalg, 2003, Understanding Value Generation in
Buyouts, Working Paper, INSEAD.

Bergström, Clas, Michael Grubb and Sara Jonsson, 2007, The Operating Impact of
Buyouts in Sweden: A Study of Value Creation, The Journal of Private Equity, Vol 11
(1), Pages 22–39.

Bernstein, Shaia, Josh Lerner and Filippo Mezzanotti, 2017, Private Equity and
Financial Fragility during the Crisis, Harvard Business School Working Paper, No. 18-
005

Boucley, Quentin, David Sraer and David Thesmar, 2011, Growth LBOs, Journal of
Financial Economics, Vol 102 (2), Pages 432-453

Copenhagen Economics, 2020, Economic Footprint of Swedish Private Equity,
https://www.investeurope.eu/media/3539/economic_footprint_of_swedish_private_equi
ty.pdf
Accessed: 2021-04-10.

Guo, Shouron, Edith Hotchkiss and Weihong Song, 2007, Do Buyouts (Still) Create
Value?

Indahl, Reynir, and Eric Zinterhofer, 1998, A note on European Private Equity, Harvard
Business School Case, No 9-299-017, Pages 1-11.

Jensen, Michael, 1989, Eclipse of the Public Corporation, Harvard Business Review,
Vol 67 (5), Pages 61–74.

                                  23
Kaplan, Steven N., 1989, The Effects of Management Buyouts on Operating
Performance and Value, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol 24 (2), Pages 217-254.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Per Stromberg, 2009, Leveraged Buyouts and Private Equity,
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol 23 (1), Pages 121-46.

Khort, Julia, 2014, Protection of private equity fund investors in the EU, Working
Paper, Uppsala Faculty of Law.

Leleux, Benoît, Hans van Swaay and Esmeralda Megally, 2015, Private Equity 4.0:
Reinventing Value Creation,
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/book/10.1002/9781118939826.
Accessed: 2021-04-30.

López-de-Foronda, Óscar, Florencio López-de-Silanes, Félix J. López-Iturriaga and
Marcos Santamaría-Mariscal, 2019, Overinvestment, leverage and financial system
liquidity: A challenging approach, BRQ Business Research Quarterly, Vol 22 (2), Pages
96-104.

Mergermarket, 2018, 2019 Global Private Equity Outlook,
https://www.mergermarket.com/info/2019-global-private-equity-outlook.
Accessed: 2021-04-05.

MJ Hudson, 2020, Private Equity ten-year top ten: the decade’s biggest changes in
funds, https://www.mjhudson.com/newsletter/private-equity-ten-year-top-ten-the-
decades-biggest-changes-in-funds/. Accessed: 2021-04-15.

Muscarella, Chris J., and Michael R. Vetsuypens, 1990, Efficiency and Organizational
Structure: A Study of Reverse LBOs, The Journal of Finance, Vol 45 (5), Pages 1389-
1413.

Porter, Michael E., 1985, Competitive Advantage, New York, Free Press.

S&P Global Market Intelligence, 2019, Private equity racks up record debt levels in
2018 European leveraged loan mart,
https://www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/news-
insights/trending/x8csYMBWebsYSpbR_Ik4Jg2.
Accessed: 2021-04-20.

Stabell, Charles B., and Oystein D. Fjaeldstad, 1998, Configuring for Competitive
Advantage: On Chains, Shops, and Networks, Strategic Management Journal, Vol 19
(5), Pages 413-437.

SVCA, https://www.svca.se/om-private-equity/, Accessed: 2021-04-05.

Toyou, Doris, 2019, Protection of Private Equity Investors under the Dodd-Frank Act,
Journal of Law and Commerce, Vol 37 (2)

                                  24
Weir, Charlie, Peter Jones and Mike Wright, 2007, Public to Private Transactions,
Private Equity and Performance in the UK: An Empirical Analysis of the Impact of
Going Private, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id1138616.
Accessed: 2021-04-10.

Wollaston, Andrew, and Pete Witte, EY, 2020, How private equity will respond to the
next economic downturn, https://www.ey.com/en_gl/private-equity/how-private-equity-
will-respond-to-the-next-economic-downturn.
Accessed: 2021-04-10.

Woodman, Andrew, 2019, Uncertain times in Europe put a damper on PE multiples,
https://pitchbook.com/news/articles/uncertain-times-in-europe-put-a-damper-on-pe-
multiples
Pitchbook.
Accessed: 2021-04-05.

World bank, 2019, Swedish GDP growth (annual %),
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.KD.ZG?end=2019&locations=SE
&start=1971&view=chart.
Accessed: 2021-04-10.

Wright, Mike, and Ken Robbie, 1998, Venture Capital and Private Equity: A Review
and Synthesis, Journal of Business Finance & Accounting, Vol 25 (5-6), Pages 521-570.

                                  25
Appendix

Table 7. Buyout company sample

The table reports the name of buyout company, years of LBO and exit, and the private
equity sponsor of the transaction for the full sample sorted by year of LBO.

                                                             Year of        Year of
 Buyout Company                                   LBO        Exit Sponsor
 Frosunda Omsorg AB 2010 2018 HgCapital
 AcadeMedia AB (publ) (OM:ACAD) 2010 2018 EQT Partners
 Solhagagruppen Solhaga by AB 2010 2016 Bridgepoint Development Capital
 Swedegas AB 2010 2015 EQT Partners
 Scanacon AB 2010 2017 Capilon
 ONE Nordic AB 2011 2020 Altor Equity Partners
 Jernforsen Energi System AB 2011 2018 Alder
 CCS Healthcare AB 2011 2019 Segulah Advisor
 Dometic Group AB (publ) (OM:DOM) 2011 2017 EQT Partners
 Akademikliniken AB 2011 2016 Valedo Partners
 Autotube AB 2011 2014 Accent Equity Partners
 Hansen Protection AS 2011 2013 Montagu Private Equity LLP
 Biolin Scientific Holding AB 2011 2017 Ratos
 Nordic Waterproofing AB 2011 2017 Axcel Management
 Bellbox AB 2011 2018 Fidelio Capital
 Troax AB 2011 2013 Accent Equity Partners
 Grolls AB 2011 2016 Litorina Capital Advisors
 SCAN COIN AB 2011 2015 Segulah Advisor
 Polarica AB 2011 2020 Hartwall Capital; Intera Partners Oy
 Perten Instruments AB 2011 2015 Valedo Partners
 Ovako Group AB 2011 2018 Triton
 Aleris AB 2011 2020 Investor
 Sveba-Dahlen AB 2012 2017 Litorina Capital Advisors
 Com Hem AB 2012 2017 BC Partners
 Kemetyl AB 2012 2016 Segulah Advisor
 GPP Perimeter Protection AB 2012 2015 Procuritas Capital Investors VI Holding
 Atos Medical AB 2012 2017 EQT Partners
 Coromatic Group AB 2012 2019 EQT Partners
 Eton AB 2012 2016 Litorina Capital Advisors
 Absortech AB 2012 2017 PEQ
 SORTERA Skandinavien AB 2012 2016 Norvestor Equity
 Persson Innovation AB 2012 2018 Connecting Capital
 Car-O-Liner Group AB 2012 2017 Polaris Management
 Fiskarhedenvillan AB 2012 2020 Litorina Capital Advisors
 Skånska Byggvaror AB 2012 2016 Polaris Management
 SEM AB 2013 2016 Perusa
 Actic Sverige AB 2013 2017 IK Investment Partners
 Cambio Healthcare Systems AB (publ) 2013 2019 Valedo Partners
 Aditro Logistics AB 2013 2020 Valedo Partners
 Robust AB 2013 2019 Norvestor Equity
 Troax Group AB (publ) (OM:TROAX) 2013 2016 FSN Capital Partners
 Netel AB 2013 2016 Axcel Management
 Breas Medical AB 2014 2017 PBM Capital Group
 Logent AB 2014 2019 Adelis Equity Partners
 Textilia Tvätt & Textilservice AB 2015 2017 Accent Equity Partners
 Bambora 2015 2018 Nordic Capital
 Bygghemma Sverige AB 2015 2017 Nordstjernan
 Hector Rail AB 2015 2020 EQT Partners
 S:T Eriks AB. 2015 2019 Accent Equity Partners
 Piab AB 2016 2018 EQT Partners
 Anlaggning & Kabel Entreprenad i Malmö AB 2016 2017 Priveq Investment
 Linfre Education AB 2017 2019 Summa Equity
 Scandinavian Cosmetics AB 2017 2020 Aurelius Equity
 IT Gården i Landskrona AB 2017 2020 Norvestor Equity
 KEWAB, Kenneth Wahlström AB 2018 2020 Triton
Note: LBOs in Sweden with close date between 2010-01-01 and 2020-06-30 having a recorded transaction exit,
holding period exceeding one year, and data on operating statistics.

                                  26
Table 8. Full buyout company samples

The table reports the number of LBOs and exits by year of the two samples on
EBITDA-margin and ROA and the distribution of operating statistics from the years
preceding the respective LBOs.

                                       EBITDA-margin (%),                   LBO ROA (%),
                                         year preceding LBO                     year preceding LBO
      Number
                       Number                  25th           75th   Std             25th            75th   Std
 Year    of    %         % Mean      Median             Mean      Median
                       of exits               pct.          pct.   dev.         pct.          pct.   dev.
       LBOs
 2009 0 0 0 0 - - - - - - - - - -
 2010 5 9 0 0 24.3 10.6 12.2 33.1 28.6 10.3 7.9 9.8 19.8 14.7
 2011 17 31 0 0 11.5 6.7 11.0 14.8 8.7 7.4 3.2 6.8 11.8 9.5
 2012 13 24 0 0 17.8 7.0 13.7 25.4 13.8 14.1 8.9 18.6 21.3 10.9
 2013 7 13 2 4 14.6 11.4 15.7 19.5 5.6 11.9 1.9 12.5 16.7 8.5
 2014 2 4 1 2 4.7 4.2 4.7 5.2 0.7 5.7 2.7 5.7 8.8 4.3
 2015 5 9 4 7 12.6 4.9 16.7 17.0 7.5 4.3 3.8 6.1 7.0 4.3
 2016 2 4 10 18 20.7 7.1 20.7 34.3 19.3 27.6 16.5 27.6 38.7 15.7
 2017 3 5 14 25 6.2 5.3 6.7 6.7 0.9 11.0 1.1 7.9 23.8 11.7
 2018 1 2 8 15 9.6 9.6 9.6 9.6 - 3.3 3.3 3.3 3.3 -
 2019 0 0 7 13 - - - - - - - - - -
 2020 0 0 9 16 - - - - - - - - - -
 Total 55 100 55 100 14.42 5.93 12.00 18.80 12.80 10.31 3.20 8.79 18.63 10.54
Note: LBOs in Sweden with close date between 2010-01-01 and 2020-06-30 having a recorded transaction exit, holding
period exceeding one year, and data on operating statistics. Listed EBITDA-margins and ROAs adhere to the semi-
annually cut-off calendar year adjusted for potential fiscal differences.

Table 9. Effect on sample size of pre-performance matching and caveat to data

The table reports the number of buyout companies in the sample with less than five peers
within 30% and 50% bandwidths around its operating statistic, negative operating
statistics, and the full sample sizes. Bandwidth of 𝑏 % is computed as (1 ± 𝑏) × 𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑖,𝑡−1
where 𝑂𝑃𝑆𝑖,𝑡−1 is the operating statistic of the year preceding the LBO.

                                                      Number of buyout companies
                     With less than five peers     With less than peers      With negative ex-LBO
                                                                                                          Full sample
                   within a 30% bandwidth   within a 50% bandwidth      operating statistic
 EBITDA-margin 7 5 3 55
 ROA 9 8 6 55
Note: LBOs in Sweden with close date between 2010-01-01 and 2020-06-30 having a recorded transaction exit, holding
period exceeding one year, and data on operating statistics.

                                  27