A STUDY ON THE INFLUENCE OF
CSR ON NORDIC STOCK
PERFORMANCE DURING COVID-19

A QUANTITATIVE STUDY OF 373 PUBLIC COMPANIES DURING
COVID-19 -2020-02-10 TO 2020-04-11

LISA BLENWALL
ARASH DABIRI

Bachelor’s Thesis in Business and Economics

Stockholm School of Economics

2021

                                       1
A Study on the influence of CSR on Nordic stock performance during COVID-19; A
quantitative study of 373 public companies during COVID-19, 2020-02-10 to 2020-04-11

Abstract
The majority of prior studies have found that firms with a high CSR rating have enjoyed higher
returns on their stocks than comparable firms with lower CSR during financial crises, generally
defined as having low societal trust levels. This effect is more prevalent in high trust societies such
as the Nordics. Therefore, the question of the value of trust in crises caused by external factors
becomes relevant, where trust levels are higher in the beginning. This trust factor will be
examined in this thesis by looking at the effect of CSR ratings on returns in Nordic companies
during the COVID-19 crisis, using the West African Ebola outbreak as a control. Our results show
that during the COVID-19 crisis firms with high CSR suffered significant lower returns than
comparable companies with lower CSR. This effect is more prevalent during the earlier stages of
the crisis, which suggests that there are other variables than trust affecting high CSR firms
negatively during the COVID-19 crisis.

Keywords:
COVID-19, Exogenous shock, CSR, Stock Performance, Trust, Social Capital

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our supervisor Olga Obizhaeva for the guidance and accessibility. We
would also like to thank Vasileios Dimopoulos and Rebecca Persson, who acted as vital support
throughout the process.

Authors:
Lisa Blenwall 24343
Arash Dabiri 24343
Supervisor:
Olga Obizhaeva
Course Director: Adrien d’Avernas

Bachelor’s Thesis
Bachelor program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Lisa Blenwall and Arash Dabiri (2021)

                                       2
I. Introduction

“Don’t think money does everything or you are going to end up doing everything for
money” – Voltaire. (Original name: François-Marie d'Arouet.)

The COVID-19 pandemic is a virus outbreak starting in December 2019, henceforth spreading
from Asia to every continent except Antarctica (UNDP, 2021). Declared as an event with the
greatest impact globally since the second World War, and is still ongoing and has so far reached a
number of over two million deaths. The crisis which was initially rooted in a health challenge,
later became a socio-economic crisis causing high volatility in financial markets. Moreover the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) established that the most severe financial occurrence
historically at the time since the great depression, which previously was the global financial crisis
of 2008, has been trumped by the COVID-19 pandemic (Atkinson et al., 2013). The IMF states
that the global output declined three times more than the global financial crisis, at half the time
(International Monetary Fund, 2021). Despite the COVID-19 crisis and the 2008 housing bubble
being triggered by different factors, they both lead to high volatility on the capital market, a drop
in corporate valuations and a lack of certainty, according to the IMF. The objective of this thesis is
to investigate whether and possibly to which extent a turbulent situation such as the COVID-19
pandemic benefits firms with high social capital, relative to low social capital firms. In our study
social capital is measured by CSR.

As Breitz and Partapuoli (2020) found there have been many studies on the differences between
high and low CSR firms during normal periods of time, who in turn also cite (Clark, Feinger, &
Viehs, 2015; Kumar, Smith, Badis, Wang, Ambrosy & Tavares 2016; Fisher-Vanden & Thorburn,
2011; Revelli & Viviani, 2015; Landi & Sciarelli, 2018), but not as many during crises (Lins et al.,
2017; Broadstock et al., 2021).

Along with the growth and attention appointed to corporations encouraging CSR, many studies
have conveyed the existence of a positive relationship between a firm's degree of corporate social
responsibility and the view the consumers and investors have of the specific firm, assuming that
the firm is already familiar to them (Brown & Dacin, 1997). More specifically, one report states
that 77% of consumers and 73% of investors (Mitchel, 2020) would be more likely to consume
products from brands that lobby and act in accordance with the principles of CSR. Hence this
thesis will investigate the extent of the corporate sustainability factor reflected in corporations’
performance on the market in times of crisis. In order to be able to make an evaluation of the
extent of trust present, a CSR rating will be utilized in viewing the financial performance of firms.
This paper will mainly rely on the ISO 26000 standard of CSR, although there exists a variety of
definitions of CSR in current literature (van Marrewijk, 2003).

                                       3
To determine the attitude toward sustainability in times of a pandemic we have chosen to focus on
the Nordic market, using over 373 stock listed companies. We motivate this metric by
emphasizing that the majority of extensive similar research previously has been conducted on
other markets, such as the American, as well as the Asian stock market (Lins et al., 2017;
Broadstock et al., 2021), although Bergh (2011) and Jonung (2008) among other researchers have
looked into the Nordic market. Also, as previous studies have shown a stronger effect in high-trust
regions, which the Nordics countries are.

In this thesis we will compare firms’ CSR rating with their performance during the COVID-19
crisis, to investigate if CSR activities pose any advantage during times of crisis. More specifically
we will first test the hypothesis of whether there is no correlation between CSR and financial
performance during the COVID-19 crisis in the Nordic market, our second null hypothesis is that
the effect of CSR is negative to returns.

In order to strengthen our robustness we will also look at a similar exogenous crisis stemming
from a virus outbreak; the West African Ebola outbreak of 2014. The Ebola crisis, on the other
hand, showed a positive relation between CSR and returns.

We found that there is an effect from CSR on returns during early parts of the crisis, however this
effect becomes statistically insignificant during the later stages of the crisis. The effect from CSR
is negative, which differs from previous research on crises. This could be due to the fact that the
COVID-19 crisis began due to exogenous factors, a new deadly virus instead of a speculative
bubble. Therefore, another explanation is the different nature of the COVID-19 crisis, as it may
have led to an unstudied variable to heighten the cost of CSR, such as travel restrictions hindering
personnel training or supply line monitoring.

The structure of the paper is the following; Section I provides an introduction to the thesis, Section
II explains our constructed hypotheses and motivation for these. Section III provides the
theoretical background that the research question is based on. Section IV describes the
methodology used in our studies. Section V presents and discusses the results that have been
obtained by our regression analyses. Section VI consists of our final conclusion.

                                       4
II. Hypothesis

Based on the data of 373 publicly traded Nordic companies during the COVID-19 stock market
crash within the specific timeframe of 2020-02-10 to 2020-04-11, we have condensed our research
question into two hypotheses.

As many studies, (Lins et al., 2017; Cornett et al., 2016; Epstein & Schnietz, 2005) have found
that there exists a correlation between CSR and returns during crises. We want to investigate
whether this holds for the Nordic market during the COVID-19 crisis as well. Our first null
hypothesis therefore states that there does not exist a correlation between a company’s CSR rating
and the stock prices during the COVID-19 crisis in the Nordic market.

Algebraically it is given by:

                                 𝐻0 : β    = 0
                                                     1   𝐶𝑆𝑅

The alternative hypothesis is given by:

                                        𝐻1 : β   ≠ 0
                                                      1   𝐶𝑆𝑅

Where β   stands for the CSR coefficient representing the effect of CSR ratings on the dependent
                 𝐶𝑆𝑅
variables of Raw and Abnormal return in our regression analysis. The first null hypothesis states
that there does not exist a correlation between the independent variable of CSR and the dependent
return variables, and a rejection of the null hypothesis would mean that there is a relation.

Earlier studies such as (Lins et al., 2017; Epstein & Schnietz, 2005) have also found a positive
relation between CSR and returns during previous crises. Therefore the second null hypothesis
will be that CSR has a negative effect on companies returns during the COVID-19 crisis, which
algebraically is written as:

                                 𝐻0 : β    < 0
                                                  2    𝐶𝑆𝑅

The alternative hypothesis is given by:

                                  𝐻1 : β   > 0
                                                  2    𝐶𝑆𝑅

This hypothesis is aligned with the hypothesis of Lins et al. (2017), which is having a trust and
social capital variable focused approach, emphasizing regional differences. However we will also
need to account for the exogenous effects of the COVID-19 crisis, which might have implications
on the results. We follow previous studies claiming that the effect of CSR on returns during crises

                                       5
pose a positive effect on returns, specifically in our study targeting the COVID-19 crisis in the
Nordics.

                                       6
III. Literature review

A. Exogenous shocks
The COVID-19 crisis can be described as an unanticipated event exposed to an exogenous shock
and with a systematic risk which in turn affects the behaviors of investors (Martín Fuentes &
Moder, 2021). Although there has been substantial research conducted regarding financial impacts
of previous global crises, less has been done on the perceived risk in connection to CSR, which in
turn is translated into a certain behaviour on the stock market. In order to be able to identify the
role of trust in a crisis as one of the key factors of a financial crisis, we will investigate the extent
of the exogenous or trust factors to impact investors behavior on the market. By relying on
previous research and looking at micro and macroeconomic effects it is possible to investigate
whether a crisis depends on endogenous or exogenous factors.

Using the definition, given by Dabla-Norris and Gündüz’s (2012), of a large negative exogenous
shock as when the annual percentage change of the relevant shock variable sinks below the 10th
percentile in the left-tail of the country-specific distribution. A shock is argued to include at least
one of the following shocks; external demand, terms-of-trade, FDI, aid, remittances; climatic
shocks (large natural disasters) (Dabla-Norris & Gündüz, 2012).

Another macroeconomic aspect of an exogenous shock is distinguished by the absence of
precursory behaviour in the market before the crash (Sornette, 2006). Elaborating on the concept
of exogenous shocks, Sornette refers to the 11th September 2001 crash, the coup attempt against
Gorbachev and claims internal shocks at the other hand to be preceded by speculative bubbles.

B. Trust
A well established statement by the CEO of Deutsche Bank, John Cryan “Trust is the foundation
of banking” (2016) shows one of the main factors surrounding a crisis. Likewise a frequently
occurring definition within the academic field of relationship trust is “the expectation held by the
consumer that the service provider is dependable and can be relied on to deliver on its promises”
(Sirdeshmukh et al., 2002, p. 17). From a general aspect, trust has a wide range of definitions. The
psychological sector would refer to it as being a collection of correlating cognitive processes and
beliefs towards a feeling of vulnerability or risk, based on the uncertainty regarding future
intentions and actions. (Kramer, 1999). In the same vein Rousseau et al. (1998) holds that “a
psychological state comprising the intention to accept vulnerability based upon positive
expectations of the intentions or behavior of another” (p. 395).

More specifically in the corporate area, trust raises the likelihood of cooperation and therefore can
lessen the real and perceived risk. Several investigations indicate that high levels of economic
inequality, which often is an effect of a recession (OECD, 2014), is negatively related to

                                       7
generalized trust (Wilkinson & Pickett, 2009). With the knowledge that trust builds on some risk
being betrayed by others (Yamagishi, 2011), it is logical that people being most exposed to a crisis
may have lower levels of generalized trust, which could explain some behavior within the
financial sector. With regards to this, there is a belief that the GFC has had a negative impact on
the trust of consumers, specifically in financial service providers (Guiso, 2006).

On the other hand a study conducted by Hansen (2014) examining the importance of the trust
factor in the relationship between customer and seller, before and after the GFC, finds that
consumers base their choice more on satisfaction than on trust after the GFC in comparison to
before. This suggests that crises do not always lead to a permanent state of lack of trust and that
trust may not always be the most important factor.

To conclude; our upcoming results showing a positive, null or negative correlation between CSR
and the stock market might therefore not only rely on trust but also include the possible efforts and
achievements of financial managers to attain satisfaction with the investors and customers. The
paper by Hansen (2014) therefore also provides us with the perspective that the CSR rating
involves many different factors and aspects and although a correlation might be found between the
stock market and CSR, trust may not be the only factor, as considerable previous studies have
indicated.

C. Corporate social responsibility
To measure social capital and corporate social responsibility CSR is frequently used, and will play
a pivotal role in our thesis (Lins et al., 2017). As there is no formal global definition of CSR, it can
be viewed as a form of an international private business regulation (Sheehy, 2014). The ISO 26000
standard on social responsibility does however provide a framework for defining CSR. The ISO
standard states that social responsibility consists of multiple core subjects such as human rights,
environment, fair operating practices and community development (IOFS 26000, 2018). Another
common definition proposed by the World Business Council for Sustainable Development (2000)
states “CSR is the commitment of a business to contribute to sustainable economic development,
working with employees, their families, the local community and society at large to improve the
quality of life.” (pg.8)

The lack of a widely utilized and standardized CSR means that there are many different
approaches on the definition and measurement. Indicators are often chosen based on available data
and current sentiment (Hopkins, 2005). Hopkins (2005) however also states that as companies
release more data due to more demanding investment funds, it is becoming easier to estimate the
CSR performance of a company. Continuing Hopkins also states that this increasing prevalence of
information allows us to find indicators which on average show a good record.

While it can be complicated to estimate CSR, it can have an effect on a company's image if its
CSR activities are seen as sincere by consumers (Yoon et al., 2006). Engaging in CSR activities

                                       8
also improves support behaviours such as employment seeking and investment in companies (Du
et al., 2010). This shows that while it may be hard to estimate a company’s CSR numerically, CSR
activities do affect companies positively and therefore is an adequate metric to use for measuring
the social capital of a company, and therefore is relevant for this thesis.

D. Corporate Social Responsibility in market crises
The considerable economic and social consequences of the financial crisis in 2008 has driven
substantial data collection, studies and analyses to be pursued regarding many different aspects
and factors surrounding the crisis. An important factor in these studies has been the question of
whether CSR poses an impact on the performance of a firm in times of turbulence. More
specifically Lins et al. (2017) investigates the value of corporate social responsibility during the
global financial crisis of 2008, where they found a positive correlation between CSR, profitability,
growth, sales per employee and debt raising. Correspondingly Cornett et al. (2016) proclaim that
the financial performance of banks in the United States during the financial crisis in 2008 exhibit a
positive relation to ESG scores, which are related to CSR scores due to similar input variables.
Also Epstein and Schnietz (2005) have found a positive effect of CSR during crises, as stock
declines of high CSR firms were protected when other firms suffered declines.

As has been clarified profound research has been performed to relate economic variables to the
2008 crisis, the COVID-19 pandemic on the contrary is still ongoing and timewise not yet had the
opportunity to have as much studies conducted. Up until now no studies have been found looking
at the whole Northern European market during COVID-19. To name one scientific study which
has examined the role of ESG performance during the COVID-19 crisis is Broadstock et al.
(2021), specifically targeting the Chinese market. Broadstock et al. (2021) found that higher ESG
firms show moderate lower price volatility during the proclaimed COVID-19.

                                       9
IV. Methodology

As we are trying to discover relationships between CSR and stock returns and want to control this
relation by using other variables, a regression analysis will be run, where return is set as the
dependent variable and CSR is set as one among other independent variables. We will use two
definitions of returns; Raw return will denote the buy and hold return of a stock, whereas
Abnormal return will be adjusted according to CAPM.

A. Data collection and calculations of CSR scores
For this study, data about Nordic companies’ stock returns, accounting data and CSR rating is
required. We define a company as Nordic if it is listed on a Nordic stock market, not by the
country of the headquarter. More specifically the Nordic countries included are Sweden, Finland,
Denmark, Iceland, Norway and the Faroe Islands. We used data from the Nordic Compass
database (NCD) with ESG data on 373 publicly traded Nordic companies to create a CSR rating.
The NCD contains data such as the percentage of female employees, the potential existence of
supplier guidelines and the number of independent directors.

As Lins et al. (2017) have found stronger effects from CSR in high-trust regions, which makes the
high-trust Nordic countries interesting. The acknowledged Environmental Protection Index (EPI),
which is linked to CSR as Environmental concerns is a subcomponent of CSR lists all Nordic
countries at the top 10 countries in the world. (Yale University, 2020). The Nordic market also
distinguishes itself by being a high trust market (Ortiz-Ospina and Roser, 2016), which according
to Lins et al. (2017) could lead to stronger relations between CSR and returns.

NCD’s data is divided into three areas, namely Environment, Social and Governance. It also
contains integers such as the number of female board members, as well as true or false answers to
questions as to whether a company has supplier guidelines and general data points on things like
the industry the company acts in. Using this data we are able to create all inputs for the CSR rating
of companies. As clarified earlier, there are various definitions of CSR and this thesis will follow
the classification of Lins et al. 2017; Broadstock et al. 2021, which is divided into five different
areas; governance, diversity, employee relation, environment and human rights, as shown in Table
I. However, Lins et al. (2017) did not define governance as part of CSR as they argued that it had
negligible impact on the social capital of firms. We will use their definition of CSR, but also study
the impact of governance on returns and also perform a robustness check where governance is
included as part of CSR.

                                      10
Table I)
Data used from Nordic compass to create subcomponents of the CSR rating.

     Governance Diversity Employee relation Environment Human rights

      Supplier        Percentage female   Employee relations   Greenhouse gases        Supplier
      guidelines,           employees,       score, Training &      per euro sales,       assessment for
   disclosure of %     Percentage female       Education       CEO/Chair/Executi    labor practices,
   suppliers visited        executives,            spending         ve Sustainability         Supplier
     and audited,      Percentage female   (hours/employee),       Statement,         assessment for
    Disclosure of      board, Reporting       Training &        Environmental       human rights,
      Supplier         on male/female     Education policy        Policy and         Whistleblower
     Evaluation      pay equality, Equal     for employees,        Assessment,        mechanisms /
     Procedures       Opportunity Policy   Disclosure of types   Targets associated        hotlines,
                         or Statement       of Injury and by           with           Anti-Corruption
                                            Region and/or       Environmental         Policy or
                                           Gender, Accidents   Performance, Steps      Statement.
                                              per millions hours     taken to reduce     including extortion
                                              worked (LTI),          negative           and bribery,
                                         Health & Safety      environmental       Human Rights
                                             Policy, Health &     impact, Increased        Policy or
                                              Safety Risk      usage of renewable   Statement, Code of
                                              Assessment,      energy, Disclosure    Conduct / Ethics
                                             Number of        of raw material          Policy
                                                 fatalities per         consumption,
                                             employee       Targets associated
                                                                     with Efficient use
                                                                   of Resources,
                                                                    Disclosure of
                                                              Water Discharges

As Morgan Stanley Capital International we argue that CSR ratings follow a normal distribution
(MSCI, 2021), which also makes it simple to distinguish CSR leaders from laggards. Z-score was
used to normalize all inputs to the subcomponents - governance, diversity, environment etc. - of
CSR, which means that all inputs have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. Thus all
subparts to CSR are equally weighted, which also is how the MSCI ESG Ratings data provider has
weighted their CSR score. As MSCI has been responsible for consulting with the 55 largest
investors internationally their methodology is recognized. Then, the CSR score is also normalized
to ensure that the standard deviation becomes one and the mean is set to zero. Furthermore, we do
not penalise companies which act in a segment and can be seen as controversial, such as nuclear
energy or weapons. We are solely interested in the impact of trust in the stock market
performance, which does not necessarily correlate to the industry they act in.

                                      11
Figure I)
The figure displays the cumulative confirmed COVID-19 cases per million people for 5 nordic countries during the
time period January 29th 2020 and January 29th 2021

Source: Open access, by Max Roser, Hannah Ritchie, Esteban Ortiz-Ospina and Joe Hasell (2020). Published online
at OurWorldInData.org.

We used CSR data from 2019, to reflect companies just before the COVID-19 crisis to illustrate
the trust image the companies had at the beginning of the crisis. The Nordic database of 2019 has
data on 459 companies. After removing private companies and firms with inadequate data on S&P
Capital IQ we have a sample of 373 firms, which means that 18.7% of companies were removed.
This sample is used for the baseline regression in this paper.

B. Collection and calculation of financial data
In order to compare CSR to stock performance, company financials and stock data is obtained
from the database S&P Capital IQ. S&P Capital IQ, utilized at over 500 academic institutions, is a
well established research database that provides over 2.8 billion firms (Phillips, 2012). The
database consists of a majority of European firms, 35.7%, which makes it suitable with our scope
focusing on the Nordics (Phillips, 2012).

                                      12
Figure II)
The figure displays the historical development of the OMX NORDIC 40 stock market during the event window
stretching from 1st of January 2020 to 1st of January 2021 for the full sample.

Source: Open access, retrieved online from MarketScreener

We define the crisis period as the time period between 2020-02-10 and 2020-04-11, which is when
the global stock market fell deeply as investors understood that the COVID-19 virus was going to
affect the world economy profoundly, as Figure II shows. The OMX Nordic 40 index fell nearly
18% during this time period, which is comparable to the worst two months of the -08 financial
crisis where the OMX Nordic 40 between August and October fell by over 30%. This is also as
the coronavirus spread to the Nordic countries, as can be seen on Figure I.

Advancing with descriptions of the computations of the dependent variables; the Crisis-Period
Raw Return defines the dependent variable Raw return, which states the raw return of owning
stock worth 1 USD during the time period stretching from 2020-02-10 to 2020-04-11. This
measurement includes dividends during the specific time period to simulate a buy and hold
investor. The other dependent variable, Crisis-Period Abnormal return reflects the same time
period, by including market model parameters calculated using data from the previous five years
of the OMX Nordic.

Proceeding with our independent variables that mainly consists of accounting measures as in long
term debt, profitability and book to market. These were extracted from the previous quarter before
the crisis to show a picture of the company’s financial health before COVID-19 hit the world
economy. Nguyen and Dam (2020) found that stock performance during crises depends on the

                                      13
financial health of the company, which leads us to also include key figures representing the
financial health, such as liquidity. The accounting data is from the quarter previous to the crisis, as
this stands for the companies standing going into the crisis.

The market capitalization is from before the stock market crash, and is stated in millions of
dollars. The market capitalization is used as an independent variable aligned with Chordia and
Avramov (2006) who have shown that small cap companies experience higher returns during
recessions. We then compute the natural logarithm of the market cap to reduce the effect of
outliers, which is large for the. Long-Term Debt is distinguished as the long-term debt divided by
assets. Likewise the computation of Short-Term Debt is given by the debt in current liabilities
divided by total assets. Cash Holdings consists of cash and marketable securities divided by
assets. Profitability is calculated by operating income divided by assets. Book-to-Market is formed
by the book value of equity divided by market value of equity. Our dummy variable is defined as
Negative B/M and is given the number one, when the book-to-market ratio is negative and is
otherwise zero. Momentum is the raw return of one invested USD in the company during the year
previous to the crisis, between the dates 2019-02-10 and 2020-02-10. This is to measure how the
company developed just before the crisis. Idiosyncratic Risk is the residual variance from the
market model estimated over the previous three years. The normal market variance is defined as
the OMX Nordic market variance. We use these control measures as Lins et al. (2017) argued that
these have an impact during crises, and indeed found significant effects from many of these
variables during crises.

Figure III)
The figure shows the data flows to the regression. The cylinders symbolize data sources.

                                      14
C. Regression methodology
Our baseline regression model is a least squares regression model, which estimates stock returns
during the crisis using CSR ratings from the pre-crisis period. The dependent variables Raw return
and Abnormal return are estimated using CSR, accounting and financial variables that could have
an impact on stock returns, such as long term debt. Lins et al. (2017) excluded financial
companies from their regression analysis due to excessive financial support, but as no specific
industry was favored by governments in the COVID-19 crisis we will not exclude any industry.
The regression was done using the Python module Statsmodels, which is a library for statistical
and econometric analysis (Seabold & Perktold, 2010).

𝑅  = α + β (𝑅   − 𝑅  ) + β 𝑆𝑀𝐵 + β 𝐻𝑀𝐿 + β 𝑅𝑀𝑊 + β 𝐶𝑀𝐴 + 𝑅
  𝑖𝑡              1   𝑀𝑡      𝐹𝑡         2       𝑡      3       𝑡      4        𝑡      5              𝐹𝑡
(1)

Firms factor loading are also controlled using the Fama-French five factor model in the equation
above, which is directed to capture the size, value, profitability, and investment patterns in average
stock returns (Fama & French, 2015). Fama and French have found that the Fama-French five
factor model better explains patterns in average returns found unexplained by CAPM, which is
why we use their method. This is done through controlling for the values of the five research
factors. In the equation 𝑅 stands for the return of a market portfolio, and 𝑅  is the risk free return.
                                           𝑖𝑡 𝐹𝑡
Then, we have 𝑅   − 𝑅  , which stands for the difference between risk free rate and market
                           𝑀𝑡       𝐹𝑡
returns. SMB stands for the excess returns of small firms over large companies, looking at market
value; while HML looks at book value. RMW is the difference between returns of firms with high
and low profitability. CMA is the difference in returns between firms with high and low
investment levels. If the coefficients of β to β capture all variation in return, the intercept α
                                            1 5
becomes zero, according to Fama and French. We use the website of Kenneth French (2020), one
of the writers of the Fama-French paper, to extract the historical values of the differences in
returns and use them in our regression. The regression then estimates the coefficients.

Studies have found that the COVID-19 pandemic has impacted different industries unevenly.
Bartik et al (2020) found that one dominant factor influencing the performance of industries has
been personal contact, where the study shows that sectors with high involvement of personal
contacts also experience a tougher climate during the pandemic and the opposite for less personal
contact firms in the United States. In addition, some industries might have a lower barrier or a
higher willingness to invest in CSR. Using the allocation of companies divided into industries
from Nordic Compass, we added industry dummies to the regression.

                                      15
D. Robustness test of effect of CSR 2019 outside crisis
To check the robustness of our results in the baseline regression we will perform robustness
checks where factors are changed to discover whether previous findings still are repeated and
statistically significant.

In order to minimize the risk of an omitted outside factor being correlated with CSR of the year
2019, we control the results by using time as a control factor. We will also investigate whether
CSR only has an effect on returns during crises, or if it also has an impact during high trust time
periods outside crises.

Therefore a regression based on monthly data stretching from January of 2018 to April of 2020
which corresponds to the time before, during and after the COVID-19 crisis is performed. As
previously stated, we use CSR data from Nordic Compass in the year of 2019 for the regression.
The independent variables are identical to the ones utilized in the baseline regression, except that a
time dummy corresponding to each unique month is added. Thus monthly effects such as a stock
market boom in one month does not distort the regression. The accounting data is from the
relevant year or quarter and the monthly returns are calculated using financial data from the
beginning and end of each month’s trading day.

As earlier, private companies are removed and months of data from companies which were not
listed on the stock market during the whole time period. Removing certain months from younger
companies may lead to skewing results as older companies would have a more prominent
placement during older time periods. The time dummies, however, will partly correct for this
effect. In the end we have 17554 data points for the regression, where each data point corresponds
to one company per month.

𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛   = α + 𝑏 𝑃𝑟𝑒𝐶𝑆𝑅      + 𝑏 𝐶𝑆𝑅      * 𝐶𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑠 + 𝑏 𝐶𝑆𝑅      * 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝐶𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑠 + 𝑏 '𝑋  + 𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒 𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑖𝑒𝑠
         𝑖,𝑡             0          𝑖,2019      1     𝑖, 2019           𝑡     2     𝑖, 2019                 𝑡     3   𝑖,𝑡
+ ε       (2)
            𝑖,𝑡

The regression is based on dummies for the pre-crisis time period, crisis, and post-crisis time
period. The dummies are set to one or zero, in order to show the effect of CSR on each time
period. Return stands for the monthly return of a firm i, during time t. Financial health factors are
denoted as the vector X. Thus the effect of the CSR of 2019 is shown for each time period, and
influences outside the COVID-19 crise period are shown. The pre-crisis monthly returns are also
included to control for any correlations where financially successful companies may be more
involved in CSR work due to more leeway in finances.

                                      16
We will also investigate whether the country the company has its headquarters in affects the
monthly returns, in conjunction with CSR and time. Sweden stands out from its Northern
neighbours due to a radically different approach from the government towards lock downs during
COVID-19 (Claeson & Hanson, 2021). Swedes also had a lower trust in the government than its
neighbours in 2020, according to data from OECD (OECD, 2019). Thus a difference between the
value of social capital between Sweden and its Nordic neighbours should emerge, according to
Lins et al (2017). This is done through modifying the earlier monthly regression, by introducing a
dummy for whether a company is located in Sweden or not.

E. Comparison to the Ebola crisis
Lins et al. (2017) have compared their final findings from the Global Financial Crisis with the
Enron scandal of 2001, which they argue both to have factors of financial crisis, trust and social
capital highly present. As proven earlier, since COVID-19 is initially triggered by the exogenous
shock factor, the trust factor is present in a later stage of the crisis than both the GFC and the
Enron crisis. To investigate whether the findings from the COVID-19 period also applies to
similar crises we need to examine a crisis with similar effects on trust. We use the Western
African Ebola virus epidemic of the early autumn of 2014 as this similar crisis, as it also is a crisis
begun by the spread of a lethal disease, which evoked an exogenous shock and the trust factor had
a similar function.

Supporting our view on COVID-19 and Ebola to have certain common mechanics is a study by
Briand et al. (2014), which explains that the World Health Organization (WHO) on the 8 August
2014 declared a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC). This is similar to
COVID-19 which on the 30th of January in 2020 was also announced by the WHO to be an
PHEIC (WHO, ND.) When a PHEIC is announced, international health regulations are set in
motion. In the time of Ebola this agreement consisted of 196 countries in total. To name one of the
undertaken regulations were strong restrictions on travels internationally, which at that time
involved four affected countries. The two crises should therefore both have similar market
reactions regarding trust and stability due to the insecure nature of both crises, especially at the
onset of the crisis.

CSR values from 2014, using the Nordic Compass database, were applied. Also the same control
factors for firms financial health and stock performance as in the baseline regression were used.
We defined the time period of the Ebola financial crisis to have started on the 1st of September,
and ended on the 15th of October in 2014, where OMX Nordic 40 fell approximately 8%.

Nordic Compass of 2014 has data on 253 firms, however after sorting out private companies and
companies with insufficient financial data we have 125 firms left. Due to the smaller sample size,
a dummy variable of CSR>0 is inserted for each company to create a crude measurement for the

                                      17
companies’ CSR rating. This aids the regression in making statistically significant results despite
the limited sample size. Otherwise we use the same financial variables in the regression to create
an identical regression of the Ebola crisis as for the COVID-19 crisis.

F. Using other definitions of the time period of the crisis
Another robustness test of our baseline regression is to change the time periods, and see if earlier
results still are significant. Another study, by Björkil and Martinsson (2020), which studies the
effect of ESG on Swedish companies during the COVID-19 crisis used the times of the Swedish
restrictions of people as start and end times for their regression analyses. Sweden had restrictions
of 500 people between 6 and 20 of March 2020, and later enforced restrictions of 50 people
between 27 of March to 20 of November 2020.

We therefore perform the baseline regression twice, using the time periods of the two restrictions.
The amount of companies in this sample is the same as for the baseline regression, 373 firms,
which is the provided financial and CSR data for these companies in the specific period. Also, the
financial health variables will be the same as in the baseline regression, as this control will only
change the time periods.

G. Limitations of method
As argued above our databases and our choice of using regression analysis have been chosen after
much deliberation and have been relied on in similar previous research (Lins et al., 2017).
However for every method there will always exist drawbacks, which we will correct through
different methods and robustness checks.

An issue regarding the companies in the Nordic compass database is that there might be a
probability that firms with the best CSR performance will report their results, compared to those
with doing poorly in that area. Therefore the results will most likely be overrepresented by the
well performing right tailed situated firms and the ones with the lowest CSR performance will be
omitted. This can be viewed as a type of “voluntary response bias and exclusion of outliers in the
left hand tail will therefore create a skew in the data.

Another drawback is that CSR ratings are difficult to measure (McWilliams, Siegel, & Wright,
2006; Öberseder et al., 2014). This might stem from the notion that much data is provided by the
companies themselves in the form of reports, with sparse comparable numbers and statistics.
Hereby firms can direct and manipulate their data in order to achieve a higher score. As Latif and
Sajjad (2018) argue the main problem is the shortage of systematic reviews of the tools and scales
utilized to compute the CSR score.

                                      18
We therefore use an equally weighted CSR score, which also is used by the ESG dataprovider
MSCI ESG research. However, Capelle-Blancard and Petit (2015) argue that not all dimensions of
CSR should be equally weighted to best represent the corporate social performance of an
organisation. Instead the weights should differ by the industry to match what each industry is most
criticized by. For example they argue that the industry segment of Basic Resources should have a
CSR rating more heavily influenced by environmental concerns than social. The CSR scores of
banking should at the other hand be heavily influenced by the governmental dimension, according
to Capelle-Blancard and Petit (2015). We therefore create a CSR value using the industry specific
weights found by Capelle-Blancard and Petit (2015) in our robustness analysis.

Another criticism of our method is whether the chosen time period of the crisis best defines the
crisis in terms of stock performance, as well as behavior. There are no daily or weekly measures of
the trustlevel in the stock market, which results in that different definitions of the crisis time can
be equally legitimate. Therefore a robustness check is needed where other authors' time periods of
the crisis is used for our baseline regression. We will also use the time periods of Björkil and
Martinsson (2020) who used lockdowns of the Swedish government as a proxy for the time
periods of the crisis.

Our regressions are limited to linear relationships between the dependent and independent
variables. Even though there have been studies where a significant linear relationship between
CSR and financial returns or volatility have been found, non-linear relations have also been found
(Nollet et al., 2016) We therefore divide the CSR rating into quantiles to find non-linear or
monotone relationships between CSR and financial returns. Also, least squares regression models
are sensitive to outliers, which means that the results may be influenced disproportionately by
certain companies. However, our normalization of CSR and removal of low quality data reduces
the issue.

                                      19
V - Results & Analysis of baseline regressions
A. Descriptive statistics

Table II)
Summary statistics table over mean, standard deviation, minimum and maximum value and different percentiles of the
variables we are using in the regression.

Table III)
A correlation matrix over the correlations between the variables we are using in the regression analysis.

Utilizing data from S&P Capital IQ and Nordic compass we computed the main variables, which
can be found in Table II. The first row in the table presents the CSR factor, showing a mean of
-0.0354, which is close to zero as the CSR score is normalized. The non-normalized CSR rating,
where each subpart is rated from -1 to +1 for each company, is 0.879 and a median of 0.9902,
which indicates that the average Nordic company performs relatively well as the median and
average is above zero. The span of the non-normalized CSR rating is -4 and +4.

The following column states a negative Raw return with a mean of -24.5%, and a median with a
similar percentage of -25.6%. The 25th percentile of Raw return of -33.8% and the 75th percentile
of -15.7%, indicates a strong financial downturn which severely affected a majority of companies
in the Nordics. Continuing, the Abnormal return does not deviate strongly from the Raw return,
with a mean of -25.4%, median of -26.4%, which further establishes that the negative returns were
widespread and not part of the historical trend. Looking at the correlation matrix of Table III we
find a negative correlation between CSR and Raw return, as well as between CSR and Abnormal
return.

                                      20
B. Results from baseline regressions
Columns (1) and (2) in Table IV illustrate a small significant negative coefficient for the Raw
return and Abnormal return showing that there is a negative dependence between the CSR score
and company performance during the COVID-19 crisis, when not controlling for other factors.
This negative dependence is shown to be statistically significant in the COVID-19 crisis with a
p-value of less than 0.1. Also, if a company was to improve one standard deviation in CSR
(1.0079) the returns would only be affected by approximately -2.07 percentage points, which
shows that CSR was a small but statistically important factor for returns in the COVID-19 crisis.
The effect is therefore not considerable, as it is notably smaller than the standard deviation of
both raw return (0.159) and abnormal return (0.162) for Nordic companies, which ultimately
shows that other factors than CSR have been more important during the crisis.

Columns (3) and (4) show the coefficients after taking the control variables into account.
Companies with higher CSR performed statistically significantly worse during the COVID-19
crisis. The effect is however still smaller than the standard deviation of the returns, but larger than
Columns (1) and (2) where the additional control variables were not taken into account. If a firm
was to increase its CSR by one standard deviation (1), it would lead to approximately -3.6
percentage units lower returns. Other variables also have a strong effect on the returns, when
looking at the change in return when altering the value of the explaining variable. Modifying the
long term debt by one standard deviation (0.148) would change the raw return by 2.0 percentage
points, which however is lower than changing the CSR by one standard deviation. Also,
companies one standard deviation higher in momentum (0.457) and cash holdings (0.148)
experienced 6.9 percentage points and 1.9 percentage points lower abnormal return during the
crisis. CSR thus has an effect corresponding to 1.9 of cash holdings, and approximately half of
momentum. CSR hence has a modest to strong effect on crisis returns in comparison to financial
health factors.

As companies with higher CSR and therefore higher social capital experienced worse returns
during the COVID-19 crisis, there seems to be a difference between crises based on exogenous
shocks and endogenous shocks, as studies on endogenous shocks have found a positive effect of
CSR on returns. As the negative effect on returns are significant the first null hypothesis of CSR
not having an effect can be rejected, and the alternative hypothesis of social capital having an
effect on returns can be implemented. The second hypothesis can however not be rejected, as the
effect of CRS is negative.

                                      21
Table IV)
Baseline regression with industry dummies and Fama-French factors.

Table V)
Regression with CSR quintiles. Also controlled by industry dummies and Fama-French factors.

Table VI)
Regression where the effect of different governance metrics are studied. Also controlled by
industry dummies and Fama-French factors.

C. Comparing CSR quantiles to return
In Table V we estimate a company’s CSR as the quantile it belongs to, instead of the linear
approach in the regression in Table IV. The estimation is achieved by creating dummy variables

                                      22
for the quantile the company lies in. We have thus created dummy variables for the 2-4 CSR
quartiles, as the intercept captures the effect of the first quartile. Looking at the effect of which
quantile a company lies in shows whether the effects of CSR are higher at the extremes or whether
there is an effect for companies in the middle of the curve too. The regression shows that for both
raw return and abnormal return, companies in the third CSR quartile perform worse, whereas
companies in the fourth and highest CSR quartile perform better than the third quartile. For the
second quartile, there is no statistically significant result, but there seems to be a lower negative
effect in the second quartile than in the other quartiles. The effects on returns from CSR are thus
non-monotonic. The differences between the firms in the highest CSR quartile and the lowest are
roughly 7.1 percentage points in Raw return, when taking control variables into account. For
Abnormal return the difference is 7.2 percentage points. Companies in the third CSR quartile had
a raw return 6.5 percentage points worse than firms with the worst CSR ratings.

Compared to financial health factors such as long term debt we see that a company improving one
standard deviation on long term debt (0.148) would decrease its Raw return by 2.22 percentage
points. Thus, the effect of being in the above average in CSR is important for explaining the
returns during the COVID-19 crisis. For companies under the average CSR level the results
become less significant, only showing a slight negative results for companies in the second
quantile.

It seems like the negative effect of social capital is explained by the third and fourth CSR quantiles
of companies having a significant negative effect on their returns. As previous research has found
a significant positive effect on the third and fourth CSR quantiles during endogenous crises,
exogenous crises seem to have different effects on firms with more than average social capital.
Here, again, the first hypothesis is rejected as CSR still has an effect on returns. The second
hypothesis is not rejected.

D. Control of the effect of Governance
CSR is still statistically significant in explaining Raw and Abnormal return after controlling for
different indexes for governance, which historically has proven to improve company returns
during crises. Therefore on the same basis as Table IV, with the addition of governance factors,
Table VI has been constructed. The same set up; with main variables and control variables as in
Table IV have been utilized. The findings indicate a negative correlation between CSR and Raw
return as well as the governance index, with a statistically significant certainty. Two indexes for
governance used; first a Governance Index using data from Nordic compass using the same
method as when creating the subparts for our CSR rating of companies. The other index is
Bebchuk, Cohen and Ferrell’s E-index, which measures the entrenchment of a firm using six
provisions and has been shown to be monotonic (Bebchuk et al. 2008). Due to data limitations it
only consists of five out of the total six measurements required. The measurements for the E-index

                                      23
are dummies which are added together to create a rating which spans from zero to five. The
dummies span subjects such as Charter amend limit, which stands for limitations for shareholders
to change the company charter, to Golden parachutes for executives.

The Governance index variable of CSR has a significant negative impact on the Raw return and
Abnormal return during the COVID-19 crisis, which goes against findings from Lins et al. (2017)
that the governance subpart of CSR had no significant impact on returns in crises. The E-index on
the other hand had no significant impact on returns, as did no other measures on governance. As
Governance has a significant effect on returns, it should be used as part of the CSR measure.

In conclusion, the findings of Table VI show that firms with high CSR ratings experienced
significant worse financial results during the financial crisis, even when controlling for financial
health and other financial metrics. Also, only governance factors connected to CSR had an impact,
whereas entrenchment factors and other governance metrics could not significantly explain returns
during the COVID-19 crisis. Therefore governance should be a subcomponent of CSR. However,
inclusion of governance in CSR would not change the outcome of previous regressions as
governance also has a negative effect on returns, and therefore the rejection of the first hypothesis
still stands.

                                      24
VI - Robustness tests and discussion

A. Comparison to Ebola

Table VII)
Regression of the Ebola crisis where two measures of CSR have been used; one dummy for if the
company has a positive CSR, and one linear measure of CSR.

We found that when using financial health factors and industry dummies as control factors, the
linear definition of CSR had a significant positive impact on crisis returns during the Ebola crisis
in the Nordic stock market. A firm one standard deviation higher in CSR (1.000) would enjoy
approximately 2.5 percentage units higher Raw return during the crisis, compared to the 8% fall in
the Nordic stock market during the crisis. However, the simpler CSR being over zero measure did
not have any significant results, suggesting that the effect is more linear than monotonic in the
Ebola crisis. This shows that companies with higher CSR enjoyed better returns during the Ebola
crisis, to the contrary of the COVID-19 crisis.

Companies with high social capital thus had higher returns during the Ebola crisis, but not during
the COVID-19 crisis, albeit these being similar crises with similar reactions from governments
and markets. The crises were however on different scales, where COVID-19 has led to complete
lockdowns in countries all over the world, whereas the Ebola crisis only created local lockdowns.
This implies that CSR may have different effects according to the severity of the crisis, or that the
nature of these different crises affected returns differently.

                                      25
B. Returns before, during and after crisis
Table IIX)
Regression on monthly data. Each datapoint is one company during one month. Crisis, PreCrisis
and Post-Crisis are dummies corresponding to the different time periods.

CSR has a positive effect outside crises, both pre- and post-crisis, but has a significant monthly
negative effect during the COVID-19 crisis. Albeit the negative effect during the crisis only has a
significance of less than 10%, the span of the coefficients for the 95% confidence interval for
CSRxCrisis in both Raw return and Abnormal Return are negative. Thus the effect of CSR during
the crisis period is not zero. The difference between the companies one standard deviation from
each other in CSR ratings is approximately 0.7 percentage units per month for both Abnormal and
Raw return. Outside of crises, however, there is a significant positive performance for high CSR
companies, where the difference between each standard deviation in CSR is approximately 1.5
percentage units.

Thus the null hypothesis of CSR having no effect in crises can be rejected, even when looking at
monthly returns during the crisis. Social capital thus has a negative effect during the exogenous
COVID-19 crisis, while having a positive effect outside crises. This goes against the notion of
Lins et al. (2017) and our second hypothesis that social capital becomes more important during
crises, while being statistically insignificant during high-trust periods.

C. Sweden compared to other Nordic countries

Table IX)
Regression on monthly data. Each datapoint is one company during one month. Crisis, PreCrisis
and Post-Crisis are dummies corresponding to the different time periods. Also, a dummy for if a
company is headquartered in Sweden has been inserted.

                                      26
CSR does not have a significant effect pre-crisis. Also, looking post-crisis a small significant
positive effect from CSR is detected both for raw return and abnormal return, which corresponds
with our hypothesis of CSR not having a strong effect outside crises. CSR does however have a
significant effect during the crisis where the companies with the highest CSR performed three
percentage units worse than the companies with the lower CSR each month in Sweden. Outside
Sweden the difference is smaller, roughly two percentage units lower raw and abnormal returns.

Thus CSR had effects to differing degrees in different countries, strengthening the results of Lins
et al (2017) where countries with lower trust experienced a less positive effect from CSR on
returns. Also, Sweden which experienced restrictions later and in a smaller degree than its
neighbours had a lower positive effect from CSR post-crisis than average, suggesting that the
crisis spilled over into the post crisis period.

D. Different definitions of crisis period

Table X)
Regression analysis during the time of restrictions on 50 people.

                                      27
Table XI)
Regression analysis during the time of restrictions on 500 people.

Looking at the coefficients we find that high CSR still influences firms negatively during the
COVID-19 crisis, however, the coefficients are not always statistically significant. Especially the
very short time interval of two weeks for the 500 people restriction on Table XI shows no
significant effect of CSR on returns when controlling for other financial measures. This period
saw the heaviest drop in the Nordic stock markets in the COVID-19 crisis. The longer time period
on Table X of the restrictions of 50 people does at the other hand show a significant negative
coefficient for CSR when controlling for financial factors.

The non-significant results for the 500 people restrictions suggests that during heavy drops and
high volatility in the stock market there may not be a significant effect of CSR, whereas for longer
time periods there may be a preference for lower CSR firms. This weakens the rejection of the
first hypothesis as there is evidence that during later parts of the crisis the relation between CSR
and returns weakens.

We also made a robustness analysis of our baseline regression using another definition of CSR,
which is in the Appendix I due to the similarities to the baseline regression of Table IV. Instead of
using an equally weighted CSR, where each subpart of CSR is assigned equal value and which is
used by data providers such as MSCI ESG Rating, we use the weight scheme proposed by
Capelle-Blancard and Petit where different industries have different weights for the CSR value.
Using these weights we still found a significant negative effect from CSR on raw and abnormal
return. Therefore, the rejection of the first null hypothesis is robust when changing the CSR
weights.

The results thus imply that CSR had a negative effect on returns during the COVID-19 crisis,
especially in companies which were in the third CSR quantile. However, during the Ebola crisis
CSR had a positive effect on returns. Also, robustness analyses imply that the measured time

                                      28
period is important in regards to the effect of CSR. Early on in the crisis, during the time period of
restrictions on 500 people and the time period of the baseline regression, CSR had a significant
negative effect on returns. However, during later stages of the crisis the effect of CSR on returns
became more ambiguous as CSR lost the significant effect it had on returns. When not in crisis,
companies with high CSR rates in the Nordics had higher returns than companies with lower CSR
rates.

This suggests that the social capital of companies had mixed effects during different parts of the
crisis. During the initial phase of the crisis where a large exogenous shock hits the economy
investors seem to punish companies with an above average amount of social capital. This goes
against the findings of Lins et al (2017) who found that companies with an above average amount
of social capital received higher returns during the entire part of the financial crisis.

One possible explanation might be that trust during exogenous crises caused by epidemics and
pandemics is not as severely reduced as in the endogenous crises studied by Lins et al (2017), at
least initially. However, during later stages of the crisis as people are hurt by the recession the role
of CSR is strengthened, in line with studies by Wilkinson and Pickett (2009) or Buttrick and Oishi
(2017) who argued that recessions are negatively related to generalized trust. In summary, our
results could indicate that in exogenous crises trust in society decreases, as the financial crisis after
a while becomes an economic crisis. Therefore, from one point of view, using the logic of Lins et
al (2017) that it solely is trust that affects the importance of CSR, there is evidence in our study
which are in line with their findings.

The reason why high CSR has a negative effect on returns during the initial phase of the crisis is
this far unclear. As CSR has a positive effect on firms when not in crisis, there may be an omitted
factor correlated to CSR and to returns on the market. An example of this could be that primarily
historically financially successful companies can afford to invest in CSR, perhaps due to a
corporate culture of risk taking. Therefore the effect of CSR on returns may be dragged down
during times of heavy downturns in the market, and vice versa. Also, the costs of CSR may have
risen during the COVID-19 crisis as employee training and supply line control becomes more
difficult when travel restrictions are in place.

There may also be a relation between uncertainty in the market and negative effects from CSR on
returns, as Broadstock et al (2021) has shown that there is a link between stock volatility, which
primarily occurs during recessions, and ESG, which is closely related to CSR. The effect of
market downturns negatively affecting the effect of CSR on returns is however not that profound
as it did not affect the results of the Ebola crisis, where CSR has a significant positive effect on
returns.

                                      29
Thus CSR might not be a reliable link to the social capital of firms, as the COVID-19 crisis has
shown. Here the fault could be the definition of CSR or the notion that CSR at all should be a
measure of the social capital of firms. Many researchers have pointed out the difficulties in
measuring CSR due to lack of data and established methods. This also means that there may be
different definitions of CSR, where each definition may be differently related to returns of
companies.

                                      30
VII. Conclusion

A. Results from the study
Previous research has found a significant positive effect from CSR in crises which are created by
lack of trust, such as the financial crisis of -08 and the Enron 2001 crisis. This effect is
pronounced in high trust societies such as the Nordic countries. In periods outside a crisis the
effect from CSR has been mixed, when looking at Raw and Abnormal returns, where different
studies have come to differing conclusions. There have not been many studies on the effect of
CSR during the COVID-19 crisis, and none measuring the effects on the whole Nordic market.
However, studies have shown that the inequality and vulnerability that follow crises such as the
COVID-19 crisis results in reduced trust. Therefore, companies with high social capital should
profit from higher returns even in a crisis which initially did not start with low trust levels.

Our study finds a significant negative effect from high CSR ratings on companies during the initial
phases of COVID-19, suggesting that trust and social capital has a damaging effect on companies
early on in a crisis. Thus the first null hypothesis that there is no relation between CSR and returns
can be rejected. However, the second null hypothesis, that CSR has a negative effect on returns
cannot be rejected. This result is robust when looking at monthly returns. However, there seems to
be different effects of CSR on returns during different phases of the crisis. When looking at
quantiles, only firms with above average CSR had negative results. Quantiles with lower than
average CSR had statistically insignificant results.

However, when looking at similar external shock situations to COVID-19, as in the Ebola crisis,
we find a significant positive effect of CSR and social capital and returns. More specifically this
illustrates that the COVID-19 crisis distinguishes itself from other studied crises through high
CSR firms suffering worse returns, at least initially during the crisis.

Firstly, the initial negative effect of CSR could be due to the exogenous shock which does not lead
to a lack of trust on the capital markets and society during the initial phases of the crisis. The lack
of trust may instead strike eventually as a reaction to the economical crisis, following the financial
one. That in turn may explain the more positive effects from CSR later on, as CSR according to
earlier research has a positive relation to a sudden decrease in trust of the society.

Secondly, this result could be due to CSR not being a reliable link to the social capital of firms
during the COVID-19 crisis. Here the fault could be the definition of CSR, since as explained

                                      31
earlier there are many different interpretations and distinctions of the factors that create the overall
CSR rating. Another reasoning could be the lack of a unified measurement of social capital.

Thirdly, there may be another factor independent to the factors we have studied affecting the
COVID-19 crisis, but not other crises. An example could be the cost of CSR, which may have
risen during the COVID-19 crisis as employee training and supply line control becomes more
difficult when travel restrictions are in place. Also, as CSR has a positive effect on firms when not
in crisis, there may be an omitted factor correlated to CSR and to returns on the market, such as
financially successful companies being able to invest more in CSR.

To conclude our null hypothesis was rejected as CSR has a significant effect on returns in the
Nordic market during the COVID-19 crisis. Instead there is a negative effect from CSR on returns,
especially during the initial part of the crisis. Hereby our contribution to previous and existing
literature is thus that CSR has a significant effect during the COVID-19 crisis in the high trust
region of the Nordics. However, unlike previous research the effect is negative, especially during
the initial parts of the COVID-19 crisis. Our aspiration is that our study builds a foundation and
creates the surge for further investigation of studies to be conducted on the mechanisms and
consequences of exogenous shocks and more specifically of COVID-19.

B. Further research opportunities
There is scarce data and few studies on the link between external shocks and trust in financial
institutions. This means that the link between lower trust and higher returns for firms with high
social capital becomes hard to pinpoint, which in turn could lead to more ineffective CSR efforts
at companies. It would be interesting to gather data on trust in the society per month, and use this
as a control in the baseline regression analysis we used. Today, trust data on societies are only
collected once per year or more seldom.

Also, our study showed that companies in the third quantile of the CSR rating had the highest
significant negative effect from CSR on returns. The reason behind this is not well understood. A
theory could be that this is an area where the marginal product of CSR investments are low.
Therefore a cost to gain ratio of CSR is interesting to study, as it could help companies develop
more efficient CSR programs.

Also, going back in history to study other exogenous crises would increase the understanding of
exogenous crises and if there are similar effects of CSR and social capital in these, which cannot
be found in endogenous crises.

                                      32
VIII. References

A. (2020, August). Kenneth R. French - Data Library. Data Library.
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html

Ashwin Kumar, N. C., Smith, C., Badis, L., Wang, N., Ambrosy, P., & Tavares, R. (2016). ESG
factors and risk-adjusted performance: a new quantitative model. Journal of Sustainable Finance
& Investment, 6(4), 292–300. https://doi.org/10.1080/20430795.2016.1234909

AVRAMOV, D., & CHORDIA, T. (2006). Predicting stock returns. Journal of Financial
Economics, 82(2), 387–415. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2005.07.014

Bebchuk, L., Cohen, A., & Ferrell, A. (2008). What Matters in Corporate Governance? Review of
Financial Studies, 22(2), 783–827. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhn099

Bergh, A. (2011). Nordics in Global Crisis: Vulnerability and Resilience. Journal of Economic
Literature, 49(1), 151-152. https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.49.1.129

Björkil, L. & Martinsson, M. (2020). ESG rating, a booster of stock performance during the
Covid- 19 pandemic in Sweden? University of Gothenburg.
https://gupea.ub.gu.se/bitstream/2077/67893/1/gupea_2077_67893_1.pdf

Blundell-Wignall, A., & Atkinson, P. (2009). Origins of the financial crisis and requirements for
reform. Journal of Asian Economics, 20(5), 536–548. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asieco.2009.07.009

Breitz, C., & Partapuoli, P. J. (2020, May). How is ESG Affecting Stock Returns? A Portfolio- and
Panel Data Analysis of US Firms in the S&P 500. Lund University.
https://lup.lub.lu.se/luur/download?func=downloadFile&recordOId=9022586&fileOId=9022590

Briand, S., Bertherat, E., Cox, P., Formenty, P., Kieny, M. P., Myhre, J. K., Roth, C., Shindo, N., &
Dye, C. (2014). The International Ebola Emergency. New England Journal of Medicine, 371(13),
1180–1183. https://doi.org/10.1056/nejmp1409858

Broadstock, D., Chan, K., Cheng, L. and Wang, X., 2021. The role of ESG performance during
times of financial crisis: Evidence from COVID-19 in China. Finance Research Letters, 38,
p.101716. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2020.101716

Brown, T., & Dacin, P. (1997). The Company and the Product: Corporate Associations and
Consumer Product Responses. Journal of Marketing, 61(1), 68-84. 10.2307/1252190

Capelle-Blancard, G., & Petit, A. (2015). The Weighting of CSR Dimensions: One Size Does Not
Fit All. Business & Society, 56(6), 919–943. https://doi.org/10.1177/0007650315620118

                                      33
Claeson, M., & Hanson, S. (2021). COVID-19 and the Swedish enigma. The Lancet, 397(10271),
259–261. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(20)32750-1

Clark, G. L., Feiner, A., & Viehs, M. (2014, October 22). From the Stockholder to the
Stakeholder: How Sustainability Can Drive Financial Outperformance. SSRN Electronic Journal.
Published. https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2508281

Cornett, M. M., Erhemjamts, O., & Tehranian, H. (2016). Greed or good deeds: An examination of
the relation between corporate social responsibility and the financial performance of U.S.
commercial banks around the financial crisis. Journal of Banking & Finance, 70, 137–159.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbankfin.2016.04.024

COVID-19 Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC) Global research and
innovation forum. (n.d.). World Health Organization.
https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/covid-19-public-health-emergency-of-international-conc
ern-(pheic)-global-research-and-innovation-forum

COVID-19 United States Cases by County. (n.d.). Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center.
Retrieved April 13, 2021, from https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/us-map

Cryan, J. (2016, October 4). Trust is the foundation of banking [Tweet]. Twitter.
https://twitter.com/Gottodix/status/783540243391737856

Dabla-Norris, E., & Bal-Gunduz, Y. (2012). Exogenous Shocks and Growth Crises in
Low-Income Countries: A Vulnerability Index. IMF Working Papers, 12(264), 1.
https://doi.org/10.5089/9781475528510.001

Dang, T. L., & Nguyen, T. M. H. (2020). Liquidity risk and stock performance during the financial
crisis. Research in International Business and Finance, 52, 101165.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ribaf.2019.101165

Du, S., Bhattacharya, C., & Sen, S. (2010). Maximizing Business Returns to Corporate Social
Responsibility (CSR): The Role of CSR Communication. International Journal of Management
Reviews, 12(1), 8–19. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2370.2009.00276.x

ESG Investing: ESG Ratings. (n.d.). MSCI. Retrieved April 3, 2021, from
https://www.msci.com/our-solutions/esg-investing/esg-ratings

Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (2015). A five-factor asset pricing model. Journal of Financial
Economics, 116(1), 1–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2014.10.010

                                      34
Fisher-Vanden, K. & Thorburn, K.S. (2011, November). Voluntary Corporate Environmental
Initiatives and Shareholder Wealth, Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, vol.
62, no. 3, pp. 430-445. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2011.04.003

Forster, M., & Cingano, F. (2014). FOCUS on Inequality and Growth. OECD.
https://www.oecd.org/social/Focus-Inequality-and-Growth-2014.pdf

Fuentes, N., & Moder, I. (2021, February 5). The scarring effects of COVID-19 on the global
economy. VOX, CEPR Policy Portal.
https://voxeu.org/article/scarring-effects-covid-19-global-economy

Government at a Glance 2019. (2019). Government at a Glance. Published.
https://doi.org/10.1787/8ccf5c38-en

Guiso, L., Sapienza, P., & Zingales, L. (2006). Does Culture Affect Economic Outcomes? Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 20(2), 23–48. https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.20.2.23

Hansen, T. (2014). The role of trust in financial customer-seller relationships before and after the
financial crisis. Journal of Consumer Behaviour, 13(6), 442–452. https://doi.org/10.1002/cb.1493

Hopkins, M. (2005). Measurement of corporate social responsibility. International Journal of
Management and Decision Making, 6(3/4), 213. https://doi.org/10.1504/ijmdm.2005.006549

International Monetary Fund. (2021). World Economic Outlook: Managing Divergent Recoveries.
International Monetary Fund

International Organization for Standardization. (2018). Discovering ISO 26000.
https://www.iso.org/files/live/sites/isoorg/files/store/en/PUB100258.pdf

Jonung, L. (2008). Lessons from Financial Liberalisation in Scandinavia. Comparative Economic

Studies, 50(4), 564–598. https://doi.org/10.1057/ces.2008.34

Kramer, R. M. (1999). TRUST AND DISTRUST IN ORGANIZATIONS: Emerging Perspectives,

Enduring Questions. Annual Review of Psychology, 50(1), 569–598.

https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.50.1.569

                                      35
Landi, G., & Sciarelli, M. (2018, October 26). Towards a more ethical market: the impact of ESG
rating on corporate financial performance. Social Responsibility Journal, 15(1), 11–27.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/SRJ-11-2017-0254.

Latif, K. F., & Sajjad, A. (2018). Measuring corporate social responsibility: A critical review of
survey instruments. Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Management, 25(6),
1174–1197. https://doi.org/10.1002/csr.1630

Lins, K.V., Servaes, H. and Tamayo, A. (2017), Social Capital, Trust, and Firm Performance: The
Value of Corporate Social Responsibility during the Financial Crisis. The Journal of Finance, 72:
1785-1824. https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12505

Mitchel, M., 2021. Top Corporate Social Responsibility Trends in 2020. SmartRecruiters. [online]
SmartRecruiters Blog. Available at
<https://www.smartrecruiters.com/blog/top-corporate-social-responsibility-trends-in-2020/>
[Accessed 16 May 2021].

Nollet, J., Filis, G., & Mitrokostas, E. (2016). Corporate social responsibility and financial
performance: A non-linear and disaggregated approach. Economic Modelling, 52, 400–407.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econmod.2015.09.019

Ortiz-Ospina, E & Roser M. (2016, July 22). Trust. Our World in Data.
https://ourworldindata.org/trust

Phillips, C. H. (2012). S&P Capital IQ. Journal of Business & Finance Librarianship, 17(3),
279–286. https://doi.org/10.1080/08963568.2012.685022

Revelli, C., & Viviani, J. L. (2014). Financial performance of socially responsible investing (SRI):
what have we learned? A meta-analysis. Business Ethics: A European Review, 24(2), 158–185.
https://doi.org/10.1111/beer.12076

Rosnan, Herwina & Saihani, Sham & Yusof, Nuryusmawati. (2013). Attitudes Towards Corporate
Social Responsibility among Budding Business Leaders. Procedia - Social and Behavioral
Sciences. 107. 52-58. 10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.12.398

Rousseau, D. M., Sitkin, S. B., Burt, R. S., & Camerer, C. (1998). Not so different after all: A
cross-discipline view of trust. Academy of Management Review, 23(3), 393-404.

Schnietz, K. E., & Epstein, M. J. (2005). Exploring the Financial Value of a Reputation for
Corporate Social Responsibility During a Crisis. Corporate Reputation Review, 7(4), 327–345.
https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.crr.1540230

                                      36
Seabold, S., & Perktold, J. (2010). Statsmodels: Econometric and Statistical Modeling with
Python. Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference. Published.
https://doi.org/10.25080/majora-92bf1922-011

Sheehy, B. (2014). Defining CSR: Problems and Solutions. Journal of Business Ethics, 131(3),
625–648. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-014-2281-x

Sirdeshmukh, D., Singh, J., & Sabol, B. (2002). Consumer Trust, Value, and Loyalty in Relational
Exchanges. Journal of Marketing, 66(1), 15–37. https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkg.66.1.15.18449

Sornette, D. (2006a). Endogenous versus Exogenous Origins of Crises. Extreme Events in Nature
and Society, 95–119. https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-28611-x_5

Tuters, S. (2012). Wilkinson, R., & Pickett, K. (2009).The Spirit Level: Why More Equal
Societies Almost Always Do Better. London: Allen Lane. Leadership and Policy in Schools,
11(1), 129–134. https://doi.org/10.1080/15700763.2011.577928

United Nations Development Programme, (2021). COVID-19. Available at:
https://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/coronavirus.html

van Marrewijk, M. (2003). Concepts and Definitions of CSR and Corporate Sustainability:
Between Agency and Communion. Journal of Business Ethics, 44(2), 95–105.
https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1023331212247

Wendling, Z. A., Emerson, J. W., de Sherbinin, A., Esty, D. C., et al. (2020). 2020 Environmental
Performance Index. New Haven, CT: Yale Center for Environmental Law & Policy. Epi.yale.edu
<https://epi.yale.edu/epi-results/2020/component/epi> [Accessed 14 April 2021].

World Business Council for Sustainable Development (2000). Corporate Social Responsibility:
Making Good Business Sense (Geneva, Switzerland).

Yamagishi, T. (2011). Trust: The Evolutionary Game of Mind and Society (The Science of the
Mind) (2011th ed.). Springer.

Yoon, Y., Gürhan-Canli, Z., & Schwarz, N. (2006). The Effect of Corporate Social Responsibility
(CSR) Activities on Companies with Bad Reputations. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 16(4),
377-390. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327663jcp1604_9

                                      37
IIX. Appendix
A. Appendix I
Table over results from regression analysis when using weights by Capelle-Blancard and Petit.

                                      38