     THE GREEN TAXONOMY

AN EVENT STUDY TO EVALUATE THE IMPACT OF EU
  TAXONOMY ANNOUNCEMENTS ON EUROPEAN
          SUSTAINABLE COMPANIES

EMMA AXELSSON

SOFIA BLOMSTRÖM

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2022
The Green Taxonomy: An Event Study to Evaluate the impact of EU Taxonomy
Announcements on European Sustainable Companies

Abstract
This paper examines how sustainable companies based in EU countries react to EU
Taxonomy announcements. This is performed using an event study methodology where
companies´ share price performances are analysed around three chosen announcement days.
The initial assumption was that green firms should generate positive abnormal returns as a
result of the announcements. When performing the analysis across the whole EU, results
indicate that this holds true for sustainable firms. However, when replicating the analysis for
individual EU countries included in the original dataset, the results are less significant with
great differences between the countries. In addition, an analysis was conducted with a dataset
including only polluting firms. The results indicate that these firms reacted negatively to the
taxonomy announcements. The results are consistent with previous event studies analysing
regulatory sustainability announcements. To summarize, our results suggest that investors
acknowledge the EU Taxonomy despite it being in an early implementation stage, but as
significance varies, further analysis is needed to reach a conclusion.

Keywords
       EU Taxonomy, share price, European stock market, market impact, event study

Authors
        Emma Axelsson (24797), Sofia Blomström (24799)

Tutor
       Christian Thomann, Researcher at the Swedish House of Finance and KTH Royal
       Institute of Technology, Senior advisor at the Ministry of Finance

Examiner
       Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Acknowledgments
We would like to direct our warmest gratitude to our tutor Christian Thomann for valuable
feedback and support.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor's Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Emma Axelsson and Sofia Blomström, 2022

                                                                          2
Introduction

In relation to the Paris agreement, the European Union has set a goal of becoming climate-
neutral and generating net-zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. This target requires all
civilians, investors, corporates, and governments to actively pursue activities that are
emission neutral or net positive. As a result, corporate sustainability efforts have been an
increasingly important factor to consider in valuation processes, and investors interpret
superior firm sustainability rankings with lower corporate risk and higher returns (Hartzmark
and Sussman, 2019). However, to perform a traditional risk-return analysis, investors need to
be able to assess the sustainability commitment of all firms. This includes interpreting CEO
sustainability statements, clean versus polluting corporate activities, and thoroughly being
able to review sustainability reports. To facilitate this process and enable a successful
comparison of companies' sustainability achievements, firms need to report in a comparable
format, both in terms of reporting structure and activities’ classification. There have been
various types of sustainability metric initiatives and reporting standards with the purpose of
identifying what is considered green. Several companies have used a mix of these,
aggravating the sustainability benchmarking process (Drempetic, Klein, and Zwergel, 2019).
The varied reporting formats and lack of a uniform sustainability definition slow down the
flow of capital towards green investments, and there is an urgent need for a homogenous
sustainability classification of economic activities (European Commission, 2019).

To address this issue, the European Commission has created the first standardized framework
for sustainable economic activities, called the EU Taxonomy. By presenting rules and
definitions that determine what economic activities are considered sustainable, this tool aims
to facilitate the classification of such activities (SP Global, 2022). As a result, the taxonomy
helps market participants to identify and compare environmentally sustainable investments
(Regeringen, 2022). However, with numerous sustainability reporting frameworks already in
place, for example GRI framework and the GHG/Kyoto protocol, the question is how
investors will react to the news of yet another reporting standard (Drempetic et al., 2019).
This derives the aim of this study.

This study aims to investigate how sustainable companies react to announcements related to
the development and implementation of the EU Taxonomy. Specifically, the study aims to
answer the following research question:

 Q: Do announcements regarding the EU Taxonomy framework generate abnormal returns
                  for sustainable companies within the European Union?

This study provides insightful discussions as, on one hand, one can assume that sustainable
firms will benefit from green policies and therefore generate positive abnormal returns. On
the other hand, the new regulation might cause stress for these firms since the taxonomy
requires additional disclosure and intensified corporate sustainability efforts. Despite the
firms potentially benefiting from increased transparency, it can be time- and energy
consuming to implement the legislative requirements into the business and its reporting. The

                                                                          3
trade-off between the increased reporting efforts and the potential benefits from being able to
transparently reflect firms’ superior sustainability performance raises questions. The
ambiguity regarding how companies should react is also elaborated on in previous research,
where the derived results have been mixed. Ramiah, Martin, and Moosa (2013) found results
indicating that certain polluting industries reacted positively to news regarding green policies,
while a few green industries reacted negatively. Hamilton (1995) on the other hand, showed
that news about environmental regulations lead to positive abnormal returns for firms with
high environmental standards and negative abnormal returns for other companies. The mixed
results suggest that additional analysis is needed to further understand how firms react to
sustainability announcements. This study builds on previous analysis, aiming to provide new
insights in this field.

The study was conducted through an event study, a methodology widely used in research
reports aiming to analyse abnormal returns of financial securities as a result of unexpected
events (Armitage, 1995). In detail, this study analysed a selected set of sustainable companies
in Europe by examining share price performance surrounding the dates of interest. Three
dates were chosen, all of them representing public announcements that convey important
information regarding either the development or the implementation of the EU Taxonomy.
According to the efficient market hypothesis, developed by Fama in 1970, this new
information should be accounted for immediately in the share prices. The market model was
used to calculate firms´ expected returns and by subtracting this from the retrieved actual
returns, abnormal returns were derived. To test whether abnormal returns occurred during the
event window, both parametric and non-parametric significance tests were conducted.

Our findings show that positive abnormal returns exist during the event window analysed for
the three dates. This indicates that the green companies reacted positively to the EU
Taxonomy announcements. The results show that the date 28 February 2022 had the largest
positive impact on market performance, whereas the other two dates exhibited weaker results,
including some negative firm reactions. This is consistent with Ramiah et al. (2013), who
observed both positive and negative abnormal returns for green industries to green policy
announcements. To further deepen the analysis, polluting firms within the oil- and gas
industry were examined. The results from this analysis were not significant for the event
window chosen in this study. However, when looking at other event windows. one could
observe significant negative market reactions to the announcements.

Our findings are important for several reasons. First, this study shows that a governmental
regulation still under development can cause significant market reactions. Second, by
examining a more recent time horizon than previous studies, this study considers society’s
current view on regulatory sustainability matters. In addition, as the EU Taxonomy is still
under development, this study may facilitate future studies focusing on, for example,
taxonomy implementations and reactions to the EU Taxonomy in its entirety.

                                                                          4
The EU Taxonomy

The aim of this chapter is to provide the reader with sufficient information and background of
the EU Taxonomy to be able to follow the logic behind the study’s purpose and reasoning
throughout the report.

Background

In December 2015 at the Paris climate conference, the first-ever legally binding global
climate change agreement was adopted, commonly known as the Paris Agreement. The
agreement is a global framework that aims to mitigate the increase in global average
temperature to below two degrees Celsius. The agreement became one of the driving forces
toward the development of other sustainability frameworks and regulations. To reach the
targets set up in the Paris Agreement, various objectives concerning emission reduction were
decided on. Despite these efforts, global greenhouse emissions have continued to increase
(TEG, 2020). This is one of the reasons why the EU Commission deemed it necessary to
create a revised and more ambitious strategy to address climate change. This ambition has
resulted in what is now commonly known as the EU Taxonomy, a framework with the aim to
promote sustainable investments (European Commission, 2022).

EU Taxonomy in practice

According to the EU Taxonomy, firms are from the year 2022 obliged to disclose their share
of taxonomy-aligned activities in a percentage figure. As this is reported in a standardized
format, the taxonomy makes it possible to compare companies and investment portfolios with
regard to their sustainability achievements. This leads to investors being able to make more
informed decisions, which facilitates investments in companies with a large proportion of
sustainable activities. As a result, the EU Taxonomy will function like a transparency tool,
aiming to reorient capital flows towards a more sustainable economy.

Taxonomy-aligned activities refer to economic activities that have been defined as
sustainable according to the Taxonomy Regulation by meeting the following four conditions:

    1. Contribute substantially to at least one of six environmental objectives listed in
      Taxonomy
    2. Do no significant harm to any of the other objectives
    3. Complying with minimum social and governance safeguards
    4. Complying with the technical screening criteria

The technical screening criteria specifies the requirements that need to be fulfilled for an
activity to make a substantial contribution and do no significant harm. Together, these
criteria ensure that the objectives in the EU Taxonomy are coherent, and that the progress
towards one objective is not made at the expense of another.

                                                                          5
The six environmental objectives listed in the Taxonomy are the following:
    1. Climate change mitigation
    2. Climate change adaptation
    3. Sustainable use and protection of water and marine resources
    4. Transition to a circular economy
    5. Pollution prevention and control, and
    6. Protection and restoration of biodiversity and ecosystems

There are three groups that must adopt the taxonomy and these groups are defined as follows:
    1. Financial market participants offering financial products in the EU, including
       occupational pension providers
    2. Large companies (over 500 employees) who are already required to provide a non-
        financial statement under the Non-Financial Reporting Directive (NFRD); and
    3. The EU and the Member States, when setting public measures, standards, or labels for
       green financial products or green (corporate) bonds (TEG, 2020).

In practice, the companies affected by the taxonomy must disclose the share of total turnover
and CAPEX (OPEX if relevant), that can be considered sustainable in accordance with the
six environmental objectives. The uniform reporting framework structure makes the
taxonomy the first-ever common measurement tool. By reporting sustainable activities as a
percentage figure of turnover, it provides investors with an understanding of the company’s
green efforts and its alignment with the taxonomy as of today. CAPEX, on the other hand,
shows the direction in which a company is headed, as the investment activities are usually
long-term commitments. This allows investors to assess the reliability of the firm's strategy
and to determine if the strategy coincides with the one of the investors (TEG, 2020). The
disclosure of these proportions of turnover and CAPEX aligned with the Taxonomy should
form part of the non-financial statement and may be presented in the annual report or an
explicit sustainability report (TEG, 2020).

The first two of the six objectives were mandatory to disclose in January 2022, and the
remaining four objectives will become mandatory to disclose in January 2023 (European
Commission, 2022).

Literature Review

This section describes previous research related to this study, including previous event studies
conducted on environmental regulatory announcements. The aim of this section is to motivate what
gap our study fills in the existing literature, as well as providing context to our study.

Previous studies have examined the impact of regulatory sustainability announcements on
listed firms, with mixed results.

                                                                          6
Klassen and McLaughlin (1996), Hamilton (1995), and White (1995) have all conducted
event studies examining environmental regulations. They showed that news about
environmental regulations lead to positive abnormal returns for firms with a high
environmental standard and negative abnormal returns for companies with a lower
environmental standard.

Rogova and Aprelkova (2020), examined the impact of sustainability-related IPCC
(Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) announcements on U.S. public companies by
conducting an event study. Their results indicated that abnormal returns were generated as an
effect of the announcements, but that this was valid for both green and polluting industries.

Guo, Kuai, and Liu (2020) performed an event study, over the period 2014-2017, examining
how announcements of newly released environmental regulations in China affected the stock
performance of the companies affected by the policy. Their result proved that heavily
polluting firms´ stock returns were affected negatively by the announcements of new
environmental policies. This was confirmed by Ramiah et al. (2013), who utilized an event
study methodology to analyse how firms listed on the Australian stock exchange reacted to
the announcement of green policies. The study proposed that polluting industries would
experience negative abnormal returns and that the opposite would occur for environmentally
friendly firms. However, the study found that some polluting industries reacted positively,
and some green industries reacted negatively, in other words, the results were mixed and
inconsistent with their hypothesis. The study concluded that this could be a result of the
environmental regulations being inefficient.

All the studies mentioned above show that there have been previous efforts within the field of
regulatory sustainability announcements and market reactions. However, the results have
been mixed and consensus has not been reached. Given the theoretical and empirical
ambiguity regarding environmental regulations and stock returns, more research is required.
This study will contribute to the existing literature by offering some new perspectives on the
topic. First, the environmental regulation being examined is an extensive framework as it
affects many countries in Europe. This study includes many of these nations. This broadens
our scope compared to previous literature, as this is one of the few cross-country analyses
conducted in the field, and specifically unique in examining developed EU-member
countries. Second, the EU taxonomy is still under development, with the natural follow-effect
that research is very scarce regarding the topic. In other words, this study can contribute to
starting to fill this gap in the existing literature. As a final note, this study differs from most
of the previous studies by looking at a more recent time horizon, 2021-2022. There is a great
probability that both attitudes and actions have changed regarding sustainability topics during
recent years.

                                                                          7
Theory

In this section, various theoretical concepts within the fields of finance and economic theory
are presented. The aim is that by including these short chapters, the reader will get a basic
knowledge of the most important concepts that will be touched upon later in the discussion
and analysis.

Greenwashing

The increasing focus on sustainability has been followed by the phenomenon of
greenwashing, a term coined by Jay Westerveld in 1986. The phenomenon refers to the
combination of positive communication concerning environmental performance and poor
actual environmental performance (Delmas and Burbano, 2011). Mitigation of greenwashing
is one of the aims of the EU Taxonomy since a common reporting standard impedes firms
from communicating misleading information regarding their sustainability efforts (European
Commission, 2022).

Sustainability and Firm Performance

According to Hahn and Figge (2011), sustainability is defined as “meeting our needs today
without compromising future generations’ ability to meet theirs”. Corporate sustainability
concerns the need for companies to not only focus on short-term financial performance but to
also implement a long-term strategy emphasizing future sustainable development. Corporate
sustainability has gained a lot of attention in recent years, as market participants have become
more aware of the current environmental challenges. Furthermore, markets have become
increasingly competitive and, to stay ahead of the competition, sustainability has almost
become a must rather than a choice (Alshehhi, Nobanee, and Khare, 2018).

The issue that researchers fail to agree on is how sustainability impacts corporate financial
performance. Various researchers have tried to answer this question, and the two most
famous competing theories are the value-creation theory and the value-destroying theory. The
value-creation theory implies that when a firm integrates sustainable responsibilities, it
reduces the firm risk. Evidence exists that markets praise companies who are classified as
having superior sustainability performance on the back that green operations are assumed to
decrease risk and generate higher returns (see e.g., Statman (2006) or Gallego-Álvarez,
Segura and Martínez-Ferrero, (2015)). The value-destroying theory, on the other hand,
theorizes that further focus on environmental and social responsibility leads to companies
focusing less on profitability. Another theory that supports the value-destroying view is the
trade-off theory which suggests that resources allocated towards sustainable activities imply
less resources allocated towards profitable activities. This causes a negative relationship
between sustainable activities and financial performance (Endrikat, Guenther, and Hoppe,
2014).

                                                                          8
Other theories that support the value-creation view are the stakeholder theory and the
resource-based view theory. According to the stakeholder theory, meeting stakeholders'
demands regarding both environmental and social aspects increases financial performance
(Russo and Foutsm, 1997). The resource-based view suggests that by incorporating
sustainability, companies may gain competitive advantages that contribute to increased
financial performance (Russo and Foutsm, 1997).

Some studies have found a negative relationship between environmentally unfriendly
behaviours by companies and market performance (see e.g., Hamilton (1995) or Capelle-
Blancard and Laguna (2010)). This is consistent with other studies showing a positive
relationship between environmental protection behaviours and market performance (Nehrt,
1996).

The Impact of Sustainability Regulations on Firm Performance

According to the traditional view which originates from neoclassical economics,
governmental regulations have a negative impact on firm performances. Even though the
regulations might be beneficial from a societal or environmental perspective, it is argued that
they damage businesses from an economic point-of-view (Ramanathan, He, Black,
Ghobadian, and Gallear, 2017). More recent research agrees that some regulations may
impact firms negatively. However, if the regulations are designed and executed properly, they
can have a positive impact on firm performance and enhance competitiveness. By introducing
regulations that put pressure on companies, further innovations in the field may be motivated.

Porter and Van der Linde (1995) argue that companies spend too much money fighting new
regulations when instead, that money and time could be spent on enhancing the business.
More focus on legal disputes than corporate development may decrease competitiveness,
especially if other firms accept the regulatory change and focus their efforts on continuing to
innovate (Porter and Van der Linde, 1995). Furthermore, the Porter hypothesis, also called
the win-win scenario, suggests that efficient environmental regulations can increase social
welfare as well as firm performance (Porter, 1991).

The Efficient Market Hypothesis

According to the efficient market hypothesis (EMH), the price of an asset should reflect all
available information. If the financial market is efficient, which the EMH assumes, newly
available information will immediately be fully reflected in asset prices. Furthermore, this
implies that changes in asset prices will occur randomly. If one cannot foresee when new
information becomes available, the corresponding changes in asset prices will also be
impossible to predict. In other words, the efficient market theory is closely related to the
Random Walk Theory which states that future price changes are random and independent of
previous prices (Burton, 2003).

                                                                          9
There are some studies supporting the EMH. Burton (2005) showed that professional
investment managers could not outperform their massive index funds. In other words, the
study proved that market prices are rational, unpredictable, and seem to reflect all available
information. Another example is the study conducted by Allen, Brealey, and Myers (2011)
which showed that today´s stock return will not influence tomorrow´s stock return and
therefore confirms return independence which is an underlying assumption of the EMH.

However, there are some researchers that have found instances where the efficient market
hypothesis fails to hold. Some studies argue that asset prices tend to overreact to certain
events and new information. According to DeBondt and Thaler (1995), all market
participants, including investors, experience feelings of optimism and pessimism. As a result,
asset prices might deviate from their actual values and the market is not efficient as assumed
in the efficient market hypothesis. This overreaction is supported by Eakins and Mishkin
(2012) who argue that this overreaction is especially prominent in the announcements of
unexpectedly bad news. According to Battalio and Mendenhall (2005), the market also tends
to under-react which their study proved by showing how financial announcements often were
underestimated by investors. Some criticism of the EMH originates from behavioural finance
and regards the irrationality of market participants and the inability to make a correct
judgment. One example is Shiller (2000) who observed herd behaviour among market
participants. Another example is the study by Battalio and Mendenhall (2005) who argue that
due to accumulated loss, investors do not sustain a short position in mispriced assets, causing
asset bubbles.

Behavioural Finance

One of the main underlying assumptions of the efficient market hypothesis, as described
above, is that all market participants act rationally. There have been studies both confirming
and opposing this assumption, but the issue becomes particularly important to discuss in this
study with regard to the recent crisis. The covid-19 pandemic was present during most of the
estimation periods used in this study and began to subside only in the beginning of 2022. The
last date chosen in this study might not be impacted by the pandemic but instead took place
during the first phase of the ongoing war in Ukraine. Hence, it is reasonable to state that the
market reactions examined in this study have taken place in times of crisis, which needs to be
considered. In times of crisis, the uncertainty is viewed as a risk that the market needs to react
to. This uncertainty, combined with scarce information and loss of control, impacts the
investment decisions of market participants. The decisions become more short-sighted as
urgent psychological needs are being prioritized above long-term needs (Markman, 2020).
For example, evidence shows that risk aversion increased during the covid-19 pandemic
(Mussio, Andrés, and Kidwai, 2022).

Event Study Analysis

The event study methodology is an increasingly used concept and is today considered to be
the standard approach when evaluating stock price effects across a variety of events (Binder,

                                                                         10
1998). Within the field of finance and accounting, the methodology is applied to numerous
happenings, such as M&A announcements, stock splits, debt issuance, and earnings
announcements. The purpose of the methodology has mainly been twofold. The first purpose
has been to test if the market is efficient in its incorporation of information (Fama, 1991). The
second purpose, under the assumption that the market is efficient, has been to evaluate the
effect on the market capitalization of a firm (Binder, 1998). The abnormal returns are
measured over an event window that should stretch over the entire period where one could
expect a reaction in stock price for a given event that is previously unknown to the market.
This could for example be the release of new information that could be expected to impact a
firm in a certain way. One common example is M&A announcements, where unexpected
acquisitions most often generate large market reactions (Lamdin, 2001). The event study
methodology is recognized as a particularly powerful tool when there is no uncertainty
regarding what date the market altered its expectations. In other words, if one can clearly
define the date when the news reached the market, this enables a more precise analysis
(Campbell, Lo and MacKinlay, 1997).

Event studies do not consider scenarios where information is leaked to the public prior to the
event date (McWilliams and Siegel, 1997). However, for regulatory events, the event might
already be anticipated by the market to some extent (Kothari and Warner, 2007). For this
reason, event studies on regulatory announcements differ from other studies with one well-
defined announcement such as stock splits or earnings announcements.
Upcoming regulations have most likely been debated during a longer time horizon prior to
their implementation. It is also possible that the implementation process occurs gradually.
This is the case for the EU Taxonomy, which in turn would also increase predictability
(McWilliams and Siegel, 1997).

Furthermore, the event study methodology disregards the fact that there may be confounding
effects taking place during the chosen event window. For example, if an event window
stretches over a longer time horizon, there may be clustering effects as more than one event
occurs and cause abnormal returns during the examined period (Campbell et al. 1997). There
exist further potential issues around the length of the event window. For example,
announcements may cause market reactions spread over more than one event day. In other
words, there may be ambiguity about whether the market recognizes all the new information
during trading hours on the chosen event day or if the reaction spreads over several days. To
solve this problem, it may be appropriate to not only examine abnormal returns for the
announcement day, but for the following day as well (Campbell et al. 1997).

                                                                         11
Methodology

This section provides a description of the methodology used in this study. The methodology is
inspired by the steps presented by Campbell et al. (1997). Thereafter, the hypotheses are
presented as well as a description of the statistical tests used.

Event Definition

The first step of the event study is to define the events to be examined. There are various
events to consider, as the EU Taxonomy has been successively developed and gradually
released. As such, there are numerous dates that are important for the process.

Three different dates were chosen which were all believed to have an impact on the
companies examined in this study. These represent dates when new information regarding the
EU Taxonomy became public, for example through report releases. The reason why the
announcement dates have been chosen rather than the actual implementation dates is because
the market is expected to react when new information becomes available, as per the EMH.
This is further strengthened by Wang, Delgado, Khanna, and Bogan (2019). They showed
that the stock market is more sensitive to announcements conveying information about the
planning of an activity rather than the actual implementation of the activity.

21 April 2021
The first date chosen is 21 April 2021. This marks the date when the College of
Commissioners reached a political agreement on the text of the Delegated Act, which
clarifies the economic activities that contribute to meeting the European Union's
environmental objectives (European Commission, 2021). Even if the act was formally
adopted on 4 June 2021, the announcement that the act had been approved was expected to
have a larger impact on share price than the formal adoption.

9 December 2021
The second date, 9 December 2021, marks the date when the EU Taxonomy was approved.
On this date, the Delegated Act on Climate Mitigation and Climate Adaptation approved the
final steps of the regulatory implementation and accepted that the EU Taxonomy would
become mandatory as of 1 January 2022. This announcement confirmed to market
participants that large corporations (>500 employees) would now have to report their
taxonomy alignment in their annual reports for the fiscal year 2021 (European Commission,
2022).

28 February 2022
28 February 2022 represents the release date for the social taxonomy report, published by the
platform on Sustainable Finance. This report includes objectives such as decent work,
adequate living standards and inclusive and sustainable communities (CSR Europe, 2022).
The reason why announcements on the social taxonomy would affect green companies in
particular is because the social taxonomy does not only aim to respect human rights and

                                                                         12
improve working conditions. Its objective is also to ensure that when companies move
towards greener operations, it is not done at the expense of workers and communities.
Therefore, the release of this taxonomy is relevant to consider for green firms (Havard-
Williams, Barret, Naeem, Bernard, Ballegeer and Winter, 2022).

Company Selection Criteria

The second step involves deciding the selection criteria for the firms included in the different
analyses.

EU-wide Analysis
The starting point in the company selection process was the screening tool provided by
Capital IQ. Three screening criteria were used: Company type, Geographic location, and
Industry classification. Company type was set to only include public firms. The geographic
location was set to European Union member countries, since these are the countries affected
by the EU Taxonomy. These countries were narrowed down to only include developed
countries. The reason for this was to increase comparability of the dataset, as operations of
companies within similar industries may vary depending on the company operating in a
developed or emerging market. After removing some countries due to insufficient data, we
were left with 15 countries (Appendix A1). Norway, despite not being officially affected by
the EU Taxonomy, has been included in the dataset. This is because Norway is usually an
adopter of EU regulations, and the assumption has been made that this is the case for the EU
Taxonomy as well (UK Parliament, 2013). Regarding industry classification, only clearly
environmentally friendly sectors were looked at, such as renewable electricity and
environmental services. This resulted in a dataset consisting of 88 companies.

Country-specific Analysis
Even if all countries analysed in the study above are classified as developed countries, there
may still exist great differences between the different countries regarding for example culture
and governance. Therefore, a few country-specific analyses will be conducted to investigate
these potential differences. The individual countries for these analyses have been screened
based on their EPI results for 2020, which provides information regarding the countries´
environmental performances. We started top-down, choosing countries that met the following
two requirements: 1) Being part of the EU, and 2) having a sufficient number of companies
for the analysis (≥ 10). The countries chosen were Sweden (15 companies), Germany (16
companies), and Spain (10 companies), shown in Appendix A2-A4. The country-specific
analysis can be considered as a robustness test for the analysis described above since the
same dataset is used, but this time tested in smaller parts. There exist gaps in the countries'
EPI score ranking, with Sweden at #8 Germany at #10, and Spain at #14 (Yale, 2020).
Therefore, the country-specific analyses will also provide an interesting addition as they test
whether national sustainability performance causes differences in firm reactions to the EU
Taxonomy.

                                                                         13
Polluting companies
Lastly, for further insights, an analysis has been conducted on the companies on the other
side of the spectrum, the polluting firms. The selection process for these companies was also
based on the screening tool in Capital IQ. The criteria company type and geographical
location used were the same as for the previous analyses but instead of choosing green
industries, industries related to oil and gas were chosen. Just as before, only developed
countries in the EU were included and after removing some countries due to insufficient data,
14 countries remained, listed in Appendix A5. The dataset consists of 44 companies.

Event Window

When deciding on the appropriate event window, there are many things to consider and one
technical requirement; the actual abnormal returns should be captured in the chosen event
window (Sethi and Krishnakumar, 2010). With that being the only technical requirement,
there is no clear consensus on how the event window should be defined, and therefore, event
windows often vary in length. Binder (1998) provides examples of studies with event periods
covering several months. Campbell et al. (1997), on the other hand, describes that for
announcements with daily data, an event window of the event date plus an additional day post
the event day is sufficient. Shleifer (2000) argues that changes in stock price can occur before
the actual announcements due to market anticipation or information leaks, and therefore
argues to include one day prior to the event day in the event window.

There are some potential advantages to having a shorter event window. For example, it
reduces the risk of having other events occurring within the event window, also affecting
share prices (Konchitchki and O’Leary, 2011). Furthermore, a shorter event window may
increase the statistical precision of the calculated abnormal returns (Andrade, Mitchell, and
Stafford, 2001). Lastly, a shorter event window can make it easier to identify abnormal
returns (Armitage, 1995).

For the purpose of this study, the event window has been defined as three days surrounding
the event day. The event window constitutes three days prior to the event (𝜏 = −3), the event
day (𝜏 = 0), and three days after the event (𝜏 = +3), yielding a total event window of seven
days. The reason why the event window is defined as (-3, +3) is due to the characteristics of
the announcement. Upcoming regulatory changes are usually partly known to the public prior
to their release date. However, by including too many days, the risk of confounding events
increases. Therefore, we have chosen an event window between Binder (1998), Shleifer
(2000) and Campbell et al. (1997), corresponding to one week. This allows us to prevent
event conflicts while still being able to examine behaviours surrounding the event date
(MacKinlay, 1997).

                                                                         14
Market Return

When conducting the EU-wide analysis of green companies and the analysis of polluting
companies, the MSCI Europe index has been used as a market benchmark. This index
represents large and mid-cap companies across 15 developed countries in Europe (MSCI,
2022).

The country-specific analysis has been conducted using country-specific indices. For the
Swedish analysis, the OMX30 index was used. This index comprises the 30 largest Swedish
companies, measured by market capitalization (Nasdaq, 2022). For the analysis of German
companies, the FTSE Germany index was used. This is also a market capitalization-weighted
index, and it comprises all German stocks, including small, medium, and large-cap (FTSE
Publications, 2022). Finally, the MSCI Spain index was used to measure market returns for
the Spanish market. The index measures mid-and large-cap companies in Spain and covers
approximately 85% of the Spanish equity markets (MSCI, 2022).

Normal and Abnormal Returns

According to Campbell et al. (1997), the abnormal return is defined as the actual return minus
the normal return over the event window. The normal return is the return that one would
expect during that period in absence of the event in question.
Denoting the event date 𝜏, and each firm i, the following equation can be derived:

                                   𝐴𝑅𝑖𝜏 = 𝑅𝑖𝜏- E(𝑅𝑖𝜏 | 𝑋𝑖𝜏) (Eq. 1)

where 𝐴𝑅𝑖𝑡 is the abnormal return, 𝑅𝑖𝑡 is the actual return and E(𝑅𝑖𝜏 ) is the normal return for
the time period t. 𝑋𝑖𝜏 constitutes the constraints in the model of normal performance. The
actual returns can be empirically observed but the normal (expected) return must be
estimated. The normal return can be estimated in different ways, with the two most common
models being the market model and the constant-mean-return model. The market model
posits that the market return and the security return have a steady linear relationship and, in
that model, 𝑋𝑖𝜏 is the market return. The constant-mean-return model assumes that a
security's mean return remains constant throughout time and therefore, 𝑋𝑖𝜏 is a constant in
that model.

In this study, the market model has been applied which builds on the correlation of the firm's
return with the return of the market portfolio. By using this model, the firm's individual
CAPM risk is considered by multiplying the firm individual 𝛽 factor by the market return.
Hence, the following formula is derived:

                              E(𝑅𝑖𝜏 ) = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽𝑖𝑅𝑚𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡 (Eq. 2)

                                          E(𝜀𝑖𝑡) = 0 (Eq. 3)

                                                                         15
                                                 2
                                             Var (𝜀𝑖𝑡) = 𝜎𝜀𝑖                                          (Eq. 4)

Where E(𝑅𝑖𝜏 ) is the expected return of security i on day t. 𝑅𝑚𝑡 is the return of the market
portfolio on date t which is also the reference market. For the market portfolio, the index used
is adapted per market, as described above. 𝜀𝑖𝑡 is the zero mean disturbance term and is
expected to be zero and with finite variance. The parameters of the market model are 𝛼𝑖, 𝛽𝑖
      2
and 𝜎𝜀𝑖. 𝛽𝑖 is the regression coefficient and measures the sensitivity of 𝑅𝑖𝜏 on the market
portfolio.

Below is an extract from using the rangestat (reg) function in STATA for the EU-wide
dataset. A regression line is assembled using b_cons, b_market_return, and market_return.
By using this equation for every data point, expected returns (𝐸(𝑅𝑖𝜏 )) can be computed
throughout the estimation window.

                          Regression extract from Europe-wide analysis

                                            Table 1

By using the market model described above, the formula for the abnormal return can be
derived as follows:

                                   𝐴𝑅𝑖𝜏 = 𝑅𝑖𝜏 − 𝐸(𝑅𝑖𝜏 ) (Eq. 5)

Estimation Period

In order to estimate the expected return E(𝑅𝑖𝜏 ) of the portfolio’s stocks, normal returns are
registered during a defined estimation period. Campbell et al. (1997) suggest using a period
prior to the event. The estimation period is determined to begin approximately one month
before the event day, denoted 𝜏 = −23, and end at 𝜏 = −142, representing an estimation
period of 120 trading days (-142, -23). The event window is not included in the estimation
period to avoid the event impacting the calculation of normal performance.
The period (-23, -3) has also been excluded from the estimation period, constituting a safety
margin to the event window. By including this safety margin, potential information leakages
regarding the event are excluded, that could otherwise impact normal returns.

                                                                         16
                   Timeline for estimation period and event window

                                       Figure 1

Hypothesis

Based on the previous literature and theories, our assumption is that green companies will
react positively to announcements regarding the EU Taxonomy. The positive reaction is
measured as the existence of positive abnormal returns. Based on the same reasoning, it is
likely to assume that non-green companies will react negatively to these announcements and
experience negative abnormal returns. Therefore, the study will examine whether the
cumulative average abnormal returns (CAARs) are statistically different from zero. From
this, a more qualitative reasoning around a positive or negative mean CAAR is conducted.

The null hypothesis and the alternative hypothesis are described as:

H0: CAAR = 0
H1: CAAR ≠ 0

Testing Procedure

In total, five analyses will be conducted, all using the same testing procedure. The dataset for
the EU-wide analysis consists of 88 companies and since there are three events being
examined, this results in 264 observations (88*3). The Swedish dataset consists of 15
companies and a total of 45 observations (15*3). The German dataset consists of 16
companies and a total of 48 observations (16*3). The Spanish dataset consists of 10
companies and a total of 30 observations (10*3). The dataset for polluting companies consists
of 44 companies and a total of 132 observations (44*3).

Using the market model and the software STATA, the abnormal return is calculated for each
of the days within the event window for our selected companies and events. The abnormal
return over the event window is interpreted as a measure of the impact on the firm's return
from the event and is defined previously in the study (Eq.5).

If 𝐴𝑅𝑖𝜏 > 0, the event has a positive impact on firms’ share prices on the specific day analyzed
If 𝐴𝑅𝑖𝜏 = 0, the event has no impact on firms’ share prices on the specific day analyzed

                                                                         17
If 𝐴𝑅𝑖𝜏 < 0, the event has a negative impact on firms’ share prices on the specific day
analysed

First, the average abnormal return (AAR) is calculated, representing the mean of the cross-
sectional average abnormal return at the time period 𝜏 (Eq. 6). The AAR conveys information
about the impact on all the firms combined at a specific date t. Thereafter, the AAR is tested
for significance. An average abnormal return that differs significantly from zero implies that
the companies react to the examined events.

                                              1   𝑁
                                 𝐴𝐴𝑅 =   ∑𝑖=1 𝐴𝑅𝑖,𝜏 (Eq. 6)
                                             𝑁

According to Mackinley (1997), it is important to aggregate the abnormal returns since tests
with single events are less useful when drawing overall inferences. Thus, the individual
abnormal returns are summed up, generating cumulative abnormal returns. This measures an
event´s total impact over the event window. The equation is as follows:

                                                               𝑡2
                                   𝐶𝐴𝑅(𝑡1,𝑡2) = ∑𝑡=𝑡1 𝐴𝑅𝑖,𝜏 (Eq. 7)

where t1 and t2 are defined as days within the event window.

The cumulative average abnormal return (CAAR) can be calculated by either deriving the
average of the cumulative abnormal returns (Eq. 8) or by summing up average abnormal
return (Eq. 9).
                                                 1   𝑁
                                𝐶𝐴𝐴𝑅 =   ∑𝑖=1 𝐶𝐴𝑅𝑖 (Eq. 8)
                                                 𝑁

                                                              𝑡2
                               𝐶𝐴𝐴𝑅 = ∑𝑡=𝑡1 𝐴𝐴𝑅𝜏 (Eq. 9)

There are various significance tests being covered in the literature on event-study hypotheses
testing. There are two common classifications of these tests, namely parametric and non-
parametric tests. The difference between them is that the abnormal returns of the individual
firm are assumed to be normally distributed according to parametric tests (Eventstudytools,
2022). According to Corrado (1989) and Corrado and Truong (2008), abnormal returns are
likely to show a positive skewness and high kurtosis which contradicts the assumption of
them being normally distributed. Because of this, the parametric t-statistics may be biased,
which is why in this study a non-parametric rank test will be carried through to complement
the parametric t-test. More specifically, the Wilcoxon signed-rank test, developed by
Wilcoxon in 1945, will be conducted which considers both the sign and the magnitude of the
abnormal returns (Eventstudytools, 2022).

To test if the abnormal returns are statistically significant, a one-sample t-test has been
conducted. The t-test assumes independent data points and that the data follows an

                                                                         18
approximate normal distribution. It is under these assumptions that STATA calculates the t-
statistic and its p-value.

According to the decision rule, the null hypothesis H0: CAAR = 0 can be rejected if |𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜| >
𝑡𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙 or if the p-value < 0.05. Since the test is being conducted at a 5% significance level,
𝑡𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙 equals 1.960. Followingly, H0 is rejected if |𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜| > 1.960. If the null hypothesis
cannot be rejected at the 5% level, we examine if it may be rejected at the 10% level. This
occurs when the p-value < 0.1, with rejection of the null hypothesis if |𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜| > 1.645.

The |𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜| is calculated as follows:

                                                                                     𝐶𝐴𝑅
                                       |𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜| =                                           (Eq. 10)
                                                               𝑆𝐸(𝐶𝐴𝑅)

CAAR originates from Eq. 8 or Eq. 9. SE(CAAR) denotes the standard deviation.

Results

This section presents the empirical results of the study. First, the EU-wide analysis is
presented followed by the country-specific analyses, and lastly, the analysis of the polluting
firms is presented. Each analysis is followed by a summary of the most important takeaways.

EU-wide Analysis

                  Figure 2 Figure 3

Both Figures 2 and 3, plot the CAAR on the Y-axis and the days within the event window on
the X-axis (-3,3). The difference between the graphs is that Figure 2 shows the CAAR for all
three events aggregated while Figure 3 shows the CAAR for each event separately. As
presented in Figure 2, the CAAR becomes positive right before the event day and remains
positive throughout the event window. This indicates that the companies had a positive
reaction to the announcements related to the EU Taxonomy. Figure 3 shows that the CAAR

                                                                         19
was positive for the entire event window for the date 28 February 2022. The other two dates
show negative abnormal returns for the entire event window.

When conducting a t-test (Table 2), it is shown that the CAAR is separated from zero at a
10% significance level across all three events during the event window since the p-value is
0.064. Therefore, the null hypothesis: H0: CAAR = 0 can be rejected, but only at a 10% level.
Furthermore, as the abnormal returns are above zero, it supports our belief that the
sustainable firms were positively impacted by the announcements.

                                        Table 2

To deepen the analysis, various event windows have been analysed to see if the CAAR is
separated from zero at a higher confidence level for another event window. As shown in
Table 3, the event windows (-2,2), (-1,1), (-2,0), and (0,1) all generate a p-value lower than
0.05. This indicates the presence of significant positive abnormal returns during various event
windows on a 5% significance level. The longest event window (-5,5) does not illustrate any
significant abnormal returns.

                                        Table 3

The individual days have also been tested for the aggregated events, illustrated in Table 4.
For the days, -3, -2, -1, 0 (the event day), and 1, the AAR is separated from zero at a 5%
significance level. This indicates that the market had abnormal reactions these days.
Specifically, there are negative reactions the day prior to the event date, while positive
reactions during the event day and the first post-event day. This strengthens the belief that the
dataset with sustainable companies would react positively to EU Taxonomy announcements,
despite some fluctuation between positive and negative returns during the event window.

                                                                         20
                                        Table 4

To examine which event that may have caused the strongest market reactions, t-tests for all
three events separately have been conducted, presented below in Tables 6-8.

                                        Table 6

For 21 April 2021, the CAAR is significantly negative for the event windows (-3,0) and (-5,5) at a 5%
significance level with a p-value of 0.013 and 0.032, respectively.

                                        Table 7
The date 9 December 2021 exhibits significantly negative CAAR for the event windows (-3,3), (-5,5),
and (-3,0) at a 5% significance level.

                                         Table 8

                                                                         21
For 28 February 2022, the CAAR is positive and significant for all event windows at a 5%
significance level.

To further test the hypothesis, a Wilcoxon signed-rank test has been conducted for the
individual days for all three events aggregated (Appendix C1). However, this test did not
yield any significant results.

Summary
The CAAR for all events aggregated is significant at a 10% significance level for the event
window (-3,3) and significant at a 5% significance level for the event windows (-2,2), (-1,1),
(-2,0), and (0,1). As the abnormal returns are separated from zero, the null hypothesis can be
rejected. Furthermore, as the abnormal returns are above zero, our initial belief of green
companies reacting positively to the announcements of the EU Taxonomy is confirmed.

When looking at the events separately, the event on 28 February 2022 exhibits a highly
significant CAAR for all event windows examined, indicating that the companies reacted
particularly positively to the announcement that day. The event on 21 April 2021 exhibits
significantly negative CAAR for two of the event windows at a 5% significance level. The
event on 9 December 2021 exhibits significantly negative CAAR for three of the event
windows including (-3,3), also at a 5% level. To conclude, the companies have a significantly
positive reaction to the announcement on 28 February 2022 and a less significant negative
reaction to the announcements on the remaining two dates.

Analysis of Swedish Companies

                    Figure 4 Figure 5

As presented in Figure 4, the CAAR becomes positive on the event day (day 0) and remains
positive throughout the event window. This indicates that the market had a positive reaction
to the announcements related to the EU Taxonomy. Figure 5 shows all three events
separately. One can see that the CAAR for 21 April 2021 and 28 February 2022 become
positive right before the event day and remain positive throughout the event window. 9
December 2021 exhibits negative CAAR throughout the event window.

                                                                         22
When analysing various event windows in Table 9, one can see that no event window
generates significant abnormal returns.

                                        Table 9

Looking at the individual days for the aggregated events, as shown in Table 10, day -3
exhibits negative abnormal returns at a 5% significance level. No other day in the event
window is associated with significant abnormal returns.

                                       Table 10

The Wilcoxon signed-rank test showed no significant results (Appendix C2).

Similar to the EU-wide analysis, t-tests for each individual event have been performed
(Appendix B1). These analyses do not support or contradict the hypothesis as most of the
event windows analysed, including (-3,3) do not exhibit significant results.

Summary
The analysis of Swedish sustainable companies shows no significant result for any event
window examined. Furthermore, given that only one individual day exhibits abnormal returns
at a 5% significance level, no conclusions can be drawn.

                                                                         23
Analysis of German Companies

                    Figure 6 Figure 7

As presented in Figure 6, the CAAR becomes positive immediately before the event day and
remains positive throughout the event window. This indicates that the market had a positive
reaction to the announcements related to the EU Taxonomy. Figure 7 shows all three events
separately. One can see that the CAARs for 21 April 2021 and 9 December 2021 are negative
but the CAAR for 21 April 2021 becomes positive on day 2. The CAAR for 28 February
2022 is mainly positive throughout the event window.

Looking at various event windows in Table 12, one can see that event windows (-2,2), (-1,1),
and (0,1) generate a significant positive abnormal return at a 5% significance level. In other
words, there are some indications that the German companies react positively to the EU
Taxonomy announcements. However, no conclusions can be drawn for the event window
chosen in this study (-3,3).

                                       Table 12

Table 13 shows the individual days for the three events combined. One can see that the days -
1 and 0 exhibit abnormal returns at a 10% and a 5% significance level, respectively, where
day -1 is negative and day 0 is positive. However, no conclusion can be drawn regarding days
1-3.

                                                                         24
                                       Table 13

From the event-specific analyses in Appendix B2, one can observe significantly negative
CAAR for the event window (-3,3) on 9 December 2021 and significantly positive CAAR for
(-3,3) on 28 February 2022, both on a 5% significance level. On 28 February 2022, all event
windows examined exhibit significantly positive abnormal returns at a 5% level.

The non-parametric Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Appendix C3) confirms and strengthens the
result of the parametric test, as day -1 is negative and day 0 is positive on a 5% significance
level. Similar to the t-test, nothing can be concluded regarding days 1-3.

Summary
For the event windows (-2,2), (-1,1) and (0,1), abnormal returns were observed at a 5%
significance level. However, as (-3,3) did not show any significant abnormal returns, the null
hypothesis is not rejected for Germany. Furthermore, the observed abnormal returns were
positive which indicates that the German sustainable companies had a positive reaction to the
EU Taxonomy announcements during some event windows.

Looking at individual days, day -1 exhibits negative significant abnormal returns at a 10%
level, and event day 0 exhibits positive abnormal returns at a 5% level. This could indicate
that the German companies had some positive reactions during the event day. The result is
insightful as the event day is the only day in the event window showing significant positive
abnormal returns. The most significant result can be observed for 28 February 2022, where
all event windows, including (-3,3) exhibited significantly positive CAARs at a 5% level.

                                                                         25
Analysis of Spanish Companies

                   Figure 8 Figure 9

As presented in Figure 8, the CAAR is positive throughout the event window, but increased
abnormal returns can be identified for the event day and the two following days. This
indicates that the Spanish companies had a positive reaction to the EU Taxonomy
announcements. Figure 9 shows all three events separately. One can see that the CAAR for
28 February 2022 is positive throughout the event window and becomes increasingly positive
during the event day. The CAARs for 9 December 2021 and 21 April 2021 are negative
during the event window.

Looking at various event windows in Table 15, event windows (-2,2) and (0,1) illustrate
abnormal returns at a 5% significance level. Event windows (-1,1) and (-3,3) exhibit
abnormal returns at a 10% significance level. Since the abnormal returns are separated from
zero, the null hypothesis can be rejected for our chosen event window (-3,3) at a 10%
significance level. In addition, the abnormal returns are positive which aligns with our initial
assumption regarding green firms reacting positively to the announcements.

                                      Table 15

Table 16 shows the individual days for the aggregated events. One can see that the days -2
and 0 show positive abnormal returns at a 5% significance level and days -1 and 3 exhibit
negative abnormal returns on the same level. Day 1 shows positive abnormal returns at a 10%
significance level.

                                                                         26
                                       Table 16

The event-specific analyses show no significant results for the chosen event window (-3,3) on
21 April 2021 or 9 December 2021. However, 28 February 2022 exhibits significantly
positive abnormal returns for the chosen event window (-3,3) at a 5% level.

The Wilcoxon signed-rank test showed no significant results (Appendix C4).

Summary
When conducting the parametric test, most of the event windows examined showed
significant abnormal returns. The null hypothesis can be rejected at a 10% significance level,
as the p-value for (-3,3) equated 0.086. Additionally, the abnormal returns are positive. When
looking at individual days, there are also significant abnormal returns. These are, however,
inconsistent in type, with varying positive and negative returns. The event on 28 February
2022 exhibits the strongest and only result with significantly positive abnormal returns for the
event window (-3,3) at a 5% level.

Analysis of Polluting Companies

                   Figure 10 Figure 11

As Figure 10 shows, the oil and gas companies display a negative share price reaction to the
EU Taxonomy announcements. All three events show a negative trend prior to the event day

                                                                         27
(-1,0). However, 28 February 2022 exhibits a strong positive reaction immediately following
the event.

As Table 18 shows, the event window (-3,3) does not exhibit significant abnormal returns on
neither the 5% nor the 10% level. However, significant negative abnormal returns can be
identified for both the event windows (-1,1) and (-2,0) at a 5% level. For the longest event
window examined (-5,5), there are instead significant positive abnormal returns.

                                       Table 18

It can be concluded that there are significant negative abnormal returns for day -1 to day 0 on
the 5% level, as shown in Table 19. Day 1 does, however, show signs of a reverse trend, and
there are instead positive abnormal returns on the same significance level.

                                       Table 19

When observing the event-specific analyses in Appendix B4, one can observe that 21 April
2021 exhibits negative abnormal returns for all the event windows including (-3,3) at a 5%
significance level. 9 December 2021 exhibits negative abnormal returns for (-2,2), (-1,1) and
(0,1) at a 10% significance level. 28 February 2022 exhibits positive abnormal returns for the
majority of the event windows, including (-3,3), at a 5% significance level.
The Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Appendix C5) exhibits significantly negative abnormal
returns on the event date (Day 0).

                                                                         28
Summary
The polluting firms exhibit negative CAAR over event windows (-1,1) and (-2,0) at a 5%
significance level. These results are confirmed by the AAR t-test and the Wilcoxon signed-
rank test. However, no significant negative abnormal returns were found for the event
window (-3,3).

Discussion and Analysis

This section elaborates on the results and the implications, focusing on the parts relevant for
answering the research question presented in this study. The final part of the analysis
develops on the limitations of the study.

Interpreting the results of the EU-wide analysis, one can conclude two things. First, there are
significant CAAR’s across most of the event windows, including (-1,1), (-2,0), (-2,2), (0,1)
on the 5% level and (-3,3) on the 10% level. This constitutes a strong basis for rejecting the
null hypothesis H0: CAAR = 0. Furthermore, the abnormal returns are positive, which
confirm our belief that EU Taxonomy announcements are beneficial for green firms’ market
performance.

It is, however, important to elaborate on the inconsistencies in the results. When looking at
the individual days, the event date (day 0) displays positive abnormal returns at a 5% level
when performing the parametric test, but not when performing the non-parametric test.
Furthermore, when examining the parametric test for days -2 and -1, the abnormal returns
move from positive to negative. On day 0, the returns are significantly positive again. This
reduces the trustworthiness, as it is unclear why the EU Taxonomy announcements would
generate this abnormal return fluctuation. The abnormal returns are, however, more
significant for the event date (day 0) than day -2. One can also argue for the fact that the
positive reactions spill over from the event date to one day post the event, where abnormal
returns are also significantly positive. This strengthens our assumption that the firms would
react positively.

Further discussions arise as the Wilcoxon test shows significant abnormal returns for both
day -1 (negative) and day 1 (positive) on the 5% level, but no significant abnormal returns for
day 0. This raises questions about the robustness of our results and is therefore important to
consider.

Looking at the country-specific analyses, the common theme was varying levels of
consistency and substance, aggravating the rejection of the null hypothesis. This could
depend on a variety of factors. One example is the size of the datasets, as the country-specific
analyses used significantly smaller datasets than the EU-wide analysis. The expectation was
that the country-specific tests would generate similar results as the EU-wide analysis, which
was the case for Germany and Spain. Both Germany and Spain showed significant positive
CAARs for some analysed event windows, for example (-2,2) and (0,1) at a 5% level.

                                                                         29
However, for the chosen event window (-3,3), positive abnormal returns could be observed
only for Spain, and only at the 10% significance level. This raises the question of whether the
event window chosen was appropriate for a regulatory event like the EU Taxonomy, which
will be discussed later in this section. This is also the case for the analysis of the polluting
companies where the chosen event window (-3,3) did not exhibit significant abnormal
returns, but other event windows did; (-1,1) and (-2,0) showed significant negative abnormal
returns and (-5,5) showed significant positive abnormal returns at a 5% level.

Sweden did, surprisingly, lack significant abnormal returns across all event windows, despite
being one of the greenest countries with regards to their EPI score. This opens up for an
interesting discussion as one could assume that the greenest countries would be home to the
most sustainable firms. In turn, these companies would be expected to exhibit the strongest
positive reactions to the EU Taxonomy announcements. It could be that the belief is correct
in its essence. However, as all companies examined have been chosen based on their green
profile, regardless of what country they originate from, it might also be reasonable to assume
that the companies would react equally. In other words, the differences between the three
countries might not be a result of the countries having different EPI scores. A possible
explanation for the difference between Sweden and the rest of the countries could instead be
national media attention to the EU Taxonomy announcements. For example, if news
reporting frequency varied between countries, so would the awareness and reactions to the
EU Taxonomy.

A substantial part of the criticism directed towards the event study methodology regards the
main assumptions underlying the methodology.

The first assumption is the efficient market theory which states that share prices incorporate
all available information immediately when it is released. This theory in turn assumes rational
market participants. One can discuss whether market participants can be considered rational
in times of turbulence, which has been the market state during the events examined in this
study. The dates 21 April 2021 and 9 December 2021 took place during the covid-19
pandemic and the last date 28 February 2022 took place during the war in Ukraine. In other
words, all events examined have occurred in times of crisis. This can lead to market
participants not reacting and acting rationally which could explain the inconsistent results,
and in some cases, the lack of results.

The second underlying assumption of the event study methodology states that all events are
unpredictable and that all market participants, who have no previous information regarding
the event, take part of the information at the same time. Since the EU Taxonomy is such an
extensive framework that has been developed over a long period of time, there are many
articles and announcements related to it. The three dates examined in this study were chosen
because they represent important stages of the development of the EU Taxonomy. However,
due to the structure of the framework, there is the possibility that investors have already been
exposed to several articles about specific events prior to the event date. Therefore, when the
final reports are released in full on the event date, all bits and pieces might already have been

                                                                         30
acknowledged. In other words, the market has already incorporated all available information.
This would reduce the share price impact during the actual event date, as this can be
classified as information leakage in the context of event studies. However, the opposite might
also be true, meaning that the information has not yet been incorporated into share prices
because of slow investor reactions. An explanation for this could be the already extensive
existence of sustainability reporting frameworks which has made market participants “numb”
to releases of additional frameworks. Investors without enough information might only view
the EU Taxonomy as another time and resource-consuming sustainability standard to keep
track of. Furthermore, as the effectiveness of the EU Taxonomy is yet to be discovered,
investors may be hesitant to acknowledge what impact the framework will have. Therefore,
they might react slower to the EU Taxonomy announcements, hence the available
information is not as swiftly incorporated into share prices.

Since the three event dates regard the same regulatory framework, it is reasonable to assume
that the first event should have the greatest impact, the second date should have the second
greatest impact, and so on. However, in this case, the results show the opposite as the last
event, 28 February 2022, has the greatest impact and exhibits the most significant result. One
reason for this could be that 28 February 2022 represents an announcement that has not been
as frequently discussed as the two other announcements. This is as it regards an extension to
social objectives whereas the previous two dates only concern the environmental objectives.
This could also be the reason why the third announcement positively affected the polluting
firms, despite our initial belief that this announcement would mainly have a positive impact
on green firms. The positive reaction could be due to the social taxonomy not solely
involving environmental objectives, thus having equal impact on polluting and green firms.

The third and last underlying assumption of the event study methodology concerns
confounding effects. For the event study to generate accurate results, there should only occur
one event during the event window, being the event analysed. Although the days surrounding
the events have been thoroughly examined, there are extraordinary macro-economic
occurrences during all events. For example, as previously mentioned, the covid-19 pandemic
extends across all three event dates. Although these effects should be neutralized in the
analysis, as the estimation windows stretch over months that are also impacted by the
pandemic, there might be unusual market behaviours that impact the result. For example,
investors may be more or less risk-averse than prior to the pandemic.

Across all analyses, 28 February 2022 represents the strongest event for generating positive
abnormal returns (Appendix B1-B4). However, this date is in the midst of Russia’s invasion
of Ukraine which could suggest a confounding event. One can assume that wars are
accompanied by recessions. This is, however, not the case in our analysis. The estimation
period stretches over days not impacted by the war. The expected returns should therefore be
higher than the actual returns during the event date. In other words, a smaller actual return
during war less a larger expected return should generate a smaller abnormal return. Despite
this, the abnormal returns were significantly positive, which indicates that the market had a
positive reaction to the announcements on this day.

                                                                         31
To conclude, despite the event study methodology producing interpretable and relevant
results, there are areas that can be further developed to better fit our study's purpose. This
leads us into a discussion about the selection criteria chosen for this study.

As the nature of the EU Taxonomy events involves continuous disclosures with more blurred
announcement dates, the event window can be discussed. In this study, an event window of
seven days was chosen (-3,3). When observing the results, however, (-3,3) rarely generated
significant abnormal returns. Instead, clearer results were drawn from the shorter event
windows. Factors to be taken into consideration can, for example, be the frequency and the
magnitude of the announcements as well as the announcement channels. In recent years, the
majority of news announcements are made through digital channels, which facilitates swift
news spread. Furthermore, the announcements are unlikely to be associated with significant
inside information since the potential share-price upside from this information is likely to be
small. This reduces the need to include days prior to the event in the event window. Rapid
news spread and the lack of inside information both constitute arguments for keeping the
event window short.

The dataset chosen for this study can also be further analysed and fine-tuned. This to help
understand how the firms actually perform sustainability-wise, as well as how transparently
they communicate their performance. When investigating the firms, we expected the
polluting firms to have a clearly inferior stock performance compared to the green firms
during the event windows. This could, however, not be shown with significance across all
events (see Appendix B4). This may depend on the two factors discussed above regarding the
event- and estimation window, but another explanation could be company disclosure.
Investors pick up and analyse the information available to them, which makes it vital for
firms to clearly communicate superior sustainability performance. This may also imply that
some firms exaggerate their sustainability performance for the purpose of receiving a higher
valuation. Some companies might even engage in greenwashing. On the other hand, polluting
firms may avoid disclosing excessive sustainability information for the same reason. This
aggravates investors to draw accurate conclusions regarding how the EU Taxonomy will
impact individual firms and may help explain why the results are not distinct when
comparing sustainable and unsustainable firms.

Limitations
There are many different factors that impact share prices, including economic factors,
industry trends, and company news and performance. Therefore, a limitation of this study
regards the difficulty to isolate the share price effects to only be associated with the
taxonomy announcements.

Secondly, in today's society, news and information are spread faster and are more accessible
than ever. It is not only the official reports regarding the EU Taxonomy that are published on
the EU Commission’s website, but also smaller news updates and interim reports. It is
difficult to assess how much of this information that investors acknowledge. One can assume
that investors only follow the official announcements, but this may not hold true for all cases.

                                                                         32
Furthermore, the various platforms and speed of technology makes it hard to assess how fast
news spreads after being officially published. This aggravates the process of choosing a
specific event date.

All the country-specific indices chosen are a good representation of each market as the largest
companies are included. However, the index chosen for the EU-wide analysis includes
developed markets in Europe but does not consider whether the countries are members of the
EU. This is a limitation to this study as it may cause a misleading representation of the
benchmark. However, since the majority of the developed countries in Europe are EU
members, this limitation can be considered negligible.

Conclusion

This section summarizes the discussion and analysis and highlights the most important take-
aways of this study. Lastly, suggestions for future research are presented.

The release of the EU Taxonomy marks a new era in the landscape of sustainability
frameworks. Despite a frequent release of announcements, it is unclear how investors are
responding to the new standard. This study aims to investigate how sustainable companies
react to the EU Taxonomy announcements, analysing the companies´ share prices during the
time surrounding the announcements. The initial assumption was that the market value of
sustainable firms would increase following the announcements while polluting firms should
experience a decreased market value as a result of the announcements. The specific research
question to answer was: Do announcements regarding the EU Taxonomy framework generate
abnormal returns for sustainable companies within the European Union?

The analysis of sustainable firms across the European Union shows that there are positive
significant CAARs during several of the event windows analysed when using a parametric t-
test. For the argued event window of (-3,3), the returns were significant but at the lower
significance level. These results confirm our belief that sustainable companies have a positive
reaction to EU Taxonomy announcements. The results were, however, not uniformly
confirmed when conducting the non-parametric Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Neither are the
results consistent across all event windows and there are also varying results across the
different event dates. The last event had the strongest positive reaction, which is
contradictory to the assumption that earlier events should exhibit the most significant results.

As a robustness test, sustainable firms operating in Sweden, Spain, and Germany were tested.
The Spanish dataset was the only dataset to generate CAARs for the chosen event window (-
3,3). When analysing individual days, the event day exhibited positive abnormal returns for
both Germany and Spain at the higher confidence level. This implies that the sustainable
companies had positive reactions to the EU Taxonomy announcements. The analysis of
Swedish firms provided no significant results, and thus no conclusion can be drawn regarding
the Swedish dataset.

                                                                         33
The analysis of polluting companies showed significant negative abnormal returns for shorter
event windows at the higher confidence level. However, for the chosen event window (-3,3),
no significant result could be observed. Analysing individual events, 21 April 2021, provided
the most significant negative results, which aligns with the theory that the earliest
announcements should have the greatest impact. The results indicate that polluting companies
reacted negatively to the EU Taxonomy announcements for some of the event windows.

To conclude by answering our research question, this study shows that the EU Taxonomy
kindles market reactions in the form of abnormal returns for sustainable companies within the
European Union. The taxonomy can therefore be considered as acknowledged by investors.
This study illustrates that in an increasingly environmentally conscious world, even early-
stage sustainability frameworks generate market movements.

Future Research
As previously mentioned, the EU Taxonomy is still in the early implementation stage, with
only two of the six criteria implemented as of May 2022. As a result, the effects of the
taxonomy are yet to be discovered. Therefore, we suggest a future replicating study to
research the future impact of the taxonomy in its entirety. Furthermore, it would be
interesting to analyse a larger dataset, with further distinguishing parameters such as size and
revenue. This would enable the researcher to draw further conclusions regarding which
companies that exhibit the strongest reactions to the taxonomy announcements. Additionally,
for a future study, a suggestion would be to emanate the discussions from a shorter event
window than the one included in this study. Lastly, an interesting analysis would be to
investigate factors beyond share price and include more qualitative factors, for example how
companies’ reputations are affected by the increased transparency associated with the EU
Taxonomy.

                                                                         34
References

Allen, F., Brealey, R.A., & Myers, S.C., 2011, Principles of Corporate Finance, 10th edition,
McGraw-Hill/Irwin, New York.

Alshehhi, A., Nobanee, H., & Khare, N., 2018, The Impact of Sustainability Practices on
Corporate Financial Performance, Literature Trends and Future Research Potential,
Sustainability. Vol. 10, pp. 494-519.

Andrade, G., Mitchell, M.L., & Stafford, E., 2001, New Evidence and Perspectives on
Mergers, HBS Finance Working Paper No. 01-070, Harvard Business School.

Armitage, S., 1995, Event Study Methods and Evidence of Their Performance, Journal of
Economic Surveys. Vol. 9, pp. 25-52.

Battalio, R.H., & Mendenhall, R.R., 2005, Earnings expectation, investor trade size, and
anomalous returns around Earnings announcements, Journal of Financial Economics. Vol.
77, pp. 289–319.

Binder, J.J., 1998, The Event Study Methodology Since 1969, Review of Quantitative Finance
and Accounting. Vol. 11, pp. 111-137.

Burton G.M., 2005, Reflections on the Efficient Market Hypothesis: 30 Years Later. The
Financial Review. Vol. 40, pp. 1-9.

Burton G.M., 2003, The Efficient Market Hypothesis and Its Critics. Journal of Economic
Perspectives. Vol. 17, pp. 59-82.

Campbell, J.Y., Lo, A.W., & MacKinlay, A.C., 1997, The Econometrics of Financial
Markets. Princeton University Press. pp. 149-178

CSR Europe, 2022, The Platform on Sustainable Finance releases the final report on Social
Taxonomy, March 2. https://www.csreurope.org/newsbundle-articles/the-platform-on-
sustainable-finance-releases-the-final-report-on-social-taxonomy.

DeBondt, W.F.M., & Thaler, R., 1995, Does the Stock Market Overreact? Journal of
Finance. Vol. 40, pp. 793-805.

Delmas M., & Burbano V., 2011, The drivers of greenwashing, Calif Manag Rev, Vol. 54,
pp. 64–87.

Drempetic, S., Klein, C., & Zwergel, B., 2019, The Influence of Firm Size on the ESG Score:
Corporate Sustainability Ratings under Review, Journal of Business Ethics. Vol. 167, pp.
333-360.

                                                                         35
Eakins, S.G., & Mishkin, F.S., 2012, Financial Markets and Institutions. Boston: Prentice
Hall, 7th Edition.

Endrikat, J., Guenther, E., & Hoppe, H., 2014, Making sense of conflicting empirical
findings: A meta-analytic review of the relationship between corporate environmental and
financial performance, European Management Journal. Vo. 32, pp 735–751.

TEG, 2020, Taxonomy: Final report of the Technical Expert Group on Sustainable Finance,
March.
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/business_economy_euro/banking_and_finance/doc
uments/200309-sustainable-finance-teg-final-report-taxonomy_en.pdf

European Commission, 2022, EU taxonomy for sustainable activities.
https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/banking-and-finance/sustainable-finance/eu-
taxonomy-sustainable-activities_en.

European Commission, 2019, Financing Sustainable Growth.
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/business_economy_euro/banking_and_finance/doc
uments/200108-financing-sustainable-growth-factsheet_en.pdf

European Commission, 2020, Information about the Regulation (EU) 2020/852 (Taxonomy)
on the establishment of a framework to facilitate sustainable investment including date of
entry into force. https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/sustainable-finance-taxonomy-regulation-eu-
2020-852/law-details_en

European Commission, 2022, 2050 long-term strategy.
https://ec.europa.eu/clima/eu-action/climate-strategies-targets/2050-long-term-strategy_sv

European Commission, 2021, Sustainable Finance and EU Taxonomy: Commission takes
further steps to channel money towards sustainable activities.
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_21_1804

Eventstudytools, 2022, Significance Tests for Event Studies.
https://www.eventstudytools.com/significance-tests#t-test

Fama, E., 1970, Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work, The
Journal of Finance. Vol. 25, pp. 383-417.

Fama, E., 1991, Efficient Capital Markets: II, Journal of Finance. Vol. 46, pp. 1575-1617.

FTSE Publications, 2022, FTSE Germany All Cap Index, April 29.
https://research.ftserussell.com/Analytics/FactSheets/temp/5a903023-d0e7-4f46-82a0-
e63aed878013.pdf

                                                                         36
Gallego-Álvarez, I., Segura, L., & Martínez-Ferrero, J., 2015, Carbon emission reduction:
the impact on the financial and operational performance of international companies, Journal
of Cleaner Production. Vol. 103, pp. 149-159.

Guo, M., Kuai, Y., & Liu, X., 2020, Stock market response to environmental policies:
Evidence from heavily polluting firms in China. Vol. 86, pp. 306-316.

Hamilton, J.T., 1995., Pollution as News: Media and Stock Market Reactions to the Toxics
Release Inventory Data, Journal of Environmental Economics and Management. Vol. 28, pp.
98-113.

Hahn, T., & Figge, F., 2011, Beyond the Bounded Instrumentality in Current Corporate
Sustainability Research: Toward an Inclusive Notion of Profitability, Journal of Business
Ethics. Vol. 104, pp. 325-345.

Hartzmark, S., & Sussman, A., 2019, Do Investors Value Sustainability? A Natural
Experiment Examining Ranking and Fund flows, The Journal of Finance. Vol. 74, pp- 2789-
2837.

Havard-Williams, V., Barret, R., Naeem, R., Bernard, S., Ballegeer, D., & Winter, Dr F.,
2022, EU: Platform on Sustainable Finance publishes final report on social taxonomy,
Linklaters, March 1.
https://sustainablefutures.linklaters.com/post/102hjsl/eu-platform-on-sustainable-finance-
publishes-final-report-on-social-taxonomy

Klassen, R. D., & McLaughlin, C.P., 1996, The Impact of Environmental Management on
Firm Performance, Management Science. Vol. 42, pp. 1199-1214.

Konchitchki, Y., & O'Leary, D., 2011, Event study methodologies in information systems
research, International Journal of Accounting Information Systems. Vol. 12, pp. 99-115.

Kothari, S.P., & Warner, J.B., 2007, Chapter 1 - Econometrics of Event Studies, Handbook of
Empirical Corporate Finance. Vol. 1, pp. 3-36.

Lamdin, D.J., 2001, Implementing and interpreting event studies of regulatory changes,
Journal of Economics and Business. Vol. 53, pp. 171-183.

Markman, A., 2020, Slow Down to Make Better Decisions in a Crisis, Harvard Business
Review, March 15. https://hbr.org/2020/03/slow-down-to-make-better-decisions-in-a-crisis

McWilliams, A., & Siegel, D., 1997, Event studies in Management Research. Theoretical and
Empirical Issues, The Academy of Management Journal. Vol. 40, pp. 626-657.

                                                                         37
Mussio, I., Andrés, M.S., & Kidwai, A.H., 2022, Higher order risk attitudes in the time of
COVID-19: an experimental study, Oxford Economic Papers.

 MSCI, 2022, MSCI Spain Index. https://www.msci.com/documents/10199/4709871b-3007-
4412-b36c-1191ab80d5bd

MSCI, 2022, MSCI Europe Index. https://www.msci.com/documents/10199/db217f4c-cc8c-
4e21-9fac-60eb6a47faf0

Nasdaq, 2022, Nasdaq OMX 30 Stockholm.
http://www.nasdaqomxnordic.com/utbildning/optionerochterminer/vadaromxstockholm30ind
ex

Ramanathan, R., He, Q., Black, A., Ghobadian, A., & Gallear; D., 2017, Environmental
regulations, innovation, and firm performance: A revisit of the Porter hypothesis. Journal of
Cleaner Production. Vol. 155, pp. 79-92.

Ramiah, V., Martin, B., & Moosa, I., 2013, How does the stock market react to the
announcement of green policies, Journal of Banking & Finance. Vol. 37, pp. 1747-1758.

Rogova, E., & Aprelkova, G., 2020, The Effect of IPCC Reports and Regulatory
Announcements on the Stock Market, MDPI.

Russo, M. V., & Fouts, P.A., 1997, A Resource-Based Perspective on Corporate
Environmental Performance and Profitability. The Academy of Management Journal. Vol.
40, pp. 534–59.

Sethi, M., & Krishnakumar, D., 2010, A Review of Methodologies Used to Determine
Mergers and Acquisitions’ Performance. SSRN Electronic Journal.

Shiller, R.J., 2000., Irrational Exuberance, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 3rd
Edition.

Shleifer, A., 2000, Inefficient Markets - An introduction to Behavioural Finance, New York:
Oxford University Press.

Statman, M., 2006., Socially Responsible Indexes, The Journal of Portfolio Management.
Vol. 32, pp. 100-109.

UK Parliament, 2013, Norway’s relationship with the EU, January 12.
https://commonslibrary.parliament.uk/research-briefings/sn06522/

                                                                         38
Wang, Y., Delgado, M,S., Khanna, N., & Bogan, V,L., 2019, Good news for environmental
self-regulation? Finding the right link, Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management. Vol. 94, pp. 217-235.

White, M.A., 1995., Corporate Environmental Performance and Shareholder Value,
McIntire School of Commerce, WHI002.
https://libraopen.lib.virginia.edu/downloads/707957685

Wilcoxon, F., 1945, Individual Comparisons by Ranking Methods, Biometrics Bulletin. Vol.
1, pp. 80-83.

Yale, 2020, 2020 EPI Results. https://epi.yale.edu/epi-results/2020/component/epi

                                                                         39
Appendix

Appendix A1: List of companies in the EU-wide analysis

 Company Ticker Company name Country

 WBAG:VER VERBUND AG Austria

 ENXTBR:ABO ABO-Group Environment NV Belgium

 ENXTBR:ELI Elia Group SA/NV Belgium

 CPSE:ORSTED Ørsted A/S Denmark

 CPSE:VWS Vestas Wind Systems A/S Denmark

 HLSE:LAT1V Lassila & Tikanoja Oyj Finland

 HLSE:VALOE Valoe Oyj Finland

 ENXTPA:ABIO Albioma France

 ENXTPA:AURE Aurea SA France

 ENXTPA:MLEDR Compagnie des Eaux de Royan France

 ENXTPA:DBG Derichebourg SA France

 ENXTPA:ALESA Ecoslops S.A. France

 ENXTPA:GPE Groupe Pizzorno Environnement France

 ENXTPA:NEOEN Neoen S.A. France

 ENXTPA:SCHP Séché Environnement SA France

 ENXTPA:VLTSA Voltalia SA France

 ENXTPA:ALENE Enertime SA France

 ENXTPA:ALVER Vergnet SA France

 ENXTPA:NAVYA Navya SA France

 ENXTPA:VIE Veolia Environnement S.A. France

 ENXTPA:ALGBE Global Bioenergies SA France

 XTRA:HRPK 7C Solarparken AG Germany

 DB:ABA ALBA SE Germany

 DUSE:ABO clearvise AG Germany

                                                                         40
XTRA:ECV Encavis AG Germany

XTRA:PRY Pacifico Renewables Yield AG Germany

XTRA:2GB 2G Energy AG Germany

DB:H2O Enapter AG Germany

XTRA:EKT Energiekontor AG Germany

HMSE:QCE Global PVQ SE Germany

XTRA:NDX1 Nordex SE Germany

XTRA:PNE3 PNE AG Germany

DB:SFX Solar-Fabrik Aktiengesellschaft Germany

DB:SWVK SolarWorld Aktiengesellschaft Germany

XTRA:S92 SMA Solar Technology AG Germany

XTRA:AB9 ABO Wind AG Germany

XTRA:ETG EnviTec Biogas AG Germany

ATSE:TENERGY Terna Energy Societe Anonyme Commercial Technical   Greece
                  Company

OB:ALT Alternus Energy Group plc Ireland

ISE:GRP Greencoat Renewables PLC Ireland

OM:KOLL Kollect on Demand Holding AB (publ) Ireland

BIT:ARN Alerion Clean Power S.p.A. Italy

BIT:ECK Ecosuntek S.p.A. Italy

BIT:FKR Falck Renewables S.p.A. Italy

BIT:FDE Frendy Energy S.p.A. Italy

BIT:IB Iniziative Bresciane S.p.A. Italy

BIT:REN Renergetica S.p.A. Italy

BIT:EVA Askoll Eva SpA Italy

XTRA:BFSA Befesa S.A. Luxembourg

NasdaqGS:ARVL Arrival Luxembourg

ENXTAM:NSE New Sources Energy N.V. Netherlands

OB:PRYME Pryme B.V. Netherlands

ENXTAM:ALFEN Alfen N.V. Netherlands

ENXTAM:FAST Fastned B.V. Netherlands

                                                                        41
OB:AEGA Aega ASA Norway

OB:AGLX Agilyx AS Norway

OB:CLOUD Cloudberry Clean Energy ASA Norway

OB:EAM EAM Solar ASA Norway

OB:SCATC Scatec ASA Norway

OB:NEL Nel ASA Norway

OB:RECSI REC Silicon ASA Norway

OB:OTOVO Otovo AS Norway

ENXTLS:EDP EDP - Energias de Portugal, S.A. Portugal

BME:ADL ADL Bionatur Solutions, S.A. Spain

BME:ADX Audax Renovables, S.A. Spain

ENXTLS:EDPR EDP Renováveis, S.A. Spain

BME:GRN Greenalia, S.A. Spain

BME:GRE Grenergy Renovables, S.A. Spain

BME:SLR Solaria Energía y Medio Ambiente, S.A. Spain

BME:ANA Acciona, S.A. Spain

BME:IBE Iberdrola, S.A. Spain

BME:SGRE Siemens Gamesa Renewable Energy, S.A. Spain

BME:HLZ Holaluz-Clidom, S.A. Spain

OM:ARISE Arise AB (publ) Sweden

OM:ECOWVE Eco Wave Power Global AB (publ) Sweden

OM:GREEN Green Landscaping Group AB (publ) Sweden

OM:SES Scandinavian Enviro Systems AB (publ) Sweden

OM:SLITE Slitevind AB Sweden

OM:AZELIO Azelio AB (publ) Sweden

OM:CLIME B Climeon AB (publ) Sweden

NGM:META Metacon AB (publ) Sweden

OM:MINEST Minesto AB (publ) Sweden

OM:STW SeaTwirl AB (publ) Sweden

OM:STRLNG Swedish Stirling AB (publ) Sweden

                                                                        42
 OM:CISH Clean Industry Solutions Holding Europe AB Sweden

 OM:MIDS Midsummer AB (publ) Sweden

 OM:CLEMO Clean Motion AB (publ) Sweden

 OM:EOLU B Eolus Vind AB (publ) Sweden

Appendix A2: List of companies in the Sweden analysis

 Company Ticker Company Name Country

 OM:ARISE Arise AB (publ) Sweden

 OM:ECOWVE Eco Wave Power Global AB (publ) Sweden

 OM:GREEN Green Landscaping Group AB (publ) Sweden

 OM:SES Scandinavian Enviro Systems AB (publ) Sweden

 OM:SLITE Slitevind AB Sweden

 OM:AZELIO Azelio AB (publ) Sweden

 OM:CLIME B Climeon AB (publ) Sweden

 NGM:META Metacon AB (publ) Sweden

 OM:MINEST Minesto AB (publ) Sweden

 OM:STW SeaTwirl AB (publ) Sweden

 OM:STRLNG Swedish Stirling AB (publ) Sweden

 OM:CISH Clean Industry Solutions Holding Europe AB Sweden

 OM:MIDS Midsummer AB (publ) Sweden

 OM:CLEMO Clean Motion AB (publ) Sweden

 OM:EOLU B Eolus Vind AB (publ) Sweden

Appendix A3: List of companies in the Germany analysis

 Company Ticker Company Name Country

 XTRA:HRPK 7C Solarparken AG Germany

 DB:ABA ALBA SE Germany

                                                                         43
 DUSE:ABO clearvise AG Germany

 XTRA:ECV Encavis AG Germany

 XTRA:PRY Pacifico Renewables Yield AG Germany

 XTRA:2GB 2G Energy AG Germany

 DB:H2O Enapter AG Germany

 XTRA:EKT Energiekontor AG Germany

 HMSE:QCE Global PVQ SE Germany

 XTRA:NDX1 Nordex SE Germany

 XTRA:PNE3 PNE AG Germany

 DB:SFX Solar-Fabrik Aktiengesellschaft Germany

 DB:SWVK SolarWorld Aktiengesellschaft Germany

 XTRA:S92 SMA Solar Technology AG Germany

 XTRA:AB9 ABO Wind AG Germany

 XTRA:ETG EnviTec Biogas AG Germany

Appendix A4: List of companies in the Spain analysis

 Company Ticker Company Name Country

 BME:ADL ADL Bionatur Solutions, S.A. Spain

 BME:ADX Audax Renovables, S.A. Spain

 ENXTLS:EDPR EDP Renováveis, S.A. Spain

 BME:GRN Greenalia, S.A. Spain

 BME:GRE Grenergy Renovables, S.A. Spain

 BME:SLR Solaria Energía y Medio Ambiente, S.A. Spain

 BME:ANA Acciona, S.A. Spain

 BME:IBE Iberdrola, S.A. Spain

 BME:SGRE Siemens Gamesa Renewable Energy, S.A. Spain

                                                                         44
 BME:HLZ Holaluz-Clidom, S.A. Spain

Appendix A5: List of companies in the polluting companies analysis

 Company Ticker Company Name Country

 WBAG:OMV OMV Aktiengesellschaft Austria

 WBAG:SBO Schoeller-Bleckmann Oilfield Equipment                Austria
                          Aktiengesellschaft

 OB:ADS ADS Maritime Holding Plc Cyprus

 OB:GEG SeaBird Exploration Plc Cyprus

 CPSE:ATLA DKK P/F Atlantic Petroleum Denmark

 CPSE:DRLCO The Drilling Company of 1972 A/S Denmark

 HLSE:NESTE Neste Oyj Finland

 ENXTPA:CGG CGG France

 ENXTPA:ES Esso S.A.F. France

 ENXTPA:GTT Gaztransport & Technigaz SA France

 ENXTPA:TTE TotalEnergies SE France

 ENXTPA:VK Vallourec S.A. France

 XTRA:CE2 CropEnergies AG Germany

 ATSE:ELPE Hellenic Petroleum Holdings Societe Anonyme Greece

 ATSE:MOH Motor Oil (Hellas) Corinth Refineries S.A. Greece

 NYSE:GLOP GasLog Partners LP Greece

 OB:OET Okeanis Eco Tankers Corp. Greece

 TSXV:FO Falcon Oil & Gas Ltd. Ireland

 BIT:SPM Saipem SpA Italy

 OB:SUBC Subsea 7 S.A. Luxembourg

 ENXTAM:VPK Koninklijke Vopak N.V. Netherlands

 OB:AKRBP Aker BP ASA Norway

 OB:AKSO Aker Solutions ASA Norway

                                                                         45
OB:AQUA AqualisBraemar LOC ASA Norway

OB:BWE BW Energy Limited Norway

OB:DNO DNO ASA Norway

OB:DOF DOF ASA Norway

OB:EMGS Electromagnetic Geoservices ASA Norway

OB:GEOS Golden Energy Offshore Services AS Norway

OB:MSEIS Magseis Fairfield ASA Norway

OB:OKEA OKEA ASA Norway

OB:PEN Panoro Energy ASA Norway

OB:PNOR PetroNor E&P ASA Norway

OB:REACH Reach Subsea ASA Norway

OB:SIOFF Siem Offshore Inc. Norway

OB:TGS TGS ASA Norway

ASX:BKY Berkeley Energia Limited Spain

NGM:ABI AB Igrene (publ) Sweden

OM:CCOR B Concordia Maritime AB (publ) Sweden

OM:DOME Dome Energy AB (publ) Sweden

OM:MAHA A Maha Energy AB (publ) Sweden

OM:MISE Misen Energy AB (publ) Sweden

OM:TETY Tethys Oil AB (publ) Sweden

OM:TRIBO B Triboron International AB (publ) Sweden

                                                                        46
Appendix B1: Event-specific analyses for Sweden

Appendix B2: Event-specific analyses for Germany

                                                                         47
Appendix B3: Event-specific analyses for Spain

                                                                         48
Appendix B4: Event-specific analyses for Polluting Companies

Appendix C1: Wilcoxon Signed-Rank test (EU-wide)

                                                                         49
Appendix C2: Wilcoxon Signed-Rank test (Sweden)

Appendix C3: Wilcoxon Signed-Rank test (Germany)

Appendix C4: Wilcoxon Signed-Rank test (Spain)

                                                                         50
Appendix C5: Wilcoxon Signed-Rank test (Polluting Companies)

                                                                         51