TRAINING AI FOR
ASSET PRICING

HOW TIME-WEIGHTING A MACHINE LEARNING PROGRAM’S TRAINING
DATA AFFECTS ITS ABILITY TO PREDICT STOCK RETURNS

AXEL JERNBÄCKER

HENRIK ANGELSTIG

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2022
Training AI for Asset Pricing : How Time-Weighting a Machine Learning Program’s
Training Data Affects Its Ability to Predict Stock Returns

Abstract:
   This bachelor’s thesis examines how a machine learning program’s ability to predict stock
   prices is affected by how the data on which the program is trained has been time-weighted.
   Building upon the work by Gu, Kelly, and Xiu (2020), we examine how the same machine
   learning program performs when its training data is time-weighted using one of three
   methods: exponential weighting, linear weighting, or cutoff. Our results show a tiny
   improvement when using either exponential or linear weighting, and a small worsening for
   cutoff, compared to no time-weighting. However, these differences were so small as to be
   almost negligible. While our study shows no evidence that weighting training data affects
   the program’s accuracy, there is a vast number of other possible combinations of different
   machine learning program designs and datasets that could be examined. Therefore, a more
   comprehensive study examining a greater variety of ML program designs and datasets
   should be undertaken before a final conclusion on the subject can be made.

Keywords:
   AI, machine learning, asset pricing, stock price prediction, time-weighting, concept drift

Authors:
   Axel Jernbäcker (24808)
   Henrik Angelstig (24829)

Tutors:
   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:
   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Axel Jernbäcker and Henrik Angelstig, 2022
Table of Contents

Introduction 1
   Background 1
    The Problem Today and Purpose of Thesis 2
    Question at Issue 3
    Delimitations 3

Literature Review 3

Theory 4
    Concept Drift 4
    Lucas’ Critique 5
   Neural Networks 5
    Backpropagation and training 5

Data and Methodology 6

Results 8

Analysis of Results 10

Discussion of Results 11

Conclusion 12

Suggestions for Further Research 12

References 12

Appendix Matlab 12

Appendix Neural Network 13

Introduction

Background
Correct asset pricing is a crucial component in allocating capital to its most productive uses
in an economy. When stocks are mispriced, it may cause either an over- or underinvestment
of capital in affected firms, resulting in a loss of value to both investors and the economy at
large.
For this reason, researchers have devoted much effort to understanding what factors that
influence stock prices. One approach toward this goal has been to develop theoretical
frameworks, such as the Capital Asset Pricing Model or the Fama-French three-factor model.
But the drawback of these models is that they only capture a small portion of all potential
factors. Another approach has been to empirically investigate how certain factors have
affected stock returns. These empirical studies consider many more potential factors, but their
downside is that they only define the relationships between stock prices and factors as static,
i.e that they will always affect each other in the same way. In reality, these relationships are
likely to be more dynamic.

However, recent advancements in AI and machine learning have now enabled researchers to
develop more complex models, where relationships between different factors can be
considered. For example, a study by researchers Gu, Kelly, and Xiu managed to create a
portfolio strategy that, by timing S&P 500 using neural network-based ML forecasts, more
than doubled the portfolio’s risk-reward ratio compared to the leading literature’s
regression-based analysis.

The Problem Today and Purpose of Thesis
AI and machine learning (ML) lend themselves nicely to stock price prediction, where
decision-making requires the analysis of countless variables with many complex
interrelations. But ML has a major caveat: its predictions rely on the assumption that the
same patterns that held in the past will continue to hold true in the future.

In the stock market, however, there is no guarantee that cause and effect relationships will
remain constant over time. The Lucas critique makes this point specifically by arguing that
the economy regularly undergoes fundamental transformations that change how different
factors relate to each other over time. This means that patterns that held true in the past may
not continue to hold true in the future. In machine learning, this notion of changing cause and
effect relationships is called concept drift.

The problem with previous ML-based research is that they have given equal weight to the
data used for training the ML program. But assuming that the Lucas’ critique holds true, this
implies that the ML program may be subject to concept drift, i.e it has trained itself to
identify cause and effect relationships that held true in the past but which may no longer hold
for the future period the program seeks to predict.

Our study aims at minimizing this error by time-weighting the data used for training an ML
program. By giving greater weight to more recent data on stock prices and their influencing
factors, we hypothesise that an ML program will make more accurate predictions compared
to when no time-weighting is applied. In addition to studying whether time-weighting is
effective, our study also aims to answer which method of time-weighting will lead to the
highest performance.

Question at Issue
Our thesis question at issue is:

   When training a neural network-based machine learning program to predict stock prices,
   does time-weighting the program’s training data lead to more accurate predictions? If so,
   which method of time-weighting training data is best?

Delimitations
The delimitations of our study are as follows:

    1. The data used is up to 60 years old, which may cause some inaccuracies.
    2. The data only encompasses US stocks during the period 1957-2016.
    3. The study is based on the same 93 different factors used by Gu et. al. (2000). Other
        potential price-influencing factors are not considered.
    4. The training and validation split is using a rolling scheme where the most recent 12
        years are the validation data and the prior years the training data. This is done to
        recreate the results from the study by Gu et. al. (2000).

Literature Review

Several papers have investigated the effectiveness of machine learning for stock price
prediction, and research has suggested several methods for dealing with concept drift in asset
pricing. However, there is a lack of empirical data on how effective these suggested
weighting scheme methods are. Providing that data is the extension to the existing literature
that our study aims to make.

One of the closest papers to our research is Gu, et. al. (2020), Empirical asset pricing via
machine learning. Their study uses a neural network ML program to predict returns of nearly
30,000 US-based stocks during the period 1957-2016, based on a set of 94 characteristics for
each stock. The paper validates that machine learning indeed is a potent tool for predicting
stock returns, managing to double the Sharpe ratio compared to foremost linear regression.
For training their ML program, Gu et. al. utilize a combination of the expanding and rolling
window approaches. Their ML program is refitted once every year on an expanding window
basis, where the training sample size is increased by 1 year each time the program is refitted.
However, the size of the validation sample is kept constant on a rolling window basis of 12
years. An expanding window approach carries the risk that data patterns from one period may
no longer hold true in future periods because of structural changes in the economy.
Consequently, the ML program trained on expanding windows gets stuck with ‘outdated’
data to navigate a radically different environment.

Another paper, Drobetz & Otto (2021). Empirical asset pricing via machine learning:
evidence from the European stock market, builds upon the ML research of Gu et. al. by
investigating their findings for European stocks. In contrast to Gu et. al., this study utilizes a
pure rolling window approach with 8 years of data for training, 2 years for validation, and 1
year for out-of-sample testing. Furthermore, the ML program is trained on just 22 predictors
instead of 94. While Drobetz & Otto’s study produced a slightly higher Sharpe ratio than Gu
et. al, 1.41 compared to 1.35, it is unclear how much of this improvement was caused by 1)
using a different dataset, 2) using a different number of predictors, or 3) using a pure rolling
window compared to a hybrid recursive-rolling window approach.

A third paper, Pesaran (2009). Forecast Combination across Estimation Windows,
investigates how asset price forecasting can be improved by using data windows of different
lengths and formats. Based on the analysis of 20 world equity index futures, the study
concludes that a strategy of averaging forecasts based on windows of different lengths
generates the lowest forecast error among a variety of approaches. This study gives
credibility to the idea that more recent data should be given greater weight when predicting
the future, while still maintaining the need to include some older data in the analysis as well.
Furthermore, the paper found exponential time-weighting produced similar results as
averaging window estimates, but noted that the accuracy of the forecast is impacted
significantly by the choice of the discount coefficient.

Finally, Nagel (2021). Machine Learning in Asset Pricing discusses methods for dealing with
ML concept drift in asset pricing, and specifically mentions weighting schemes such as cutoff
and exponential weighting as possible solutions. But the discussion is reserved only on a
theoretical level without any comprehensive study on actual stocks.

None of these papers, however, present any concrete results of how time-weighting data
affects an ML program’s effectiveness in predicting stock prices. While the existing literature
suggests that time-weighting might be an improvement, the research field is lacking tangible
results regarding both 1) the merits of time-weighting in general, and 2) how effective
different methods of time-weighting are. Shedding light on these two questions is the purpose
of our study.

The contribution this paper aims to add to the literature is two-fold. First, to AI research, we
hope that our analysis of different weighting schemes will provide guidance on how ML
programs should be trained to avoid concept drift in general. Second, to the finance research,
we aim to generate a higher-performing algorithm for predicting stock prices that other
researchers may build upon in the future.
Theory

Concept Drift
In machine learning terminology, concept drift refers to changes over time in the target
variable trying to be predicted (Lu et al., 2018). It is a well-studied area in machine learning
because it worsens the performance of most models that are trained on historical data. The
idea is that a model trained on historical data will learn patterns that enable it to predict, for
example, share price. However, the patterns that exist in the historical data would have been
rendered obsolete by concept drift and therefore the model will perform poorly. To counter
this there are different approaches, most notably refreshing and reactive solutions. Reactive
solutions work by detecting deterioration in prediction accuracy which triggers a retraining of
the model to keep error due to concept drift within an acceptable error bound. Refreshing is a
solution where models are continuously being trained on newer data and replacing old
models in an ensemble. The solution used in this thesis is an implementation of refreshing
where an ensemble of models is trained on data weighted towards more recent data. This
effectively makes the model more sensitive to patterns in recent data but also enables it to
find patterns that could persist for the entire historical period.

Lucas’ Critique
To understand why concept drift relates to predicting patterns in the stock market there is a
need to look at the underlying economic theory. The most notable example here is the Lucas
critique. In essence, the critique says that it is naive to predict the effects of a change in
economic policy only based on relationships in historical data. This is due to the change of
behavior in different economic policies. More closely related to this thesis one could explain
it such that, when patterns are detected in the stock market, the trading changes which in turn
alter the patterns. Therefore it would be naive to assume the patterns that could be used in
evaluating returns are invariant of time and behavior. This is a brief reasoning as to why a
certain measure of concept drift is to be expected when relating historical data and patterns to
current or future data.

Neural Networks
There exist many different machine learning models, each one with its own benefits and
drawbacks. One of the most widely used is Neural Networks which are excellent and
versatile predictors. Without going too deep into the technical nature of a neural network the
basics of them will be explained here. A network consists of “layers” which hold “neurons”.
Each layer has a number of inputs and outputs. These inputs each go through a neuron, where
some weighted function is applied to it, in our case the ReLU (a standard function in neural
networks). This produces an output that is sent to the next layer of neurons. The idea is that a
properly weighted network becomes a complex function that takes some complex input, for
example accounting information, and then produces some desired output, for example, the
expected share price. These types of problems hold great interest in society and therefore
neural networks are widely used.
Backpropagation and training
After explaining the value of a neural network one might wonder what holds them from being
universal predictors that perfectly predict all complex dynamics in society. This relates to the
training of networks. The training is the method with which you set the desired weights to the
neurons in the different layers. Since there can be thousands of weights and these only make
sense in a context with each other this is far from a straightforward process. There will not be
much technical detail in this explanation but it serves conceptually to create an understanding
of how weighting the training data affects the created model. The training method used in this
thesis and most popular in general is backpropagation. It works by inputting training data and
the desired outcome. The model then runs and calculates a loss, this can be defined in
different ways, for example, mean squared difference. This loss is used to approximate a
value for how “wrong” each weight is. This is done using a complicated process of derivative
approximations that in the end can update the weights to be more “right”. The weights of
training data are normally 1 for all data points which means that having a difference between
desired and actual outcome is equally important regardless of where in the training set that
particular datapoint resides. This study experiments with weights that make the training more
focused on minimizing errors on recent data points. This relates to the issue of concept drift
above where the older data is more likely to contain larger differences from current stock
return patterns.

Data and Methodology

Data Collection
In this thesis, the data used comes from the WRDS database combined with a lagged dataset
made by Gu, Kelly, and Xiu in their paper: Empirical Asset Pricing via Machine Learning.
This dataset has firm characteristics that are lagged to mimic how the public would receive
the information. Therefore, monthly characteristics are delayed 1 month, quarterly are
delayed 4 months and annual data is delayed by a year. The dataset contains 94 lagged firm
characteristics, ID:s for every stock and date. Furthermore the returns of the stocks given a
certain date are appended, these are downloaded from the WRDS database using the CRSP
annually updated stock returns.

Description of Methodology
The methodology used in this thesis is predominantly quantitative. The work begins by
downloading the data set used by Gu, Kelly, and Xiu which contains nearly 30 000 stocks
over a period of 60 years. This data contains the lagged firm characteristics and only needs to
be appended to the monthly return of stocks, data which can be found in the WRDS database.

Secondly, the neural network used in this thesis has to be constructed according to the
specifications of Gu, Kelly, and Xiu. This neural network is described extensively in their
paper and could, apart from small ambiguities, be replicated exactly. The network consists of
an input layer with all the lagged firm characteristics, 3 dense hidden layers with 32, 16, and
8 neurons respectively, and a single output node. The network uses a ReLU activation
between all layers and an ensemble training of 10 networks for stability. A batch
normalization function between layers for faster training. An early stopping algorithm that
detects when the error in the validation set starts to increase again, has patience 5. This means
it will run for 5 epochs even after detecting an increase in validation set errors. A normal
Adam optimization algorithm is used and the learning rate is between 0.001 and 0.01.

There is an L1 penalty that causes parameters close to zero to tend to zero, to remove
irrelevant inputs. As one can see there is extensive documentation on how to replicate their
network but there still remain some ambiguities. Firstly, and most notably, the L1 penalty is
           −5      −3
between 10   𝑡𝑜 10  . This is most likely different values for the hidden layers but the paper
does not state if it is in ascending or descending order. Secondly, the learning rate decreases
from 0.01 to 0.001 but they do not state at what rate the decrease happens. Thirdly, they don’t
specify which function they use to compute loss in backpropagation training. This could be
either Huber loss or least squares as both are used in their paper. They do, however, seem to
imply that least squares are used for neural networks, which is also used in this bachelor
thesis. Fourthly, they do not specify whether they use a rollback in their early stopping or not.
It is quite common to “revert back” to the best result which minimized the error in the
validation set. But they could also use the latest iteration of their trained network, omitting a
rollback scheme. Our network uses a rollback scheme.

After replicating the neural network custom loss functions are implemented. These custom
loss functions are used to calculate a weighted loss which potentially could improve the
performance of the neural network by reducing the issue of concept drift and prioritizing the
training of more recent data. Here 3 additional functions are created, one with exponential
decay of weight. One with linear decay and one cutoff scheme which ignores data older than
10 years later than the validation set. Worth noting is that we use the rolling validation split
they implemented in all different training schemes. This is to improve the comparability
between different weighting methods.

When the different loss functions are created the program is run to generate the R-squared
out-of-sample values for all different years and weighting schemes. This is a time-consuming
process since all networks need to be retrained for every year they should predict. Therefore a
loop was implemented that consecutively runs the program and outputs the R-squared out of
sample values for all different years. Allowing the computer to run for a few hours yields
results for all years with the used weighting scheme. The results can then be aggregated to
detect performance differences between the different weighting schemes, most importantly
the mean of R-squared out-of-sample.

Rolling scheme
For all different weighting schemes and years predicted the same data split is used. The split consists
of training data, validation data, and test data. The model is retrained for every year it is trying to
predict, the year it predicts is the test data. The model uses the 12 most recent years as validation data.
It then uses the remaining years as training data. As illustrated in the figure below.

                               Figure 1: dataset split during different years

The blue dots here correspond to the years used for training data. The green is the validation data used
for the early stopping. The red years are the out-of-sample years that are predicted. The model is
retrained with the different datasets for every new year to be predicted.

Weighting schemes
The weighting schemes used are exponential, linear, cutoff, and normal. They work such that
the exponential decay makes data that is ten years earlier twice as important. With a
continuous exponential curve between. This has the benefit of treating data that is 40
respectively 30 years old with the same amount of concept drift as data that is 20 respectively
10 years old.

The second scheme is linear. This is a very simple approach where the oldest data is set to
matter zero and the most recent is 100 percent. The data in the middle as such matters half of
what the newest data does. The drawback with this is that data points that are 58 years old
might matter 2 times as much as data points that are 59 years old due to the nature of the
linear relationship. Furthermore, it decays very slowly in the beginning when counting as a
proportion of the weight of each data point.

The third scheme is a cutoff scheme, sometimes also called a rolling window. This is even
more simple than the linear and means that the model only trains on the ten latest years in the
training set. This should deal with concept drift very well, however it reduces the size of the
training set drastically and as such, could lead to other issues during training. It is beneficial
for a neural network model to train on as large of a dataset as possible.
Results

Running the Neural Network with the four different weighting schemes – Exponential,
Linear, Cutoff, and No Weight – gives the results found in the table below. The percentages
displayed in the table represent the out-of-sample R-squared value when predicting the year
shown at the top.

R-squared is a statistical measurement that indicates how good a model is at explaining the
results. An R-squared of 100% means the model predicts the results perfectly every time,
while an R-squared of 30% means that 30% of the results can be explained by the model.
Generally, the higher the R-squared value, the better the model is.

                 R-squared of ML model’s predicitions for period 1988-2016,
                         based on the four different weighting schemes

                                       Weighting Scheme
         Year Exponential Linear Cutoff No weight
         1988 0.67% 0.63% 0.38% 0.64%
         1989 0.27% 0.30% 0.13% 0.33%
         1990 -0.45% -0.19% -0.87% -0.62%
         1991 1.24% 1.15% 0.96% 1.35%
         1992 0.80% 0.75% 0.83% 0.78%
         1993 1.09% 1.24% 1.22% 0.95%
         1994 -0.80% -0.84% -1.03% -0.73%
         1995 1.26% 1.24% 1.33% 1.34%
         1996 -0.09% -0.05% -0.50% -0.13%
         1997 -0.54% -1.01% -1.10% -0.41%
         1998 0.02% -0.01% -0.22% 0.09%
         1999 1.66% 1.51% 1.28% 1.54%
         2000 -0.70% -0.52% -0.74% -0.63%
         2001 0.48% 0.82% 0.56% 0.72%
         2002 -0.78% -0.66% -0.67% -0.69%
         2003 2.42% 2.32% 1.67% 2.33%
         2004 1.34% 1.12% 1.20% 0.78%
         2005 -0.13% -0.42% -0.19% -0.14%
         2006 1.10% 1.21% 1.40% 1.32%
         2007 -1.07% -1.16% -1.32% -1.10%
         2008 -2.14% -2.41% -2.83% -2.34%
                                       Weighting Scheme
         Year Exponential Linear Cutoff No weight
         2009 1.72% 1.55% 1.14% 1.53%
         2010 1.70% 1.67% 1.90% 1.69%
         2011 -1.34% -1.40% -1.32% -1.32%
         2012 1.21% 1.12% 1.04% 1.01%
         2013 2.91% 2.82% 3.06% 2.41%
         2014 -0.72% -0.37% -0.50% -0.43%
         2015 -1.01% -1.05% -0.69% -1.20%
         2016 0.95% 0.97% 0.70% 0.80%

From this table above, the mean R-squared is calculated using the program found in Appendix
Matlab. The results are shown below.

                              R-squared out-of-sample mean

          Exp Linear Cutoff No weight

          0.38% 0.36% 0.24% 0.34%

The graph below shows how the different schemes perform over time.

                         R-squared values of each weighting scheme
Analysis of Results

The results of this study show that different weighting schemes perform similarly in
predicting stock returns. The most notable exception is the cutoff scheme, which not only
performed worse than the other two weighting schemes, but also worse compared to training
without any weighting at all. As shown by the graph above, it is evident that the predictions
made by the different networks are very similar, and the difference that weighting historical
data causes is small or negligible in the setup described in this thesis methodology.

There are a few areas in the setup that should be considered before drawing any conclusions
that weighting historical data for training does not impact predictive performance.

First and foremost, this network is trained on historical data with a training/validation split
that uses the last 12 years of the known training data as validation data. This is useful because
it indicates when the model starts overfitting. Therefore, the setup utilizes an early stop
function which prevents overfitting during training. This could, however, lead to an effect
that “hides” the impact of weighting schemes. Since the training stops when the model fits
the validation data well, it can be viewed as such that the model is trained to fit the validation
data, which is not weighted, only the training data is. This would intuitively make the model
more likely to converge to solutions that are good on the validation data which is unrelated to
the used weighting schemes.
Secondly, the R-squared measurement is slightly crude and not necessarily that interesting
when analyzing the predictive power of a model. The returns of a model with a slightly lower
R-squared could still be higher than a model with a higher R-squared. R-squared does
however indicate how well the model predicts returns overall very well, and is thus still an
interesting measurement.

Thirdly, a neural network is only one of many different models that could be suited for
predicting stock returns. In the paper by Gu et al., they had the most success with a network
of this design which is why it is used in this paper. But it is not obvious by any means that the
impact of weighting historical data would be the same for a neural network as for an elastic
net or Lasso model.

With these caveats in mind, these results still indicate that weighting schemes do not impact
the predictive power of a neural network trained on stock returns. More elaborate ML
training schemes might have to be designed to combat the issue that concept drift poses to
predicting stock returns using AI.

Discussion of Results

The results shown above show that the performance of different weighting schemes is very
similar. The most notable exception is the poor performance of the cutoff scheme. This could,
however, be caused by the fact that the cutoff scheme consistently trained on a smaller
training dataset. With other schemes using 18-48 years of data it always only used 10 years.
This leads to shorter epochs during training and increases the likelihood of an early stop
being premature. Since the training uses 10 000 data points per batch in each epoch there are
far fewer steps for the cutoff scheme. This means it has to go through more epochs than other
schemes to “travel” to a local maximum in predictive power.

Furthermore, the split between training data and validation data could likely have had a
norming effect on the impact of weighting schemes. Therefore it is not guaranteed that the
results of this study confirming small or no impact with weighting schemes would be
replicated in a study with a different training/validation split.

The dataset is not complete, there are missing returns for some stocks in different time
periods. These rows with missing returns are excluded but could nonetheless affect the
training of the network. For example, there are many more missing data points for the oldest
data, from the 50s and 60s. This leads to different classes of data points being represented
disproportionally. With fewer old data points and more newer ones, the training will naturally
tend to fit newer data better. This could inadvertently account for concept drift and actually
reduce the effect weighting schemes would have. It could be imagined that on a complete
dataset a larger effect could be seen from weighting schemes.
Overall the predictive power is low, with R-squared being measured in fractions of a percent.
This gives credibility that the stock market as a whole is almost truly random. That does not
mean that the model performs poorly or well, however. An analysis showing the return of
trading strategies using networks trained with the different weighting schemes might show
larger discrepancies between returns.

This work gives an indication that weighting data during training might be too naive of an
approach to combat concept drift, at least by itself, especially with the training/validation
split used which partially accounts for concept drift. There is more work to be done that
would further strengthen or refute the results of this work. Some ideas are written under
“Suggestions for Further Research”.

Conclusion

To summarize the results of this study, it is not impactful to time-weight data when training a
neural network that predicts monthly stock returns. The performance of the model remains
similar across different weighting schemes compared to no weighting, and has similar
predictivity between years as shown in the plot above. While a few caveats that have been
discussed above exist, this work demonstrates that weighting historical data is most likely not
sufficient to avoid concept drift in its entirety during training.

Suggestions for Further Research

While our study shows little evidence that weighting training data improves the program’s
accuracy, there is a vast number of other possible combinations of different machine learning
program designs and datasets that could be examined.

To illustrate, ML program designs can vary in: the number of neural network layers used, the
number of neurons within each layer, size of training data, size of validation data, and the
discount factor used, just to mention a few dimensions. And within each of these dimensions,
there is a lot of room for variability. For example, the number of neurons in each layer can be
anywhere from two to several hundred.

In addition, the dataset of stock prices used can vary in the geography of firms, size of firms,
time period examined, and the number of stock price factors examined. And within each of
these dimensions, there is again a lot of room for variability.

In total, the number of combinations of ML program design and datasets that could be studied
easily exceeds one million. Naturally, if each combination was examined we should expect
many of them to yield similar results as our study; that time-weighting training data has little
to no effect on ML prediction performance. However, it is not unreasonable to believe that
there could also be combinations that do show an effect of time-weighting training data. We,
therefore, suggest that future research should examine a larger quantity of diverse
combinations of datasets and ML program designs, and perform a comparative meta-study of
these examinations, in order to reach a final conclusion on the matter.
References

Drobetz, W. and Otto, T., 2020. Empirical Asset Pricing via Machine Learning: Evidence
from the European Stock Market. SSRN Electronic Journal.

Gu, S., Kelly, B. and Xiu, D., 2018. Empirical Asset Pricing via Machine Learning. SSRN
Electronic Journal.

Lu, J., Liu, A., Dong, F., Gu, F., Gama, J. and Zhang, G., 2018. Learning under Concept
Drift: A Review. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, p.1-1.

Nagel, Stefan. Machine Learning in Asset Pricing. Princeton University Press, 2021,
https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctv19fvx8r. p.59-63.

Pesaran, M. and Pick, A., 2011. Forecast Combination Across Estimation Windows. Journal
of Business &amp; Economic Statistics, 29(2), p.307-318.
Appendix Matlab

Years = 1988:2016;
Exp =
[0.67,0.27,-0.45,1.24,0.80,1.09,-0.80,1.26,-0.09,-0.54,0.02,1.66,-0.70,0.48,-0.78,2.42,1.34,-0.13,1.10,-
1.07,-2.14,1.72,1.7,-1.34,1.21,2.91,-0.72,-1.01,0.95];
Lin =
[0.63,0.3,-0.19,1.15,0.75,1.24,-0.84,1.24,-0.05,-1.01,-0.01,1.51,-0.52,0.82,-0.66,2.32,1.12,-0.42,1.21,-
1.16,-2.41,1.55,1.67,-1.40,1.12,2.82,-0.37,-1.05,0.97];
Cutoff =
[0.38,0.13,-0.87,0.96,0.83,1.22,-1.03,1.33,-0.50,-1.1,-0.22,1.28,-0.74,0.56,-0.67,1.67,1.20,-0.19,1.40,-
1.32,-2.83,1.14,1.9,-1.32,1.04,3.06,-0.5,-0.69,0.70];
NoWeight =
[0.64,0.33,-0.62,1.35,0.78,0.95,-0.73,1.34,-0.13,-0.41,0.09,1.54,-0.63,0.72,-0.69,2.33,0.78,-0.14,1.32,-
1.1,-2.34,1.53,1.69,-1.32,1.01,2.41,-0.43,-1.2,0.8];

plot(Years, Exp)
hold on
plot(Years, Lin)
plot(Years, Cutoff)
plot(Years, NoWeight)
legend('Exp','Lin', 'Cutoff', 'No Weight')

mean(Cutoff)
mean(Exp)
mean(NoWeight)
mean(Lin)
Appendix Neural Network

See Python files for machine learning models.