GOVERNMENT INTERVENTIONS
DURING A CRISIS

AN EVENT STUDY OF THE EXTRAORDINARY BUDGET
ANNOUNCEMENTS’ EFFECT ON THE SWEDISH STOCK
MARKET

HARIS BADAKHSH

JEAN-PIERRE SALIBA

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2022
Government Interventions During a Crisis: An Event Study of the Extraordinary
Budget Announcements’ Effect on the Swedish Stock Market

Abstract:

The impact of several stimulus packages implemented by the Swedish government during the
COVID-19 pandemic on the Swedish stock market is studied in this paper. An event study
methodology is used to investigate the abnormal returns of Swedish firms during four
announcements related to the stimulus packages. We discovered no significant results on an
aggregate level among three separate stimulus packages. Our findings, on the other hand, show
that the stimulus package related to short-term layoffs had a significantly positive impact on
returns of sectors affected severely in terms of lost net sales by the COVID-19. Furthermore,
because we looked at fiscal policy changes in the context of a high degree of market
uncertainty, our research is relevant to the literature on investor behavior during a period that
featured a high level of uncertainty. Finally, our study provides a contribution to the literature
focusing on the effect of fiscal policy changes on asset prices.

Keywords:
   Fiscal policy, Stock market, COVID-19, Stimulus package, Event study

Authors:
   Haris Badakhsh (24803)
   Jean-Pierre Saliba (24738)

Tutors:
   Christian Thomann, Researcher, Swedish House of Finance

Examiner:
   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Acknowledgments:
   We would first like to thank our supervisor, Christian Thomann, whose suggestions and
feedback were extremely useful throughout the process of our study. We are also sincerely
thankful to Håkan Lyckeborg for his assistance with the statistical methods used in our thesis.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Haris Badakhsh and Jean-Pierre Saliba, 2022

                                     2
1. Introduction

                 1
The COVID-19 pandemic struck the world in 2020 and was declared an ongoing pandemic,
and as of 2020, the pandemic had reached over 1.8 million fatalities (WHO, 2020). Even
though the virus imposed severe health challenges, the consequences stemming from COVID-
19 also affected the global macroeconomic landscape. Through constrained human interactions
due to restrictions and lockdowns, most firms had to take actions such as reorganizing work,
which led to substantial layoffs leading to an unstable labor market. Diminished consumer
stability, together with the consequent trade difficulties, in turn, deteriorated the financial
performance of firms in terms of revenue losses and organizational uncertainties (Altig et al.,
2020).

The recession connected to the COVID-19 is estimated to be the most extraordinary recession
since the Great Depression in 1929 (IMF, 2020). Increased volatility in the financial markets
coupled with uncertainties sparked the market crash in March 2020 (Baker et al. 2020). In
addition, Baker et al. (2020) associated nearly half of the forecasted contraction in production
with COVID-induced volatility, implying that the COVID-19-related uncertainties highly
influenced forecasters’ beliefs regarding future economic growth. Consequently, the OMXS30
index declined by 30%, causing financial distress and increasing the probability of bankruptcy
in different industries. In March 2020, the Swedish growth in bankruptcies compared to the
previous year increased by 123% and 105%, respectively, for the restaurant and hotel, and the
transportation industries (Statista, 2022). In order to cope with the destructive impacts
stemming from the pandemic, the Swedish government responded with stimulus packages and
other fiscal stabilization measures. The different government stabilization measures also aimed
at targeting different areas that would help mitigate the experienced economic consequences
of corporations (Reuters, 2020). One of the measures studied in this paper was set to contribute
to strengthened liquidity among the affected firms (Anstand). The other measure was more
focused on supporting short-term work (Korttidsarbete), and the last measure involved direct
support for firms that experienced a significant decrease in revenue (Omstallningsstod).
Although the stock market crash in March 2020 was estimated to be one of the most severe in
history, a rapid recovery could be seen as the stock markets recovered in just a couple of
months, with the OMX index rising by 16% from May 2020 to August 2020 (Gustafsson and
Brömsen, 2021).

While many studies have focused on the effects of changes in monetary policy on stock markets
(Thorbecke, 1997; Bernanke and Kuttner, 2005; Neuhierl and Weber, 2019), there seems to be
a lack of literature focusing on effects that stems from fiscal policy measures. Therefore, we
add to this literature by examining the Swedish stock market reaction to the fiscal stabilization
measures undertaken during the COVID-19 pandemic in Sweden. The events analyzed in this
study constitute four extraordinary budget announcements proposed by the Swedish
government's financial department. Usually, budgets are proposed once a fiscal year and
illustrate the expected distribution of the government expenditures, thus being less uncertain.
However, the COVID-19 crisis overturned the usual order, which led to several so-called extra
change budgets. Because investors were unable to predict the quantity and timing of these
budget amendments in the same manner that they could with a standard budget, these budget
adjustments were perceived as unexpected and unpredictable. Thus, it supports the
unexpectedness, which is a vital assumption in the event study methodology when investigating
the efficiency of the stock market reaction to events (Brown and Warner, 1980).

1
 The coronavirus pandemic will, in this paper, be denoted as COVID-19.

                                     3
In this study, our research question predominantly concerns two issues.

1. What was the reaction of the Swedish equity market to the announcement of these
stimulus packages?

2. Was there any heterogeneity in the impact of these stimulus packages on firms
depending on whether they were in an unaffected, affected, or strongly affected sectors in terms
of lost net sales?

We base our study on the Swedish stock market and use the market model, an event study
methodology, to capture abnormal returns around the event dates on publicly traded Swedish
firms. The abnormal returns represent the difference between a stock’s realized return and the
estimated expected return by the market model. By accumulating the abnormal returns and
taking the average within an event window, we estimate the average abnormal returns and the
cumulative average abnormal returns, which will be denoted CAAR henceforth. In order to
examine the Swedish stock market reaction, we perform significance tests on each CAAR over
the different event windows. Our results show significantly negative CAARs at the 5% level
across three event windows on the announcement of 16 March 2020. However, due to the
prevalence of information uncertainty and high financial market volatility around that event,
we argue that external forces most likely influenced those results. Furthermore, our results on
different sectors imply significantly positive CAARs for the strongly affected and affected
sectors by the COVID-19 around the announcement on 14 April 2020, which primarily
involved increased support for short-time work. Additionally, in our cross-sectional regression
analysis, we discovered a significantly positive correlation between the dependent variable
CAAR and the independent variable Korttidsarbete on the event of 14 April 2020. These
findings initiate a discussion on how different government-financed stimulus packages are
perceived by different firms’ that operate in different sectors. Given that this study also is based
on a time of a worldwide crisis studying abnormal returns around a time of crisis also
contributes to the literature on how countercyclical fiscal policies affect asset prices, such as
common stocks.

2. Literature Review

2.1 Previous Studies on Fiscal Policy

This study explicitly studies the implications of fiscal stabilization policy measures on asset
prices. Hence our study is related to that of Croce et al. (2012), who studied the effects of fiscal
policies on asset prices. They used a production-based general equilibrium model and modelled
the taxation implications from fiscal stabilization policies. Their findings highlight that
stimulus initiatives enacted in response to the financial crisis can generate concerns about
future tax pressures, which can have a negative impact on the cost of equity. When studying
whether countercyclical fiscal policies are effective, Gordon and Leeper (2005) highlight the
long-term costs that come along with certain countercyclical fiscal policies. In that way,
Gordon and Leeper conclude that the implemented policies have a counterproductive impact
through, for instance, the implications of the future tax uncertainty on the equity cost of capital.
Furthermore, Foresti and Napolitano (2017) investigated the effects of fiscal policies on stock
market indices in the Eurozone. Their findings manifest that fiscal policy affects the stock
market in that an increase in public deficit makes the stock market decline. Moreover, Gomes

                                     4
et al. (2013) found that increases in public debt led to significant increases in the riskless rate
and a reduction in the equity premium, while higher capital income tax rates led to a higher
equity premium.

Our events surrounding changes in fiscal policy involve significant government expenditures;
thus, it is also essential to understand the underlying economic implications. From the
intertemporal government budget constraint, it is explained that tax and spending decisions are
connected because increased spending must be matched by additional revenues; if not, a budget
deficit will occur (Trehan et al.,1988). Due to decreasing tax revenue and increased spending,
the Swedish government’s budget surplus turned into a large budget deficit amidst COVID-19,
which led to a substantial increase in the Swedish public debt (Riksgälden, 2021). As a result,
we also contribute to the abovementioned literature by presenting evidence from the Swedish
stock market's response to increased public debt due to COVID-19 stimulus packages.

Furthermore, as our study is directly linked to government spending, there are also earlier
studies focused on the government spending’s implications on the macroeconomic
environment. Earlier research has, for instance, studied the relationship between government
spending and the cross-section of stock returns (Belo et al., 2013). However, Belo et al. (2013)
studied the average returns conditional on the presidential partisan cycle, based on the
democratic and republican presidential terms, which differs from this study as it investigates
the effects of increased government expenditures during the COVID-19 crisis. Since our study
investigates implications on the financial markets and, more specifically, the Swedish stock
market, it is important to focus on the reactions of common stocks. Da et al. (2018) studied the
effects of fiscal policies on equity returns in different states in the US. Their first finding was
that countercyclical fiscal policies decrease the consumption risk, and their second finding was
that countercyclical states induce lower stock returns for investors.

As our study focuses on changes in government policies, one aspect to consider is the
government policy uncertainty. Considering the implications on the overall economic activity,
Kim (2019) instead examined how government spending policy uncertainty affects economic
activity in terms of different transmission channels using US time series data. Kim’s findings
show that the adverse effects of the uncertainty involve prolonged negative effects on GDP,
private consumption, and private investment. Brogaard and Detzel (2015) investigated the asset
pricing implications of economic policy uncertainty. Their study found a negative correlation
between simultaneous market returns and changes in economic policy uncertainty.
Furthermore, they also found that economic policy uncertainty affects the discount rate. Boothe
and Raid (1989) concluded that Canadian fiscal policy did not affect any excess holding period
returns and, in that way, nor the interest rates. This study further contributes to the literature
above in that the effects of fiscal stimulus packages on stock returns are investigated during a
time of liquidity shortage, economic uncertainty, and high market volatility.

2.2 Previous Studies Regarding Announcements

Our study focuses on events surrounding the COVID-19 outbreak and, in that way, investigates
the effects of the stimulus actions taken by the Swedish government on the Swedish stock
market. More specifically, as our events constitute announcements that pertain to new
information that is revealed to market participants, one theoretical framework that this study is
based on is the efficient market hypothesis. According to the efficient market hypothesis
(Fama, 1970), the financial markets are efficient, which means that the asset price should reflect
all the available information and that the price is thus correct in the sense that it reflects the

                                     5
collective analysis of all investors. However, the chosen events in this study can be categorized
as “shocks” due to the unprecedented nature of COVID-19 and the uncertainty regarding the
economic implications, which concretizes the then prevailing information uncertainty.
Regarding information uncertainty, Zhang (2006) studied the relation between information
uncertainty and stock returns. Zhang (2006) found evidence that bad news predicts relatively
lower future returns and that good news instead predicts relatively higher future returns. Zhang
(2006) also mentioned that when the market is influenced by higher information uncertainty,
investors’ reaction following bad news is greater than that to positive news, which can be
observed in the increased level of errors involved in their forecasts. Furthermore, Nofsinger
(2001) investigated the investor behavior of both institutional and individual investors around
macroeconomic news and found an increased trading volume stemming from both the activity
of institutional and individual investors. Most relevant to this study is the information
uncertainty in combination with an increased trading activity of individual and institutional
investors around macroeconomic news and the effects on asset prices in the aftermath of the
COVID-19.

When examining the reaction of stocks’, it is important to note that several determinants can
be behind specific movements in stock prices, and multiple studies have examined what moves
stock prices. When investigating the determinants of aggregate movements in stock prices,
Cutler et al. (1988) found that one-third of the variation in stock returns induced by
macroeconomic news is challenging to be explained. Other factors influencing the stock prices
involved inflation, interest rates, volatility, and real money supply. Moreover, they also
emphasized the effect of non-economic news in the study. Brogaard et al. (2022) also recently
examined the determinants behind stock movements. They used a return variance model in
order to examine the distinct roles of contrast types of information and noise in the movements
of stock prices. They found that 31% of the return variance stems from noise, 37% comes from
firm-specific public information, and 24% is explained by firm-specific private information.

Forasmuch as our study aims at examining the reaction of the Swedish equity market to changes
in government policy, Pastor and Veronesi (2012) provide us with a theoretical framework
regarding government policy uncertainty and asset prices. In their study, they analyzed how
changes in government policy affect stock prices. Their model involves uncertainty about
government policy, including decisions and announcements with economic motives. One of
their findings was related to the degree to which a firm is exposed to the government policy
announcement. Accordingly, the more a firm is exposed to the policy announcement, the higher
future expected returns could be expected, conditional on the state of the economy. Pastor and
Veronesi (2012) also argued that government policy affects stock prices through two channels:
future cash flows and discount rates. While the cash flow effect can be positive if the
government acts as a benevolent agent, the discount rate will still be negative due to the
uncertainty involved in the policy change. Nevertheless, which factor will be dominating
depends on the state of the economy. If the economy is in a deep downturn, the positive effect
of the cash flow will dominate as the government will be providing the economy with put
protection. Thus, their findings are relevant for our study as we are investigating the changes
in policy during a significant downturn in the economy coupled with the government acting
extensively as a benevolent agent to stimulate the economy. Hence, like Pastor and Veronesi
(2012), we also focus on government policy announcements involving economic motives,
while this event study is based on the COVID-19 pandemic.

Regarding reactions to different fiscal policy announcements, Sahalia et al. (2012) investigated
the effect of macroeconomic and financial policy-related announcements during the 2008-2009

                                     6
crisis. They found results indicating that interest rate cuts and bank recapitalization was
estimated to have the most significant effect on the market. Earlier literature has also
extensively focused on a specific group when studying the effects of fiscal policy, namely
financial institutions. Demirgüç et al. (2021) found that the effects of the COVID-19 shock
were more long-lasting on banks in comparison to non-banks. Moreover, banks with lower
liquidity before the crisis also experienced a more significant decline in stock returns.
Furthermore, Demirgüc et al. (2021) also found that announcements surrounding liquidity
support and borrower assistance most positively impacted the abnormal returns of banks.
Norden et al. (2013) studied the influence of government interventions on the stock returns of
financial institutions, such as banks. They found significant results in that government
interventions during the 2008-2009 financial crisis positively affected the stock returns of
financial corporations. Similarly, Pennathur et al. (2014) studied the stock market implications
in connection to the government interventions on financial services industry groups during the
financial crisis of 2008-2009. Their study manifests that firms with more leverage experience
lower abnormal returns around the event period. However, in contrast to those studies, we
include multiple non-financial industries in order to capture differences in reactions among the
different industries. To that end , our second hypothesis in this study is formulated to
investigate the differential reaction of different groups of sectors to the announced stimulus
packages.

3. Hypotheses

We formulated the following three hypotheses after reviewing the literature on the influence
of fiscal policy changes on the stock market, as well as the market's reaction to announcements.
Our hypotheses are built in a systematic way to quantify the impact of stimulus packages on
an aggregate level, which includes the full sample of firms, and then to see if there is a
heterogeneous reaction across sectors based on how severely they were affected by the
COVID-19. Finally, we examine whether the stimulus packages contained in the relevant
announcements can account for the stock market's cumulative average abnormal returns in each
event. In addition, we supplied pertinent literature that aided us in developing each hypothesis.

Hypothesis 1:
The extraordinary budget announcements had a statistically significant effect on the Swedish
stock market returns CAAR ≠ 0.

The underlying assumptions behind the first hypothesis are that the market is efficient and that
the studied events are characterized as being unexpected. One aspect that supports the
unexpectedness of the events can be allocated to the frequency because usually, budget
announcements only occur once a fiscal year. However, during COVID-19, the Swedish
government had to frequently change its budget in connection to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Furthermore, considering the Economic Policy Uncertainty index in Sweden (Armelius et al.,
2017), one can also witness the prevailing economic policy uncertainty during the period
March 2020 – April 2020. Graph A.3 in the appendix illustrates this uncertainty, supporting
the unexpectedness of the different events, which also is an essential assumption in the event
study methodology (Brown and Warner, 1980). Furthermore, hypothesizing obtaining a
significant reaction from the market upon announcement of these stimulus packages is based
on the findings of Pastor and Veronesi (2012). COVID-19 can be seen as a deep downturn due
to its severe economic consequences. According to Pastor and Veronesi (2012), in a deep bad
state of the economy, government intervention can be perceived positively by the stock market
as it will provide the market with a floor and stop the economy from descending deeper into

                                     7
recession. Accordingly, we argue that there was a high degree of uncertainty in respect of the
exact magnitude and timing of these interventions as well as the consequent impact thereof. As
a result, we argue that based on the unexpectedness of the events and the government acting as
a benevolent agent to maximize the utility of the market, the announcements could have
induced a significant reaction in the stock market.

Hypothesis 2:
The extraordinary budget announcements had a different effect on the abnormal returns
depending on whether the sector was strongly affected, affected, or unaffected by the COVID-
19 pandemic, such that the cumulative average abnormal returns differed among the strongly
affected, affected, and unaffected sectors.

Due to the nature of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is manifested that certain sectors were affected
more in comparison to other sectors, and hence being more targeted by the extraordinary budget
announcements. For instance, according to the Swedish Tax Agency, as seen in table A.7 in
the appendix, sectors such as Accommodation and Food Services and Transportation and
Storage received a significant percentage of the stimulus package relating to Omstallningsstod.
As a result, we expect these sectors' reaction to the announcement associated with
Omstallningssod to be more substantial than Construction, which received considerably less
funding. The same reasoning is applied to other announcements. The findings from Pastor and
Veronesi (2012) also show that the more a firm is exposed to the economic announcement, the
stronger reaction in stock returns will be observed. Furthermore, as stated by the Swedish
Financial Department (Regeringskansliet, 2020), only firms affected by COVID-19 to a certain
degree are eligible to benefit from the government-financed stimulus packages. We also use
Belo et al. (2013)'s findings, which indicate that companies' exposure to government
expenditure has a heterogeneous impact on their return performance. Because the magnitude
of the stimulus was distributed based on how severely a sector was affected by COVID-19,
sectors severely affected benefited extensively from these packages. In that way, the second
hypothesis is formulated because different sectors might have been more or less affected by
the extraordinary budget announcements.

Hypothesis 3:
The independent variables that are related to the fiscal measures taken by the government can
explain the cumulative average abnormal returns of stocks, such as Omstallningsstod, Anstand,
and Korttidsarbete.

This hypothesis is formulated in accordance with the findings of Belo et al. (2013). According
to their findings, increased government purchase from a specific industry will increase that
industry's output, thereby impacting the cash flow of that industry and consequently affecting
the returns. In the events of interest, according to the Swedish government and the Swedish
Tax Agency, there were three main financial aid channels to mitigate the adverse economic
effects of COVID-19 on the economic landscape: Omstallningstod, Anstand, and
Korttidsarbete (Regeringskansliet, 2020; Skatteverket, 2020). These stimulus measures differ
from those used by Belo et al. (2013) in that they are not related to output, but they are
comparable because they indicate the inflow of funds into each industry. Swedish firms
affected by COVID-19, for example, would be able to lower employee-related expenses by up
to 70 percent through Korttidsarbete and get up to 75 percent of their fixed costs through
Omstallningsstod. Finally, they would be able to obtain a temporary tax respite through
Anstand. Insomuch as all of these measures will affect the corporation's cash flow, they might
have affected their return performance. Bartlett and Morse (2021) also offered evidence for the

                                     8
Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) impact on small enterprises in the U.S. They stated that as
a consequence of this initiative, these businesses' survival capabilities grew by 20,5 percent,
but that it also had a positive influence on larger businesses. Considering the potentially
positive impact of these stimulus packages on the cash flow along with its improving effect on
the survival capabilities of firms, we examine whether these independent variables may explain
the CAAR's movement during the extraordinary budget announcements.

4. Data and Methodology

4.1 Data

The chosen daily stock price data was retrieved from Datastream, ranging from 1 January 2019
– 31 December 2020. We also made sure only to include trading days rather than calendar days
to arrive at a correct estimation period. In the selection of specific stocks, we based our
selection on stocks that, as of the end of 2020, had a market capitalization higher than 500
MKR. Bessembinder et al. (1996) found that the market-wide information is mostly reflected
in the stock returns of larger firms. According to their presented evidence, larger firms
generally are overtraded upon the release of market-related news, primarily because they are
typically monitored by larger analysts and are more subject to news stories. Thus, based on
these findings, the sample of firms is constrained to firms with relatively larger market
capitalization. Furthermore, only common stocks that were traded on the Swedish stock
exchange (Stockholm stock exchange, First North, and Spotlight) were selected.

Moreover, we excluded firms in sectors with insufficient data, such as sectors with only 1-2
listed firms except for affected sectors and pharmaceutical companies (NACE 72). After that,
we merged the stock price data with each stock’s specific nomenclature for economic activities
(NACE), the classification of economic activities in the European Union, which was
downloaded from Thomson Reuters. Regarding the sectoral distribution, a two-digit
classification was used, which also is illustrated in table 1. Moreover, we also cleaned for stocks
with missing data during the estimation period and the chosen event windows; for instance,
these firms might have been newly listed stocks or delisted. Finally, our finished sample of
stocks constituted 217 stocks that fulfilled all the criteria.

Regarding our regression variables, the market capitalization, leverage ratio, and price to book
ratio were all retrieved from Thomson Reuters. Moreover, we also used industry-specific data
provided by different public state authorities. The data on the financial aid distribution and the
tax relief to different industries were collected through the Swedish Tax Agency (Skatteverket).
Furthermore, the data surrounding the employment-related cost reduction was provided by the
Swedish Agency for Economic and Regional Growth (Tillväxtverket). The industry
classification used by the Swedish Public Agencies was based on “Svensk
näringslivsindelning” (SNI), which is equivalent to the NACE classification, and thus explains
the use of NACE classification when categorizing stocks in different sectors and industries.
Since the data was only available at an industry level, we used the NACE classification to
assign each stock the corresponding industry value used in our regression, which is illustrated
in table 3.

                                     9
                             Table 1: Sectoral Categorizaiton
 NACE Description N Change in     Unaffected /Affected /
                                                                Net Sales         Strongly affected
   51 Air transport 1 -49% A/SA
   55 Accommodation 2 -40% A/SA
   29 Manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers, and      6 -15% A/SA
                                semi-trailers
   24 Manufacture of basic metals 4 -12% A/SA
   50 Water transport 1 -10% A/SA
   93 Sports activities and amusement and recreation     1 -9% A/SA
                                     activities
   25 Manufacture of fabricated metal products, except    7 -7% A/SA
                   machinery and equipment
   28 Manufacture of machinery and equipment 20 -7% A/SA
   30 Manufacture of other transport equipment 3 -7% A/SA
   32 Other manufacturing 9 -7% A/SA
   35 Electricity, gas, steam, and air conditioning      3 -6% A
                              supply
   17 Manufacture of paper and paper products 6 -4% A
   31 Manufacture of furniture 3 -3% A
   22 Manufacture of rubber and plastic products 2 -2% A
   26 Manufacture of computer, electronic and optical    33 -2% A
                             products
   27 Manufacture of electrical equipment 9 -1% UA
   45 Wholesale and retail trade and repair of motor     3 -1% UA
                       vehicles and motorcycles
   46 Wholesale trade, except for motor vehicles and     5 0% UA
                           motorcycles
   43 Specialized construction activities 4 1% UA
   61 Telecommunications 4 1% UA
   71 Engineering activities and related technical      4 1% UA
                            consultancy
   10 Manufacture of food products 4 2% UA
   16 Manufacture of wood and of products of wood    2 2% UA
                       and cork, except furniture
   20 Manufacture of chemicals and chemical products 6 3% UA
   62 Computer programming, consultancy, and      16 3% UA
                                related activities
   68 Real estate activities 28 3% UA
   81 Services to buildings and landscape activities 1 3% UA
   41 Construction of buildings 9 4% UA
   42 Civil engineering 5 4% UA
   70 Activities of head offices; management        3 4% UA
                           consultancy activities
   47 Retail trade, except of motor vehicles and      10 5% UA
                           motorcycles
   80 Security and investigation activities 3 5% UA

Table 1 reports the summary statistics of the different economic sectors. NACE represents the two-digit sectorial
classification. The total amount of firms in the working sample (N) refers to the sector that each firm belongs to.
Change in net sales is the median of the change in net sales between 2020-2019 for each sector. Affected/Unaffected refers
to sectors that experienced a negative/positive change in net sales during year 2020. (A) stands for affected, (SA)
stands for strongly affected and (UA) stands for unaffected.

Besides the industry and sectoral categorization, we also distinguished between each sector in
terms of being strongly affected, affected, and unaffected by the COVID-19 pandemic,
illustrated in table 1. In order to classify the sample of sectors as being strongly affected,
affected, and unaffected, we conducted a boxplot analysis.

                                     10
                               Table 2: Summary Statistics
                      Sectors Mean SD p25 Median p75
  Change in Net Sales 32 -.044 0.118 -.07 -.01 .03
Table 2 represents the summary statistics for the boxplot analysis regarding the change in net sales between 2020-
2019 among all the 32 sectors included in the data sample.

                                      Figure 1: Boxplot

Figure 1 shows the boxplot of the change in net sales of each sector between 2020-2019 among the 32 sectors included
in the data sample.

According to figure 1, the affected sectors are the sectors with a change in net sales between
the lowest value and the sample’s median. The strongly affected sectors are identified to be
sectors whose change in net sales varied between the lowest value and Q1 of the boxplot.
Finally, unaffected sectors constitute the sectors that are positioned between the median and
upper whisker. This categorization was done using the Swedish Central Bureau of Statistics
database, which provided us with the change in net sales of each two-digit sector between 2020
and 2019. Moreover, as the database provides only constraints for the number of employees, it
is assumed that firms recruiting over 50 employees are likely to be listed, and, therefore, only
these firms’ data was retrieved. The negative change in net sales represents a direct effect of
COVID-19 on the sector. This relationship is also aligned with the state evaluation of the
pandemic’s impact on Swedish sectors by the Swedish Tax Agency (Skatteverket, 2020).

Furthermore, the Swedish Financial Department stated that only firms that had experienced a
negative change in net sales would be able to receive reduced revenue-based financial aid. As
for the tax deferment, the Swedish Tax Agency stated that only firms unable to make their
payment due to uncontrollable circumstances are eligible to apply for tax deferment
(Skatteverket, 2020). Another stimulus package that was included in the Swedish government’s
effort to mitigate the adverse consequences of COVID-19 on the Swedish market was
employee-related cost reductions. This measure also targeted the firms that experienced
temporary and serious financial problems because of COVID-19 (Regeringskansliet, 2020).
There exists a consistent relationship between being eligible to receive financial aid and being
affected by the COVID-19. Thus, the more COVID-19 impacted a firm, the more exposure it
had to the extraordinary budget announcements. Additionally, sectors that were not eligible for
these stimulus packages and sectors for which data was unavailable were omitted. For instance,
the financial sector was not given funding from the stimulus package related to
Omstallningsstod (Skatteverket, 2020), and there were also no available figures on the change
in net sales for the sector. Because including these sectors will prevent us from grouping the

                                     11
firms in strongly affected, affected, and unaffected sectors, we decided not to include them if
data for a sector was missing for any of the government's fiscal measures.

4.2 Method

4.2.1 Choice of Events

The events of interest in this study are the Swedish government’s extraordinary budget
revisions to alleviate the impact of the COVID-19 on the Swedish economy. The study aims at
investigating the effects of these measures on investors’ reactions to their announcements. Four
significant events were chosen from the lists of announcements published on the Swedish
government’s official website (Regeringskansliet, 2020).

   • 16 March 2020: The government proposed a crisis package for Swedish companies and
       jobs, and the proposal was based on an agreement between Socialdemokraterna,
        Centerpartiet, Liberalerna, and Miljöpartiet. This proposition mostly involved measures
       taken in order to strengthen the liquidity of Swedish corporations. The liquidity support
       meant that corporations could get a deferment of payments such as general payroll tax
        and value-added tax (Anstand). In this announcement, the government also introduced
        the support for short-term layoffs, in which the government announced that they would
        stand for the larger part of the employee-related costs (Korttidsarbete). In total, the
       proposed crisis package was estimated to involve 300 billion SEK in support, but not
        all of it constituting publicly financed expenditures.

   • 25 March 2020: Based on an agreement between Socialdemokraterna, Centerpartiet,
        Liberalerna, and Miljöpartiet, the government presented a government loan guarantee
      in order to make it easier for corporations to finance their operational activities. The
       government would guarantee corporations 70 percent of new loans from banks to
       corporations that had suffered economic difficulties due to the COVID-19. Moreover,
       firms affected financially by the COVID-19 were provided with the possibility to apply
        for temporary tax-payment respite (Anstand). According to this proposition, 100
       percent of profit for 2019 could be set aside and then set off against losses incurred
       during 2020. This approach would enable firms to get back the preliminary taxes paid
       for 2019. The proposal is estimated to lead to a 13 billion increase in liquidity.
       However, the measures mainly targeted small to mid-cap firms, but there was no legal
        limit on firm size.

   • 14 April 2020: Together with Centerpartiet and Liberalerna, the government proposed
       further measures to mitigate the consequences of COVID-19 on jobs and the economy
       in Sweden. The new system would allow corporations to decrease employees’ work
        time up to 80 percent, while the government would bear the largest part of the costs. As
        a result, companies would be able to decrease their costs of salaries by up to 70 percent,
       while the affected workers would still keep 90 percent of their salary. In total, the
       expected publicly financed expenditures related to this measure were estimated to be
       49 billion SEK. This proposition was mainly associated with “Korttidsarbete”.

    • 30 April 2020: The government, together with Centerpartiet and Liberalerna, presented
       a measure aimed at relieving the consequences of jobs and corporations. It involved
        adjustment support, and the object was to make it possible for corporations to overcome

                                     12
        their extreme losses in revenues. The criteria for being able to take advantage of this
       support was that the company had to experience revenue losses of at least 30 percent
       between March and April 2020. Furthermore, at most, the Swedish government can
       grant 75 percent of the percentage loss of revenue calculated on the fixed costs of
       operations. For instance, Firm A reported a reduction in sales of 30% and had fixed
       costs of 500 000 SEK. As a result of this program, the firm would be entitled to SEK
       112 500 SEK (75% x 30% x 500 000 SEK). In the proposition, they estimated the
       government expenditures in connection to this announcement to correspond to 39
       billion SEK. This proposition was primarily related to ”Omstallningsstod”.

These events were chosen based on their relevantly significant magnitude compared to other
announcements that were either insignificant in terms of magnitude or mostly focused on
unlisted firms. Hence, the list of events in this study includes only events that had the potential
to induce a market reaction.

                           Figure 2: OMXSPI Price Movement

Figure 2 illustrates the OMXSPI price movements between 01-01-2020 and 01-06-2020. Moreover, the graph
highlights four extraordinary budget announcements released on 16 March 2020, 25 March 2020, 14 April 2020, and
30 April 2020.

                                     13
4.2.2 Event Study

Following the event-study methodology proposed by MacKinlay (1997), this study aims to
analyze the abnormal returns of Swedish listed firms during the relevant events. While different
methodologies are available to separate the abnormal returns from the systematic market
movements, this study utilizes the market model proposed by MacKinlay (1997). This
approach is chosen partly due to the extensive usage of the market model in event studies
(Ahern, 2009) and that, according to Campbell et al. (1998), the marginal explanatory power
of other models, such as factor models, is minimal. However, Campbell et al. (1998) reason
that factor models have the potential to reduce the variance of the abnormal returns by adding
additional factors that provide further explanation for the systematic market movement. For
example, Fama and French (1993) included, in the estimation of average stock returns, a factor
related to the overall market and factors associated with the firm characteristics such as firm
size and book-to-market equity. Because we were unable to use a multifactor model to further
reduce the variance of the abnormal returns due to lack of data, this can be seen as a limitation
of our study.

4.2.3 Market Model

We use in this study The Market Model methodology for event studies of Campbell et al.
(1998). In the following sections, we first introduce the relevant intervals used in the market
model and thereafter explain the procedures used in calculating cumulative average abnormal
returns (CAAR), which are the main measures when investigating the reaction of the multiple
firms to the events of interest. Finally, we provide the methodology used when testing for the
significance of the obtained CAAR values.

4.2.3.1 Intervals

Relevant time intervals in this study are of three types: The estimation period, the event
windows, and the events. The estimation period and the event windows are chosen in alignment
with the proposed lengths in the event-study methodology of Campbell et al. (1998). The
estimation period covers 120 trading days prior to the event date, consistent with MacKinlay
(1997). More precisely, the cut-off of the estimation period is chosen to be two days before the
event date. According to Jeng and Jau-Lian (2020), as the market incorporates new information
sequentially, selecting a too distant estimation period from the event date runs the risk of not
including enough information regarding the systematic risk of the market, which may
consequently generate imprecise abnormal returns. Thus, the decided cut-off for the estimation
period in our study is close enough to the event windows to include all prevailing systematic
risks in the market.

The event windows are as follows: (-1,1), (-1,0), (0,1), (0,3). 0 denotes the event date, (-) refers
to the dates before the event, and (+) shows the dates after the occurrence of the event of

                                     14
interest. Additionally, the reason behind including one day of pre-event is to take into account
the possibility of the information being leaked before the announcements. To consider the
possibility of the market not being able to incorporate the information immediately, the upper
bound of the event window is widened between 1 to 3 days. The chosen event windows are
consistent with Bushnell et al. (2013).

Furthermore, during the COVID-19 period, various events occurred that may have influenced
the market, including the increase in COVID-19 cases, a reduction in oil prices, and COVID-
19 restrictions. Therefore, we use short event windows in order to minimize the risk of
incorporating the reaction to other events and, in that way, only capture the true market reaction
to the chosen events. We also based our shortened event windows on the findings of
McWilliams and Siegel (1997). They argued that if other events emerge during the events of
interest, it will give rise to confounding effects, consequently decreasing the precision of the
results.

4.2.3.2 Procedures Used in The Calculation of CAAR Values

In estimating the market model regression, we use the logarithmic returns of the stocks and the
benchmark (OMXSPI index) as described in equation (1). OMXSPI includes all of the stocks
listed on the OMX Nordic Exchange Stockholm, aiming to represent the Swedish market’s
overall state and fluctuations, thus being appropriate for our study as we focus on the Swedish
equity market.
                                                       Pt                                          (1)
                                   R(i,mkt),t = ln (    )
                                                     Pt−1

Where Pt,t−1 denotes the stock price or the benchmark price, and R(i,mkt),t represents its
logarithmic return. Moreover, in establishing a relationship between the firms’ stock return and
the benchmark market index, the following regression between the stock returns and the
benchmark market index is conducted over the estimation window, as shown in equation (2).

                                Ri,t = αi + βi ∗ Rmkt,t + εit (2)

Rit is the realized log return of stock i at day t, and Rmkt is the market log return at day t
approximated by the OMXSPI index. Applying this regression model over the estimation
period will generate the normal returns of the stocks. This expected normal returns of the
stocks are based on the estimated αi and β𝑖 in this OLS regression model. βi represents how
responsive the stock is regarding changes in the market, and αi shows the level of abnormal
returns observed by the stock during the estimation period. Moreover, the error term in the
equation is assumed to be an independent and identically distributed random variable.

Furthermore, through this model, the variation of the firms’ stock return that stems from the
market’s movement will be removed, and thus the variance of the abnormal returns will be
reduced. According to Campbell et al. (1998), this reduction in the variance of abnormal returns
will make it more probable to detect the effects of events. Furthermore, there exists a linear
relationship between the stock returns and the market returns. The estimated expected returns
generated by this model are usually denoted as normal returns, which implies that in the
absence of any significant event, the security of interest will generate a realized return
approximately equal to the estimated expected return. In contrast, if securities realized returns
are significantly different from the estimated expected returns, it shall indicate that a significant

                                     15
event had occurred, which will be reflected by the difference between the actual return and the
estimated expected return. Thus, in separating the normal returns from the abnormal returns,
we deduct the estimated normal returns from realized returns, resulting in abnormal returns for
the event windows.

                            ARit = Rit − (â i + β̂ i ∗ Rmkt) (3)

                                             Realized stock return Estimated expected
                                                                                       return by the market
                                                                       model

Where ARit is the abnormal return of stock i at day t, Rit is the realized log return of stock i at
day t, and Rmkt is the market log return at day t approximated by the OMXSPI index. To the
extent that the aim of this study is to provide evidence for the reaction of multiple firms to the
events of interest, we subsequently calculate the average of the abnormal returns included in
each sample using equation (4).

                                  1  N
                            AARt =  ∑ ARi,t                                   (4)
                                      N   i=1

Where AARt stands for the average abnormal returns of the stocks included in the sample on
date t and N represents the number of firms included in the sample. Finally, we calculate the
cumulative average abnormal returns by aggregating the AARs over the specific event
windows using the equation (5).
                                                             t2
                             CAAR(t ,t  = ∑ AARi,t                              (5)
                                               1 2)
                                                     t=t1
CAAR(t1,t2) denotes the cumulative average abnormal returns and AARi,t shows the average
abnormal returns. The firms that are included in this study comprise 217 Swedish firms that
are listed on any of the following exchanges: Nasdaq, First North, or Spotlight. Moreover,
aligned with Campbell et al. (1998) suggestions, the market index used in this study is based
on where the firms studied are mostly traded. Both stock prices for the sample firms and data
on the OMXSPI index were obtained from Datastream.

The calculations of cumulative average abnormal returns (CAAR) are done with the estudy
command (Pacicco et al., 2018) in STATA. As a first step, the study analyzes the cumulative
abnormal returns of all firms included in our sample test. Then, the sample test is divided into
firms that operate in sectors most exposed to the COVID-19 pandemic and firms that operate
in sectors not affected by the COVID-19. The cumulative average abnormal returns of these
groups are analyzed with the aim of finding any existing disparity between gäroups regarding
their reaction to the budget announcements.

4.2.3.3 Test for The Significance of The CAAR Values

Since the uncertainties stemming from the COVID-19 were largely prevalent during the events
in March 2020 and April 2020, it is important to consider the volatility surrounding the events.
Therefore, we use the generalized rank test (GRANK) by Kolari and Pynnönen (2011), a non-
parametric test, when testing for the significance of each cumulative average abnormal return.
Kolari and Pynönnen found that the GRANK test is superior to other rank tests when testing
for CAARs and is robust to event-induced volatility as well as the serial correlation among
abnormal returns. Kolari and Pynnönen (2010) highlighted that even minor cross-sectional

                                     16
correlation could lead to over-rejection of the hypothesis due to overestimation of the test
statistics. Therefore, due to the superiority of the GRANK test compared to popular parametric
and other non-parametric tests, the use of the GRANK test will provide robust empirical results
(Kolari and Pynönnen, 2011). Lastly, the calculation of the significance test is also done with
the estudy command in STATA.

4.2.4 Cross-Sectional Regression Model

In order to capture the effect of Omstallningsstod, Anstand, and Korttidsarbete on the CAAR
values of stocks, we regress each exposure variable that is included in the extraordinary budget
announcement; hence we get the following equations for each event:

 Event Regression model
 16 March 2020 CAARi,t = α + β1 ∗ Anstandj,t + β2 ∗ Korttidsarbetej,t + β3 ∗ Price_to_Book i,t       (6)
                                   + β4 ∗ Debt_to_Equityi,t + β5 ∗ Firm_Sizei,t + εi,t

 25 March 2020 CAARi,t = α + β1 ∗ Anstandj,t + β2 ∗ Price_to_Booki,t + β3 ∗ Debt_to_Equityi,t      (7)
                                   + β4 ∗ Firm_Sizei,t + εi,t

 14 April 2020 CAARi,t = α + β1 ∗ Korttidsarbetej,t + β2 ∗ Price_to_Booki,t + β3                  (8)
                                    ∗ Debt_to_Equityi,t + β4 ∗ Firm_Sizei,t + εi,t

 30 April 2020 CAARi,t = α + β1 ∗ Omstallningsstodj,t + β3 ∗ Price_to_Booki,t + β4               (9)
                                    ∗ Debt_to_Equityi,t + β5 ∗ Firm_Sizei,t + εi,t

A cross-sectional regression model is a common econometrics methodology to estimate stock
returns by including common factors across all stocks. Considering the firm control variables,
Banz (1981) found that the firm’s size has significant explanatory power in explaining stock
returns; thus, Firm_Size, in terms of each firm’s logarithmic market capitalization, is included
as a control variable in the regression model. Debt_to_Equity is introduced as a control variable
based on the findings of Bhandari (1988). The author found that firm leverage is associated
with risk and expected returns; thus, it has the potential to explain the calculated CAARs of the
stocks. Moreover, the relationship between the Price_to_Book and equity premium was
established by Stattman (1980) and Rosenberg et al. (1985), thus making this variable
important to be included as a control variable in our regression.

As illustrated by equations 6 - 9, not all of the independent variables Omstallningsstod, Anstand
and Korttidsarbete are regressed at each event. The regression model includes an exposure
variable only if it was mentioned in the announcement; otherwise, it will be excluded from the
regression model. This method is analogous to using dummy variables in the regression model,
which assigns a value of zero to an independent variable in order to remove it from the
regression model and a value of one in order to include it. According to Greene (2012),
including irrelevant variables will increase the estimator's variance and hence reduce the
model's accuracy. In order to highlight the approach, it is essential to consider the different
events that are studied in this paper. Following the event, on 16 March 2020, only tax relief
and short-term layoffs were announced as stimulus measures. Similarly, only revenue-based
aid was announced during the event on 30 April 2020. Therefore, we argue that including a
measure as an independent variable when the measure has not yet been announced is equivalent
to including an irrelevant variable. For instance, if the aim is to capture the explanatory value
of a specific measure, hence it is important that the measure has been announced to the public

                                     17
so that investors can process the related information. If not, there is no information on a specific
measure for investors to react to because it has not yet been revealed.

4.2.5 Constructed Independent Variables

In constructing the exposure variable of firms to Omstallningsstod, Anstand, and
Korttidsarbete, which constituted the three largest publicly financed aid channels
(Regeringskanslier, 2020), we follow the methodology used in Perotti (2008) and Belo et al.
(2013). The effect of government spending on industries was investigated by Perroti (2008),
who defined the government demand variable as follows:

                                              Git − Gi(t−1)
                                                            Si(t−1)

In the ratio, 𝐺𝑖 stands for the total sales of a specific industry to the government, and 𝑆𝑖
represents the total sales of the industry. While Perotti (2008) aimed to investigate the effect
of changes in government spending on private consumption, the same methodology was used
by Belo et al. (2013) in investigating the effect of government spending on asset prices. They
used government spending and constructed industry exposure variables that, in turn, also
represented the firm-level exposure to government spending. Replacing the government
spending with the amount of stimulus package allocated to a specific industry and the total
sales of industry with the total amount of stimulus package proposed, we constructed three
ratios that represent the exposure of a specific industry to stimulus packages proposed by the
Swedish government. Moreover, a larger ratio indicates that the industry received more aid
than the one with a lower ratio. Thus, it is assumed that there exists a positive relationship
between the ratio of this variable and the level of exposure to announcements related to this
fiscal policy. As data for firm-level is not available, we base our exposure variable on industry-
level data.

                              Table 3: Industry Exposure
 Industry NACE Description N Omstallningsstod Anstand Korttidsarbete

  C 10-33 Manufacturing 114 0.07462 0.18075 0.24854
  D 35 Electricity, gas, steam, and   3 0.00313 0.00229 0.00003
                        air conditioning supply
  F 41-43 Construction 18 0.00997 0.19724 0.02864
  G 45-47 Wholesale and retail trade;    18 0.11495 0.16008 0.16336
                        repair of motor vehicles
                      and motorcycles
  H 49-53 Transporting and storage 2 0.24359 0.09343 0.07474
  I 55-56 Accommodation and food    2 0.31526 0.05555 0.10969
                           service activities
  J 58-63 Information and            20 0.01547 0.05349 0.06307
                    communication
  L 68 Real estate activities 28 0.02664 0.01295 0.00629
  M 69-75 Professional, scientific, and   7 0.03309 0.06476 0.13874
                          technical activities
  N 77-82 Rental and leasing activities 4 0.06510 0.06610 0.06735
  R 90-93 Creative, arts and           1 0.06432 0.00876 0.03537
                         entertainment activities
Table 3 reports the summary statistics of the different economic sectors. Industry stands for the one-digit industry
classification according to the nomenclature for economic activities. NACE represents the two-digit sectorial

                                     18
classification. The total amount of firms in the working sample (N) refers to the sector to which each firm belongs.
Omstallningsstod is the exposure to the financial aid provided by the government and represents the percentage each
industry received of the total financial aid (over March 2020 – Oct 2020). Anstand is defined as the exposure to the
total tax relief provided by the government and represents the percentage each industry received of the total tax relief
(over March 2020 – Oct 2020). Korttidsarbete is the exposure to the total employment-related cost reduction and is
expressed in terms of the total percentage each industry received of the total employment related cost reduction that
was provided (over 2020).

Omstallningsstod

Bartlett and Morse (2021) studied the effect of fiscal programs during COVID-19 on small
businesses. However, they concluded regarding large enterprises that programs providing aid
to cover committed costs would increase the survival probabilities of these firms. Moreover,
they related the survival probability of a firm to revenue grit, labor flexibility, and committed
costs. According to the Swedish Finance Department, this stimulus package would enable
Swedish companies to receive compensation for a large part of their fixed costs for the periods
affected by the COVID-19 pandemic (Regeringskansliet, 2020). If the revenue loss of a firm
is 100 percent, the company would be able to receive compensation for 75 percent of the fixed
costs. Thus, the amount of aid received by a company is linear in relation to the percentage of
the loss of revenue. Based on the findings of Bartlett and Morse (2021), we assume that this
approach might have improved the survival probability of large enterprises and thus influenced
their returns. In order to measure the exposure of a firm to this stimulus package, we
constructed the following variable.

                          Financial aid received by the industy j (Mar 2020 − Oct 2020 )        (6)
  Omstallningsstod =
                     Total Financial aid provided by the government (Mar 2020 − Oct 2020)

The amount of financial aid received by a specific industry is standardized by the total amount
of aid provided by the government. In addition, the periods in the ratio consist of support
periods for which a firm could apply for Omstallningsstod. The first support period was March-
April 2020, but there have been more periods during the COVID-19’s first wave, which ranged
from March – to October 2020 (Socialstyrelsen, 2021). In order to capture the first wave of
COVID-19’s effect, we limit the support period to March - October 2020.

Anstand

                        Tax relief received by the industy j (Mar 2020 − Oct 2020)              (7)
       Anstand =
                  Total Tax relief provided by the government (Mar 2020 − Oct 2020)

Another primary target of the stimulus packages announced in the extraordinary budget
announcement was related to strengthening the liquidity of corporations (Regeringskansliet,
2020). It involved the possibility for firms to defer payments pertaining to the general payroll
tax, preliminary tax on salary, and the value-added tax. In order to measure the effect of the
exposure to the possibility of deferring tax payments, we use a variable that directly measures
each industry’s exposure to the announcement regarding the deferment of payments. The
variable is constructed by dividing the tax relief received by each industry by the total tax relief
that the government provided between the support periods of March 2020 - and October 2020,
which covers the significant COVID-19 period.

                                     19
Korttidsarbete

                       Employement related cost reduction received by the industy j (2020)        (8)
 Korttidsarbete =
                 Total Employement related cost reduction provided by the government (2020)

Since one of the targets of the extraordinary budget announcements regarded the increase in
layoffs, hence one way to measure the exposure is to consider the employment-related cost
reduction the government provided. In this case, we take inspiration from the findings of Kilic
and Wachter (2018), which examined the existence of a relationship between unemployment
and stock market valuation. Their model highlights the relation between labor markets and
volatility in equity. Furthermore, according to the extraordinary budget announcements
(Regerinskansliet, 2020), the main reason behind their proposal of support for short-time work
(Korttidsarbete) was to save the Swedish jobs and thus decrease the unemployment rate in the
Swedish labor market. Therefore, we construct an independent variable, Korttidsarbete, that
will measure the exposure of each industry to total employment-related cost reduction that was
provided by the government. Moreover, the support for short-term layoffs was the most
extensive publicly financed measure when considering the estimated costs among the three
chosen publicly financed aid channels in terms of budgetary impact.

5. Empirical Results and Analysis

5.1 Total Sample of Firms

In this section, the first hypothesis will be discussed and analyzed based on the results from
the calculations of the cumulative average abnormal returns (equation 5). The results of the
total sample of firms are further summarized in table 4 below.

          Table 4: Cumulative Average Abnormal Returns for The Chosen Events
                                  All The Firms
 Events N CAAR [-1,1] CAAR [-1,0] CAAR [0,1] CAAR [0,3]
 16 March 2020 (217 firms) -5.19%** -2.56% -4.99%** -5.69%**
                                         (0.0334) (0.1053) (0.0151) (0.0222)
 25 March 2020 (217 firms) -2.06% -1.77% -0.96% 0.12%
                                         (0.2272) (0.2409) (0.4021) (0.9692)
 14 April 2020 (217 firms) 2.09% 1.77% 0.40% -0.19%
                                         (0.1942) (0.2331) (0.9065) (0.6191)
 30 April 2020 (217 firms) 1.29% 0.72% 1.36%* 1.34%
                                         (0.1768) (0.3366) (0.0891) (0.1441)
*** p-value < .01, ** p-value <.05, * p-value <.1
p-values in parentheses
Table 4 reports the cumulative average abnormal returns for all the stocks included in the sample. The table represents
each CAAR over a specific event window for each event, where 0 constitutes the day of the event.

In this case, we hypothesized that the extraordinary budget announcements would have a
statistically significant effect on the Swedish stock market, which involves all the firms
included in our sample. Considering table 4, the CAARs for most of the event windows during
16 March 2020 are significantly negative at the 5% level. The results imply that the
extraordinary budget announcement on 16 March 2020 had a statistically significant negative
effect on the Swedish stock market returns. However, the CAARs for the event windows [-
1,1], [-1,0], and [0,1] during the extraordinary budget announcement on 25 March 2020 are
negative but not statistically significant, illustrating a non-significant effect at any level on the

                                     20
total sample of firms combined. Moreover, during 14 April and 30 April 2020, the stock market
reaction to the events seems to be different. Most of the CAARs during the event on 14 April
2020 were positive, except for the event window [0,3], but due to the non-significance of each
CAAR, those results do not support the first hypothesis. Lastly, the CAARs for the event on
30 April 2020 were all positive for each event window, and interestingly, the event window
[0,1] even turned out to be significantly positive at the 10% level.

When analyzing the results, it is important to note that the event on 16 March 2020 occurred
when the Stock markets all over the world, including the Swedish stock market, were exposed
to high uncertainties in terms of the COVID-19 outbreak, which in turn sparked the market
crash in March 2020 (Baker et al., 2020). Those uncertainties can be manifested in the
substantial increase in financial market volatility caused by the lack of knowledge regarding
the infectiousness and lethality of the COVID-19 virus (Baker et al., 2020). In that way, it can
be hard to capture the true effects of the extraordinary budget announcements on 16 March
2020 due to the market turmoil in March 2020. Even though the results from the GRANK test
consider the event-induced volatility, it is not feasible to make any conclusions regarding the
event on 16 March 2020 due to the external influences stemming from the COVID-19
pandemic. This is also in line with the findings of Brogaard et al. (2022), who found that a
substantial part of the stock variance could be explained by noise. Therefore, due to the
prevalence of noise on 16 March 2020, no concluding remarks can be made regarding that
specific event.

Other than the event on 16 March 2020, the results from the three other events seem to highlight
the quick stock market recovery (Gustafsson and Brömsen, 2021), which in turn reflects an
increased market optimism. Since the extraordinary budget announcements can be categorized
as positive announcements, it could be possible that a part of the increase in investor optimism
can be explained by the constructive fiscal interventions introduced by the Swedish
government. Nevertheless, since only the CAAR for the event window [0,1] on 30 April 2020
was significant at the 10% level, no such conclusions can be made. A plausible explanation
can be that the investors expect long-term costs because of the countercyclical fiscal policies,
such as a future tax uncertainty. As the increase in government expenditures will either be
financed via debt or through an increase in future tax income, it will affect the firm value by
impacting the equity cost of capital and the discount rate when discounting future cash flows
(Gordon and Leeper, 2005; Brogaard and Detzel, 2015).

Overall, the empirical results from this study do not provide consistent evidence showing that
the extraordinary budget announcements significantly affected the overall Swedish stock
market returns, which in this study involves all the firms included in the sample. As explained
earlier, the event on 16 March 2020 was most likely influenced by external noise due to the
market turmoil closely around that date, and none of the other events provided sufficient
statistical significance, other than the significant positive CAAR at the 10% level on 30 April
2020. In that way, the first hypothesis is rejected due to the ambiguity of the empirical results
regarding the effect of the different extraordinary budget announcement events.

                                     21
5.2 Differences among Different Groups (Unaffected, Affected and
Strongly Affected)

        Table 5: Cumulative Average Abnormal Returns for Different Groups of Sectors
                                  Panel A: Unaffected Sectors
 Events N CAAR [-1,1] CAAR [-1,0] CAAR [0,1] CAAR [0,3]
 16 March 2020 (116 firms) -6.54%** -3.25%** -6.11%*** -7.09%***
                                         (0.0137) (0.0460) (0.0056) (0.0070)
 25 March 2020 (116 firms) -1.19% -1.00% -0.23% 1.27%
                                         (0.4457) (0.5284) (0.6434) (0.6104)
 14 April 2020 (116 firms) 1.56% 1.38% -0.06% -0.85%
                                         (0.5190) (0.5057) (0.7523) (0.4264)
 30 April 2020 (116 firms) 1.41% 0.74% 1.41% 1.70%
                                         (0.2035) (0.5113) (0.1025) (0.1064)
*** p-value < .01, ** p-value <.05, * p-value <.1
p-values in parentheses

Panel A reports the cumulative average abnormal returns for the unaffected sectors in the data sample. The panel
represents each CAAR over a specific event window for each event, where 0 constitutes the day of the event.

                                  Panel B: Affected Sectors
 Events N CAAR [-1,1] CAAR [-1,0] CAAR [0,1] CAAR [0,3]
 16 March 2020 (101 firms) -3.65% -1.78% -3.72% -4.09%
                                          (0.2641) (0.4775) (0.1715) (0.2007)
 25 March 2020 (101 firms) -3.07% -2.66%* -1.80% -1.21%
                                          (0.1022) (0.0820) (0.2216) (0.3520)
 14 April 2020 (101 firms) 2.70%** 2.21%* 0.94% 0.57%
                                          (0.0430) (0.0865) (0.4358) (0.9186)
 30 April 2020 (101 firms) 1.16% 0.71% 1.30% 0.93%
                                          (0.2450) (0.2258) (0.1522) (0.3585)
*** p-value < .01, ** p-value <.05, * p-value <.1
p-values in parentheses

Panel B reports the cumulative average abnormal returns for the affected sectors in the data sample. The panel
represents each CAAR over a specific event window for each event, where 0 constitutes the day of the event.

                            Panel C: Strongly Affected Sectors
 Events N CAAR [-1,1] CAAR [-1,0] CAAR [0,1] CAAR [0,3]
 16 March 2020 (54 firms) -5.33% -2.95% -4.81% -6.47%*
                                         (0.1463) (0.2185) (0.1158) (0.0694)
 25 March 2020 (54 firms) -2.06% -1.76% -1.65% -2.25%
                                         (0.3989) (0.4170) (0.4814) (0.3367)
 14 April 2020 (54 firms) 2.09% 2.62%** -0.34% -0.54%
                                         (0.2327) (0.0470) (0.6765) (0.6038)
 30 April 2020 (54 firms) 1.09% 0.63% 1.28% 0.68%
                                         (0.4442) (0.4762) (0.3960) (0.7488)
*** p-value < .01, ** p-value <.05, * p-value <.1
p-values in parentheses

Panel C reports the cumulative average abnormal returns for the strongly affected sectors in the data sample. The
panel represents each CAAR over a specific event window for each event, where 0 constitutes the day of the event.

In investigating our second hypothesis, the cumulative average abnormal returns of our
constructed groups of sectors will be analyzed in this part. We hypothesized that the
extraordinary budget announcements had a different effect depending on whether the sector
was strongly affected, affected, or unaffected by the COVID-19 pandemic, such that the
cumulative average abnormal returns differed among the strongly affected, affected, and

                                     22
unaffected sectors. In addition, the relationship between budget announcements exposure and
returns was constructed using the amount of the stimulus package distributed to the sector in
which the firm operates, also indicating the extent to which the firm would benefit from the
stimulus package. As a result, the more a group is exposed to the announcement, the stronger
the reaction is predicted.

Table 5 presents panels for the cumulative average abnormal returns of our constructed groups
of sectors around different budget announcements. The cumulative average abnormal returns
(CAARs) of our constructed groups are, across all event windows, negative for the
announcement released on 16 March 2020. Nevertheless, the CAAR values for the affected
and strongly affected sectors are contrary to the unaffected sector, non-significant. In this event,
the Swedish government announced that the budget would be amended to mitigate the adverse
effects of the COVID-19, and the inflow of the stimulus package would mainly target sectors
impacted severely by the pandemic. Furthermore, as previously noted, these results are
inconclusive since they were most likely impacted by external noise due to the predominance
of uncertainty in March 2020.

The second announcement, released on 25 March 2020, informed the market that the
government would guarantee 70 percent of new loans issued by financial institutions and the
possibility of a temporary tax-payment respite. The approach aimed to mitigate the severe
liquidity shortage prevailing in the Swedish market. Consequently, the reaction of all groups
of sectors to the announcement was negative across all event windows apart from the event
window [-1,0] for the affected sectors, which was significantly negative. Both the affected and
strongly affected sectors that experienced a significant drop in net sales resulting in a
substantial decrease in cash flows from operating activities were expected to be more likely to
benefit from this stimulus package and, hence, overwintering the liquidity shortfall.
Nevertheless, regardless of the exposure of the groups of sectors to the announcement, the
CAAR values generated for this liquidity-enhancing announcement across all groups were
homogenously not significant. Therefore, our findings also indicate that non-financial sectors
did not react positively, which can be seen as a contribution to the findings of Demirgüç et al.
(2021), who provided evidence for the positive reaction of financial sectors to liquidity-
enhancing measures.

While these results decline the explanatory power of whether groups more exposed to the
budget announcements incorporated better the content of these announcements (Pastor and
Veronesi, 2012), it is important to mention that during March 2020, the financial markets were
experiencing significant volatility (Baker et al., 2020). Furthermore, as previously said, the
market was in turmoil. Consequently, it's reasonable to conclude that those results were skewed
by external noise (Brogaard et al., 2022) and hence do not accurately reflect market
participants' actual reaction to the announcement. Another plausible explanation can be
attributed to the fact that the announcement of 25 March 2020 targeted small businesses to a
larger extent. As a result, because we based our research on publicly traded companies,
investors likely did not perceive the stimulus program to favor larger companies as much as
smaller companies and hence did not exhibit a substantial reaction.

Contrary to the first and second announcements, the government fiscal policy announcement
on 14 April 2020 introduced a system of it bearing the largest part of the employee-related cost
generated statistically significant CAAR values for the event window [-1,1] and [-1,0] for the
affected sectors and only for the event window [-1,0] for the strongly affected sectors. The
CAAR values for the unaffected sectors are positive across event windows [-1,1] and [-1,0]

                                     23
and negative for the event windows [0,1] and [0,3]. However, these values are not statistically
significant. In addition, it is interesting to observe that sectors strongly affected and affected
by the COVID-19 reacted positively to this announcement. As strongly affected and affected
sectors are expected to be more exposed to the budget announcements, these findings are in
line with the findings of Pastor and Veronesi (2012), who found that the more exposed a firm
is to an announcement, the stronger reaction will be observed. Additionally, it is important to
point out that the nature of this stimulus package differs from that of the 16 March 2020 and
25 March 2020 announcements. The former informed the market in general terms that the
government would take several measures to stimulate the market. The latter communicated the
government's preparedness to guarantee newly issued loans as well as the possibility of
temporary tax-payment respite. While understanding the economic consequences of these
announcements from a firm-level perspective could be ambiguous, the 14 April 2020
announcement's economic consequence for a firm was more straightforward since it only
focused on one measure compared to the earlier announcements (16 March 2020 and 25 March
2020). In addition, according to Zhang (2006), analysts walk up to their projections for good
news as more information becomes available; thus, with more precise information, the
forecasts of analysts might have impacted positively regarding the prospects of the future
during this event. Furthermore, the announcement regarding support for short-term layoffs was
also estimated to be the largest in terms of government expenditures (Regeringskansliet, 2020),
which also can explain the positive stock market reaction surrounding that event. Overall, the
affected and strongly affected sectors reacted more positively compared to the unaffected
sectors around the announcement released on 14 April 2020. For example, the CAAR values
obtained for the event window [-1,0] for this event are as follows: 1,38% (unaffected sectors),
2,21% (affected sectors), and 2,62% (strongly affected sectors). The differential reaction of
each sector to this announcement illustrates that market participants viewed this announcement
as good news for all sectors but more in favor of the affected and strongly affected sectors.

Regarding the last event on 30 April 2020, the CAARs for all groups are non-significantly
positive across all event windows, indicating that investors perceived the effects of the
adjustment support on affected, strongly affected, and unaffected sectors as the same as on the
overall Swedish equity market.

Lastly, the difference between the affected and strongly affected sectors in CAAR values was
not substantial. While the strongly affected sector shows more positive values than the affected
sectors for the event window [-1,0] on 14 April 2020, the inequality sign is reversed for all
CAAR values during the 30 April 2020 event. For example, in the event window [0,1], affected
sectors and strongly affected sectors generated 1,30% versus 1,28%, respectively. It implies
that while the spread in exposure was large between the affected and strongly affected, the
differential impact of the budget announcement on these groups is not substantial.
Consequently, the attribution of CAAR values to the difference in the exposure of each sector
to the stimulus packages can be observed only between the unaffected sectors and (affected
and strongly affected sectors). But the same conclusion cannot be drawn when comparing the
affected sectors with only the strongly affected sectors. Nevertheless, even though the results
do not provide overall evidence for our hypothesis of obtaining a heterogeneous reaction across
the groups of sectors, statistically significant results for the affected and strongly affected
sectors could still be seen around the 14 April 2020 event. Considering the magnitude of that
measure compared to the other measures, one can conclude that the support for short-term
layoffs on 14 April 2020 was perceived positively by the affected and strongly affected sectors
due to the positive significance of the generated CAAR values.

                                     24
5.3 Cross-Sectional Regression Results

                        Table 6: Cross Sectional Regression Results

                                                     Panel A: 16 March 2020
 VARIABLES
                                 CAAR [-1,1] CAAR [-1,0] CAAR [0,1] CAAR [0,3]
 Anstand 0.209 0.160 0.0903 -0.0293
                                  (0.158) (0.111) (0.133) (0.188)
 Korttidsarbete 0.0727 -0.0031 0.0967 0.0736
                                  (0.107) (0.0747) (0.0901) (0.127)
 Firm_Size 0.00577 0.00458 0.00817** 0.00560
                                (0.00430) (0.00301) (0.00363) (0.00511)
 Price_to_Book 0.000421 2.75e-05 0.000627 0.00314***
                               (0.000914) (0.000640) (0.000771) (0.00109)
 Debt_to_Equity -0.0232*** -0.0128*** -0.0176*** -0.0286***
                                (0.00618) (0.00433) (0.00521) (0.00735)

 Observations 217 217 217 217
 R-squared 0.131 0.083 0.122 0.130
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Panel A in Table 6 reports the correlation coefficients obtained using Equation 6 for the event on 16 March 2020.
The dependent variables are different cumulative average abnormal returns (CAAR) for the entire sample, including
217 firms. The independent variables are stimulus package-related variables announced on this date and measured by
the ratio of the amount of financial aid received by the industry and the total amount of the financial aid provided:
Anstand and Korttidsarbete. The independent variables also include control variables which are Price_to_Book,
Debt_to_Equity, and Firm_Size.

                                             Panel B: 25 March 2020
 VARIABLES
                                 CAAR [-1,1] CAAR [-1,0] CAAR [0,1] CAAR [0,3]
 Anstand -0.0905 0.0126 -0.104* -0.107
                                 (0.0709) (0.0629) (0.0571) (0.0753)
 Firm_Size 0.0146*** 0.0125*** 0.00637*** 0.00425
                                (0.00287) (0.00255) (0.00231) (0.00305)
 Price_to_Book -0.00105* -0.000216 -0.000446 0.000768
                                (0.000612) (0.000543) (0.000493) (0.000650)
 Debt_to_Equity 0.00284 0.00461 0.00118 -0.00884**
                                (0.00414) (0.00367) (0.00333) (0.00440)

 Observations 217 217 217 217
 R-squared 0.141 0.115 0.060 0.037
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Panel B in Table 6 reports the correlation coefficients obtained using Equation 7 for the event on 25 March 2020.
The dependent variables are different cumulative average abnormal returns (CAAR) for the entire sample, including
217 firms. The independent variables are stimulus package-related variables announced on this date and measured by
the ratio of the amount of financial aid received by the industry and the total amount of the financial aid provided:
Anstand. The independent variables also include control variables which are Price_to_Book, Debt_to_Equity, and
Firm_Size.

                                     25
                                              Panel C: 14 April 2020
 VARIABLES
                                 CAAR [-1,1] CAAR [-1,0] CAAR [0,1] CAAR [0,3]
 Korttidsarbete 0.0932** 0.0606* 0.0777* 0.124**
                                (0.0471) (0.0366) (0.0416) (0.0486)
 Firm_Size -0.0112*** -0.00883*** -0.00559** -0.00501*
                                (0.00283) (0.00220) (0.00250) (0.00292)
 Price_to_Book 0.000162 0.000370 0.000233 0.000349
                               (0.000602) (0.000468) (0.000532) (0.000622)
 Debt_to_Equity -0.00129 0.00123 -0.0107*** -0.0131***
                               (0.00405) (0.00315) (0.00358) (0.00419)

 Observations 217 217 217 217
 R-squared 0.086 0.084 0.096 0.109
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Panel C in Table 6 reports the correlation coefficients obtained using Equation 8 for the event on 14 April 2020. The
dependent variables are different cumulative average abnormal returns (CAAR) for the entire sample, including 217
firms. The independent variables are stimulus package-related variables announced on this date and measured by the
ratio of the amount of financial aid received by the industry and the total amount of the financial aid provided:
Korttidsarbete. The independent variables also include control variables which are Price_to_Book, Debt_to_Equity,
and Firm_Size.

                                                        Panel D: 30 April 2020
 VARIABLES
                                 CAAR [-1,1] CAAR [-1,0] CAAR [0,1] CAAR [0,3]
 Omstallningsstod 0.0513 0.0673 0.0301 -0.00257
                                  (0.0749) (0.0642) (0.0607) (0.0872)
 Firm_Size -0.00236 -0.00155 -0.00308** -0.000308
                                (0.00186) (0.00160) (0.00151) (0.00217)
 Price_to_Book -0.000151 -0.000803** 0.000831** 0.000949**
                               (0.000395) (0.000339) (0.000321) (0.000461)
 Debt_to_Equity 0.00149 0.00387 0.00452** 0.00188
                                (0.00279) (0.00239) (0.00226) (0.00325)

 Observations 217 217 217 217
 R-squared 0.013 0.059 0.066 0.020
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Panel D in Table 6 reports the correlation coefficients obtained using Equation 9 for the event on 30 April 2020. The
dependent variables are different cumulative average abnormal returns (CAAR) for the entire sample, including 217
firms. The independent variables are stimulus package-related variables announced on this date and measured by the
ratio of the amount of financial aid received by the industry and the total amount of the financial aid provided:
Omstallningsstod. The independent variables also include control variables which are Price_to_Book,
Debt_to_Equity, and Firm_Size.

In regressing the CAAR values of all firms on independent variables, stimulus package related
variables, and control variables, we intended to capture the effects of Omstallningsstod,
Anstand, and Korttidsarbete on CAAR values. Table 6 presents panels for the coefficient values
generated from the OLS regression model.

Regarding Anstand, the correlation between CAAR values and this independent variable is
positive for all the event windows except for [0,3] on 16 March 2020 and negative for all the

                                     26
event windows except for [0,1] on 25 March 2020. However, the β coefficients for the
independent variable Anstand are not statistically significant, except for [0,1] on 25 March
2020 at the 10 % level. The mixed results of this exposure variable can be explained by two
factors. The first factor relates to the prevalent economic policy uncertainty around the events
of March 2020 (Brogaard and Detzel, 2015). The other explanation relates to that this stimulus
initiative involved the possibility of temporary tax respite, which in turn can generate concerns
about the future tax pressure (Croce et al., 2012). Even though firms taking advantage of this
stimulus initiative will be temporarily free from paying taxes, the government still emphasized
that the possibility of temporary tax respite only extends until corporations show an improved
ability to pay. Moreover, the resulted negative correlation can also be related to the theoretical
framework provided by Pastor and Veronesi (2012). They mentioned that the stock market
could be influenced through two channels, the cash flow channel, and the discount rate channel.
If the economy is in a deep bad state, the cash flow channel will dominate, consequently
affecting returns positively. In contrast, our finding illustrates that despite the economy being
in a deep downturn on 25 March 2020, the discounting rate with its ill-effect on the returns was
the dominating force.

As for the Korttidsarbete, this independent variable, apart from the event window [1,0] on 16
March 2020, is consistently positively correlated with the CAAR values. These values are also
significant at the 10% level for [1,0] and [0,1] and significant at the 5% level for [-1,1] and
[0,3] for the 14 April 2020 event. During this event, the government mentioned that it would
extend its proposition of bearing a substantial portion of the employee-related costs and, at the
same time, save the Swedish jobs by letting workers keep 90% of their salary. Thus, obtaining
a significantly positive correlation between CAAR values and Korttidsarbete illustrates the
positive impact of Korttidsarbete on CAAR values. The positive correlation is also aligned
with the findings of Kilic and Wachter (2018), who also found a positive correlation between
stock market valuation and labor market tightness, i.e., the balance between labor demand and
supply. Furthermore, another plausible explanation behind the significant positive correlation
of the independent variable Korttidsarbete can also be manifested in the presentational material
of the Swedish financial department. According to the presentation of the financial department,
the support for short-term layoffs was the largest publicly financed measure in magnitude
among all the fiscal measures in terms of the budgetary impact measured in government
expenditures. Relieving firms from substantial employee-related costs can significantly reduce
firms’ operating costs. This is plausibly the reason behind why the affected and strongly
affected sectors also reacted positively upon the announcement of this stimulus package since
it would imply an increased operating margin for these sectors. Also, relating our results to
Pastor and Veronesi (2012), may explain the driving force behind this positive reaction as the
dominating effect of the cash flow channel.

Finally, the β coefficient values of Omstallningsstod for the event windows around the
announcement released on 30 April 2020 are positive but are not statistically significant. The
stimulus package in terms of Omstallningsstod was also the only fiscal measure announced on
30 April 2020, involving the second largest publicly financed measure. Additionally, due to
the non-significant value of the β coefficient of the independent variable Omstallningsstod, the
result does not support our third hypothesis that higher exposure to the Omstallningsstod would
significantly explain the CAARs for this event.

                                     27
5.4 Robustness Tests

To provide more robustness to our empirical findings, we repeat the calculations of the CAARs
for the total stock sample by prolonging the estimation period. This is in line with (Ahern,
2009), who found that the choice of estimation period is important since the choice of
estimation period will influence the regressed parameters that underline the calculations of the
abnormal returns. Therefore, in our robustness test, we prolong the estimation period by 110
days so that the estimation period instead constitutes 230 days prior to the event. The choice
depends on our stock sample since one of the stocks in our sample only has stock returns 230
days prior to the events; therefore, our estimation period is limited to 230 days prior to the
event.

As seen in the appendix (Section A.4), the results manifest robust results since the CAARs for
each event and event window only differ slightly, which is expected due to the inclusion of
additional data points in the model. The small deviations between the two results can be seen
in that the significance of the event window [0,1] on 30 April 2020 turns insignificant, as well
as an increase in significance for three event windows on 16 March 2020, which can be
expected due to the existence of noise during that event.

Another aspect that highlights the robustness of our empirical results constitutes the use of the
GRANK test in the initial analysis. As explained earlier, the GRANK test considers the event-
induced volatility as well as the serial correlation among the abnormal returns, which provides
superior empirical robustness in comparison to other parametric tests. Hence, it is plausible to
conclude that the empirical results in terms of the CAARs are robust, considering both the use
of the GRANK test and the change in the estimation period.

Lastly, the cross-sectional regression model was also tested for the existence of
multicollinearity among our independent variables. The applied technique was based on the
variance inflation factor (VIF), which generated VIF values for all independent variables, with
the highest value being 2.39 (see A.1). According to Shrestha (2020), when the VIF value is 5
<VIF<10, there exists a problematic level of multicollinearity among the independent
variables. Therefore, our regression model does not suffer from the issue of multicollinearity.

5.5 Limitations

We discovered certain constraints when doing this event study, which might have enhanced
our results in their absence. One limitation was the lack of data for the Fama and French model
components for the period being studied. According to Campbell et al. (1998), including more
factors could have decreased the variance of the abnormal returns, thereby rendering the
estimated αi and β𝑖 for the firms more precise and subsequently improving the CAAR values
obtained. Moreover, the market was in upheaval during the events of interest owing to the
repeated emergence of covid-related news and a significant drop in oil prices (Reuters, 2020).
Although we attempted to mitigate the influence of these events by shortening the event
windows, it is still possible that they might have influenced to some degree the abnormal
returns.

Furthermore, we were unable to collect data on the firm level for computing the independent
variables in our regression models, so we utilized industry-level data instead. As a result of the
data limitations, our independent variable is less precise. Therefore, future researchers are
encouraged, conditional on the availability of data, to use firm-level data to get more definitive

                                     28
conclusions. In addition, R2 values in the OLS regression aiming at investigating the effect of
independent variables on the CAAR values are low. For instance, Korttidsarbete on the event
14 April 2020 provided significant positive coefficient values, but R2 values throughout the
event windows range from 10,9% and 8,4%. Thus, we raise a cautious note when interpreting
the obtained results.

Finally, we discovered heteroskedasticity in the OLS regression model while testing it for
heteroskedasticity (see A.2). However, while conducting cross-sectional regression, the
problem of heteroscedasticity usually emerges, and according to Mankiw et al. (1990),
heteroskedasticity should not be a cause to abandon a regression model.

6. Conclusion

The aim of this thesis was to investigate the reaction of the Swedish stock market to the
extraordinary announcements that involved specific stimulus initiatives in order to help
affected corporations as well as affected workers. As a first stage, we used the event study
approach to capture any abnormal returns for the entire sample of firms, followed by a sector-
specific analysis and a cross-sectional regression analysis to offer evidence for the drivers of
CAAR values.

Considering our first hypothesis, we could observe significantly negative CAAR values at the
5% level around the first event of 16 March 2020 across three event windows. However, during
that event, the market was in turmoil, influenced by high uncertainties and high financial
market volatility. Even though the results showed statistical significance, we found that it is
more likely that those results were influenced by external noise. Other than the event of 16
March 2020, we could not find any statistically significant results except for one positively
significant CAAR value on the event of 30 April 2020. One plausible argument behind the
ambiguous results is that market participants may expect long-term costs that come along with
the stimulus initiatives, as it will lead to a government budget deficit. The budget deficit will,
in turn, have to be financed via either debt or future taxes, which raises uncertainty about the
future taxes, affecting the firm valuation through the discount rate channel. Hence, the results
did not support the hypothesis of detecting a significant reaction to the events across all the
stocks in our sample.

Regarding our sector-specific study, we found significantly negative CAARs on the event of
16 March 2020 for the unaffected groups of sectors, i.e., sectors that we argue were not affected
by the COVID-19 pandemic. On the contrary, no significant results were observed for the
affected and strongly affected sectors around that event. As stated before, due to the prevalence
of uncertainties during March 2020, those results are inconclusive as they most likely were
influenced by external noise.

However, during the event of 14 April 2020, we found positively significant CAARs for the
affected and strongly affected groups of sectors, respectively. The results from the event of 14
April 2020 imply two things; (1) The more exposed the sector was to the announcement,
measured in change in net sales, the stronger reaction the sector showed, and (2) affected and
strongly affected sectors reacted positively to the announcement regarding support for short-
term layoffs, which would allow corporations to substantially decrease the staff costs while
allowing the workers to keep most part of their salary.

                                     29
When conducting our cross-sectional regression, we aimed at capturing significant correlations
between the CAAR values and the independent exposure variables Omstallningsstod, Anstand,
and Korttidsarbete. Considering our exposure variables of Omstallningsstod and Anstand, we
could not find any significant correlation except for one significant negative coefficient for
Anstand at the 10% level. As the exposure variable Anstand represents the exposure to the
announcement regarding Temporary tax respite, we argue that one of the reasons behind the
negatively insignificant result can be attributed to the concerns about the future tax pressure.
Nevertheless, our cross-sectional regression showed a significant positive correlation at the
10% and the 5% level across all event windows on the event of 14 April 2020. One of the
reasons behind the significant positive correlation is that the stimulus initiative regarding
support for short-term layoffs was the largest publicly financed measure. Additionally, as the
measure would decrease firms' staff costs, it is also likely that the positive effect stems from
the contribution to an increase in firms' cash flows, thus relating it to the cash flow channel.
Lastly, the cross-sectional analysis is also consistent with the significantly positive CAAR
values for the Affected and Strongly Affected sectors. Thus, the Korttidsarbete-related stimulus
package can be identified as a driving force behind the positive movement returns of these
sectors on the event of 14 April 2020.

6.1 Future Research

As this study only was based on the Swedish stock market, hence our results are limited to
Sweden. Meanwhile, as the COVID-19 pandemic had a global impact, several other countries
also introduced similar stimulus packages that aimed at relieving firms from the destructive
effects of COVID-19. In that way, one proposition for future research would be to investigate
how different countries’ stock markets reacted to the announcements of different stimulus
initiatives. By doing that, one would get a broader perspective regarding how fiscal measures
introduced in different countries affect stock markets.

Moreover, in measuring the exposure variables, we used the industry-level data. Therefore, to
obtain more conclusive results, future researchers can improve the precision of the results by
conducting their analysis with firm-level data. Finally, we estimated the beta values of the firms
using the market model. Therefore, we recommend that future researchers calculate abnormal
returns by including other models to confirm the obtained results; for instance, the generalized
autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity model (GARCH) can generate different beta for
the firms.

                                     30
References

Ahern, K. R. (2009). Sample selection and event study estimation. Journal of Empirical
Finance, 16(3), 466-482.

Aït-Sahalia, Y., Andritzky, J., Jobst, A., Nowak, S., & Tamirisa, N. (2012). Market response
to policy initiatives during the global financial crisis. Journal of International
Economics, 87(1), 162–177.

Altig, D., Baker, S., Barrero, J. M., Bloom, N., Bunn, P., Chen, S., ... & Thwaites, G. (2020).
Economic uncertainty before and during the COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of Public
Economics, 191, 104274.

Armelius, H., Hull, I., & Köhler, H. S. (2017). The timing of uncertainty shocks in a small
open economy. Economics Letters, 155, 31-34.

Baker, S. R., Bloom, N., Davis, S. J., & Terry, S. J. (2020). Covid-induced economic
uncertainty (No. w26983). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Banz, R. W. (1981). The relationship between return and market value of common
stocks. Journal of Financial Economics, 9(1), 3-18.

Bartlett, R. P., & Morse, A. (2021). Small-Business Survival Capabilities and Fiscal
Programs: Evidence from Oakland. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 56(7),
2500-2544.

Belo, F., Gala, V. D., & Li, J. (2013). Government spending, political cycles, and the cross
section of stock returns. Journal of Financial Economics, 107(2), 305–324.

Bernanke, B. S., & Kuttner, K. N. (2005). What explains the stock market's reaction to
Federal Reserve policy?. The Journal of Finance, 60(3), 1221-1257.

Bessembinder, H., Chan, K., & Seguin, P. J. (1996). An empirical examination of
information, differences of opinion, and trading activity. Journal of Financial
Economics, 40(1), 105-134.

Bhandari, L. C. (1988). Debt/equity ratio and expected common stock returns: Empirical
evidence. The Journal of Finance, 43(2), 507-528.

Boothe, P. M., & Reid, B. G. (1989). Asset returns and government budgets in a small open
economy: Empirical evidence for Canada. Journal of Monetary Economics, 23(1), 65-77.

Brogaard, J., & Detzel, A. (2015). The asset-pricing implications of government economic
policy uncertainty. Management Science, 61(1), 3-18.

Brogaard, J., Nguyen, H., Putniņš, T. J., & Wu, E. (2021). What moves stock prices? the role
of news, noise, and information. Review of Financial Studies, Forthcoming.

Brown, S. J., & Warner, J. B. (1980). Measuring security price performance. Journal of
financial economics, 8(3), 205-258.

                                     31
Bushnell, J. B., Chong, H., & Mansur, E. T. (2013). Profiting from regulation: Evidence from
the European carbon market. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(4), 78-106.

Campbell, J. Y., Lo, A. W., MacKinlay, A. C., & Whitelaw, R. F. (1998). The econometrics
of financial markets. Macroeconomic Dynamics, 2(4), 559-562.

Croce, M. M., Kung, H., Nguyen, T. T., & Schmid, L. (2012). Fiscal policies and asset
prices. The Review of Financial Studies, 25(9), 2635-2672.

Cutler, D. M., Poterba, J. M., & Summers, L. H. (1988). What Moves Stock Prices?. NBER
Working Paper, (w2538).

Da, Z., Warachka, M., & Yun, H. (2018). Fiscal Policy, Consumption Risk, and Stock
Returns: Evidence from U.S. States. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 53(1),
109-136.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Pedraza, A., & Ruiz-Ortega, C. (2021). Banking sector performance
during the covid-19 crisis. Journal of Banking & Finance, 133, 106305.

Fama, E. F. (1970). Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work. The
Journal of Finance, 25(2), 383-417.

Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (1993). Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
bonds. Journal of financial economics, 33(1), 3-56.

Foresti, P., & Napolitano, O. (2017). On the stock market reactions to fiscal
policies. International Journal of Finance & Economics, 22(4), 296-303.

Gomes, F., Michaelides, A., & Polkovnichenko, V. (2013). Fiscal policy and asset prices with
incomplete markets. The Review of Financial Studies, 26(2), 531-566.

Gopinath, Gita. International Monetary Fund. (2020, April 14) – The Great Lockdown: Worst
Economic Downturn Since the Great Depression. Retreived from International Monetary
Fund. https://blogs.imf.org/2020/04/14/the-great-lockdown-worst-economic-downturn-since-
the-great-depression/.

Gordon, D. B., & Leeper, E. M. (2005). Are Countercyclical Fiscal Policies
Counterproductive?. NBER Working Paper, (w11869).

Greene, W. H. (2012). Econometric analysis, 71e. Stern School of Business, New York
University.

Gustafsson, P., & von Brömsen, T. (2021). Coronavirus pandemic: The Riksbank’s measures
and financial developments during spring and summer 2020. Sveriges Riksbank Economic
Review (Sweden), (1), 52-9

James W. Kolari, Seppo Pynnönen. (2010). Event Study Testing with Cross-sectional
Correlation of Abnormal Returns. The Review of Financial Studies, 23(11), 3996–4025.

                                     32
Jeng, J. L. (2020). Popular Methods for Event Studies in Corporate Finance—Subjectivity
Versus Robustness. In Contemporaneous Event Studies in Corporate Finance (pp. 3–52).
Palgrave Macmillan, Cham.

Kilic, M., & Wachter, J. A. (2018). Risk, unemployment, and the stock market: A rare-event-
based explanation of labor market volatility. The Review of Financial Studies, 31(12), 4762-
4814.

Kim, W. (2019). Government spending policy uncertainty and economic activity: US time
series evidence. Journal of Macroeconomics, 61, 103124.

Kolari, J. W., & Pynnonen, S. (2011). Nonparametric rank tests for event studies. Journal of
Empirical Finance, 18(5), 953–971.

MacKinlay, A. C. (1997). Event studies in economics and finance. Journal of Economic
Literature, 35(1), 13-39.

Mankiw, N. G. (1990). A Quick Refresher Course in Macroeconomics. NBER Working
Paper, (w3256).

McWilliams, A., & Siegel, D. (1997). Event Studies in Management Research: Theoretical
and Empirical Issues. The Academy of Management Journal, 40(3), 626–657.

Neuhierl, A., & Weber, M. (2019). Monetary policy communication, policy slope, and the
stock market. Journal of Monetary Economics, 108, 140-155.

Nofsinger, J. R. (2001). The impact of public information on investors. Journal of Banking &
Finance, 25(7), 1339-1366.

Norden, L., Roosenboom, P., & Wang, T. (2013). The Impact of Government Intervention in
Banks on Corporate Borrowers’ Stock Returns. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis, 48(5), 1635-1662.

Pacicco, F., Vena, L., & Venegoni, A. (2018). Event study estimations using Stata: The
estudy command. The Stata Journal, 18(2), 461-476.

Pastor, L., & Veronesi, P. (2012). Uncertainty about government policy and stock prices. The
Journal of Finance, 67(4), 1219-1264.

Pennathur, A., Smith, D., & Subrahmanyam, V. (2014). The stock market impact of
government interventions on financial services industry groups: Evidence from the 2007–
2009 crisis. Journal of Economics and Business, 71, 22-44.

Perotti, R. (2008). In Search of the Transmission Mechanism of Fiscal Policy. In NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2007, Volume 22 (pp. 169-226). University of Chicago Press.

Regeringskansliet. (2020, April 30). Företag får stöd baserat på omsättningstapp. Retreived
from Regeringskansliet: https://www.regeringen.se/pressmeddelanden/2020/04/foretag-far-
stod-baserat-pa-omsattningstapp/

                                     33
Regeringskansliet. (2020, March 16). Krispaket för svenska företag och jobb. Retreived from
Regeringskansliet: https://www.regeringen.se/pressmeddelanden/2020/03/krispaket-for-
svenska-foretag-och-jobb/

Regeringskansliet. (2020, March 25). Krispaket för svenska småföretag. Retreived from
Regeringskansliet: https://www.regeringen.se/pressmeddelanden/2020/03/krispaket-for-
svenska-smaforetag/

Regeringskansliet. (2020, May). Omställningsstöd till företag som fått minskad omsättning
på grund av coronaviruset. Retrieved from Regeringskansliet:
https://regeringen.se/4a6e60/contentassets/27f6cc12e52049d789c044690e92bec0/omstallning
sstod-till-foretag-som-fatt-minskad-omsattning-pa-grund-av-coronaviruset.pdf

Regeringskansliet. (2020, April 14). Uppväxling krisåtgärd för jobb och företag. Retreived
from Regeringskansliet: https://www.regeringen.se/pressmeddelanden/2020/04/uppvaxling-
krisatgard-for-jobb-och-foretag/

Reuters. (2020, March 16). Sweden launches coronavirus crisis package worth more than
$30 billion. Retreived from Reuters: https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-
sweden-budget-idUSKBN21311G

Riksgälden. (2021, February 19). Increased government debt in 2020 amid pandemic.
Retreived from Riksgälden: https://www.riksgalden.se/en/press-and-publications/press-
releases-and-news/news/2021/increased-government-debt-in-2020-amid-pandemic/

Rosenberg, B., Reid, K., & Lanstein, R. (1985). Persuasive evidence of market
inefficiency. The Journal of Portfolio Management, 11(3), 9-16.

Shrestha, N. (2020). Detecting multicollinearity in regression analysis. American Journal of
Applied Mathematics and Statistics, 8(2), 39-42.

Skatteverket. (n.d.). Anstånd med skattebetalning. Retreived March 30, 2022, from
Skatteverket:
https://skatteverket.se/privat/skatter/skattekontobetalaochfatillbaka/inbetalningtillskattekontot
/anstandmedskattebetalning.4.69ef368911e1304a62580004910.html

Skatteverket. (2021, April 26). Svenska företag under coronapandemin. Retreived from
Skatteverket:
https://www.skatteverket.se/download/18.5b35a6251761e691420ccc6/1619170326242/Svens
ka%20företag%20under%20coronapandemin.pdf

Skatteverket. (n.d.). Stödåtgärder Covid-19. Retreived March 15, 2022, from Skatteverket:
https://www.skatteverket.se/omoss/varverksamhet/statistikochhistorik/stodatgardercovid19.4.
3152d9ac158968eb8fd1d40.html

Socialstyrelsen. (2021, June). Analys av första och andra covid-19-vågen-produktion, köer
och väntetider i vården. Retreived from Socialstyrelsen:
https://www.socialstyrelsen.se/globalassets/sharepoint-dokument/artikelkatalog/ovrigt/2021-
5-7371.pdf

                                     34
Statista. (2022, February 9). Growth in bankruptcies after the coronavirus outbreak in
Sweden from March 2020 to January 2022, by industry. Retreived from Statista:
https://www.statista.com/statistics/1112296/bankruptcy-growth-after-the-coronavirus-
outbreak-in-sweden-by-industry/

Stattman, D. (1980). Book values and stock returns. The Chicago MBA: A journal of selected
papers, 4(1), 25-45.

Tillväxtverket. (2021, December 06). Statistik – korttidsarbete 2020 och 2021. Retrieved
from Tillväxtverket:
https://tillvaxtverket.se/om-tillvaxtverket/information-och-stod-kring-coronakrisen/statistik-
om-korttidsarbete.html

Trehan, B., & Walsh, C. E. (1988). Common trends, the government's budget constraint, and
revenue smoothing. Journal of economic dynamics and control, 12(2-3), 425-444.

Thorbecke, W. (1997). On stock market returns and monetary policy. The Journal of
Finance, 52(2), 635-654.

World Health Organization. (2021). The true death toll of COVID-19: estimating global
excess mortality. Retreived from World Health Organization:
https://www.who.int/data/stories/the-true-death-toll-of-covid-19-estimating-global-excess-
mortality

Zhang, X. F. (2006). Information uncertainty and stock returns. The Journal of
Finance, 61(1), 105-137.

                                     35
Appendix:

A.1: Table over the variance inflation factor test for multicollinearity

Variance inflation factor – Test for multicollinearity

     16 March 2020 VIF 1/VIF
  Anstand 2.39 .4186
  Korttidsarbete 2.38 .4205
  Debt_to_Equity 1.09 .9166
  Price_to_Book 1.05 .9565
  Firm_Size 1.02 .9808
  Mean VIF 1.58 .

     25 March 2020 VIF 1/VIF
  Anstand 1.07 .9368
  Debt_to_Equity 1.09 .9193
  Price_to_Book 1.04 .9582
  Firm_Size 1.01 .9876
  Mean VIF 1.05 .

       14 April 2020 VIF 1/VIF
  Korttidsarbete 1.06 .9408
  Debt_to_Equity 1.08 .9269
  Price_to_Book 1.04 .9574
  Firm_Size 1.02 .9819
  Mean VIF 1.05 .

       30 April 2020 VIF 1/VIF
  Omstallningsstod 1.14 .8741
  Debt_to_Equity 1.18 .8480
  Price_to_Book 1.04 .9636
  Firm_Size 1.01 .9870
  Mean VIF 1.09 .

Table A.1 reports the multicollinearity among variables for all regression models used in the study. Moreover, a high
value for vif shows a significant level of multicollinearity between variables.

                                     36
A.2: Summary of the Breusch-Pagan/Cook-Weisberg test for heteroskedasticity

Breusch-Pagan/Cook-Weisberg test for heteroskedasticity
  Assumption: Normal error terms
  Variable: Fitted values of CAARs
  H0: Constant variance

 16 March 2020 CAAR [-1,1] CAAR [-1,0] CAAR [0,1] CAAR [0,3]
 chi2(1) 0.12 0.18 0.97 0.33
 Prob > chi2 0.7281 0.6735 0.3242 0.5629

 25 March 2020 CAAR [-1,1] CAAR [-1,0] CAAR [0,1] CAAR [0,3]
 chi2(1) 10.80 9.45 8.74 5.87
 Prob > chi2 0.0010 0.0021 0.0031 0.0154

 14 April 2020 CAAR [-1,1] CAAR [-1,0] CAAR [0,1] CAAR [0,3]
 chi2(1) 62.07 51.45 20.80 13.31
 Prob > chi2 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0003

 30 April 2020 CAAR [-1,1] CAAR [-1,0] CAAR [0,1] CAAR [0,3]
 chi2(1) 1.06 1.81 3.03 0.75
 Prob > chi2 0.3021 0.1785 0.0819 0.3864

Table A.2 reports the Breuch-Pagan/Cook-Weisberg test for heteroscedasticity among variables for all regression
models across each event window. Moreover, a probability value of less than 5% indicates a high level of
heteroscedasticity between variables in the regression model.

A.3: Graph illustrating the Swedish Economic Policy Uncertainty index (EPU)
                   Swedish News-Based EPU Index

      200
       180                                      2020-03

      160

      140

      120

     Based EPU Index- 100

       80

       60
     Swedish News
       40

       20

        0

                                              Date

This figure illustrates the Economic Policy Uncertantiy index and ranges between January 2019 – January
2022. (www.policyuncertainty.com)

                                     37
A.4: These tables illustrate the robustness tests when changing the estimation periods

Robustness test
                      Panel A: (Estimation window = 120 days)
 Events N CAAR [-1,1] CAAR [-1,0] CAAR [0,1] CAAR [0,3]
 16 March 2020 (217 firms) -5.19%** -2.56% -4.99%** -5.69%**
                                         (0.0334) (0.1053) (0.0151) (0.0222)
 25 March 2020 (217 firms) -2.06% -1.77% -0.96% 0.12%
                                         (0.2272) (0.2409) (0.4021) (0.9692)
 14 April 2020 (217 firms) 2.09% 1.77% 0.40% -0.19%
                                         (0.1942) (0.2331) (0.9065) (0.6191)
 30 April 2020 (217 firms) 1.29% 0.72% 1.36%* 1.34%
                                         (0.1768) (0.3366) (0.0891) (0.1441)
*** p-value < .01, ** p-value <.05, * p-value <.1
p-values in parentheses

Panel A reports the cumulative average abnormal returns for all the stocks included in the sample. The table represents
each CAAR over a specific event window for each event, where 0 constitutes the day of the event. The estimation
window ranges 120 days.

                      Panel B: (Estimation window = 230 days)
 Events N CAAR [-1,1] CAAR [-1,0] CAAR [0,1] CAAR [0,3]
 16 March 2020 (217 firms) -5.27%** -2.78%* -5.19%*** -5.87%***
                                         (0.0161) (0.0514) (0.0056) (0.0082)
 25 March 2020 (217 firms) -1.26% -1.07% -0.59% 0.39%
                                         (0.4172) (0.4539) (0.5645) (0.9191)
 14 April 2020 (217 firms) 2.01% 1.87% 0.31% -0.15%
                                         (0.2114) (0.1861) (0.9805) (0.6028)
 30 April 2020 (217 firms) 1.20% 0.80% 1.17% 1.25%
                                         (0.2122) (0.2771) (0.1215) (0.1489)
*** p-value < .01, ** p-value <.05, * p-value <.1
p-values in parentheses

Panel B reports the cumulative average abnormal returns for all the stocks included in the sample. The table represents
each CAAR over a specific event window for each event, where 0 constitutes the day of the event. The estimation
window ranges 230 days.

                                     38
A.5: Summary over the industrial proportion of the total tax relief that was provided by
the government (Anstand)

                            Anstand received by industry

                                     F Construction

                                 C Manufacturing

         G Wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor…

                          H Transporting and storage

                        N Rental and leasing activities

     M Professional, scientific and technical activities

         I Accommodation and food service activities

                   J Information and communication

                                 L Real estate activities

           R Creative, arts and entertainment activities

  D Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply

                                          0 5E+09 1E+10 1,5E+10

This bar chart represents the absolute value of the temporary tax respite (Anstand) each industry received from the
government and is expressed in SEK. The data was retreived from Skatteverket March 15, 2022.
https://www.skatteverket.se/omoss/varverksamhet/statistikochhistorik/stodatgardercovid19.4.3152d9ac158968eb8fd1d40.ht
ml

A.6: Summary of the industrial proportion of the employment related cost reduction
that was provided by the government (Korttidsarbete)

                          Korttidsarbete received by industry

                                 C Manufacturing
         G Wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor…
     M Professional, scientific and technical activities
         I Accommodation and food service activities
                          H Transporting and storage
                        N Rental and leasing activities
                   J Information and communication
           R Creative, arts and entertainment activities
                                     F Construction
                                 L Real estate activities
  D Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply

                                             0 4 000 000 000 8 000 000 000

This bar chart represents the absolute value of the employment related cost reduction (Korttidsarbete) each industry
received from the government and is expressed in SEK. The data was retreived from Tillväxtverket March 15, 2022.
https://tillvaxtverket.se/om-tillvaxtverket/information-och-stod-kring-coronakrisen/statistik-om-korttidsarbete.html

                                     39
A.7: Summary of the industrial proportion of the total financial aid that was provided
by the government (Omstallningsstod)

                        Omstallningsstod received by industry

         I Accommodation and food service activities

                          H Transporting and storage

         G Wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor…

                                 C Manufacturing

                        N Rental and leasing activities

           R Creative, arts and entertainment activities

     M Professional, scientific and technical activities

                                 L Real estate activities

                   J Information and communication

                                     F Construction

  D Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply

                                         0 1E+09 2E+09 3E+09
This bar chart represents the absolute value of the revenue based financial aid (Omstallningsstod) each industry
received from the government and is expressed in SEK. The data was retreived from Skatteverket March 15, 2022.
https://www.skatteverket.se/omoss/varverksamhet/statistikochhistorik/stodatgardercovid19.4.3152d9ac158968eb8fd1d40.ht
ml

                                     40
A.8: Summary of the change in net sales for each sector in our data sample

                       Change in Net Sales % Compared to 2019

                    Security and investigation activities                                                5%
     Retail trade, except of motor vehicles and motorcycles                                               5%
Activities of head offices; management consultancy activities                                              4%
                                 Civil engineering                                              4%
                           Construction of buildings                                              4%
            Services to buildings and landscape activities                                              3%
                                Real estate activities                                               3%
  Computer programming, consultancy, and related activities                                             3%
         Manufacture of chemicals and chemical products                                             3%
    Manufacture of wood and of products of wood and cork,…                                          2%
                       Manufacture of food products                                            2%
     Engineering activities and related technical consultancy                                             1%
                             Telecommunications                                          1%
                     Specialized construction activities                                             1%
 Wholesale trade, except for motor vehicles and motorcycles                                           0%
  Wholesale and retail trade and repair of motor vehicles and…                                        -1%
                      Manufacture of electrical equipment                                          -1%
    Manufacture of computer, electronic and optical products                                          -2%
                Manufacture of rubber and plastic products                                          -2%
                               Manufacture of furniture                                         -3%
                 Manufacture of paper and paper products                                        -4%
          Electricity, gas, steam, and air conditioning supply                                       -6%
                                  Other manufacturing                                     -7%
                 Manufacture of other transport equipment                                      -7%
                Manufacture of machinery and equipment                                     -7%
           Manufacture of fabricated metal products, except…                                    -7%
    Sports activities and amusement and recreation activities                                     -9%
                                         Water transport                                    -10%
                             Manufacture of basic metals                                  -12%
    Manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers, and semi-trailers                                -15%
                                     Accommodation           -40%
                                            Air transport     -49%
                                            -60% -50% -40% -30% -20% -10% 0% 10%

This bar chart represents the change in net sales between 2020-2019 among all the sectors included in our data
sample. The data was retrieved from Statistiskacentralbyrån March 10, 2022.
https://www.statistikdatabasen.scb.se/pxweb/sv/ssd/START__NV__NV0109__NV0109O/BNTT01/table/tableViewLayout1
/

                                     41