STOCKHOLM SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
Department of Economics
659 Degree project in economics / 649 Degree project in finance
Spring 2022

                         Winds  of Change
    How  Swedish Wind Power Generation is Impacting Electricity Prices

                       Karolina Sundell (24662) and Liv Nyström (24633)

             Abstract:  This study provides  fresh evidence  on  the impact  of  wind
             power generation on Swedish electricity prices. Hourly observations from
             the Nord Pool  electricity  market  dated  January 1, 2019 to December 31,
             2021  are  used  to  investigate  the  relationship  between  wind  power
             generation  and electricity spot price  level and volatility.  A  time series
            analysis  is performed with the use of an  integrated  ARMAX-GARCHX
             model, which is  optimized for the data set.  The ARMAX  models the
              electricity spot price level in terms of wind power  generation, controlling
             for  consumption,  net exchange, and  oil price.  Similarly,  the GARCHX
              models the electricity spot price volatility in terms of the  selected
             explanatory variables.  The results  conclude  that  wind power  generation
              significantly lowers the electricity spot price level, and  increases the spot
             price volatility.  Understanding how variable renewable energy  sources
             impact electricity market conditions has important implications for  the
             design of  energy policy.  Our findings  add  to the energy political debate
             by  providing  insight  on  how a drastic  expansion  of  wind power in
             Sweden  may  impact electricity markets.

Key words:  electricity  spot  price,  price volatility,  wind power,  merit order theory,  time series
analysis

JEL:  C32,  L94,  Q41, Q42

Supervisor:                  Elena Paltseva
Date submitted:             May 16, 2022
Date examined:             May 24, 2022
Discussant:                 Theo Renaudin
Examiner:                  Johanna Wallenius
                              Acknowledgements

We wish to extend our deepest gratitude to our supervisor  Elena Paltseva (Associate Professor at
the  Stockholm Institute of Transition Economics), Rickard Sandberg (Associate Professor at  the
Stockholm School of  Economics), Gustav Fredriksson (Doctoral Candidate  at ETH  Zürich), and
Gustaf   Sundell   (Student   at   LTH   Faculty   of   Engineering)   for   their   continuous   support,
encouragement,  and invaluable comments.  We would also like to thank Dr. Mats Lundberg, Head
of Sustainability at Sandvik,  for providing insight  and inspiration for our study.

Moreover, we would like to thank the Nord  Pool Group for their generosity in supplying us with
the data needed to conduct this study.
Table of Contents
1.    Introduction                                                                       1
2.    Background                                                                      3
  2.1 Electricity as a Commodity                                                       3
  2.2 The Swedish Electricity Market                                                   3
  2.3 Nord Pool                                                                     5
3.    Literature Review and Theory                                                       6
  3.1 Previous Literature                                                              6
  3.2 Our Contribution                                                               8
  3.3 Theory                                                                       9
4.    Hypotheses                                                                      11
5.    Data                                                                          12
  5.1 Input Data Selection                                                            12
  5.2 The Dependent Variables                                                       12
  5.3 The Independent Variable                                                       13
  5.4 Control Variables                                                               14
  5.5 Missing Values                                                                 16
6.    Methodology                                                                    17
  6.1 Time Series Properties of the Data                                                17
  6.2 Conditional Mean Equation: AutoRegressive Moving Average (ARMA) Model           18
  6.3 Conditional Variance Equation: Generalized AutoRegressive Conditional Heteroscedastic
  (GARCH) Model                                                             20
  6.4 Integrated Framework: ARMAX-GARCHX Model                                  21
7.    Results                                                                           22
  7.1 Mean Equation: ARMAX Results                                               22
  7.2 Variance Equation: GARCHX Results                                            25
  7.3 Goodness of Fit Tests                                                           26
8.    Sensitivity Analysis                                                                 28
9.    Discussion                                                                        30
  9.1 Policy Implications                                                              30
  9.2 Limitations                                                                    34
10.   Conclusion                                                                      35
Bibliography                                                                       36
Appendices                                                                       40
       1.  Introduction

At the time of writing  this paper,  war is raging  in Europe. The Russian invasion of Ukraine on
February 24, 2022 has caused immense suffering  and  left  us wondering where it will end. Amongst
this uncertainty, one thing has become abundantly clear: Europe must free itself from dependence
on Russian fossil fuels. The urgent need for a green energy transition has seldom been as evident as
right now. A shift to renewable sources of energy is a crucial step to securing European energy
supply while mitigating climate change.

Wind power is expected to play a central role as the global economy commits to reducing its
dependence on fossil fuels. Wind is a clean energy source  that  produces close to zero greenhouse gas
emissions and no air pollutants, making it an attractive alternative to fossil fuels  (Wind Europe,
2022). In Sweden, wind power production has increased remarkably over the past two decades (figure
1). Wind power is a source of variable renewable energy (VRE), different from conventional energy
sources in that its production is intermittent,  exogenously dependent on weather conditions,  and
cannot be  planned  by power generating companies  (Wind Europe, 2022).  An increased dependence
on intermittent energy sources will likely have impacts on the behavior of electricity prices
(Rintamäki et al., 2016). Knowledge about the impact  on electricity spot prices  of increased reliance
on  VRE  is therefore important for risk management purposes. To this end, this study seeks to
examine the effect of increased wind power generation on electricity prices. A thorough empirical
analysis will be undertaken in an attempt to answer the  following  question:

How  has the generation of wind power in Sweden impacted  the  level and volatility of the  Swedish
electricity spot price?

On February 3, 2022, a commission issued by the Swedish government published the Electrification
strategy   –   a national strategy  formulated  to serve as the basis for  the  electrification  of Sweden.
The strategy includes an  ambitious  expansion of wind power, whereby land-based wind power
production is planned to increase with a minimum of 5  terawatt hour (TWh)  per year until 2024
(illustrated in figure 1). Additionally,  sea-based  wind  power  production is projected to increase from
today’s yearly capacity of 0.3 TWh, to 34 TWh by 2050 (Elektrifieringsstrategin, 2022).  Before
Sweden commits to the  Electrification strategy, it is  important  to understand how  an  increased
share of wind  power impacts Swedish electricity prices.

                                                                                     1
                                        Figure 1
                                                                                                                           1
                       Historical and forecasted wind power production in Sweden.

                                  Source: Energimyndighetens  statistikdatabas  (2022).

Because  wind power production has a low marginal cost relative to  non-renewable sources  of energy,
wind power generation  is expected to have  a dampening effect  on electricity spot prices. Moreover,
the intermittent and unplannable nature  of  wind power, accompanied by  the current  inability  to
efficiently store large amounts of electricity, should entail a positive  correlation  between  wind power
and  electricity spot price volatility.  The predicted effects  will be  investigated  using hourly data on
the Swedish market from  January 1, 2019 to  December 31, 2021.  Using  an ARMAX-GARCHX
framework, we  find that 1 MWh increase in  wind power  generation  significantly lowers  the  average
spot  price  by  0.0180 SEK, and  increases  the variance  by 0.0004, equivalent to a volatility increase
of 0.020  SEK (2 öre).  The effects are reliable as various model specifications are made without
altering the significance or the effects.

The paper will adhere to the following structure: it will begin with a background section, providing
information about electricity as a commodity, characteristics of the Swedish electricity market, as
well as the Nordic-Baltic marketplace for electricity trade called Nord Pool. This section will be
followed by a review of previous literature on the subject,  after which  the theoretical foundation of
the study will be outlined. In the fourth section of the paper, our hypotheses will be presented,
before we move onto  describing  the data and methodology parts of our paper. The subsequent
sections will present the results and a discussion of these, including possible policy implications. In
the final section of the paper, conclusions will be drawn together with suggestions for possible future
research.

1
  Figure includes land-based wind power only.

                                                                                     2
       2.  Background

2.1 Electricity  as a  Commodity

Electricity is an important  commodity,  which  possesses characteristics  that  differentiate it from
other  commodities  like  crude  oil  or  natural  gas  (CME  Group,  2022).  Firstly,  electricity  is
interchangeable  –  one  produced unit of electricity is equivalent to any other,  that is,  there  are no
variations in quality,  efficiency,  or energy content  between  units of electricity. Secondly, electricity
is virtually non-storable.  Much  research  and development  are  being directed towards  the  future
implementation of  hydrogen technology  that  potentially can store large amounts of energy  (Ny
Teknik, 2021). However,  there is  today  no  cost-efficient technology that allows for  large-scale  storage
of electricity, requiring it to be produced and consumed simultaneously. This makes the electricity
market unique.  As opposed to other free markets, there  must  always  be  a balance between supply
and demand. This non-storability makes electricity a commodity with naturally high price volatility;
changes in demand and supply drive prices up and down because storage cannot be used as a hedging
tool to reduce shocks. The physical  power grid  constitutes the basis of the market and sets a cap on
market capacity as all energy that is produced or consumed  must  be transferred via the physical
grid. Prices of electricity are then determined by a combination of factors linked to supply and
demand (Svenska Kraftnät, 2021).

2.2 The  Swedish  Electricity  Market

The Swedish  electricity  market  was deregulated in 1996. Following the deregulation, the industry
underwent  substantial  consolidation  (Swedish  Competition  Authority,  2018).  The  European
electricity  markets  are interconnected,  and electricity can be traded across country borders (Svenska
Kraftnät, 2021).   In 2011, the Swedish market was divided into four bidding areas, illustrated in
figure 2. The rationale behind the market division was to make it easier to oversee where in the
market there is  a  capacity  excess or  shortage. This to  better match demand with supply,  in an effort
to avoid costly transportation of electricity.  A consequence of the division into four bidding areas is
that the price of electricity can differ substantially between the areas. Northern Sweden is the region
which produces the largest amount of electricity due to extensive hydropower capacity. This region
is also the most sparsely populated, meaning that high levels of supply are met by low levels of
demand, entailing lower prices. Correspondingly, southern Sweden enjoys less production capacity
but is more densely populated. This creates excess demand, resulting in significantly higher
electricity prices in southern Sweden than in the north (Konsumenternas energimarknadsbyrå,
2021).

                                                                                     3
                                       Figure  2
                              Sweden’s bidding areas SE1, SE2, SE3, SE4

                                             Source: Kundkraft (2022)

Seeing  to  the  production  side,  the  Swedish  electricity  market  is  dominated  by  hydropower,
accounting for 43 percent of the supply, followed by nuclear power, accounting for 31 percent of the
supply,  and  by wind power, accounting for 17 percent (figure  3).  Sweden’s access to large-scale
hydropower generation is  important for  the stability of Swedish electricity supply  (Rintamäki et al.,
2016). Hydro reservoirs create flexibility in the production of power, and the marginal cost is low
relative to  non-renewable sources. Solar power currently makes up only a small portion of the total
Swedish energy  supply  but  is being expanded.  However,  solar power supply and demand are poorly
matched; during the  darker periods of the year, demand for electricity is typically high while the
supply of solar power is small due to fewer hours of daylight  (Energimyndigheten, 2018).  Given the
inability to storge large amounts of energy, Sweden cannot readily rely on solar power as a  central
source of energy.

                                                                                     4
                                       Figure  3
                             Swedish  electricity  production by source in 2021.

                                         Source: Statistics Sweden  (2022)
               Note:  Thermal power  consists  mainly  of  fossil fuels and  biofuels  (Energiföretagen, 2022)

The market for electricity is one characterized by low price elasticity of demand, as our societal
structure is reliant on electricity use.  The share of electricity generated by wind power  in Sweden
has increased steadily over the past decades.  In an attempt to promote investments in sustainable
energy sources, the Swedish government introduced a subsidy system in 2012, called the electricity
certificate system (Energimyndigheten, 2021).  Producers of renewable energy  such as  wind power
are  eligible for the subsidy, further reducing the  already relatively low  operational costs.

The unplannable nature of VRE sources may give rise  to fluctuations in market prices,  causing
destabilization  (Mwampashi et al.,  2021). An  increasingly volatile market  with a lower average
electricity price  has negative implications  for its actors  and  risks deterring producers  and investors
(Mauritzen,  2012).  Therefore,  a  volatile,  price-pressured  market  may  counteract  the  goal  of
substantially increasing electricity production in Sweden.

2.3 Nord Pool

Electricity  trade in the Nordics and the Baltics is organized on the  marketplace  called Nord Pool,
which includes Sweden, Norway, Finland, Denmark, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. 85 percent of
the electricity consumed in the Nordic region is bought and sold via this  joint Nordic-Baltic power
exchange. Nord Pool  provides a trading space where  power companies  (producers of electricity)  and
electricity distributors, that sell electricity to consuming households and the industry,  engage in
trade, as illustrated in figure  4. Based on supply and demand, Nord Pool  sets market clearing  spot
prices.  There is a combined system price for the whole of Nord Pool as well as prices for the
individual market areas  (Nord Pool, 2021).

                                                                                     5
                                       Figure  4
                                  Swedish electricity market and its actors

                  Source: Illustration is authors’ own, inspired by image from Göteborg Energi (2014)

The lion part of all electricity trade on Nord Pool is carried out in the day-ahead market, called
Elspot.  A smaller portion of electricity trade takes place on the intraday market, called Elbas, where
market players can balance trade up until one hour before delivery (Swedish Competition Authority,
2018).  As  Elspot  is the dominant trading place, it  will serve as the basis for this study.

At  the Elspot market, the bidding process is initiated at 10:00 CET every day.  Electricity
distributors acting as buyers  and  power producing companies acting as  sellers can  then  place bids
on electricity to be delivered the following day. These bids specify the volume of electricity the
participating actors want to buy or sell at a given hour the next day. The bidding process ends at
12:00 CET, and one aggregated demand and supply curve is created for each hour of the following
day, for each of the bidding  areas. In this way, area  spot  prices are set (Energimarknadsinspektionen,
2021).

       3.  Literature Review and Theory

3.1 Previous  Literature

The increased integration of renewable energy sources into Western power markets has given rise
to a growing body of literature on the topic. Scholars are interested in understanding the implications
of  VRE  sources for different actors in the electricity market. Interest is particularly devoted to
understanding the behavior of electricity prices, in terms of level and volatility.  The  statistical
properties of electricity price data  make certain modeling approaches more suitable than others.
This section of our paper merely focuses on previous  literature;  however, a detailed description of
these statistical  properties will be included in  the methodology section (6) of this paper.

                                                                                     6
The theoretical presumption  of wind power having a negative effect on electricity price  level  due to
its lower marginal cost has been tested empirically  on a range of markets  and confirmed  by multiple
scholars  (e.g.  Hagfors  et al., 2016;  Mwampashi et al., 2021;  Woo et al.,  2011).  A second  widespread
conclusion  is that increased shares of non-dispatchable energy sources like wind and solar power in
the energy mix lead to increased price volatility (Auer, 2016; Hagfors et al, 2016; Huisman et al.,
2021).  However,  there  is  also  literature,  specifically  on  the  Nordic  market,  which  presents
contradicting evidence  and finds that  wind power generation decreases  intraday  volatility  (e.g.  Li,
2015; Mauritzen, 2010;  Rintamäki et al.,  2016).

ARMA Approach
A  number of scholars have investigated wind power production and spot price volatility using
autoregressive moving average (ARMA) models. Mauritzen (2010) studies the Danish electricity
market  and uses  an  ARMA  approach to  conclude  that wind power generation reduces intraday
volatility,  a finding which  challenges  a large body of literature.  Mauritzen also looks at volatility
over longer time  periods and  finds that wind power  instead  seems to increase weekly volatility of
spot prices. Rintamäki et al. (2016) compare the Danish and German  electricity markets using a
SARMA  model, which is an ARMA model with the addition of a seasonal component often found
in electricity price data. They find some contradicting evidence; in Denmark, daily spot price
volatility decreases with wind power, whereas  the opposite trend is observed  in Germany. This result
is explained to stem from differing access to flexible generation capacity,  as the Danish market is
coupled to other Nordic markets and their large-scale hydro reservoirs. Moreover, Rintamäki et al.
(2016) find that weekly spot price volatility increases in both Denmark and Germany due to the
intermittent characteristics of VRE.

ARMA-GARCH  Approach
An  integrated  ARMA-GARCH  framework is commonly used by scholars, where ARMA  is used to
model  the mean equation,  that is,  the price level, and  a  generalized autoregressive conditional
heteroscedasticity (GARCH)  models the variance equation.  Mwampashi et al. (2021)  use  this
approach to investigate  the Australian National Electricity market. They  confirm the negative effect
of wind power  on price level, often referred to as the  ‘merit order effect’.  Moreover, they  find that
a 1 MWh increase in wind  power  generation  increases price volatility by 2 percent.  The  ARMA-
GARCH  model is  also  used by Kyritsis et al. (2016) who study the German electricity market and
the effect of wind and photovoltaic power sources on electricity spot price volatility. The authors
conclude that solar power generation in general reduces electricity price volatility, whereas wind
power generation increases volatility.  Li (2015)  and Fredriksson (2017)  employ  a similar ARMA-
GARCH model to  investigate  the Nordic day-ahead system price and its volatility  in response to
wind power generation.  Li (2015)  finds that  wind  power  generation seems to reduce spot price
volatility in the Nordic day-ahead market, contradicting the results found by  Fredriksson (2017),
Mwampashi et al. (2021)  and  Kyritsis  et al. (2016).

                                                                                     7
Other  Modeling  Approaches
Some papers use a  conditional autoregressive model,  such as  Auer (2016)  who  uses data from the
European Energy Exchange to investigate how the shift toward green energy in Germany is affecting
electricity prices. He investigates the hypothesis that although renewables generally exhibit lower
variable costs that translate into lower variable prices, their non-dispatchable nature may lead to
price spikes causing greater overall market volatility.  Auer  (2016)  finds a reduction of volatility in
response to increased  VRE  generation, suggesting that Germany has been successful in integrating
renewable sources in the electricity market  without compromising its stability.

Another  way of investigating  the effects  of VRE on price level and volatility  is  with  a  quantile
regression model. Both Maciejowska (2018) and Hagfors et al. (2016) look specifically into the
German market and conclude that wind and solar power have negative effects on price level.
Conclusions regarding  the effect on  volatility are however more  ambiguous. Maciejowska  (2018)
finds that the effect of wind  power  generation on volatility, measured by the inter-quantile range,
increases  when demand is low, and decreases  when demand is high.

Focusing on the Danish market, Jónsson (2010) investigates the market impact of wind energy
forecasts  by using a non-parametric regression model. Drawing on existing literature, Jónsson  (2010)
formulates a hypothesis that increased wind power production bears responsibility for increasingly
“extreme” electricity prices.  He finds  a reduction in prices as a result of wind power  generation,
while intra-day  variations  seem  to diminish  in a non-linear manner.

Studies  Focused on the  Swedish  Market
Alam (2021)  uses a GARCH model to study  the Swedish market  and, more specifically, analyze  the
extent to which wind power generation impacts the  long-term  electricity price volatility.  He finds
that a more inflexible wind power supply leads to  an increase of long-term volatility.  Moreover,
Dong et al.  (2018)  use  a non-parametric  model to investigate  the influence of VRE on  electricity
price volatility  in  the  Swedish,  Danish,  and  North-Eastern  American  markets.  They find that
electricity prices  are more stable in the Swedish market, suggesting  hydropower  as an enabler of  a
stable  market environment.

3.2  Our  Contribution

The review of previous literature reveals a convincing argument for the negative effect of wind  power
generation  on the electricity spot price level.  Additionally, there is currently a large body of
literature suggesting  that volatility increases with wind power  generation  (Kyritsis  et al., 2016;
Mwampashi et al, 2021).  However, there is  also  evidence of wind power generation  reducing  price
volatility  in  the  Nordic  market  (Jónsson, 2009; Li, 2015;  Mauritzen, 2019; Rintamäki et al., 2016).
The  lack of consensus on  the effect of renewable energy on electricity spot price volatility calls for
further studies of  an increasingly renewable energy mix.

                                                                                     8
A suggested  explanation  for  why  wind power  generation  has been found to  reduce volatility  of
electricity prices  in some parts of the Nordics  is  the  access to large hydro reservoirs  in  Norway and
Sweden  working as a  stabilizing factor (Li, 2015;  Rintamäki et al., 2016).  Sweden is  pointed  out  to
have  good base-load capacity  through its hydropower, which  should  entail  resistance to volatility,
as is  pointed out by Dong et al. (2018).  The unique characteristics of the Swedish power mix make
it  interesting  to further investigate the Swedish  market.  This especially because the  current  body of
research  focused  on  Sweden  is  limited  in scope.

                                       Figure  5
                  Wind power as a share [%] of total energy  supply in Sweden, 2010-2021

                                        Source:  Statistics Sweden (2022)

As  is seen in figure 5,  the  Swedish  energy sector  has  changed  remarkably  over the past decade
towards more dependence  on  wind power, which  calls  for continuous  reassessment  of  the electricity
market dynamics.  When Sweden commits to the Electrification strategy, it is of utmost importance
to have an up-to-date evaluation regarding the effects of wind power. This in order for suppliers,
consumers and the government to anticipate any challenges that may follow from an expansion of
wind power production. The importance is reinforced by the war in Ukraine, as Sweden and the EU
want to speed up the green transition to become less dependent on Russian resources (European
Commission,  2022). Using  recent  data, this paper will add to the  existing  body of research an
updated investigation  of  the impacts of wind power in Sweden.

3.3  Theory

Electricity demand is  typically considered  highly  price inelastic as consumption is essentially
independent of the spot price  –  at least in the short term (Forrest et al.,  2013;  Huisman et al., 2021;
Jónsson et al.,  2009;  Michelfelder & Pilotte, 2019). This has to do with electricity being a commodity
without efficient substitutes: we are completely dependent on it in our day-to-day lives. Hence, the
slope of the demand curve is close to vertical. The supply curve in electricity markets can be drawn
as a ‘merit order curve’. The curve illustrates the  marginal  cost  of production  and  total  supply  of
each  available electricity source  in the energy mix. The quantity produced by each source of energy

                                                                                     9
is represented by a step in the curve  (figure  6).  Wind power generation has a low marginal cost,
placing wind at the lowest level in the supply curve.  Fossil fuels, on the other hand, have  a high
marginal  cost. As such, the supply of fossil fuels appears at a higher level in the supply curve  (The
European  Wind Energy Association, 2020).

The spot prices for electricity are driven by supply, and therefore, by  marginal  costs (Swedish
Competition Authority, 2018).  The idea of the merit order curve is to illustrate the ‘crowding out
effect’ of energy sources with a  high  marginal  cost.  For lower levels of demand, wind power  and
other low  marginal cost sources of energy  can supply the demanded quantity, eliminating the
demand for fossil  fuels  which, due to their  higher marginal costs,  would operate at a loss  when prices
are low.  The supply of fossil  fuels kicks in only at higher levels of demand when prices are higher.
This is called the merit order effect (The European Wind Energy Association, 2020).

                                       Figure  6
                                       Merit order effect of wind power generation.

                                                                                     10
                            Source: Authors’ own, inspired by  Forrest & MacGill  (2013)
                 Note:  As the supply of wind power increases from Q1  to Q2, the price falls from P1  to P2,
               ‘crowding out’ the more expensive energy source  (nuclear power at this level of demand).

If wind  power supply  was constantly large, the merit order theory would indicate a permanently
lower price level, leading to other non-renewable sources  being  partially or fully  pushed out of  the
market. However, wind power generation  is  unpredictable.  Today,  it is  not possible  to efficiently
store large amounts of electricity,  meaning that  the power generation mix varies across each point
in time (Mauritzen, 2012). If the wind speed is low during a given hour, this will cause the supply
curve to shift left and supply to become more reliant on other power sources with higher marginal
costs to meet the demand. As a result, the electricity spot price will increase. However, when wind
speeds  are high, the  supply curve shifts right and prices go down  (The European Wind Energy
Association, 2020).

Due to the low price elasticity of demand, these changes in the electricity supply mix will lead to
large price swings. The supply curve with a larger share of  unplannable  wind power  generation
should therefore entail greater variations in the electricity  price. Increased wind power  generation
should intuitively increase volatility as a result of this mechanism (Jónsson et al.,  2010;  Woo et al.,
2011).

       4.  Hypotheses

The theoretical  framework presented  in  the theory  section  of this paper  gives rise to predictions
about how electricity prices  should behave in response to wind power generation.  Together with the
results  found in  previous literature, these  predictions have  been used  to  develop  two  hypotheses  that
will be  empirically  assessed in this paper.  Our hypotheses  are specified as follows:

                                                                                     11
Hypothesis 1:  Wind  power generation is  negatively correlated with the average Swedish electricity
spot price level.

Hypothesis 2:  Wind power generation is positively correlated with the Swedish electricity spot price
volatility.

       5.  Data

5.1  Input  Data  Selection

The  time series  data used in this paper has primarily been retrieved from the Nord Pool Group
(2022). The Nord Pool ftp servers contain hourly observations of our variables of interest, including
day-ahead electricity spot prices, forecasted wind power  generation, forecasted consumption of
electricity, and forecasted net exchange (imports  –  exports). To capture the intra-day variation of
electricity spot prices, we have chosen to use hourly data, which is in line with the method employed
by the majority of previous studies on the subject  (e.g.  Jónsson et al, 2009;  Mwampashi, 2021;
Rintamäki et al., 2016). The high frequency data is studied for a limited time period  in order to
keep the data set to a workable size. We have decided to limit the scope of our study to include
hourly data from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2021. With 24 hours in each day, this implies
                                                                                           2
that a total of 26,304 observations are available per variable.

A second reason  for using data from a relatively short period,  apart from keeping the data set to a
manageable size,  is that the energy market is continuously  changing  in terms of composition. For
our results to bear relevance for general audiences and  policymakers  in 2022, we have decided to
use the most recent data available, making us opt for data leading up to December 31, 2021.

5.2  The  Dependent  Variables

In our study, there are two different dependent variables of interest, namely, the electricity spot
price level and  the  electricity spot price volatility.  The  volatility  variable will be defined in the
methodology section  (6)  of this paper.

This study concerns the Swedish market  as  we seek to investigate how wind power  generation  in
Sweden impacts Swedish electricity spot prices. The system price for the entire Nordic-Baltic market
is therefore less relevant. Simply considering the system price for the entire market would decrease
any effect Swedish wind power generation might have  on prices. Meanwhile, looking at only one of
the four Swedish bidding areas would fail to capture the substantial variations across the regions.
For instance, the effect of increased wind power is expected to have a greater impact on electricity

2
 Note that 2020 was a leap year with 366 days.

                                                                                     12
prices in  areas  where the majority of windmill installations are located, than it would in  those
heavily dominated by hydropower.

In order to  be able to draw conclusions on the national level, an average for hourly electricity spot
prices has been calculated, using  prices from the four bidding areas. By calculating an average, we
have generated data for a Sweden specific  system price of electricity. Prices are measured in SEK
per megawatt hour (SEK/MWh). Potentially, using an average could reduce the volatility of prices,
weakening our findings. However, we have judged the scope of this paper insufficient to motivate a
four-part assessment of the bidding zones separately. Moreover, as outlined above, we aim for results
that can have a national implication, which is why we opt for a Swedish system price, rather than
a Nordic-Baltic system price.  Taking the average of the four Swedish bidding zones is also done by
Alam (2021).

5.3  The  Independent  Variable

The independent variable of interest is the forecasted generation of wind power in Sweden. The
price of electricity in the day-ahead market is formed on the basis of forecasted supply and  demand,
which is why forecasted rather than actualized values are used (Fredriksson, 2017). The forecasted
production of wind power is a product of installed capacity, and more importantly, the wind speed.
The independent variable is exogenously determined  and  driven by  the  current weather conditions.
Wind power generation is measured in megawatt hours  (MWh).

                                       Figure  7
               Plot of dependent variable electricity spot price and independent variable
                             forecasted wind power production over time.

                  Source:  Authors’ own illustration based on data from Nord Pool  Group (2022)

                                                                                     13
According  to the merit order theory,  wind power  generation  is expected to have  a  price dampening
effect.  As is illustrated in  figure 7, the predicted wind power  generation  is highly volatile  exhibiting
large swings. Due to the  unpredictable  nature of weather conditions, it  is  intuitive  that increased
reliance on wind power should transmit some of the wind volatility into price risks.

5.4  Control  Variables

Consumption of  Electricity
Data regarding the forecasted electricity consumption  is expected to  bear relevance for  price setting
in  the  electricity spot price market (Forrest & MacGill, 2013;  Mwampashi  et al., 2021).  Like  the
wind variable, day-ahead  electricity  prices are set  based on  forecasted consumption  rather than
actualized demand. The  consumption  forecasts are set before the electricity prices, and are therefore
exogenous  to the spot price.  On the Nord Pool  power exchange  electricity spot prices are determined
by supply and demand. Much like the supply of  electricity, demanded consumption  for electricity
fluctuates  and follows a seasonal pattern. For example,  electricity consumption  is  higher during
business hours than during night-time, and generally higher during peak winter months,  when the
Swedish climate serves cold temperatures, than in summer.  The seasonality in demand  in turn drives
the seasonal variations of the electricity spot price.  The seasonality  in  consumption  can be  clearly
observed in figure  8  which shows a plot of the  forecasted consumption  variable.

                                       Figure  8

                                                                                                                                 3
                   Plot of control variable  forecasted electricity consumption  over time.

                   Source:  Authors’ own illustration based on data from Nord Pool Group (2022)

The seasonal and intra-day variations in  consumption  impact the price of electricity at any given
time. To isolate the impact of our independent variable of interest on the electricity price, it is of

3
 The plot  in figure 8  shows  corrected  forecasted consumption variable.  For further  information, see  appendix B.

                                                                                     14
interest to eliminate the seasonal variations in electricity spot prices. A common method to control
for these seasonal variations is to deseasonalize the price data  with the use of  dummy variables, as
is done by Li (2015).
An alternative approach, which is simpler but meets the same objective, is to control for  forecasted
consumption. By including  this variable  as a control variable, the  seasonal and intra-day variations
of the electricity spot price is captured. Because the two variables move in tandem, controlling for
demand is in effect a way of deseasonalizing the price data.

In line with the theory of supply and demand, forecasted consumption  is expected to  exhibit a
positive relationship  with the  price level, as is found by other scholars (see for instance Li, 2015;
Mwampashi et al., 2021).  Moreover,  because  the supply curve is steeper at higher levels of demanded
consumption  as seen in the merit order diagram (figure  6),  small consumption  changes will cause
greater price swings at higher levels of demanded consumption. The effect is amplified  due to the
inelasticity  of the demand  curve.  This  predicts a positive relationship between  consumption and
electricity price volatility.

Net  Exchange
The European market for electricity is interconnected and allows for transmission of electricity
across country borders. This means that the Swedish market for electricity is not a closed system  –
what is produced in Sweden is not necessarily consumed within the country. The net exchange refers
to the sum of imports minus the sum of exports. Hence, a negative number indicates net exports,
whereas a positive number is indicative of net imports for that particular hour. On a yearly basis,
Sweden  is  a  net exporter of electricity (Energimyndigheten, 2022).

Contracts for exports and imports are signed before the bidding process takes place, meaning that
the volume of electricity that is exported or imported affects the supply of electricity available for
domestic  market actors to bid for, and therefore also the price. This entails that the dependent
variable of interest, the price of electricity, is exogenously impacted by the volume of exports and
imports. It follows that net exchange of electricity should be controlled for to avoid an omitted
variable bias.

Imports increase the supply of electricity available for buyers in the Swedish market. Therefore,
basic supply and demand frameworks  suggest that  the variable net exchange  should  exhibit a
negative correlation with  the spot price level.  The Swedish  power  mix  is dominated by  stable,  low-
cost  hydropower. Imported  energy  originates  from  a range of sources,  many  of which are  more
expensive  than the domestically produced electricity.  Imports  from other countries  can  thus  crowd
in expensive technologies. This could in turn  give rise to larger price swings and  greater  price
volatility  in  the  Swedish  market (Fredriksson, 2017).  For this reason, a positive relationship between
the variable net exchange  and  the  price volatility is expected.

                                                                                     15
Oil  Price
It can be reasonably assumed that the price of electricity is influenced by the price of other sources
of energy, such as fossil fuels  (Woo et al., 2011). As a proxy for fossil fuel prices, we will use the
price of US light crude oil.  The use of  US light crude oil  rather than Brent crude oil  is  due to
potential endogeneity concerns associated with the latter (Ketterer, 2014;  Woo et al., 2011). Nord
Pool has a least-cost dispatching rule which means that the volume of  energy produced from oil is
endogenous to electricity price and wind power production. If the wind speed is high, less oil will be
used in the production of electricity. If the electricity price is low, less oil will be produced due to
its higher marginal  cost. A strategy to avoid this endogeneity is therefore to use US light crude oil
as a proxy for fossil fuels.  A positive effect is expected with regards to  the effect of oil on price level,
as  its higher marginal cost should  force prices upwards.  It is however more difficult to  hypothesize
the effect of oil on electricity price volatility. On  one hand  it  is dispatchable, meaning that it could
smoothen the supply curve  from  other  intermittent sources  when needed. On the other hand,  the
high cost of  the technologies needed  when operating in the market can lead to large price swings
(Fredriksson, 2017).

From Dukascopy  (2022) we have retrieved hourly prices for US light crude oil as traded on the
Swiss FX marketplace (SWFX).  The oil price data is reported in USD. Therefore, the prices have
been manually converted to SEK for the purpose of this paper, using official exchange rates from
the Swedish  Central  Bank (Sveriges Riksbank, 2022). Official exchange rate data is available only
with daily frequency, meaning that the daily exchange rates have been used to convert oil prices for
the full 24 hours of each day. While hourly conversion rates would have been ideal, we have settled
for the use of daily  rates  for access purposes. Moreover, the exchange rates from the Swedish central
bank are updated only for business days (Monday through Friday, public holidays excluded). For
this reason, we have used the exchange rate for the most recent business day, and prolonged it to
cover for adjacent days of the weekend and, where applicable, public holidays.  The same method is
used to account for missing oil price data on weekends and public holidays,  when  no oil trade takes
place.

To capture the effect the oil price is predicted to have on the electricity spot price, we have chosen
to include the control variable with a  24-hour  lag, as was done by O’Mahoney and Denny (2014).
The rationale  is  that it is the close price of the day before which is used as the basis for energy
supply and demand in the  market. The natural logarithm of the oil price  is used, and the first
                                                 4
difference is taken,  to  achieve stationarity.  This is illustrated in appendix C.

5.5  Missing  Values

Our  raw  data  features  missing values. For the variable wind, 51  observations are missing,  and for
net exchange, 27 are missing.  For the variable  consumption,  3 are missing, and for the variables

4
 The model used (ARMAX) requires stationary variables. This will be elaborated on in the methodology section  (6).

                                                                                     16
electricity price  and  oil  price, no data points are missing.  The  reason for the missing values is simply
that the data points are absent in the raw data  retrieved  from the Nord Pool ftp server, without
further information as to why these are missing.  We use linear interpolation to handle the missing
values. In practice, this means that the missing values are estimated as a linear trend from the last
to  the  next  existing value, to ensure continuity of  the  time series. This method is suitable for
variables with  a small number of  missing values grouped together, which is the case for the variable
consumption.  For the variable wind, there are  24  missing values grouped together, after each other,
in two sequences. For the variable net exchange, the same problem of 23 missing values grouped
together is found. The relatively large number of consecutive missing values creates a problem with
linear interpolation as the smoothing period becomes very long. However, due to the limited scope
of this paper, we have decided to simplify the procedure and use linear interpolation for all variables.

                                      Table 1
                                                                                               6
                                               Descriptive statistics.
Variable        Observations         Unit         Mean         St.d.      Minimum     Maximum
Price                26 279    SEK/MWh        397.889        301.961        -20.000      4 003.355
Wind               26 279       MWh/h      2 771.391      1 768.699         9.000      9 414.000
Consumption         26 279       MWh/h     15 128.250      4 040.054       828.000     25 254.000
Net exchange         26 279       MWh/h     -2 924.134      1 563.405     -8 047.000      2 276.000
 Oil price             26 279          SEK         0.000         0.009         -0.519         0.314
         Source:  Authors’ own illustration based on data from Nord Pool Group (2022) and Dukascopy (2022)

       6.  Methodology

6.1  Time  Series  Properties of the  Data

Electricity spot price data  have  important  characteristics  that must be accounted for when choosing
how to model the relationship between electricity prices and  wind  power generation.  Previous
literature suggests that electricity spot prices are autocorrelated (see for instance  Kyritsis  et al.,
2016; Mwampashi et al., 2021;  Rintamäki  et al., 2016). This means that the electricity spot price at
a given  time  in part can be explained by the spot price in the previous period or periods.  The Ljung-
Box test will be performed on the dependent variable, the electricity spot price,  to  confirm this
autocorrelation  in our data  for different lagged values  (Ljung & Box, 1978).

6
 The descriptive statistics  are presented after manipulation of the data is done (i.e.  linear interpolation and first
difference of the natural logarithm of the oil  price  variable).

                                                                                     17
                                      Table  2
       Result of Ljung-Box test for autocorrelation in the dependent variable, the electricity spot price,
                                          for three different lag lengths
                                Lag length        Ljung-Box Q Statistic

                                     5               1.066e+05***

                                    10              1.829e+05***

                                    15              2.504e+05***
        Note:  ***Significant at  1  percent level, **significant at  5  percent level, *significant at  10  percent level.

The null hypothesis of zero autocorrelation is rejected for all  chosen  lag lengths, confirming presence
of autocorrelation in our  time series data.  Table 2 indicates that the price of electricity  at a given
hour  is influenced by the price up to 15 hours earlier.

The presence of autocorrelation in electricity spot prices indicates that our regression model needs
to include lagged values of  the  price  as variables,  to  capture the autocorrelation effect. A model for
electricity prices which omits lagged values of the dependent variable  will inevitably give rise to an
omitted variable bias, whereby explanatory information is lost, and misplaced among the included
variables. This would lead to biased coefficients, meaning that we would not be able to trust the
precision of the results. For this reason, a suitable model for the  price level  should be autoregressive,
to  account for the autocorrelation of electricity prices.

6.2  Conditional Mean Equation: AutoRegressive Moving Average (ARMA)
Model

Autoregressive (AR) models allow for predicting a dependent variable based on the past values of
that same variable. In a pure AR(𝑝) model, the electricity spot price level  at time  𝑡  is linearly
explained by the electricity price  𝑝  hours back in time, as follows  (Stock & Watson, 2020):

                                                #
                                𝑠𝑝!  =  𝑐  + ∑ "=$ 𝑎" 𝑠𝑝!−"  + 𝜀!
                                                                                (Equation 1)

where  𝑠𝑝!  is the electricity spot price at time  𝑡,  𝑎!  is the coefficient for the autoregressive terms,
and  𝑝  is the number of lags.

A multitude of previous studies have recognized that the addition of a moving average (MA)
component  is informational for electricity prices  and  improves the fit of the model (Mauritzen, 2010;
Mwampashi et al., 2021; Rintamäki, 2016).  The MA component implies including past error terms,
in addition to the past values of the dependent variable at hand.  The ARMA equation is specified
as follows:

                                           #                 '
                        𝑠𝑝!  =  𝑐  + ∑ "=$ 𝑎" 𝑠𝑝!−"  + ∑ &=$ 𝛽& 𝜀!−&  + 𝜀!

                                                                                     18
                                                                                (Equation 2)

where  𝑞  is the number of moving average lags and  𝛽"  is the coefficient for the respective  MA  term.

Previous  literature has  also  found  that  electricity spot prices are  not only  affected  by  their  own past,
but also by exogenous factors  𝑥#  (Alam, 2021;  Kyritsis  et al., 2016;  Mwamphasi et al., 2021). The
purpose of this paper is to examine the impact of the exogenous variable wind power production on
the electricity spot price. Therefore, we are interested in applying a version of the ARMA model
which adds  the  exogenous variable of interest and the exogenous control variables. Including  all
exogenous factors gives an ARMAX(𝑝, 𝑞, 𝑏) model with the following specification:

                        #                  '                 )                                    +
       𝑠𝑝!  =  𝑐  + ∑ "=$ 𝑎" 𝑠𝑝!−"  + ∑ &=$ 𝛽& 𝜀!−&  + ∑(  =$ 𝛾( 𝑥(*!  + 𝜀!,     𝜀!  ∼  𝑁 (0, 𝜎! )
                                                                                (Equation 3)

where  𝑏  is the number of exogenous variables, and  𝛾(  are the coefficients of each of the exogenous
variables. The error terms (𝜀$) are assumed to be white noise, meaning that they  have a  mean of
zero  and a constant variance. This ARMAX(𝑝, 𝑞, 𝑏) model fits the mean equation, in which the
electricity price level is linearly expressed by its past values, by the past values of the error terms,
and by other  exogenous factors  (Weron,  2014).

One key assumption of the ARMAX  model is that all variables are weakly stationary, meaning that
the mean, variance,  and covariance are constant over time (Weron, 2014). The augmented Dickey-
Fuller (ADF) test is therefore performed  on  all variables with the null hypothesis of non-stationarity
(Clò, 2014).  The null hypothesis is rejected for all variables  as seen in  table 3, confirming stationarity
                                  7
of the time series data.

                                      Table 3
                        Augmented Dickey-Fuller test for stationarity on all variables.
    The fist  difference of the natural logarithm of the oil price is used as variable, to achieve stationarity.
                                 Variable                ADF test statistics

                               Price                     -17.246***

                            Wind                    -7.466***

                             Consumption               -14.267***

                               Oil price                  -161.749***

                              Net exchange               -17.493***
        Note:  ***Significant at  1  percent level, **significant at  5  percent level, *significant at  10  percent level.

7
  The price of crude oil is found to be non-stationary. The natural logarithm of the oil price is  used, and the first order
difference is taken, to achieve stationarity.  Therefore, the coefficients of the oil price will be interpreted in a different way
than all other coefficients  in the results  section.

                                                                                     19
6.3  Conditional Variance Equation: Generalized AutoRegressive Conditional
Heteroscedastic (GARCH) Model

Moving over to  the volatility of electricity prices, some  key  characteristics of the  error terms  in  the
ARMAX equation must be considered. As is stated in  the  previous section, an important assumption
underlying the ARMAX  model is homoscedasticity in the error terms;  that is,  constant variance
over time. Weron (2014) states that the volatility of electricity prices  is  often  non-constant, implying
heteroscedastic  error terms.  Moreover,  periods of high volatility  tend  to be followed by periods of
high volatility, and vice versa. This  phenomenon is within finance often referred to as volatility
clustering  (Engle, 2001).  These characteristics are  reasonably  expected to be  present  in our data.
An  arbitrarily chosen ARMA model with 3 p  and  3 q  lags  is constructed to  investigate  the properties
of  the error terms.  The plot in figure  9  is indicative of non-constant variance over time and volatility
clustering;  the volatility  is clearly  higher  around  𝑡  = 25 000 than  𝑡  = 5 000.

                                       Figure  9
                       Plotted residuals of an arbitrarily chosen ARMA(3,3) model.

                  Source:  Authors’ own  illustration based on data from Nord Pool Group (2022)

One way to formally investigate  the error term properties  indicated in figure 9  is  by applying  the
Engle’s  multiplier  test  for  residual  heteroscedasticity  (Engle,  1982).  The  null  hypothesis  of
homoscedasticity is rejected for all  tested  lag lengths  (table  4),  confirming  heteroscedasticity.  This
implies that the  variance  of the  error terms depends on  its own past and is conditional  on time
(Bollerslev,  1986).  Heteroscedasticity in the  error terms  violates the assumption of constant  variance,
which  calls  for further modeling to improve  precision and reliability  of our  variance model output
(Engle, 1982).

                                      Table  4
                   Engle’s multiplier test for heteroscedasticity  in  the squared residuals

                                                                                     20
                     for various lag  lengths,  of an  arbitrarily chosen ARMA(3,3) model.
                         Lag length                     Engle's Multiplier Test Statistic

                            5                               1205.526***

                           10                               1281.166***

                           15                               2552.766***
        Note:  ***Significant at  1  percent level, **significant at  5  percent level, *significant at  10  percent level.

Engle (1982) developed an autoregressive conditional heteroscedastic (ARCH) model to account for
heteroscedastic error terms.  Effectively, the  heteroscedasticity  is treated  as a  variance that  needs to
be modeled,  rather than  a forecasting issue that needs to be corrected  (Engle, 2001).  ARCH  type
models  are  often  used  to  model  the  variance  of  electricity  prices,  given  an  already  fitted
ARMAX(𝑝, 𝑞, 𝑏)  model (Kyritsis et al., 2016;  Li, 2015;  Mwampashi  et al.,  2021). The dependent
variable in an ARCH model is the conditional variance  of the electricity price data. In short, this
means that the  modeled  variance is allowed to change  over time as  a function of  lagged  squared
errors  from a previously  specified  ARMAX  model.  An ARCH(𝑢) model has the following  equation:

                                       +            -     +
                                    𝜎! =  𝛼 + ∑ ,=$ 𝜃,𝜀!−,
                                                                                (Equation 4)

        +                                                                     +
where  𝜎! is the conditional variance,  𝑢  is the number of past squared errors,  𝜀! is the squared error
term  from the ARMAX  equation, and  𝜃,  is the coefficient for the  respective squared error term.

Bollerslev   (1986)   extended   the   model   to   form   a   generalized   autoregressive   conditional
heteroscedastic (GARCH) model. A GARCH(𝑢, 𝑣) model  is  an ARCH(𝑢) model  which also  includes
                                   %
𝑣  lagged conditional variances  𝜎$  with coefficients  𝜛&(Bollerslev, 1986). A GARCH model is
superior to an  ARCH model  because  it permits  a  more flexible lag structure  and allows for a more
parsimonious description  (Bollerslev, 1986).  Most  scholars use  this generalized form  instead of  a
simple ARCH model when  modeling electricity price data (Kyritsis  et al.,  2016;  Li, 2015; Mwampashi
et al., 2021).  Including  𝑤  exogenous variables  𝑥'  with coefficients  𝜋., a GARCHX(𝑢, 𝑣, 𝑤)  approach
to  modeling the conditional variance will  allow us to find the effect of wind power generation on
electricity price variance as follows  (Fredriksson, 2017):

                    +           -        +       0         +         1
                𝜎! =  𝛼 + ∑    𝜃, 𝜀!−,  + ∑    𝜛/ 𝜎!−/ + ∑    𝜋.𝑥.*!
                             ,=$             /=$               .=$
                                                                                (Equation 5)

6.4  Integrated Framework: ARMAX-GARCHX Model

An integrated framework will hereby be applied where an ARMAX(𝑝, 𝑞, 𝑏)  model is used to describe
the relationship between  wind power generation and  the  electricity price level.  A  GARCHX(𝑢, 𝑣, 𝑤)
model will  then  be used to describe the relationship between  wind power generation and  the
electricity spot price volatility.

                                                                                     21
In practical terms, we will first optimize the ARMAX(𝑝, 𝑞, 𝑏)  model by choosing the number of lags
𝑝  and  𝑞  that best fit our data, given the inclusion of our  four  exogenous variables. This optimization
process will be performed using the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC), which is a measure of the
relative quality of a statistical model for a given data set  (Stock & Watson, 2020).  The best fitted
ARMAX(𝑝, 𝑞, 𝑏)  model exhibits the combination of  𝑝  and  𝑞  which optimizes the AIC by minimizing
the information loss.  In practice, the marginal  benefit of adding an extra  lag  is weighted against the
marginal cost of  additional  estimation error which  stems  from  the  addition  of an  explanatory
variable  (Stock & Watson, 2020).  The AIC, which we seek to minimize, can be expressed as follows:

                                𝐴𝐼𝐶  =  2𝐾  −  2𝑙𝑛(𝐿)
                                                                                (Equation 6)

where  𝐾  is the number of estimated parameters in the model, and  𝐿  is the likelihood that the model
can produce our observed y-values (Stock & Watson, 2020). Hence, the AIC penalizes overly complex
models with many parameters, and rewards good data fit. The best  model according to  the  AIC will
as such be the one that best describes the  changes in  the dependent variable, with the smallest
number of explanatory variables.

After finding the optimal ARMAX(𝑝, 𝑞, 𝑏)  model, the squared residuals obtained  will be  used as
input (the ARCH component) in a GARCHX(𝑢, 𝑣, 𝑤)  equation to find the conditional variance.
Various  iterations  are  made  to find the optimal  integrated  ARMAX-GARCHX model  which
minimizes the AIC  (Mwamphasi et al., 2021).  The  optimized  integrated model is used to  test the
two hypotheses  that wind power  generation  is negatively correlated with electricity spot price level,
and positively correlated with electricity spot price volatility.

       7.  Results

7.1  Mean Equation: ARMAX  Results

To optimize the ARMAX(𝑝, 𝑞, 𝑏)  model describing the conditional mean, we would ideally test all
possible combinations of  𝑝  and  𝑞  lags. It is not feasible to  test  every potential model to find the one
optimizing the AIC, as the number of possible combinations increases exponentially. Different
numbers of  𝑝  and  𝑞  lags, ranging from 0 to 3, are combined and their fit is assessed using AIC, as
reported in  appendix  D.  The best fitted model, with the minimized AIC, is an ARMAX(3,3,4) model
with  𝑝=3 and  𝑞=3, including all  four  exogenous variables which are expected to have explanatory
value.

In order to confirm the usage of an integrated ARMAX-GARCHX  framework for modeling the level
and volatility of Swedish electricity prices, we need to verify the existence of ARCH effects in the
ARMAX(3,3,4)  error terms, as predicted in the methodology section. Plotting the error terms of the

                                                                                     22
optimized model ARMAX(3,3,4) in figure  10, it can be deduced that the variance is non-constant
and that the error terms exhibit volatility clustering: periods of high variance are followed by periods
of high variance.

                                      Figure  10
                        Plotted residuals of the optimized ARMAX(3,3,4) model

                   Source:  Authors’ own illustration based on data from Nord Pool Group (2022)

Both hypotheses are therefore tested using an integrated ARMAX(3,3,4)-GARCHX(1,1,4) approach.
The  output is reported  as  model A  in  table  5.  Adhering to  a common  approach,  we choose  ARCH
and GARCH lags of 1  (see for instance  Kyritsis et al., 2016;  Li, 2015;  Mwampashi et al., 2021).

Apart from the fact that electricity prices are autocorrelated,  prices  are  also  found to  have a strong
daily pattern (see for instance, Rintamäki et al., 2016). Therefore, including a 24 hour AR(𝑝) lag
could be informative for prices of the kind we are using. Adding this to model B  in table  5, we find
that the  AR(𝑝)  24 hour lag has a significant impact of the electricity spot price and the addition
also improves the AIC for the  integrated  model. As the daily  pattern of electricity prices might not
exhibit a perfect integer periodicity, one could potentially improve model fit further by including
AR(𝑝)  lags at hour 23 and 25 (Jakobsson, 2019). In model C, these additions are made, resulting in
significant results for both lag 23 and lag 25, and a drastically lowered  AIC.
As seen in  models A to C, the variable oil price lacks significance which could have various
explanations, a  plausible  one being  the  substantial manipulation  performed to the oil price data.
Because the oil price variable lacks explanatory value, we improve our model by excluding this
variable, resulting in model D.

Engle’s multiplier test for residual heteroscedasticity is presented in the bottom  row  of table  5  to
formally  test for  heteroscedasticity in the  error terms for each mean equation. The null hypothesis

                                                                                     23
of homoscedasticity is rejected  for all ARMAX models,  formally  confirming  usage of a GARCHX
equation to model the variance  in the integrated ARMAX-GARCHX framework.

                                      Table  5
                                Results for ARMAX-GARCHX processes.
Variables                    Model A               Model B               Model C                  Model D
                                                       Mean Equation
Wind                     -0.0177***              -0.0197***             -0.0180***                -0.0180***
                                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                    (0.000)
Consumption                 0.0137***              0.0140***              0.0074***                 0.0074***
                                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                    (0.000)
Net exchange                   -0.0002              -0.0039***              -0.0032***                 -0.0032***
                                 (0.409)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                    (0.000)
Oil price                       2.1773                  0.5367                 3.4551
                                  (0.880)                  (0.969)                 (0.812)
Constant                   189.604***             131.0271***            224.4423***               224.4307***
                                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                    (0.000)
 AR lags
   !!                          2.7178***               0.4162***              1.3805***                  1.3802***
                                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                    (0.000)
   !"                         -2.7049***                  0.0260              -0.5383***                 -0.5378***
                                 (0.000)                 (0.206)                 (0.000)                    (0.000)
   !#                          0.9840***               0.2613***              0.0987***                  0.0985***
                                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                    (0.000)
   !"#                                                                             0.1590***                   0.1590***
                                                                                      (0.000)                     (0.000)
  !"$                                                   0.2786***               0.1434***                  0.1434***
                                                           (0.000)                 (0.000)                    (0.000)
   !"%                                                                             -0.2491***                  -0.2492***
                                                                                      (0.000)                     (0.000)
 MA lags
   "!                         -1.5285***               0.7649***              -0.2160***                 -0.2156***
                                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                    (0.000)
   ""                          0.6511***               0.5826***               0.0324**                  0.0323**
                                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.049)                    (0.050)
   "#                          0.1811***               0.1892***              -0.0387***                 -0.0387***
                                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                    (0.000)
                                                         Variance Equation
Wind                      0.0004***              0.0005***              0.0004***                 0.0004***
                                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                    (0.000)
Consumption                 -0.0002***              -0.0002***             -0.0001***                 -0.0001***
                                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                    (0.000)
Net exchange                 0.0001***               0.0001***              0.0002***                 0.0002***
                                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                    (0.000)
Oil price                    19.2695***              19.0495***             17.9246***                17.9572***
                                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                    (0.000)
Constant                     4.074689               3.7282***              2.9899***                 2.9900***
                                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                    (0.000)
ARCH lags
   #!                          0.1432***               0.1209***              0.1151***                  0.1151***
                                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                    (0.000)
GARCH lags
   $!                        0.8853***               0.8979***              0.9007***                 0.9008***
                                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)                    (0.000)
AIC                       254 616.3               253 844.0              252 169.9                 252 168.0
Engle's multiplier              933.630***              730.215***             540.090***                539.532***
 test statistic (using one lag)
        Note:  ***Significant at  1  percent level, **significant at  5  percent level, *significant at  10  percent level.

                                                                                     24
The results in the mean equation of all models A to D confirm the first hypothesis of wind power
generation having a significantly negative impact on  the  electricity price level. This  illustrates  the
merit order effect of wind crowding out more expensive energy sources, and  is  consistent with
findings made by  other scholars  (see for instance  Hagfors et al.,  2016;  Li,  2015; Maciejowska,  2018;).

Through the various model iterations  A, B C, and D, our coefficient of interest  is not altered  to  a
noteworthy extent  which speaks towards  a  credible  result.  Model D, our best fitted model, implies
that for each unit (MWh) of  wind power  generation, the  average  electricity price level decreases by
0.0180 SEK. Moreover, all control variables except for the oil price  have  significant impact  on the
price level.  For each unit increase in  consumption, the  average  price level increases by 0.0074 SEK.
This is consistent with basic  supply and demand  theory, as a demand curve that shifts right increases
prices, all else fixed. For an additional unit net exchanged  (imported)  electricity, the price decreases
by 0.0032 SEK (0.32 öre), on average.  The result  is in line  with what is found by Li (2015)  on the
Danish market.  Intuitively,  as more energy is  imported, the available supply of electricity in the
Swedish market is  increased. An upward  shift in supply should, in line with standard supply and
demand theory,  drive  down  prices in the Swedish market. Therefore, the result is expected.

The  specification  of  our best fitted model (D) shows  that AR(p)  lags 1, 2, 3, 23, 24 and 25 all have
significant explanatory power for the electricity price level. Some of the lags (2 and 25) are negatively
correlated with the price, whereas the rest exhibit a positive correlation. Had all lags been positive,
the electricity spot price would increase indefinitely. The different signs indicate mean reversion,
that is, stationarity of our chosen model  (Stock & Watson, 2020).

The regression results presented in table  5  also illustrate the significant impact of the MA lag
components, which improves model fit.

                                                             8
7.2 Variance Equation: GARCHX  Results

The results for the variance equation shown in table  5  confirm our second hypothesis: that  wind
power generation increases volatility of electricity spot prices. For each additional unit of  wind
power  generation, the variance in electricity spot prices increases by 0.0004, equivalent to a volatility
increase of 0.020  SEK (2  öre). This significant  and positive  effect of wind power generation on
volatility is consistent with what other scholars have found, such as Mwampashi et al. (2021) who
study  the Australian market,  Fredriksson (2017) who investigates the Nordic market, and Alam

8
  For an ARCH process to generate real results, the conditional variance must exhibit mean reversion, also known as
process stationarity.  A mean reverting variance process requires the sum of the ARCH and GARCH  coefficients to be less
than one. Otherwise, the conditional variance grows infinitely large, which undermines the modeling process  (Engle, 2001).
The GARCH(1,1,4) process that is modeled and displayed in table  5  generates ARCH and GARCH coefficients with a
sum that marginally exceeds unity. This implies a non-stationary GARCH process. To avoid this so-called integrated
volatility problem, standard errors would need to be calculated in a different way. However, that is beyond the scope of
this paper.

                                                                                     25
(2021) who analyzes the Swedish market. Thereby, our results contribute to this perspective within
the body of contradicting evidence in the Nordic market.

It is found that the  consumption  variable is negatively correlated with the variance of the electricity
spot price.  As is shown in the merit order framework  (figure 6), the supply curve is steeper at higher
levels of demand, which should entail that  changes in  demand  at  high  levels  cause  greater  variations
in  electricity price  than  changes in  demand  at low levels.  Thus,  a positive coefficient was  expected
for the consumption variable.  As such, the observed result is somewhat surprising,  and a plausible
explanation is likely found in a methodology shortcoming  as seen in footnote  8.  Alternatively,  the
result could derive from  suboptimal data handling, further discussed in the limitations section of
this paper.

Net  exchange  is  correlated with an increase in volatility.  The result contradicts what is found by Li
(2015).  However,  she defines Danish imports as electricity transmitted from Norway and Sweden  –
countries with relatively high shares  of hydropower  which  has  a  low marginal cost.  As Sweden  is
largely self-sufficient with  relatively cheap electricity,  a potential explanation  for the observed result
could be that  more  expensive energy sources are crowded in  when there is  a  shortage in domestic
electricity supply, leading to larger price swings  and increased volatility.

As opposed to the mean equation, the oil price variable  is highly  significant in our  variance equation.
Oil prices have a  positive effect on the volatility,  suggesting  that  the dispatchable nature of oil  does
not  dampen the volatility,  but the contrary.  The result is in line with the presumption that increased
oil prices drive up differences in relative prices of different sources of energy in the mix.  The
magnitude of the coefficient is  large relative to the other  explanatory variables. This is related to
the  heavy manipulation performed on the oil price data  to  achieve stationarity  (see appendix  C).
The  manipulation  complicates intuitive  interpretation of the coefficient.

7.3 Goodness of  Fit  Tests

Testing the ARMAX  Model
An additional step to securing the reliability of our model output  is to test the  specification  of our
optimized model.  The  Ljung-Box test on the residuals of our optimized ARMAX(𝑝, 𝑞, 𝑏)  model (table
5, model D) tests for any remaining autocorrelation not captured by the lagged values p  and q, or
by the exogenous variables (Ljung & Box, 1978).  In an  ARMAX(𝑝, 𝑞, 𝑏)  model  with  perfect
explanatory power, the residuals would be white noise only. That is, the residuals would be random
error terms with a zero mean and constant variance, and no autocorrelation should remain.
Therefore, we  want  the null hypothesis of zero  remaining  autocorrelation  to hold  in the Ljung-Box
test. As displayed in table  6, the null hypothesis  cannot be rejected  at a  1  percent significance level.
This  indicates  good fit of our model and appropriate specification of our p  and q  lags.

                                                                                     26
                                      Table  6
 Ljung-Box test for remaining autocorrelation in the residuals of the ARMAX model with AR lags = 1, 2, 3,
   23, 24, 25; MA lags = 1, 2, 3; Exogenous variables = wind,  consumption, net exchange, for various lag
                                                    lengths.
                            Lag length     Ljung-Box Q Statistic    P-value

                                1               0.0170           0.8963

                                2               0.1733           0.9170

                                3               3.3354           0.3428
                         Interpretation:  If the  p-value  exceeds the  significance level  (e.g.  0.001),
                      the null hypothesis  of  no  remaining  autocorrelation  cannot be rejected
        Note:  ***Significant at  1  percent level, **significant at  5  percent level, *significant at  10  percent level.

Testing the GARCHX  Model
Like the ARMAX model, the  specification  of the GARCHX model  should be assessed.  Performing
the Ljung-Box test on the squared residuals of the GARCHX  model instead tests for remaining
ARCH effects in the residuals of the model  (Ljung & Box, 1978). Ideally, there should be no
remaining ARCH effects as a well-fitted  GARCHX  model  would capture all of these  in  the variance
modeling process. Therefore, we  want  the null hypothesis of zero  remaining  ARCH effects  to hold.
                                                                                                                                                  9
As displayed in table  7,  the null hypothesis  cannot be rejected  at a  1  percent significance level.
This indicates that our model is sufficiently well-fitted.

                                      Table  7
     Ljung-Box test for remaining ARCH effects in the squared residuals of the GARCHX  model  with
      ARCH lag = 1; GARCH lag = 1; Exogenous variables = wind, consumption, net exchange,  oil,
                                             for various lag lengths.
                          Lag length     Ljung-Box Q Statistic    P-value

                              1               5.1514          0.0232**

                              2               6.2406          0.0441**

                              3               6.2406           0.1005

                        Interpretation:  If the p-value exceeds the  significance level  (e.g. 0.001),
                      the null hypothesis of  no  remaining ARCH effects  cannot be rejected
        Note:  ***Significant at  1  percent level, **significant at  5  percent level, *significant at  10  percent level.

9
 As seen, the null hypothesis for lags 1 and 2 would be rejected at a  5  percent significance level, indicating that ARCH
effects  may still be present. As such, it is likely that the GARCH(1,1,4) model does not capture the full ARCH effect
and would benefit from additional optimization methods that go beyond the scope of this paper.

                                                                                     27
      8.  Sensitivity  Analysis

A shortcoming to our study is the model  specification  process, specifically, the chosen number of p
and q  lags included in the mean equation (ARMAX model) and the number of u  and v  lags in the
variance equation (GARCHX  model). We have only tested a limited number of lag combinations  to
avoid an overwhelming set of results. Our selected models  do  indeed perform  relatively  well in the
goodness of fit tests, however, one could question the decision to  only  test models under strict lag
length constraints.

The optimized ARMAX-GARCHX model equation displayed in table  5  has been derived using
maximum lag lengths of 3 for both ARMAX lags p  and q, with the exemption of  AR  lags 23, 24,
and 25. For the GARCHX  lags  𝑢  and  𝑣  the maximum lag length tested was 1. Therefore, there may
exist a combination of lags  𝑝, 𝑞, 𝑢,  and  𝑣  that better captures the characteristics of the time series
data at hand, and consequently offers a better model fit. To verify the reliability of our findings,
and legitimize our choice to test for a maximum of  3  AR/MA  lags,  and  1  ARCH/GARCH lags
respectively, a sensitivity analysis is conducted. Various alternative model specifications are tested
in addition to our optimized model D.

                                      Table  8

                                                                                                                                    10
                 Specification of tested models with arbitrarily chosen lag  combinations.
                                           Model Specification
                   Name              ARMAX        GARCHX
                         Test Model 1              (4, 4)              (1, 1)
                         Test Model 2              (4, 5)              (1, 2)
                         Test Model 3              (5, 4)              (1, 2)
                         Test Model 4              (6, 6)              (1, 1)
                         Test Model 5              (4, 4)              (1, 3)
                         Test Model 6              (7, 3)              (1, 1)
                         Test Model 7              (6, 4)              (1, 3)
                         Test Model 8              (5, 5)              (1, 3)
                         Test Model 9              (8, 2)              (1, 1)
                         Test Model 10           (10, 10)             (1, 1)
Note:  All tested ARMAX  specifications include the exogenous variables wind, demand, and net exchange, as well as AR
 lags 23, 24 and 25, to make the test models 1-10 comparable to our previously optimized model  D. All tested GARCH
                       specifications include the exogenous variables wind, demand, net exchange,
                                                          and oil price.

10
  The ARCH lag is still restricted to 1 due to infeasibility to increase its lag length in  the statistical software used.

                                                                                     28
                                                                                                     11
                                                      Table  9
                                                                                                                                                                      12
                                   Specification of coefficients  for  the exogenous variables for each test  model.
 Variables       Test model 1   Test model 2   Test model 3   Test model 4   Test model 5   Test model 6   Test model 7   Test model 8  Test model 9   Test model 10
                                                                     Mean equation
Wind           -0.0178***    -0.0179***    -0.0178***    -0.0176***    -0.0173***    -0.0176***    -0.0177***    -0.0177***    -0.0176***    -0.0177***
                    (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
Consumption      0.0075***     0.0077***     0.0078***     0.0079***     0.0066***     0.0079***     0.0081***     0.0080***     0.0080***     0.0082***
                    (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
 Net exchange     -0.0032***    -0.0034***    -0.0032***    -0.0029***    -0.0032***    -0.0028***    -0.0035***    -0.0035***    -0.0027***    -0.0027***
                    (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
Constant       223.0557***   218.7815***   215.8549***   213.5365***   231.1080***   210.8380***   208.1408***   210.8576***   206.3847***   197.5979***
                    (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
                                                                        Variance equation
Wind           0.0004***     0.0004***     0.0004***     0.0004***     0.0004***     0.0004***     0.0005***     0.0005***     0.0004***     0.0004***
                    (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
 Consumption     -0.0001***    -0.0001***    -0.0001***    -0.0001***    -0.0001***    -0.0001***    -0.0001***    -0.0001***    -0.0001***    -0.0001***
                    (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
Net exchange      0.0002***     0.0002***     0.0002***     0.0002***     0.0002***     0.0002***     0.0002***     0.0002***     0.0002***     0.0002***
                    (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
Oil price        19.0467***    18.2451***    18.2415***    18.1351***    19.8197***    18.1247***    19.8827***    19.8463***    18.1455***    18.1587***
                    (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
Constant         3.0239***     3.4199***     3.4264***     3.0560***     3.4764***     3.0747***     3.7218***     3.7091***     3.0716***     3.0616***
                    (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
 AIC             252 101.6     251 557.6     251 537.2     252 004.4     251 054.7     251 996.6     251 076.8     251 104.5     251 990.3     251 939.0
                            Note:  ***Significant at  1  percent level, **significant at  5  percent level, *significant at  10  percent level.

11
  The coefficients for the  lags are excluded in the table  due to limited space.
12
  All GARCH processes in the test models  are, as in the results  section, non-stationary, meaning that the  conditional variance does not exhibit mean reversion  (Engle,
2001).  This undermines the modeling processes  and implies that  standard errors would need to be calculated in a different way. However, this is beyond of  the scope of
this paper.

                                                                                                                      29
The AIC is lower for all above tested ARMAX-GARCHX  processes, indicating that the inclusion of
more lags  indeed  gives rise to a better model fit. This is not surprising, as the addition of more
explanatory variables increases  the  explanatory capacity of the model. However, worth noting is
that the coefficients for all variables of interest exhibit little to no deviations regardless of how many
lags are included, and they are all significant at the  1  percent level. This verifies the accuracy and
reliability of the results generated by our optimized model  D  in table  5.

Even if the theoretical best-fitting model for our data contains a different lag combination than our
optimized model D, including different  𝑝, 𝑞, 𝑢,  and  𝑣  lags  does  not  seem to  alter  the results. As
illustrated in table  9, the number of ARMAX lags does not change the result that for each unit
(MWh) of  wind power  generation, the electricity price level decreases by approximately 0.0180 SEK.
Similarly, a unit (MWh) increase of  wind power  generation  increases volatility by approximately
0.020  SEK.

       9.  Discussion

9.1  Policy  Implications

Implications of  Lowered  Price  Levels
In order  to  make our results comparable to other studies,  we convert our  results  into percentage
terms  of the mean  values seen in table 1. A  1 percent increase  of wind power  generation  decreases
the average  electricity spot price  by 0.13 percent. This can be compared to  Fredriksson (2017)  who
studies  the effect of Danish and Swedish wind power production on  the  Nordic  system price. He
finds  that  a 1 percent increase in wind power  generation  reduces  the average price by  0.04  percent.
Similarly,  Li (2015) who studies  the Danish market,  finds  an effect of  0.03 percent.  It can be deduced
that  the effect we found is  of  comparable  magnitude, but  greater.  The  two  studies date  back  five
and  seven  years respectively,  a  time  when  wind power production  in the Nordics  was  smaller.  The
greater  effect  found in this paper  could be attributable to the  past few years’  growth  of  the  wind
power  share  in the energy mix.  The difference between our results and those in previous studies
indicate that the  transformation  of the  energy sector  affects  how policy should be formulated, which
emphasizes  the need for  continuous  reassessment  on  the  subject.

At first sight, an electrification strategy based on wind power which significantly lowers the price
of electricity seems attractive. Lower prices should be at the benefit of consumers and society as a
whole. However, reality is more complex. The green  transition requires  that we maximize the
production  of  sustainable  energy  in  order  to  steer  away  from  fossil  fuel  dependency.  The
electrification of Sweden will cause a drastic increase in the demand for electricity;  according to
some estimates,  the demand for electricity in 2045  will  exceed today’s levels by up to  120 percent
(Borglund, 2021). To sustain an electrified Sweden, we need to make sure that the market conditions

                                                                                     30
are attractive enough for power generating companies to remain in the market  –  otherwise we are
unlikely to achieve the necessary increase in capacity.

Supported by the results presented in this paper, investing in wind power risks setting the scene for
an unattractive market, characterized by low profit margins. Power companies with high marginal
costs, such as those  burning fossil fuels  or produce  nuclear energy, may struggle to stay afloat in
such  a  market, ultimately,  being  forced to exit.  The typical high-cost power sources  are  dispatchable,
making them  integral  to a stable  and balanced  electricity supply in Sweden  (Fredriksson, 2017).
Without these plannable energy sources stabilizing on non-windy days, the market is poorly
equipped  to  meet  demand. Unless accompanied by appropriate measures, an expansion of wind
power may result in generation capacity shortages.

Implications of  Increased  Price  Volatility
In contrast to lowered electricity prices,  which benefit some groups at the expense of others,
increased price volatility is unambiguously undesirable. All parties suffer from a volatile market.
Producers will struggle to predict cash flows, and will therefore require a larger buffer to meet
unexpectedly low prices, and consumers  will  be exposed to  large price swings.  Risk averse investors
will  seek other investment opportunities,  possibly depriving the energy sector of the necessary  influx
of  capital.

Possible  Remedies for  Increased  Price  Volatility
The policy implications of increased price volatility due to increased wind power production have
been discussed by previous scholars. Woo et al. (2011) encourage the principal actors in the
electricity market to meet the challenge through increased efforts at risk management. An efficient
way to deal with risk for economic actors with large stakes in the electricity market is to engage in
the energy security market and invest in financial products like electricity  futures and forward
contracts  with  important  hedging  abilities.  Mwampashi  et  al.  (2021)  instead  emphasize  the
importance of adequate infrastructure,  and  an  expansion of the electricity grid.  A drastic  expansion
of wind power  and a subsequent  loss of  stabilizing  dispatchable power sources  requires  improved
integration of  the  Swedish  market with  the rest of Europe  to avoid  domestic  power outages.  Further
connecting the power grids  with Europe can also increase profitability for producers, and stabilize
supply and prices (Schaber et al., 2012).

Aside from financial products  and expanding electricity grids, new technology may be the solution
to  increasingly volatile markets.  For  example,  large investments  are being made within the market
for frequency containment reserves (FCR). In 2019, Svenska Kraftnät, the electricity transmission
system operator in Sweden, opened up  for more intermittent energy sources  in the electricity grid
by enabling consumers to make money  through  flexible electricity consumption  (Vattenfall, 2021).
This is an example of how technology can be used to hedge market risk,  which presents great
potential for counteracting the volatility induced  by intermittent  energy sources like wind power in
the electricity grid.

                                                                                     31
Up until this point, the discussion in this  paper  has only been about wind power directly being
converted to electricity. However, resources are being directed toward the research, development,
and future implementation of  hydrogen technology.  Dr. Mats Lundberg, Head of Sustainability at
Sandvik, elaborates on the  development  in an interview.  As previously discussed, we currently lack
technology for efficient large-scale storage of electricity. Electricity transmission causes substantial
energy losses, sometimes as high as  15 percent.  Energy  converted into hydrogen, on the other hand,
allows for  storage  and transmission  without  energy losses.  A combination of batteries, for short-
term storage, and hydrogen, for longer-term storage,  can have important smoothening effects,
reducing the negative impacts of intermittent energy sources  on  the Swedish electricity market.
Apart from alleviating the impact of wind power on price volatility, this can also  improve  the
business case for the wind power producers.  With a storage option,  producers can  maximize
production without worrying about  price drops when wind speeds are high, which today  can
incentivize  shutting off  windmills  to avoid operating at a loss  (Lundberg, 2022). This could in turn
reduce the negative profitability effects that wind power generation otherwise may have on the
electricity market.

As a consequence of  the war in Ukraine, efforts in line with the green transition, including
investments in hydrogen technology, have been accelerated in the European Union. In fact,  Dr.
Lundberg  (2022)  claims  that the  sense of urgency has  never been  greater.  Despite its status as a
sustainability pioneer, Sweden has fallen behind the rest of Europe when it comes to the development
and implementation of appropriate infrastructure.  Figure 11 shows  the  network  of hydrogen
compatible pipes, which are evenly distributed across Europe but with a clear gap  in  Sweden,
Norway, and Finland. This further emphasizes the need for additional investments into research
and development  to keep up with technology advancements.

                                                                                     32
                                      Figure  11
              Map of Europe, illustrating  stretches of pipe capable of transporting hydrogen.

                                     Source:  Gas for Climate 2050  (2022)

The  Benefits of  Self  Sufficiency
Despite  some  undesirable effects on the electricity market,  there are aspects  beyond climate
considerations  that motivate an expansion of  wind power  production. As illustrated by recent
geopolitical  events,  a  strive  towards  self-sufficiency  in  energy  supply  has  valuable  security
implications, as it can provide protection in terms of crisis. It builds resilience in international
conflict,  by  effectively  reducing  the threat of aggressions intended  to put energy supply on the line.
Sweden has no independent supply of oil or gas, meaning that all fossil fuel driven energy production
relies on international trade and import of these fuels. The intrinsic value in being self-sufficient
creates additional  support for moving away from fossil fuels, and heavily investing in types of energy
that Sweden is capable of producing on its own. Most Swedish hydropower plants date back to the
1960s and 1970s, and the installation of new plants is limited due to their  impacts on ecosystems
and biodiversity (Energiföretagen, 2022). Wind power is therefore a natural step to electrify Sweden,
without increasing dependency on international trade. It is crucial to securing Swedish independence,
and the possibility to opt for neutrality in a crisis.

                                                                                     33
9.2 Limitations

Input  Data  Selection
There are inherent limitations to this study which may have undermined the findings. One limitation
is our manipulation of the input price data. As described in section 5.1, we use  the national average
prices of the different bidding zones in Sweden, rather than the separate prices for each area. Using
an averaged value as input may have omitted important information, preventing us from fully
understanding the relationship between our investigated variables. Particularly, it is possible that
the investigation of how wind power impacts electricity spot price volatility may have been
hampered by our decision to use averaged data, as any volatility effects are expected to have been
reduced.  The same manipulation is  however  done by Alam (2021),  which  should  legitimize  the
approach.

Another limitation  regarding  our input data is our choice not to include Danish wind power
production in our analysis. Danish wind power accounts for a substantial portion of the total wind
power produced within the Nord Pool market (Li, 2015). Because the market is highly integrated,
the ideal way to investigate and understand the relationship between wind power production and
electricity spot prices would arguably have been to  include Danish  production.  Our choice of a pure
Swedish focus made us opt for Sweden specific input values, and we instead attempted to mitigate
this shortcoming by controlling for net exchange.

Possible  Impacts of the Covid-19  Pandemic
Attention must be directed to the fact that our time series stretches across the Covid-19 pandemic.
The years  2020 and 2021 were characterized by unusual circumstances, impacting society and the
economy on a wide front, possible affecting  variables  such as  electricity  consumption.  We chose not
to dedicate time or effort into investigating the possible  effects the pandemic may have had on our
study.  Our  devotion  to  producing  time  relevant results made us  use  current  day data  in spite of a
possible  pandemic effect.  This is in part motivated by Sweden’s relatively soft approach to the
pandemic, with no official lockdowns (Our world in data, 2022), which  arguably entails that any
effects  are  limited in size.

Manual Data Entry
The  raw data retrieved from the Nord Pool data base  had  to be converted  into a format that could
readily be  used as input for our regression analysis in our chosen  statistical software tool.  For a
number of steps in this process, manual data entry was required.  Manual data entry is prone to
human  error  (Barchard & Pace, 2011).  Upon  thorough  examination of our data set  done in the final
stage of writing this paper, existence of human error was confirmed.  The  inspection  revealed that
720 values of the variable forecasted consumption had been  entered incorrectly.  A plot of the
consumption variable containing these errors is seen in appendix B, along with a  table of the
corrected  summary statistics.  With a total of 26  279 observations of this same variable, the

                                                                                     34
incorrectly  entered values result in an error rate of approximately  2.7 percent.  A rule of thumb  in
statistics  is that  manual data entry generates an error rate of approximately 1 percent,  which  should
be  considered acceptable  (Laurila, 2022). We deem our error rate of 2.7 percent to fall within an
acceptable range, and therefore,  made the decision to  keep our faulty variable as an input  in our
regression analysis  to avoid excessive reworking.  However, it should be mentioned that the confirmed
existence  of  error  may have,  albeit negligibly,  altered our results.

       10.  Conclusion

The aim of this study was to contribute to the current energy political debate by investigating how
Swedish wind power generation impacts electricity spot prices in terms of level and volatility.  To
this end, we  have specified  and applied  an ARMAX-GARCHX  model to our set of hourly electricity
price and wind power generation data, together with a  number  of control variables.  The model  has
subsequently  been altered  with regard to lag lengths and control variables in order  to achieve optimal
fit.  Using the optimized model, we  tested our two hypotheses;  that wind power generation is
negatively correlated with electricity spot price level, and positively correlated with electricity spot
price volatility.  Both  hypotheses were confirmed at a  1  percent significance level. More specifically,
increasing  wind power generation by 1 MWh lowers the average electricity spot price by 0.018 SEK
(1.8 öre), and increases the volatility by 0.020  SEK (2 öre). Lowered price levels combined with high
volatility risks  setting the scene for  an  unprofitable and unstable electricity market, potentially
unattractive for both producers and  investors. As Sweden embarks on an ambitious electrification
journey, in which wind power is to play a major part, these risks must be accounted for.  In an effort
to  stabilize  an electricity market  with a large share of VRE, extensive  resources  are  currently being
invested in the   development of  volatility dampening  tools,  including hydrogen technology  and
frequency containment reserves. However, Sweden  has a long way to go in terms of building new
infrastructure  before the country is adequately equipped for a green energy transition.  Unless
accompanied by a  rigorous  risk management  strategy,  a  rapid  expansion of  wind power  could
challenge  the  long-term  goal  of  substantially  and  sustainably  increasing  Swedish  electricity
production.

The results presented in this study have  partial  support in previous literature, but  the lack of
consensus  regarding  the  effect of wind power generation on electricity price volatility  calls for further
research.  A suggestion is to  particularly  focus on  Sweden and other  countries  with a high penetration
of wind power.  Moreover,  the  ongoing  transformation of  the  energy market composition  requires
continuous reassessment of  effects,  as changed circumstances seem to impact results.  Reaching  a
consensus  regarding the  impacts  of a  green transition  on  electricity  price  behavior  will be crucial to
designing  the optimal electrification strategy for Sweden  –  a strategy  that  paves way for efficient
and sustainable electricity production without compromising market stability.

                                                                                     35
      Bibliography

Alam, M. (2021). Accessing the effect of renewables on the wholesale power market. International
         Journal of Energy Economics and Policy.  11(2), 341-360.
Auer, B. R. (2016). How does Germany's Green Energy Policy Affect Electricity Market
         Volatility? an Application of Conditional Autoregressive Range Models. Energy Policy,
          98, 621-8.
Barchard, K. & Pace, L.  (2011). Preventing human error: The impact of data entry methods on
         data accuracy and statistical results. Computers in Human Behavior,  27,  1834-1839.
Bollerslev, T. (1986). Generalized autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity. Journal of
         Econometrics, 31, 307-327.
Borglund, A.  (2021, Apr, 27). Elanvändningen kan öka med 120 procent till 2045. Tidningen
         Energi.  https://www.energi.se/artiklar/2021/april-2021/elanvandningen-kan-oka-med-
          120-procent-till-2045/
Burenius,  L., et al. (2020, Nov 13).  Havsbaserad vindkraft blir en viktig del  i framtida
         elförsörjning. Svensk vindenergi.  https://svenskvindenergi.org/debattinlagg/havsbaserad-
          vindkraft-blir-en-central-del-i-framtida-elforsorjning
Clò, S., Cataldi, A., & Zoppoli, P. (2014). The merit-order effect in the Italian power market: The
        impact of solar and wind generation on national  wholesale electricity prices. Energy
         Policy, 77, 79–88.
CME Group. (2022, Mar 9) Understanding Basics of the Power Market.
          https://www.cmegroup.com/education/courses/introduction-to-energy/introduction-to-
          power/understanding-basics-of-the-power-market.html
Dong, S., Li, H., Wallin, F., Avelin, A., Zhang, Q., Yu, Z. (2019) “Volatility of electricity price in
         Denmark and Sweden”. Energy Procedia, 158, 4331-4337.
Dukascopy. (2022, Mar 2). Historical Data Export.
        https://www.dukascopy.com/plugins/fxMarketWatch/?historical_data
Energiföretagen. (2022, Apr 8). Kraftvärme.
        https://www.energiforetagen.se/energifakta/kraftvarme/
Energiföretagen. (2021, Oct 19). Kundens elkostnader.
         https://www.energiforetagen.se/energifakta/elsystemet/elhandel/for-dig-som-
         elkund/kundens-elkostnader/
Energiföretagen. (2022, Feb 21). Vattenkraft.
        https://www.energiforetagen.se/energifakta/elsystemet/produktion/vattenkraft/
Energimarknadsinspektionen. (2021, Mar 3). Så här fungerar elmarknaden.
         https://ei.se/konsument/el/sa-har-fungerar-elmarknaden

                                                                                     36
Energimyndigheten. (2022, Feb 10). Fortsatthög elproduktion och elexport under 2021.
         https://www.energimyndigheten.se/nyhetsarkiv/2022/fortsatt-hog-elproduktion-och-
         elexport-under-2021/
Energimyndigheten. (2018, Aug 31). Solceller i Sveriges energisystem.
         https://www.energimyndigheten.se/fornybart/solelportalen/lar-dig-mer-om-
           solceller/systemperspektiv-i-sverige/
Energimyndighetens  statistikdatabas. (2022, Mar 9) Antal verk, installerad effekt och
           elproduktion, hela landet, 1982-.
         https://pxexternal.energimyndigheten.se/pxweb/sv/Vindkraftsstatistik/Vindkraftsstatisti
       k/EN0105_1.px/
Engle, R. (1982). Autoregressive Conditional Heteroscedasticity  with Estimates of the Variance of
         United Kingdom Inflation. Econometrica, 50, 987-1007.
Engle, R. (2001). GARCH 101: The Use of ARCH/GARCH Models in Applied Econometrics.
         Journal of Economic Perspectives, 157-168.
European Commission. (2022). REPowerEU: Joint European action for more affordable, secure
         and sustainable energy.
Forrest, S., & MacGill, I. (2013). Assessing the impact of wind generation on wholesale prices and
         generator dispatch in the Australian National Electricity Market. Energy Policy, 59, 120-
         132.
Fredriksson, G. (2017) An Empirical Analysis of the Effect of Wind Power on the Level  and the
         Volatility of the Electricity Price in the Nordic-Baltic Market. M.Sc. thesis in Economics,
        Stockholm School of Economics.
Gas for climate: a path to 2050. (2022, May 3). The european hydrogen backbone vision.
        https://gasforclimate2050.eu/ehb/
Hagfors, L. I., Paraschiv, F., Molnar, P. & Westgaard, S. (2016).  Using quantile regression to
        analyze the effect of renewables on EEX price formation, Renew. Energy Environ
         Sustain, 1, 32.
Huisman, R., Koolen D., & Stet, C. (2021) Pricing Forward Contracts in Power Markets with
         Variable Renewable Energy Sources. Renewable Energy,  180, 1260-5.
Jakobsson, A. (2019). An introduction to time series modeling.  Studentlitteratur, 3rd
         edition.
Jónsson, T., Pinson, P., & Madsen, H. (2010). On the market impact of wind energy forecasts.
         Energy Economics, 32(2), 313-320.
Ketterer, J. C. (2014). The impact of wind power generation on the electricity price in Germany.
         Energy Economics, 44, 270-280.
Konkurrensverket [Swedish Competition Authority]. (2018). Konkurrensen i Sverige 2018. Report
         2018:1, Chapter 27. Retrieved from:

                                                                                     37
        https://www.konkurrensverket.se/globalassets/dokument/informationsmaterial/rapporter
         -och-broschyrer/rapportserie/rapport_2018-1_kap27-elmarknaden.pdf
Konsumenternas energimarknadsbyrå. (2021, Oct 26). Elområdespriser.”
          https://www.energimarknadsbyran.se/el/dina-avtal-och-kostnader/elpriser-
         statistik/elomradespriser/
Kundkraft. (2022, May 3). Elguide för full kontroll på elmarknaden.
         https://www.kundkraft.se/elguiden/vad-ar
Kyritsis et al. (2017). Electricity prices, large-scale renewable integration, and policy implications.
         Energy Policy, 101, 550-560
Laurila, H. (2022).  Manual Data Entry And Its Effects On Quality. Quality Magazine,  61.
Li, Y. (2015). Quantifying the impacts of wind power generation in the day-ahead market: The
         case of Denmark. Chaire European Electricity Markets (CEEM), Université Paris-
        Dauphine.
Ljung, G., & Box, G. (1978).  On a Measure of Lack of Fit in Time Series Models. Biometrika,
         297-303.
Lundberg, W. Mats. Ph.D. Head of Sustainability, Sandvik. (2022, Apr 29). Personal interview.
Maciejowska, K. (2020) Assessing the Impact of Renewable Energy Sources on the Electricity
        Price Level and Variability  –  A Quantile Regression Approach. Energy Economics, 85,
        104532.
Mwampashi, M.M, et al. (2021) Wind Generation and the Dynamics of Electricity Prices in
         Australia. Energy Economics, 103, 105547.
Nord Pool Group (2022, Apr 11). Day-ahead trading.
         https://www.nordpoolgroup.com/en/trading/Day-ahead-trading/Price-calculation/
Nord Pool Spot. (2022, Feb 21). Historical market data.  https://ftp.nordpoolgroup.com
Ny  Teknik. (2021, Jan 29) 15 frågor och svar om vätgas: ”Stora förväntningar”.
         https://www.nyteknik.se/energi/15-fragor-och-svar-om-vatgas-stora-forvantningar-
        7008779
O'Mahoney, A. & Denny, E. (2011).  The merit order effect of wind generation in the Irish
         electricity market. Conference Paper.
Our world in data. (2022, May 2). Covid-19: Stay-at-home restrictions.
         https://ourworldindata.org/covid-stay-home-restrictions
Rintamäki, T. et al. (2016) Does renewable energy generation decrease the volatility of electricity
         prices? An analysis  of Denmark and Germany. Energy Economics,  62, 270-282
Schaber, K., Steinke, F., & Hamacher, T. (2012). Transmission grid extensions for the integration
         of variable renewable energies in Europe: Who benefits where? Energy Policy, 43, 123-
         135.
Stock, J. & Watson, M (2020) Introduction to Econometrics. Pearson Education Limited.

                                                                                     38
Svenska kraftnät. (2022, Mar 9). Elcertifikatsystemet.
        http://www.energimyndigheten.se/fornybart/elcertifikatsystemet/
Svenska kraftnät. (2021, Mar 9). Om elmarknaden.  https://www.svk.se/om-kraftsystemet/om-
        elmarknaden/
Sveriges riksbank. (2022, Mar 5). Sök räntor & valutakurser.
          https://www.riksbank.se/sv/statistik/sok-rantor--valutakurser/
United Nations.  (2022, May 2). Ukraine.  https://news.un.org/en/focus/ukraine
Vattenfall. (2021, Oct 5). Tjäna pengar på din flexibla elförbrukning.
          https://energyplaza.vattenfall.se/blogg/tjana-pengar-pa-din-flexibla-elforbrukning
Weron, R. (2014). Electricity price forecasting: A review of the state-of-the-art with a look into
         the future. International Journal of Forecasting, 30(4), 1030-1081.
Wind Europe. (2022, Mar 9) Welcome to Wind Energy Basics.  https://windeurope.org/about-
         wind/wind-basics/
Woo, C., Horowitz, I., Moore, J., & Pacheco, A. (2011). The impact of wind generation on the
         electricity spot-market price level and variance: The Texas experience. Energy Policy,
        39(7), 3939-3944.

                                                                                     39
   Appendices

                                Appendix A
    Definition of  the  dependent variable,  the  independent variable of interest, and  all  control variables.
Variable                            Definition
Electricity spot price                   Hourly price of electricity set on day-ahead market (average of SE1, SE2, SE3, and SE4 prices)
Forecasted wind power production         Day-ahead hourly Swedish wind power production prognosis
Forecasted electricity consumption         Day-ahead hourly Swedish consumption prognosis
Net exchange                        Day-ahead hourly Swedish net import - net export prognosis
Oil price                            Hourly US crude oil price with a 24 hour lag (natural logarithm, first difference)

                                                                                    40
                               Appendix  B

                                       B.1
    Figure shows plot of the (faulty) consumption variable which has been used as input in the regression
   analysis. Faulty values (outliers, observed between t = 18  000 and t = 23  000) are visible in the graph.

                   Source:  Authors’ own illustration based on data from Nord Pool Group (2022)

                                       B.2
     Table  showing consumption variable  corrected for faulty values. Mean,  st.d., min, and max.  can be
compared to the descriptive statistics in table 1, where the consumption variable exhibits different  numbers.
Variable        Observations         Unit         Mean         St.d.      Minimum     Maximum
Consumption         26 279       MWh/h     15 574.090      3 348.947      8 415.000     25 745.000
                   Source:  Authors’ own illustration based on data from Nord Pool Group (2022)

Comment:  The faulty values  were  noticed  at a late stage in the process  of  writing this paper.  The  faulty  values
are  attributable to  manual data entry,  whereby  inaccurate data points  were entered in the data set. This
resulted  in the consumption variable  exhibiting  an unexpected pattern.  Upon notice, the faulty data was
corrected, and  a  plot of the corrected data points was included in figure 8  to  illustrate the  seasonal  behavior
of the consumption variable.  However, the faulty  variable,  including  a total of  720 faulty values  (equal to an
error rate of 2.7 percent) was  still  used as input in  the regression analysis.

                                                                                     41
                           Appendix C

                                C.1
                 Graph showing  time plot of  the  non-stationary  oil price.

             Source:  Authors’ own illustration based on data from  Dukascopy  (2022)

                                C.2
Graph showing time plot of  manipulated oil price  (first difference of the natural logarithm).

             Source:  Authors’ own illustration based on data from Dukascopy (2022)

                                                                              42
                                           Appendix  D
                         Specification and AIC for various combinations  of p  and q  lags  in the ARMAX(p,q,4) model.
ARMAX(p,q,b)         1,0,4        1,1,4        1,2,4        1,3,4        2,0,4        2,1,4        2,2,4        2,3,4        3,0,4        3,1,4        3,2,4        3,3,4
Wind          -0.03183***    -0.0343***    -0.0346***    -0.0346***    -0.0347***    -0.0346***    -0.0346***    -0.0346***    -0.0346***    -0.0345***    -0.0360***    -0.0336***
                    (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)
Consumption       0.0256***     0.0194***     0.0186***     0.0183***     0.0184***     0.0185***     0.0185***     0.0183***     0.0185***     0.0184***    0.01590***    0.0155***
                    (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)
Net exchange       0.0259***     0.0223***     0.0218***     0.0218***     0.0219***     0.0219***     0.0218***     0.0218***     0.0218***     0.0220***     0.0221***    0.0197***
                    (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)
Oil price            -6.5815      -13.0021      -10.6532      -11.2666      -9.5750      -11.0844      -10.7729      -11.0954      -10.9852      -11.8048      -9.3491   -13.2367***
                    (0.895)       (0.774)       (0.815)       (0.805)       (0.835)       (0.808)       (0.813)       (0.808)       (0.809)       (0.795)       (0.824)      (0.757)
Constant        155.9973***   252.4922***   265.4000***   269.2289***   269.3460***   266.4310***   266.6280***   269.7242***   265.8089***   268.0985***   240.6660***   265.8466***
                    (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)
AR lags
!!
                0.9779***     0.9658***     0.9621***     0.9602***     1.2583***     1.1380***     1.0632***     0.2843***     1.2704***     0.4958***     2.3347***    2.7987***
                    (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)
!"
                                                               -0.2875***    -0.1698***     -0.0978**     0.6498***    -0.3413***     0.6473***    -1.8057***    -2.6552***
                                                                     (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.025)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)
!#
                                                                                                                0.0431***    -0.1938***     0.4707***    0.8561***
                                                                                                                        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)
MA lags
"!
                            0.2882***     0.3059***     0.3115***               0.1313***     0.2061***     0.9876***               0.7718***    -1.1070***    -1.5779***
                                (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)                 (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)                 (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)
""
                                        0.0530***     0.0633***                          0.0254*    0.27360***                         0.1511***    0.3787***
                                            (0.000)       (0.000)                            (0.066)       (0.000)                            (0.000)      (0.000)
"#
                                                     0.0217***                                   0.0654***                                   0.2289***
                                                          (0.000)                                       (0.000)                                       (0.000)
AIC             289 201.0     287 178.4     287 119.3     287 112.2     287 158.8     287 118.8     287 119.0     287 087.0     287 112.1     287 113.8     285 927.5    285 758.3
                            Note:  ***Significant at  1  percent level, **significant at  5  percent level, *significant at  10  percent level.

                                                                                                                      43