Can FEARS predict market
returns?

VICTOR LÖTHNER

MARKUS PALSANDER

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2022
Can FEARS predict market returns?

Abstract
[This paper  examines  whether internet queries provided by Google Trends can
proxy investor sentiment and thereby predict future market returns. By creating
our own Financial and Economic Attitudes Revealed by Searches (FEARS) index
using Internet Search Volume (SVI), we examine the period 2013-2022. We find
FEARS (i) to  not predict  short  term reversals,  and  (ii)  to  have a  contemporaneous
negative  correlation with  returns  for  multiple  asset  classes. These results  differs
from  the study that  we  replicate  and  other  earlier  research  within the field. We
also find  inconsistencies  in the data which we  believe  to be the  reason  for why our
period show different results compared to earlier periods.  This paper contributes
to the  research of investor sentiment and more particularly  the use of Google
Trends as a proxy for investor sentiment.]

Keywords
[Investor sentiment, FEARS, Google Trends, Market returns, Limits to arbitrage]

Authors
Victor Löthner (24617)
Markus Palsander (24615)

Tutor
Christian Thomann, Researcher, Department of Finance

Examiner
Adrien d'Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the  following people for helping us with this paper.  Our
tutor Christian Thomann for great insights and feedback about the process and
methodology. Secondly,  we would like to thank Sebastian Löthner for his support
with the Python programming. All errors  are on behalf of our mistakes.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Victor Löthner and Markus Palsander, 2022
   1.  Introduction
Investor sentiment, an area within the field of behavioral finance, tries to  capture
the overall sentiment of investors. There have been many studies that examine
the impact of investor sentiment on financial markets. For instance, Baker and
Wurgler (2006) find that sentiment broadly defined has significant cross-sectional
effects  on different types of stocks. Their measurement of sentiment is built using
six different proxies that include NYSE share turnover and average first-day
return on IPOs. While these proxies are valid measurements of sentiment, they
work as an indirect proxy. Instead, internet queries have been proposed to be a
more direct way of measuring household sentiment related to financial markets.
One way of measuring household sentiment using internet queries has been by
measuring their Google searches as they give  more direct information about
households' state of mind.

Our study is an extension of the Da, Engelberg, and Gao (2015) study and
primarily contributes by examining whether the findings by Da et al. (2015) can
be validated for an extended time period since a method that consistently can
measure investor sentiment over time would be preferred. Such findings would
also contribute to the robustness of Google Trends' ability to measure investor
sentiment. By creating our own Financial and Economic Attitudes Revealed by
Search (FEARS) index, using Internet Search Volume (SVI) which is provided by
Google Trends, we use the FEARS index as a proxy for investor sentiment.

The study by Da et al. (2015) is conducted for eight years, ranging from January
2004 to  December 2011. Our study includes nine years, ranging from January
2013 until December 2021. We have chosen an independent time period so their
findings do not interfere with  ours.  Furthermore, we choose a slightly longer time
period to check for more significance and include over 2000 observations. The
study also captures the whole time period of the COVID-19 pandemic up until the
study began.

The Da et al. (2015) study resulted in three major findings. They find that their
own-created FEARS index (i) predicts short-term reversals, (ii) predicts temporary
increases in volatility, and, (iii) predicts mutual fund flows out of equity funds and
into  bond  funds.  Moreover,  they  conclude  these  findings  to,  in  general,  be
consistent with other research on investor sentiment.

Other studies have also managed to find that internet search queries measured
by Google Trends have been able to predict market returns. In an earlier study by
Da, Engelberg, and Gao, (2011) they were able to predict higher stock prices when
SVI increased  for different companies, measured by their stock ticker names. The
same method with stock ticker names was also used by Wintoki, and Zhang (2011)
to predict abnormal returns. By using their method, a trading strategy was formed
by Bijl, Kringhaug, Molnár,  and Sandvik (2016) which also yielded an abnormal
return, but not after trading costs.
To measure household sentiment using internet queries, we use Google Searches
since  Google  is by far the most used search engine on the internet with over 85%
of the market share in December 2021 according to Statista (2022). Furthermore,
Google provides the service Google Trends which gathers data on the frequency of
searches for different terms in different regions. The service Google Trends
(https://www.google.com/trends) provides the SVI Index for every term which
ranges from 0 to 100 depending on the number of searches on that term worldwide
or from specific regions. The scale of 0 to 100 is relative to other dates within the
given time period instead of giving an exact number of searches. As argued by
Vozlyublennaia (2014) SVI reflects sentiment for retail investors rather than
institutional investors might have more effective ways to gather information.
While this is more true when the sentiment is measured using stock ticker names
we anticipate that the majority of searches carried out reflect households rather
than professional investors. In Figure 1 we show how the data for the two terms
“PRICE OF GOLD” and “RECESSION” are displayed by Google Trends.

Figure 1
Interest over time for the term “PRICE OF GOLD”

Interest over time for the term “RECESSION”

Figure 1 shows the monthly SVI for the terms “PRICE OF GOLD” and “RECESSION”
as they are displayed by the service Google Trends (https://www.google.com/trends). The
period plotted is 2013 January to 2021 December.

Da et al. (2015) stress the importance of identifying the relevant words that reveal
the   true   investors’   sentiment.   By   combining   commonly   known   financial
dictionaries,  such  as  the  Harvard  IV-4  Dictionary  and  the  Lasswell  Value
Dictionary,  we  generate  a  primitive  list  of  149  search  words.  Well  known
dictionaries are used in  order to stay as objective as possible when choosing our
terms (Tetlock, 2007). From the primitive word list, we access 1490 search terms.
After identifying economic-related words that either reflect a positive or negative
sentiment, as well as removing duplicates, we end up with a list of 155 terms
including terms such as “GOLD”, “RECESSION”, and “ECONOMICS”.
Moreover, we eliminate all the terms that are not economic-related as well as
eliminating the terms with too few valid SVIs. The list then includes 137 search
terms, which we then calculate daily log differences for. Due to comparable
purposes, we also winsorize, remove seasonality, and remove heteroscedasticity
through standardizing each term (Baker and Wurgler, 2006; Da et al., 2015).
Lastly, we compute backward rolling regressions in order to assess which terms
are of the highest interest.

Aside from our own-created FEARS index we also use the Economic Policy
Uncertainty Index (EPU) developed by Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2013) to measure
economic-political uncertainty, the commonly known market volatility index, VIX,
from Chicago Board Operations Exchange (CBOE) that measures option-implied
volatility   on   the   S&P   500,   and,   also   the   Aruoba-Diebold-Scotti   Business
Conditions Index (ADS) developed by  Aruoba, Diebold, and Scotti (2009) to
measure business conditions during different times.  All these indices are used as
independent variables in our study.

We then  use  our FEARS index  when testing  on different  asset classes. Our
findings suggest that FEARS cannot predict short-term reversals, however, we
find that an increase in FEARS correlates with a contemporaneous decline in
market returns. For our time period, this appears to be true for multiple asset
classes. Moreover, for bond index returns we find neither any reversals nor
contemporaneous effects.

After relating our FEARS index to the asset classes, we do a final test where we
consider limits to arbitrage. We create a high-low  beta portfolio by calculating the
spread from decile portfolios from data provided by CRSP. Moreover, we do a
similar test for volatility, where we also create a high-low portfolio. Consistent
with our previous findings, we do not find any reversals, although, we find
contemporaneous correlations.

We compute multiple robustness checks to be certain of our results. We decided to
use 30 search terms in our FEARS index throughout our previous calculations,
but we also test with 25 and 35 words in our robustness checks. Additionally, we
also test without any winsorization at all, as well as testing on different time
periods. The results from our robustness checks show no sign of reversals. Da et
al. (2015) also examine fund flows, which we do not. They conclude that FEARS
can predict mutual fund flows from equity funds into bond funds. We have decided
to restrict the scope of our study to market returns and asset classes.

   2.  Literature review
Behavioral  finance  contradicts  the  Efficient  Market  Hypothesis  (EMH)  and
suggests a psychological view of financial models in order to explain market
anomalies (Shiller, 2003). The research on investor sentiment emerged from the
behavioral finance field, whereas Barberis, Shleifer, & Vishny (1998) define
investor sentiment as the way that investors form their beliefs. Baker and Wurgler
(2007) suggest a similar definition of market sentiment as “the belief about future
cash flows and investment risks that is not justified by the facts at hand”. Baker
and Wurgler (2007) determine that investor sentiment does affect stock prices, but
the question is rather how one can measure investor sentiment and what its effects
are. Moreover, they conclude that the stocks that are most affected by sentiment,
are stocks that are difficult to arbitrage or value.

Investor sentiment can be measured in a variety of different ways. However, there
are two methods that mainly have been used in order to measure investor
sentiment. One method that empiricists have used, is market-based measures
such as trading volume, closed-end fund discount, initial public offering (IPO)
first-day returns, IPO volume, option-implied volatilities (VIX), and, mutual fund
flows. The second approach used by some studies is a survey-based approach,
where for example, one uses the Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index (MCSI),
investment letters, UBS/GALLUP Index for Investor Optimism, or the Baker and
Wurgler Index to measure investor sentiment (Brown and Cliff, 2005; Lemmon
and Portniaguina, 2006; and  Qiu and Welch, 2006; Baker and Wurgler, 2006,
2007).  However,  the  second  method  mentioned  suffers  from  the  issue  of
respondents not needing to be truthful or accurate in their beliefs or opinions
(Singer,  2002).

In addition to these two main methods used  in order to proxy investor sentiment,
more recent studies suggest a more unexamined method by studying micro-
blogging  sentiment  or  social  network  sentiment,  which  measures  investor
sentiment through internet usage by  using  Twitter, Facebook, Yahoo! Finance, or
Google searches (e.g. Sprenger, Tumasjan, Sandner & Welpe, 2014; Zhang, Li,
Shen & Teglio, 2016; Siganos, Vagenas-Nanos & Verwijmeren, 2017; Kim & Kim,
2014; Da et al., 2011; Da et al., 2015). These different methods of measuring
sentiment show that there is no standardized way for how investor sentiment
should be measured.

Investor sentiment does affect the stock market activity, where one example would
be through asset valuation (Brown and Cliff, 2005). High investor sentiment can
relate to that investors in the stock market being bullish about the current market
outlook,  and,  is  also  connected  to  overconfidence  (Liu,  2015;  Odean,  1998).
Furthermore, Barberis et al. (1998) suggest that due to the overconfident behavior
of investors, momentum effects exist.

Investor sentiment is closely related to momentum strategies since momentum
strategies build upon the foundation of buying stocks that rises. Jagadeesh and
Titman (1993) examined the momentum effect and find evidence that momentum
strategies outperform the S&P 500 index. Another study, also by Jagadeesh and
Titman (2002), validated their findings and showed that over a three to 12-month
period, the best-performing stocks  continue to perform well the following three to
12 months. Moreover, they also find the opposite to be true, the stocks that perform
worst  continue to do so for the coming three to 12 months thereafter. Hence, their
result provides an interesting reason for our study to try to validate the findings
from Da et al. (2015) by measuring investor sentiment. Moreover, Yang & Zhou
(2015) find that investor sentiment can help explain market anomalies, for
example, fire sales or limits to arbitrage. Research also suggests that limits to
arbitrage can explain some anomalies that are fundamental-based, for example,
post-earnings- announcement drift, accruals, and the cash holding effect (Li & Luo
2017; Mashruwala, Rajgopal, & Shevlin, 2006; Mendenhall, 2004).

In theory, e.g. De Long, Shleifer, Summers, Waldmann (1990) and, Shleifer and
Vishny (1997) suggest that transaction cost and holding costs are reasons why
arbitrageurs (rational investors) do not correct mispricings immediately when
they occur. Thus, in the real world, arbitrageurs only exploit arbitrage mispricing
when the profit exceeds the costs. Furthermore, the speed of corrections would be
slower, implying that with high limits to arbitrage, the magnitude of mispricing
would be larger.

Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2012) suggest that firms with strong fundamentals are
less likely to be underpriced since both optimistic, as well as pessimistic investors,
are willing to invest in firms that have strong fundamentals during both high and
low sentiment periods. Rather, it is a possibility that these firms instead are
overvalued. Zhu, Sun, and, Yung, (2020) suggest that fundamentally strong firms
that also have high arbitrage costs have lower future returns, in comparison with
fundamentally strong firms that have high arbitrage costs when overpricing is
corrected gradually. They also argue  the opposite to be true, that fundamentally
weak  firms  that  have  low  arbitrage  costs  are  less  overpriced  compared  to
fundamentally weak firms that have high arbitrage costs.

   3.  Data and methodology

3.1 Construction of FEARS index
Since our study is a replication of (Da et al. 2015) we try to keep as close as possible
to their method when creating our FEARS index. Using Google Trends, SVI can
be obtained for all terms that are searched by households. To find relevant search
terms for our research we use the dictionary Harvard IV-4 and Laswell value
Dictionary.  By combining these two directories we can extract words based on
categories from the Harvard IV-4 dictionary as well as filter those that display
sentiment using Lasswell's value dictionary. The categories chosen are “Econ@”
and “ECON” which means that the terms are related to economics and from them,
we keep  the  ones that have a positive or negative sentiment tag. The method used
to create the primitive word list makes sure we find terms using a method that
limits hindsight bias which can arise when choosing  the appropriate terms
(Dzielinski, 2012). For instance, choosing words like “COVID” or “VACCINE” to
better capture sentiment during the pandemic would suffer from such bias since
investors at the time would not be able to anticipate covid to have the impact it
had. Using this method we end up with a“primitive” list of 149 words. Using the
primitive list we then find additional related words using Google Trends list of top
ten related queries for each of those terms. These top 10 related queries can vary
over time and we choose the top related ones for our time period  2013-2022.
From the primitive word list, we get access to 1490 search terms that we have at
our disposal. The next step is to find terms that are related to economics and
finance to then create a final word list that will be used for further analysis and
ultimately the construction of our FEARS index. To make the procedure more
effective we make an initial manual sorting of the 1490 related search terms before
downloading the data. In this sorting, we remove duplicates as well as terms that
are clearly not related to finance or economics which leaves us with 155. An
example of how we sort out terms that are not related to economics can be
illustrated by some of the top 10 related search terms to  the word “BANKRUPT”
which   yields   the   terms:   “US   BANKRUPT”,   “BANKRUPT   COMPANIES”,
“BANKRUPTCY”,  “TRUMP  BANKRUPT”  “WHAT  IS  BANKRUPTCY”  and
“DETROIT”. We choose to keep the first three terms as they are related to
economics while the other terms are related  to one individual; a question about
the definition and a city, and are therefore removed. Finally, 18 terms with less
than 1000 observations are removed which  leaves  us with 137 terms. These terms
are then downloaded using a Python API for Google trends in increments of 3
months in order to receive daily data and then stitched together for the entire time
period. Google Trends also gives us the option of downloading data from different
regions  like  states,  countries,  and  worldwide  searches.  Because  our  other
independent  and dependent  variables are based on data from the United States
alone we choose to only use data from the U.S.

Once we have downloaded the data for all the Search terms we want to calculate
the change in interest over time. To do that we calculate the log change between
day (t) and day (t-1) where (t) denotes the day our SVI is reported for and  j  denotes
each search term.

                              ∆𝑆𝑉𝐼!,#  =  ln(𝑆𝑉𝐼!,#)  −  ln(𝑆𝑉𝐼!,#$%)

When observing the changes in SVI for different terms we find that there are signs
of seasonality in the data as illustrated by Figure 1 where we plot the log changes
during the same quarter of 2013 for the two terms “INFLATION” and “THE
RECESSION”. For the former, we see a clear rise during Mondays followed by a
progressive drop during the rest of the weeks. Comparing the log change for the
two terms we also find that there are large differences in variance between them
as well as some extreme values for the term “THE RECESSION”. In order to
address these issues, we decide to treat our data before finding the most relevant
search terms to construct our FEARS index. First,  we  address the extreme values
by winsorizing each  𝚫SVI by 5% (2,5% in each tail end).  Secondly,  seasonality  is
removed by regressing each 𝚫SVI on day of the week and month of the year dummy
variables  and  keep  the  residual.  Finally,  we  remove  heteroscedasticity  by
standardizing each term. The standardization is done by scaling each term by its
standard deviation to achieve a unit variance and standard deviation of one. What
we are left with is an adjusted  𝚫SVI that is winsorized, seasonally adjusted, and
standardized that we call  𝚫ASVI.
Figure 2
SVI log change for the terms “INFLATION” and “THE RECESSION”

These figures plot the log changes for the terms “INFLATION” and “THE RECESSION”
during the same quarter (2013-01-01 to 2013-03-31). Both terms are also plotted on the
same scale for comparability.

To then assess which search terms have the greatest correlation with market
returns  we do an expanding backward rolling regression for each  𝚫ASVI on
market returns every six months. To find the most relevant terms for each 6-
month period we, therefore, do a regression for all predating dates to find the most
significant T-statistic. For example, to find the terms that will construct our
FEARS index for the 6-month period of (1st of January 2019  -  30th of June 2019)
we regress all terms on contemporaneous market returns for the time period (1st
January 2013  -  31st December 2018). Because we need an initial window of 6
months to find the most relevant terms, our data period starts 1st of July 2013.
We choose to use an expanding window for our regressions in order to find more
significant results. From each regression, we rank all the terms (i=1) to (i=137)
based on T-statistics from smallest to largest. In Table 1 we list the top 30 most
negative significant terms that we find for a regression that covers our entire time
period  (1st of January 2013  -  31st of December 2021). What we find when looking
at the entire time period is that the term by far  with the lowest T-statistic is the
term “GOLD PRICE” (T-statistic:  -8,52), followed by “RECESSION” (T-statistic:
-5,60) and “GOLD” (T-statistic:  -5,26). Our findings are consistent with those of
Da et al. (2015) in that we do not find any term that has a  T-statistic greater than
2.5 that covers our entire time period while we find 8  terms that have a T-statistic
lower than  -2.5. Our findings are consistent with that of Tetlock (2007) in that
negative  words  that  show  pessimism  is  more  useful  in  measuring  investor
sentiment. Following that argument and because we find few positive terms with
high T-statistic for our entire time period we only use terms with negative
correlation with the market in our index. The FEARS index is constructed as
follows:

                                            '(
                                                                                 &
                            𝐹𝐸𝐴𝑅𝑆#  =  0 𝑅 (∆𝐴𝑆𝑉𝐼#)
                                              &)%

Based on our results from each 6-month period we choose the 30 terms with the
lowest T-statistics from each period to construct our FEARS index by simply
calculating an equally weighted average of them. The choice of 30 terms is because
it's the least amount of terms to eliminate idiosyncratic risk (Da et al. 2015). At
the same time, we do not want to use too many terms as the significance becomes
lower further down the list and since the terms have an equal impact on the index
we want the more significant terms to not lose their impact. As a robustness check,
we also calculate a FEARS index that contains 35 terms as well as one that
contains 25 (see  Section 7).
Table 1

This table displays our top 30 terms out of 137 derived from Harvard-IV dictionary that
has the most negative correlation with market returns for the time period 2013 January
to 2021 December.

3.2 Other data
Most of the daily indices are collected from Capital IQ via Wharton Research Data
Services (WRDS). We use the S&P 500 index as the main dependent variable due
to its large sample of stocks and its weighting method. The S&P 500 (SPX) index
is  gathered  from  the  CRSP  via  WRDS.  Furthermore,  we  include  the  same
exchange-traded funds (ETFs) as the Da et al. (2015) study for comparison
purposes: the SPDR S&P 500 ETF Trust (ARCA: SPY), the Invesco QQQ Trust,
Series 1 (NasdaqGM: QQQ), the iShares Trust - iShares Russell 1000 ETF (ARCA:
IWB), and the iShares Russell 2000 ETF (ARCA: IWM).1  We use these ETFs in
order to assure that our results are not driven by illiquid index component stocks.
All four ETFs are  gathered from CRSP via WRDS.  We  collect the return from the
S&P U.S. Treasury Bond 10-Year Index gathered from Capital IQ via WRDS. The
index comprise the most recent issued 10-year U.S. treasury notes or bonds. The
index began on Septmeber 13th 2013 but provide values back to December 29th
1989. The S&P use backtesting to provide historical data before the start date of
the index. However, the backtesting data regards a relatively short period of time
in relation to our whole time period that is examined in our study. The treasury
bond index differ from the one Da et al. (2015) use in their study, due to access
limitations.

Moreover, we also use a number of independent variables, other than our own
created FEARS index. VIX is used as an independent  variable and estimates the
volatility over the coming 30 days on the S&P 500 by calculating the implied
volatility of options on the S&P 500 index. The VIX is commonly known as the
“Fear Index” and an increasing value of the VIX implies more fear and uncertainty
in the market. Hence, the index can be viewed as a proxy for investor sentiment.
VIX was created by the CBOE, where we also collect the daily historical data for
VIX. Furthermore, we also use the monthly MCSI in a separate test to examine
whether there is correlation between the MCSI and Google Trends. The MCSI is
collected from the Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED) via the Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis.

In order to measure real business conditions at high observation frequency, we use
the  ADS index, developed by Aruoba et al. (2009), as an independent variable  in
our  tests.  The ADS index is collected from  FRED  via the Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia, and  measures a number of underlying economic indicators: weekly
initial jobless claims; monthly payroll employment, monthly industrial production,
monthly   real   personal   income   fewer   transfer   payments,   monthly   real
manufacturing and trade sales; and quarterly real GDP. The underlying economic
indicators are seasonally adjusted. The index is  not cumulative and the average
value for the index is 0, and the index can be used in order to compare business
conditions during different times. Progressively more positive (negative) values
indicate progressively better-than-average (worse-than-average) conditions.

As for our sample period, we see large spikes in the index during 2020 due to the
COVID-19 outbreak, which is the largest value on the index during the whole
period that the FRED database provides value for the index. We choose to  include
the values during the spikes year 2020 in our study to capture the extreme
movements in market returns during this period.

1  The Invesco QQQ Trust, Series 1 (NasdaqGM: QQQ) was previously named
PowerShares QQQ Trust (NASDAQ: QQQQ), which is the name used for the ETF
in previous studies, such as Da et al. (2015)
Baker et al. (2013) developed the economic policy uncertainty index (EPU) which
is a news-based measure that measures policy-related economic uncertainty by
three different components for the U.S. Firstly, the index for the U.S. is calculated
by indexing ten large U.S. newspapers. Secondly, the index builds on reports from
the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), by their list of  temporary federal tax code
provisions. Lastly, the third component of the index regards the Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia’s Survey of Professional Forecasters. The data for the EPU
index is collected from  FRED  via the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

Since  the  ADS  index  and  the  EPU  index  provides  daily  data  (7-days),  the
weekends and holidays have not been included in our regression, since the daily
equity  market  indices  (5-days)  do  not  provide  any  value  for  these  days.
Additionally,  all the raw data has been collected on a daily basis, since the SVI
index is updated daily (7-days). We have excluded values on weekends and
holidays for the SVI index since values are missing for our dependent variables
these days. Although, the MCSI index  is an exception to our collection of daily
values since the index only is measured on a monthly basis. Thus, the correlation
with Google Trends is examined in a separate test.

We also use beta-  and volatility-sorted portfolios in our calculations which are
provided by CRSP via WRDS. The provided portfolios are divided into ten deciles
where we calculate the return spread by calculating a high-low portfolio. The same
procedure applies to both beta-  and volatility-sorted portfolios. Additionally, we
collect  value-weighted and equally-weighted index returns from CRSP via WRDS,
as additional asset classes.

3.3 Limitations
In our method, we have tried to stay as close as possible to the method proposed
in the study we replicate. However, one limitation that we  face in our work is the
fact that we do not have access to the  original dataset used by Da et al. (2015)
which makes it difficult to know if our method is an exact replica of theirs (but for
a different time period).  While the method used to create the FEARS index and
treat the data is simple to follow, one concern due to not having access to the
original data file is related to the data gathering. For instance, Google Trends daily
data can be downloaded for different time periods of up to 189 days before it
switches to weekly data and for even longer periods only monthly data. When we
compare data downloaded for 90 days and 189 days we find that for the same two
terms, the average correlation for all SVIs we use is 0.828. The result means that
the outcome can be very different depending on which time span one chooses to
download the data. We ultimately go for the time period of 3 months when
downloading the data since we suspect that is what has been done by Da et al.
(2015) based on  Figure 3 and 90 days sometimes being reported as the maximum
span you can download daily data for (Kim, Lučivjanská, Molnár and Villa, 2019).
   4.  FEARS and Asset Returns
In the first section of FEARS and Asset Returns, we test for different asset classes
as the dependent variable. In the second section, we do more tests that incorporate
limits to arbitrage.

4.1 FEARS and average returns
The data that compose our FEARS index works as a proxy for investor sentiment
which does not perfectly reflect the fundamental value of assets and the stock
market. Different from informed investors, households often do not base their
valuations based on future cash flows but instead other available information from
news,  or in our case,  the internet. An effect of uninformed investors or so called
noise traders is that stock returns unexplained by fundamentals are more likely
to reverse back in the short run  rather than those affected by fundamentals. One
explanation for short term reversals is overreaction to information and cognitive
biases i.e.  investor sentiment  (Da, Liu and Schaumburg, 2014). We therefore look
for reversals  due to  changes in sentiment using the following regression:

                                                  ,
                𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛&,#*+  =  𝛽(  + 𝛽%𝐹𝐸𝐴𝑅𝑆#  +  0 𝛾, 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙&,# + 𝑢&,#*+
                                ,

Using our FEARS as an independent variable we begin our first test by conducting
                                                            ,
a regression for testing average returns. Other independent  (𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙&,#)  variables
include the CBOE VIX index, daily change in ADS and daily changes in EPU. We
also decide to include lagged asset class returns up to five lags. In the equation
above (Returnt+k) denotes asset returns on time  t+k.  To  spot potential  reversals,
we do a regression on contemporaneous returns then further test for the following
days in order to see if any change remains or if it reverts back over the following
five days from (k=1) until (k=5). Additionally, we test for cumulative returns over
day one and two [Rett+1, Rett+2].

Our first test is done using the very broad equity market index S&P 500 in order
to assess if household sentiment in the form of our FEARS index shows a
contemporaneous correlation with market decline and  reversal over the following
days. Looking at the results from day (t) we see that an increase in our FEARS
index has a negative contemporaneous correlation with market returns. This is
not surprising as our FEARS index is constructed by the terms that have the most
negative correlation with market returns. In  Table 2 we show our result from the
first regression. Recall that we standardized the SVIs that made up our FEARS
index to have unit variance. However, since there is a lot of correlation between
terms the standard deviation is not 1 for the final FEARS index but instead 0.248.
This means that a change in one standard deviation for our FEARS index means
a contemporaneous decline in the market of 10 basis points. The change is also
significant at the 1%  level. However, if we look at time (t+1) we only see a slight
reversal which is not significant. Over the following days, we see the same pattern
of insignificant predictability of the FEARS index.  In Section 7 we will go over
some of the possible explanations for why that might be. When looking at the EPU
we see that it has predictive power when it comes to market returns for some of
the following days returns. One explanation for the significance could be that it
takes a while for households to adjust their expectations based on news-related
policy uncertainty sentiment. However, the coefficients are very small which
shows that it only predicts a minor change in market returns. As for the ADS, we
know that there were some extreme changes during the COVID-19 pandemic
which makes it better correlated with market returns.

Table 2

This table shows the S&P 500 daily market returns as the dependent variable and
regressed on the independent variables that are our FEARS index, control variables
that include the VIX from CBOE, change in ADS, and change in EPU. Together with the
control variables we also include lagged asset class returns on day (t+k) where (k=1) to
(k=5), displayed on (1), (2), (3), (5), (6), and (7). We also include cumulative returns from
[t+1,t+2]. *signifies significance at the 10% level, ** at 5%, and *** at the 1% level.

After testing for the S&P 500 we want to find out if we also find the same pattern
of contemporaneous market decline and non-reversals on other asset classes. The
rationale for testing  other asset classes is to see if we achieve the same results as
with the S&P 500 or if it is related to one index alone. Furthermore, we use highly
liquid ETFs since reversals can be caused by liquidity shocks. Simply, when a fall
in stock prices arises due to exogenous selling pressure on uninformed investors
or public information that reduces investors valuation. Following that market
makers require a higher expected return and prices rise during the following days
(Campbell, Grossman, and Wang, 1993). Highly liquid ETFs will therefore isolate
the effect of the change in sentiment reflected by our FEARS index. Other than
equity portfolios we also test on a safer security that is reflecting bonds by using
the S&P 500 ten-year maturity treasury bonds index.

In Table 3 we report the results from the different asset classes that we mentioned
previously. In Panel A we report the results from the equally weighted and value-
weighted CRSP index returns, in Panel B we show the results from the four
different ETFs, and in Panel C we report the results from treasury bonds. Similar
to our first tests we find that we do not find any significant reversal on the days
following day  t. We decide to only report the results for each asset  class up until
day (t+2) in accordance with Da et al. (2015) since we do not find any reversals for
the first two following trading days and we do not anticipate any for the three days
after that. In our result, we see the same pattern of  non-significant reversals as in
our first test. Because the ETFs and indexes we test are broad we see the same
negative contemporaneous day (t) decline. A one standard deviation change
corresponds with a contemporaneous decline of between 9.5 and 11.9 basis points
for all indexes and ETFs which are significant at the 1% level. In most of our tests,
we see a small reversal on day  t+1 that is a fraction (about one-tenth) of the initial
decline, however, it is not significant even at the 10% level which makes us unable
to draw any conclusions from it. From the final test with treasury bonds, we do
not find any signs of either significant reversals or significant contemporaneous
change in bond returns.
Table 3
FEARS and returns to other  asset classes

4.2 FEARS and limits to arbitrage
Before we come to the robustness of our results we want to do a final test in order
to understand the predictability of our FEARS index. In order to do that we explore
the concept of limit to arbitrage. The arbitrage pricing theory developed by Ross
(1971) says that mispricings in the market create arbitrage opportunities that are
then exploited and as a result remove the mispricing as the market adjusts.
However, as put forward by Shleifer and Vishny (1997) there are limits to
arbitrage  that  makes  arbitrageurs  more  or  less  able  to  exploit  arbitrage
opportunities for some assets compared to others. For instance, assets with high
volatility driven by sentiment investors, are considered unattractive if alpha does
not increase proportionally to the increased volatility and in particular when
fundamental   risk   is   part   of   the   volatility   (Shleifer   and   Vishny,   1997).
Furthermore, sentiment is costly to bet against and therefore harder to arbitrage
any mispricings that resulted from it. Market Beta is also a feature that can have
an impact on whether or not it can be hard to arbitrage away mispricings. High
beta has this feature since an investment manager benchmark against the market
would like to exploit mispricing in assets with betas close to 1. Also, high beta
stocks are prone to more speculation and institutional constraints like bench-
marking that make them unattractive  to arbitrageurs (Baker, Bradley, and
Wurgler, 2011). Because high beta stocks are less likely to be arbitraged away we
anticipate a larger contemporaneous decrease as a result of an increase in
sentiment.

To test this we create a high-low beta portfolio calculated from the spread between
the highest and lowest beta portfolios that are formed in decile by CRSP using all
stocks traded on NYSE and AMEX. We also test for the volatility by using the
spread between the high and low volatility from the CRSP decile sorted, total
volatility portfolios that use daily stock returns to calculate the total volatility.

In Table 3 we show the result from our regressions with  beta and total  volatility.
Like previous tests, we see that when FEARS increase we see a contemporaneous
decrease in returns on day (t) but we fail to find reversals on the following day.
Worth noting is that there is a higher contemporaneous decrease in returns when
FEARS  increases on day (t) compared to previous tests. A change in one standard
deviation in our FEARS index corresponds with a decrease of  12.3 basis points on
day (t). Compared to S&P 500 with 9.5 basis points, there is a quite substantial
difference from the one observed with a hi-lo beta portfolio. However, compared to
that of Russell 2000 the difference is much smaller. When we look at the hi-lo total
volatility portfolio we can see that we also find a contemporaneous decrease in
return when FEARS increases on day (t). This also confirms our prediction that
high total volatility stocks will be more affected by sentiment than stocks with low
total volatility. On the other hand, we do not find any reversals for hi-lo total
volatility on the days following a rise in FEARS.

Table 4
FEARS and limits to arbitrage

This table shows how our FEARS index correlates to daily returns of a hi-lo beta spread
portfolio and a daily hi-lo total volatility spread portfolio over day (t), (t+1), (t+2), and
cumulative returns during [t+1,t+2]. Controls include VIX from CBOE, change in EPU,
and change in ADS and lagged returns up to five lags (k=1) to (k=5). *,**, and *** denote
coefficients are significant at 10%, 5% and 1% significance.

4.3  Robustness checks
Because the results we find in our previous sections vastly differ from the ones
found in Da et al. (2015) we carry out multiple robustness checks in order to
solidify our findings. When we constructed our FEARS index we decided to go  for
30 terms as our standard, which we then used in our previous regressions. As
shown in Table 1 however, we can see that there is a fast decrease in significance
among the ASVI displayed. Therefore, we want to test the robustness of our result
by using  two other FEARS indexes that are constructed in the same way as our
original but with five fewer and five more terms that make up them (FEARS35 and
FEARS25). Because we do not find reversals in our data we focus our robustness
on the actual sentiment components in the form of our FEARS index since the
other data with one exception up until now have been the same as in Da et al.
(2015).

Another decision that impacted our FEARS index was the choice to winsorize each
SVI by 5% (2.5% in each tail end)  when adjusting to ASVI. Because winsorization
reduces the extreme values, one concern could be that because of it, each of our
ASVI could lose some of its predictive power. Our decision to  winsorize  is also
made as a result of information that was not available if we were to create the
index in real-time. This results in a forward-looking bias where we treat the data
that are available to us ex-post.  In order to account for this, we also construct a
FEARS index where we refrain from winsorizing each SVI before continuing with
any other adjustments like standardizing and removing seasonality. Next, we also
check how our index performs in different subsamples in order to see if the
predictability changes during different time periods.

For instance, during the  early stages of the pandemic, we witnessed a sharp
downfall in the market which was not followed by an immediate reversal during
the following business days. There is a possibility that such a downfall in the
market without immediate reversals could have  an impact on our results since we
fail to find any reversals the following day (t). In order to account for this, we test
a time period that excludes the pandemic to see if our results change. We also
decided to test for another time period that is even shorter since there is a potential
that Google Trends could have lost predictive power gradually over time. Since we
know that Da et al. (2015) find reversals during their time period and we,
therefore, shorten our time period even further to be closer to theirs in order to
eliminate possible loss of predictability later in our time period. A third period is
tested that limits our time series to only the final three years. Recall that we in
our construction of the FEARS index used a backward rolling regression to assess
the most significant correlation with the market. Because the last period has the
largest sample period, these terms are also most significant in terms of negative
correlation. Finally, we decide to include a test that only includes our FEARS
index as an independent variable to see if the index alone predicts reversals and
if the control variables account for these.

In Table 5 we report the results from our robustness check. In Panel A we show
the results from our two robustness FEARS indexes.  We see that an increase in
FEARS25  correlates with a contemporaneous decline in S&P 500 returns that is
greater than that of our regular FEARS index. This is in line with our predictions
since we have a cutoff point at 25 which includes more negative correlated terms,
recall this from the construction of our FEARS index and Table 1. Similarly, an

increase in FEARS35  correlates with a marginally lower  contemporaneous decline
in market returns.

In Panel B and C we show the results from the tests that involve the three
subsections of our entire time series. We notice that when we limit the period to
before 2020 and the pandemic the contemporaneous correlation loses  some of  its
significance and is only significant at the 10%. When we limit the time period even
more and check for only about 1000 observations from the beginning of 2013 to
July 2017 all contemporaneous correlation is lost. Therefore, we can estimate that
our earlier period does not have more  predictive power than later. However, some
of the  lost  significant  contemporaneous  negative correlation  can be due to fewer
observations and the backward rolling regressions not including enough data. At
the same time we do observe an increase in correlation with contemporaneous
market decline on day (t) for our third-time series that only looks at the last third
years. One interpretation could be that sentiment has a larger correlation with
negative market returns during time periods with market instability like during
the pandemic. On the other hand, our last time periods have the terms with the
best fit thanks to the backward rolling regression which could increase the
correlation during our time period.

In Panel 3 we show the result from our FEARS index that is constructed without
winsorization. Here we find that an increase in FEARS has a larger negative
correlation with market returns on day (t) compared to when we winsorize. In
Appendix Table 6, we show the list of the 30 terms with the most negative
correlation with market returns  for these non winsorized ASVIs. We observe that
the number one term “GOLD PRICE” has a more negative t-statistic than
compared  without  winsorization  see  Table  1.  Other  than  that  change,  the
significance of each term remains relatively similar to that of our original ASVI.

Finally, in Panel D in Table 5  we show the results from our regression that only
includes our FEARS index as an independent variable. We find that a larger
contemporaneous market decline when FEARS increase which is due to the
control variables in other tests explaining some of that decline. Throughout all our
robustness checks including the one without control variables, we do not find any
signs of significant reversals during the following days.
Table 5
Robustness check

This table shows FEARS and different control tests that include two FEARS indexes
that use the top 25 and 35 negative, most significant terms respectively. The table also
shows our FEARS index and shorter time periods that include before 2020, before 2017,
and 2019 to 2022. Finally, we display the results from FEARS without winsorization and
without controls. All tests use S&P 500 as the dependent variable. *,** and *** denotes
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% significance.

5. Discussion
Based on our non-significant results, which differ from the Da et al. (2015) study,
we here provide a discussion around the two main plausible reasons for what we
believe may  be the main reason(s). Firstly, we discuss the measurement and the
methods  of  measuring  investor  sentiment.  Secondly,  the  reliability  and  the
predictive power of Google Trends are discussed.

5.1 Measuring investor sentiment
One explanation for why our results do not show validity or support short  term
reversals might be connected to the way of proxying investor sentiment. As
mentioned previously, there are different approaches that include many different
ways to proxy investor sentiment within those approaches. There is yet no
standardized method for measuring investor sentiment, which explains the use of
the many different methods that are being examined. We focus our study on using
Google Trends to measure sentiment, where one proxy investor sentiment is based
on different communication platforms  and news  on the internet. Other studies on
microblogging sentiment also, for example, focus on proxy investor sentiment by
examining Twitter or even music sentiment through Spotify as shown in a very
recent study, where market reversals were found after an initial change in market
returns as a result of a change in music sentiment. (Sprenger et al., 2014; Zhang,
et al., 2016; Edmans, Fernandez-Perez, Garel, Indriawan, 2021).

Research  shows  that  investor  sentiment  affects  market  returns  (Baker  and
Wurgler, 2007). One theory that would explain our non-significant results for
short-term reversals would be that this no longer  is true. However, we find it
unlikely that this is the case since this would imply that eminent research would
be outdated and momentum strategies would no longer appear to be true. We
agree with Baker and Wurgler’s (2007) reflection regarding the question of how
one can measure investor sentiment. Although, we want to extend this question
further to whether investor sentiment even can be measured consistently over
time, at all. It might be the case that different proxies work well during different
time periods, but there is also a possibility that there is no proxy that will ever
grasp the investor sentiment with significance.

While Da et al. (2015)  highlights  that there are concerns about the reverse
causality in the prediction  model and  cannot conclude that  sentiment causes
return tomorrow.  They find  reverse causality  unlikely  thanks to their findings of
positive reversals. We on the  other hand,  do not find any reversals and  therefore
reverse causality could be more of a risk.  At the same time,  we share their view in
that it  is  unlikely  that investors  anticipating  higher  returns would search for
negative  terms.

5.2 Reliability of Google Trends
As we have discussed in the previous section there is a lot of evidence for investor
sentiment affecting market returns and the different ways of measuring that
impact.  Our  second  explanation  for  why  our  tests  do  not  show  signs  of
predictability, therefore, relies on us using Google Trends as our proxy for the
sentiment. There is no standardized way of using Google trends when doing
predictions. In our study, we have shown one way that the data can be used but
there are many more ways. For instance, one common practice when handling
Google trends data is to use normalized data like in Joseph, Babajide Wintoki, and
Zhang, (2011) which we do not include as it is not mentioned in the Da et al. (2015).
Furthermore,  methods  have  been  proposed  that  improve  the  method  for
constructing a FEARS index using Google Trends. As argued by Yang, Dong,
James, and Xu  (2019) one way of improving the construction of a FEARS index
using Google Trends is to weight the search terms based on impact rather than
take an equally weighted average of all the 30 terms. This would make sense since
as we saw in Tables 1 and 6 there is a big difference in how much an increase in a
specific term correlates with a decline in the market. Furthermore, another
concern with Google trends is that it can show some inconsistencies as we have
already discussed a bit in the limitations part. As reported by Da et al. (2011) there
is also a difference in data depending on when the data is downloaded where terms
downloaded from different points in time had a 97% correlation. Taken together
there are both measurement issues and different methods when it comes to using
Google Trends to predict market movements and sentiment.

While the inconsistencies in the SVIs  mentioned above may result in a difficulty
to find the exact same result as another study, we believe the data overall should
be accurate enough to give relevant information of the interest for a specific search
term for any given time. When it comes to the optimal weighting of each SVI in
our FEARS index we do recognize that there are improvements to be made,
however, we do not believe this would lead to any finding of reversals. In our
results, we find that the increase in FEARS correlating with a contemporaneous
decline  in  returns  is  consistent  over  our  tests  with  a  significance  of  1%.
Furthermore, in our robustness test, we make adjustments that lead to a greater
contemporaneous decline in market returns yet no increased sign of any reversals.
Therefore,  optimizing the construction of our FEARS index would lead to the
finding of a greater contemporaneous decline yet we doubt that it would increase
the chance of finding any reversals.

In our tests, we use controls that include VIX as well as ADS, EPU, and lagged
market returns. One might therefore assume that these controls account for the
reversals from our FEARS index. Because macroeconomic factors as well as
previous   returns   can   have   a   significant   impact   on   investor   sentiment
(Vozlyublennaia, 2014). However, when not including any of the lags we are still
not able to find any reversals which also confirms that our FEARS index does not
predict reversals in the stock market. We, therefore, come to the conclusion that
Google Trends is inconsistent as a proxy for sentiment rather than investor
sentiment not having an impact or predicting market returns. Furthermore, when
testing the correlation between the monthly MCSI and monthly SVI for the term
“RECESSION” we find that the correlation coefficient is  –0.1351 which means
there is no correlation between the two and we show their relation in the Appendix
(Figure 2). When comparing that to the time period used in Da et al. (2015) we
find the correlation to be 0.862 which supports their finding which is almost
identical (0.858).

Other studies find that using Google Trends as a measurement of sentiment has
shown to be able to predict market returns (Da et al. 2011, 2015; Vozlyublennaia
2014; Joseph, Babajide Wintoki, and Zhang, 2011; Dzielinski  2012). However,
with the exception of Da et al. (2015), these studies have used weekly data which
in   theory   should   have   less   ability   to   explain   sentiment   according   to
Vozlyublennaia (2014) since the destabilizing effect of attention from noise traders
would  be more noticeable on shorter time horizons. On the other hand, weekly
data intuitively has the potential to be more accurate than daily data as it delivers
a SVI based on more data and a longer period. Many previous studies also get their
result from time  periods ranging from 2004 to 2013 which means that our
independent time period does not have to reflect theirs which is what we find.
There is also some evidence that for later time periods Google Trends could not
predict market returns as shown by Kim et  al. (2019) who found that Google
Trends  could  predict  trading  volume  and  volatility  but  not  returns  for  the
Norwegian stock market. Finally, almost all previous studies on our topic have
used SVIs for stock ticker names to predict future market returns. With the
support from the lack of correlation between SVI and MCSI, it is, therefore, more
likely that terms we use and that are unrelated to specific company names have
lost predictive power and we, therefore, do not find reversals or predictability in
our  data. One reason why this could be is that terms such as “RECESSION” and
“THE DEPRESSION” now, more so than before, reflect interest and information
gathering about such topics rather than investor sentiment. However, we do not
have data that can confirm  such explanations.

6. Conclusion
We   use   Google   search   terms   like   “RECESSION”,   “GOLD   PRICES”   and
“FINANCIAL CRISIS” to create a FEARS index and investigate its prediction of
market returns from 2013 to 2022. We find that an increase in FEARS correlates
to  a contemporaneous decline in market returns and no signs of reversals over the
following days, both when we control and do not control for past asset class
returns, CBOEs VIX, EPU, and ADS. This effect remains for different asset classes
like broad ETFs, value-  and equally-weighted index portfolios but not for bond
index returns where neither reversals nor any contemporaneous effect is found.
When testing for limits to arbitrage we find that  for  high-low spread sorted beta
portfolios,  an increase in FEARS correlates with a greater contemporaneous
decline in returns compared to market returns (S&P 500) while not showing signs
of reversals. We do not dispute the findings of Da et al. (2015) for their time period
but rather question the predictability and reliability of Google Trends for later
time periods. Contrary to their study, using our data we find that there is no
correlation between the MCSI and the SVI “RECESSION”. In light of this finding,
we come to the conclusion that SVIs that are not related to stock tickers and
company names have become worse at predicting market returns. However, the
explanation why is not found. Our findings open for more research on Google
Trends  ability  to  reflect  investor  sentiment  and  predict  market  returns.  A
practical  takeaway  is  that  investors  wanting  to  use  strategies  that  involve
sentiment from internet queries should do so with caution about the reliability of
the data.
                         References
Aruoba, S., Diebold, F. and Scotti, C., 2009. Real-Time Measurement of Business
Conditions. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 27(4), pp.417-427.

Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis. (2013). Measuring economic policy
uncertainty. Working Paper, Stanford University.

Baker, M., Bradley, B., and Wurgler, J., 2011. Benchmarks as Limits to Arbitrage:
Understanding the Low-Volatility Anomaly. Financial Analysts Journal, 67(1),
pp.40-54.

Baker, M., & Wurgler, J. (2007). Investor sentiment in the stock market. Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 21(2), 129–151.

Baker, M. and Wurgler, J., (2006). Investor Sentiment and the Cross-Section of
Stock Returns. The Journal of Finance, 61(4), pp.1645-1680.

Barberis, N., Shleifer, A., & Vishny, R., 1998. A model of investor sentiment.
Journal of Financial Economics, 49(3), pp. 307–343.

Bijl, L., Kringhaug, G., Molnár, P. and Sandvik, E., 2016. Google searches and
stock returns. International Review of Financial Analysis, 45, pp.150-156.

Brown, G. and Cliff, M., 2005. Investor Sentiment and Asset Valuation. The
Journal of Business, 78(2), pp.405-440.

Campbell, J., Grossman, S. and Wang, J., 1993. Trading Volume and Serial
Correlation in Stock Returns. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(4), pp.905-
939.

Da, Z., Engelberg, J. and Gao, P., 2014. The Sum of All FEARS Investor Sentiment
and Asset Prices. Review of Financial Studies, 28(1), pp.1-32.

Da, Z., Engelberg, J. and Gao, P., 2011. In Search of Attention. The Journal of
Finance, 66(5), pp.1461-1499.

Da, Z., Liu, Q. and Schaumburg, E., 2014. A Closer Look at the Short-Term Return
Reversal. Management Science, 60(3), pp.658-674.

De Long, J., Shleifer, A., Summers, L. and Waldmann, R., 1990. Noise Trader Risk
in Financial Markets. Journal of Political Economy, 98(4), pp.703-738.
Dzielinski, M., 2012. Measuring economic uncertainty and its impact on the stock
market. Finance Research Letters, 9(3), pp.167-175.

Edmans, A., Fernandez-Perez, A., Garel, A., and Indriawan, I., 2021. Music
sentiment and stock returns around the world. Journal of Financial Economics,
Forthcoming.

Jegadeesh, N. and Titman, S., 2001. Profitability of Momentum Strategies: An
Evaluation of Alternative Explanations. The Journal of Finance, 56(2), pp.699-
720.

Jegadeesh, N. and Titman, S., 1993. Returns to Buying Winners and Selling
Losers: Implications  for Stock Market Efficiency. The Journal of Finance, 48(1),
pp.65-91.

Joseph, K., Babajide Wintoki, M. and Zhang, Z., 2011. Forecasting abnormal stock
returns and trading volume using investor sentiment: Evidence from online
search. International Journal  of Forecasting, 27(4), pp.1116-1127.

Kim, S., & Kim, D. (2014). Investor sentiment from internet message postings and
the predictability of stock returns. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization,
107,  708–729.

Kim, N., Lučivjanská, K., Molnár, P. and Villa, R., 2019. Google searches and stock
market activity: Evidence from Norway. Finance Research Letters, 28, pp.208-
220.

Lam, F. and Wei, K., 2011. Limits-to-arbitrage, investment frictions, and the asset
growth anomaly. Journal of Financial Economics, 102(1), pp.127-149.

Lemmon, M. and Portniaguina, E., 2006. Consumer Confidence and Asset Prices:
Some Empirical Evidence. Review of Financial Studies, 19(4), pp.1499-1529.

Li, X. and Luo, D., 2016. Investor Sentiment, Limited Arbitrage, and the  Cash
Holding Effect. Review of Finance, p.2141–2168.

Linyi Yang, Ruihai Dong, Tin Lok James Ng, and Yang Xu. 2019. Leveraging
BERT to Improve the FEARS Index for Stock Forecasting. In Proceedings of the
First Workshop on Financial Technology and Natural Language Processing, pages
54–60.
Liu,  S.  (2015).  Investor  sentiment  and  stock  market  liquidity.  Journal  of
Behavioral Finance, 16(1), 51–67.

Mashruwala, C., Rajgopal, S. and Shevlin, T., 2006. Why is the accrual anomaly
not arbitraged away? The role of idiosyncratic risk and transaction costs. Journal
of Accounting and Economics, 42(1-2), pp.3-33.

Mendenhall, R., 2004. Arbitrage Risk and Post-Earnings-Announcement Drift.
The Journal of Business, 77(4), pp.875-894.

Odean, T. (1998). Volume, volatility, price, and profit when all traders are above
average. Journal of Finance, 53(6), 1887–1934.

Qiu, L., and I. Welch. (2006). Investor sentiment measures. Working Paper, Brown
University.

Shiller, R., 2003. From Efficient Markets Theory to Behavioral Finance.  Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 17(1), pp.83-104.

Shleifer, A. and Vishny, R., 1997. The Limits of Arbitrage. The Journal of Finance,
52(1),                                                                    pp.35-55.

Siganos,  A.,  Vagenas-Nanos,  E.,  &  Verwijmeren,  P.  (2017).  Divergence  of
sentiment and stockmarket trading. Journal of Banking & Finance, 78, 130–141.

Singer, E. (2002). The use of incentives to reduce nonresponse in household
surveys. Working Paper, University of Michigan.

Sprenger, T., Tumasjan, A., Sandner, P., & Welpe, I. M. (2014). Tweets and trades:
The information content of stock microblogs. European Financial Management,
20(5), 926–957.

Stambaugh, R., Yu, J. and Yuan, Y., 2012. The short of it: Investor sentiment and
anomalies. Journal of Financial Economics, 104(2), pp.288-302.

StatCounter. (March 1, 2022). Worldwide desktop market share of leading search
engines from January 2010 to January 2022 [Graph]. In Statista. Retrieved May
10,   2022,   from   https://www.statista.com/statistics/216573/worldwide-market-
share-of-search-engines/

Tetlock, P., 2007. Giving Content to Investor Sentiment: The Role of Media in the
Stock Market. The Journal of Finance, 62(3), pp.1139-1168.
Vozlyublennaia, N., 2014. Investor attention, index performance, and return
predictability. Journal of Banking  &  Finance, 41, pp.17-35.

Yang,  C.,  &  Zhou,  L.  (2015).  Sentiment  approach  to  underestimation  and
overestimation pricing model. Economic Modelling, 51, 280–288.

Zhang, W., Li, X., Shen, D., & Teglio, A. (2016). Daily happiness and stock returns:
Some   international   evidence.   Physica   A-Statistical   Mechanics   and   Its
Applications,                         460,                         201–209.

Zhu, Z., Sun, L. and Yung, K., 2020. Fundamental strength strategy: The role of
investor sentiment versus limits to arbitrage. International Review of Financial
Analysis, 71, 101452.
Figure 2
“Recession” and MCSI

This figure shows the  correlation between the  monthly  –(log) change for the SVI
“RECESSION”  and  Michigan Consumer Sentiment Index (MCSI)  for the time  period
2013 January to 2021 December.
Table 6

This table displays our top 30 terms out of 137 derived from the Harvard-IV dictionary
that have the most negative correlation with market returns when we do not winsorize
the data. The time period is 2013 January to 2021 December.