THE EFFECT OF BANKING
RELATIONSHIPS AND
PROSPECTUS TRANSPARENCY
ON IPO UNDERPRICING

ERIK AUDUN SØRENSEN

SEBASTIAN HOLM

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2022
The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO
Underpricing
Abstract:
   This paper investigates whether (1) pre-IPO banking relationships with a potential IPO
   underwriter, and (2) transparency in the “Use of Proceeds” section in the IPO prospectus,
   ameliorate asymmetric information problems behind IPO underpricing. If pre-IPO banking
   relationships and prospectus transparency generate and transmit information to the market,
   and thus reduce asymmetric information, firms with these characteristics should exhibit
   lower underpricing when going public. The results indicate no support for any of the
   hypotheses. However, we find that firms with a greater size of certain financial firm
   characteristics, including total assets, EBIT and cash, face lower IPO underpricing.
Keywords:
   IPOs, Banking relationship, Prospectus, Asymmetric information, Underpricing
Authors:
   Erik Audun Sørensen (24846)
   Sebastian Holm (24838)
Tutors:
  Olga Obizhaeva, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance
Examiner:
   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Erik Audun Sørensen and Sebastian Holm, 2022

Acknowledgements: We would like to express our gratitude to Olga Obizhaeva
for her guidance throughout the writing of our thesis.

                                        1
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

This paper examines whether IPO underpricing is affected by (1) the firm having an
established relationship with a bank that can manage IPOs prior to the offering, and (2)
transparency in the “Use of Proceeds” section in the firm’s IPO prospectus, on a sample of
firms going public in Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Finland, Iceland, Germany, the United
Kingdom and France during 2000-2021. In a regression of variables representing asymmetric
information, firm characteristics and IPO characteristics, we find results indicating that firms
that have a pre-IPO relationship with a potential underwriter (owing to a loan or debt issue
transaction) might experience lower underpricing than firms without such a relationship.
These results are robust when controlling for size, industry-fixed effects and venture capital
(VC) backing, but not, however, when controlling for country-fixed effects. We do not find
any support for the effect of transparency in the firm’s IPO prospectus on IPO underpricing.
Nevertheless, the results reveal that certain financial firm characteristics, including total
assets, EBIT and cash, can reduce IPO underpricing.
       As firms go public, there could be asymmetric information between the firm, the
underwriter and investors regarding the true value of the firm. This constitutes, according to
                                                                                      1
many researchers, the main reason for the existence of IPO underpricing . The uncertainty
requires investors to be compensated for the risk they take on when participating in IPO
transactions, and this compensation can take the form of underpriced shares. Further, the
research literature has extensively examined the effect of having a bank with borrower/issuer-
specific information on various topics within the financial context. Parts of the information
that the bank obtains might be unknown to the market because the firm-bank relationship
enables the bank greater insight into the firm’s projects, investments and management team.
Such relationships could work as information channels toward market participants as the
existence and nature of the relationships are publicly available, which enables investors to
become aware of the market actors that hold superior information. That is, market
participants who hold private information can have a certification effect of the true value of a
company toward the financial market if the remaining market participants are aware of the
identity of the informed actor and its relationship with the firm going public. In such a
situation, the knowledge about which players that hold superior information might to some
extent help mitigate asymmetric information, and possibly reduce uncertainty of the true
value of the company, as investors have a larger pool of data to infer information from.
       Another possible way that a firm could reduce firm uncertainty at the time of the IPO
is to include a detailed description of the intended use of IPO proceeds in the prospectus.
Some firms are very accurate in the description of what it plans to use the raised capital for,
while other firms are vague and only provide a generic and uninformative statement. Hence,
IPO prospectuses provide firms with a channel of communication toward the market and
could therefore have an impact on firm uncertainty. It is therefore interesting to investigate
the effect of having a clear description of the use of proceeds in the prospectus on the
subsequent IPO, and especially how this interplays with having a relationship with a potential
IPO underwriter prior to the offering. In the following, the words “precise”, “accurate”,
“detailed” and “transparent” will be used interchangeably for the examination of IPO
prospectuses despite that these words have nuanced meanings in a strict sense.
        In this paper, we investigate the intersection between the asymmetric information
problems in IPOs and the possible mitigating effects of firm-bank relationships and
transparency in the IPO prospectus. We combine a dataset comprising firms that have
completed an initial public offering on one of the stock exchanges in the Nordics, Germany,
the UK or France during the period 2000-2021 with loan data and debt issue data on these

1
 See, for instance, Allen and Faulhaber (1989), Benveniste and Spindt (1989), Benveniste and Wilhelm (1990),
Grinblatt and Hwang (1989), Rock (1986), and Welch (1989, 1992).

                                        2
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

firms. This enables us to establish pre-IPO relationships between firms and banks, and
examine whether this relationship affects the subsequent IPO in terms of underpricing.
Furthermore, we retrieve IPO prospectuses for the firms in our sample to determine whether
the firm is transparent in its “Use of Proceeds” section or not.
       Given that asymmetric information between the issuing firm, the underwriter and
investors is the explanation for IPO underpricing, and if firm-bank relationships can mitigate
asymmetric information between market participants, then firms with these relationships
should exhibit less underpricing than otherwise equal firms. Schenone (2004) examines this
on a sample of US IPOs from 1998 to 2000 and finds that firms with a pre-existing
relationship with a potential underwriter experience 17% less underpricing than firms without
such a relationship. The purpose of our paper is to examine how the hypothesized effect of
relationships on underpricing interacts with whether the firm going public is transparent in
the IPO prospectus or not. This is especially interesting in light of the European
                                       2
Commission’s 2003/71 directive , which requires firms in the EU to disclose information on
the intended use of proceeds in more detail.
       The results of this study could be valuable for issuing firms, banks and investors.
Firstly, it is useful to discover how asymmetric information between market participants
might be mitigated to limit the magnitude of “money left on the table” for firms going public.
Given that the aftermarket demand for a firm’s shares is inelastic, i.e., the shares sold at the
offer price could have been sold at the first-day close price, IPO underpricing is a costly
phenomenon that inhibits value-maximization of raising funds through the process of going
public. Second, whether IPO underwriter abilities affect the extent of IPO underpricing or not
is valuable knowledge for banks. To illustrate, if private firms find that a pre-existing
relationship with a potential underwriter reduces the underpricing in their subsequent IPO,
they are more likely to choose banks with IPO underwriter abilities than otherwise equal
banks to begin with. Hence, it is a reasonable proposition that banks without IPO underwriter
abilities might suffer from reduced competitiveness. For investors, the implications of
reduced asymmetric information are less clear. If a pre-existing relationship with a
prospective underwriter mitigates IPO underpricing, then informed and uninformed investors
will have more similar knowledge about the true firm value. Therefore, the wedge between
the two groups should be smaller, which should be beneficial for uninformed investors who
are less likely to be victims of adverse selection problems. In sum, the results can serve as
novel insights for the key parties involved in European IPO transactions.
        The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section I provides an overview
of the most closely related literature and the way in which this paper extends on those papers.
Section II presents our hypotheses and their underlying theoretical framework. Section III
describes our data and the methods we use to test the hypotheses. In Section IV, we first
examine if IPO underpricing is affected by the firm having a pre-IPO banking relationship
with a potential underwriter. Secondly, we investigate how this potential effect interacts with
the transparency in the “Use of proceeds” section of the IPO prospectus. These analyses are
then made subject to robustness tests. Section V presents a discussion of the results. Lastly,
Section VI concludes the paper.

                                 I. Literature review

Our paper contributes to the literature on IPO underpricing, such as Loughran, Ritter (2004),
Schenone (2004) and Liu, Ritter (2011), by extending the method developed by Schenone
(2004) and combining it with an examination of the extent of transparency in the firm’s IPO

2
 The European Parliament and the Council of the European Union. (2022).

                                        3
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

prospectus. Our dataset enables our paper to be a novel contribution to the literature, by
investigating the effect of pre-IPO banking relationships with a potential underwriter in
combination with the effect of the European Commission’s 2003/71 directive on increased
transparency in the “Use of proceeds” section in the prospectus. Section II.B. outlines how
the extent of transparency in the description of use of proceeds is an intuitive approach to
investigate the underpricing phenomenon for firms going public in the Nordics, Germany, the
UK and France.
        Duarte-Silva (2010) shows, holding other underwriter capabilities constant, that an
underwriter that a priori has private information about the firm issuing new equity in a
seasoned equity offering (SEO) is more credible at certifying the true value of the firm. Given
this, more opaque firms have the greatest potential in using underwriters it has an established
relationship with since they will have a higher certification effect for reducing asymmetric
information in SEOs. However, even for firms that are less opaque, it is value-maximizing
for the firm to use an underwriter that can decrease market uncertainty through a certification
effect. Our paper develops the analysis of Duarte-Silva (2010) by extending the findings of
underwriter certification in SEOs on IPOs. Here, our paper contributes to the literature by
examining how underwriters participate in valuable information production and transmission
toward the market through its greater due diligence incentives stemming from a loan and/or
debt issue.
       Consistent with these findings are the results provided by Fitza and Dean (2016) on
the effect of venture capital-backing on IPO underpricing. They find results indicating that
the identity, proxied by size, of the venture capital firm explains 20.07% of the variance in
IPO underpricing. They propose that the results are driven by signaling and certification of
firm quality to the market, thus reducing the asymmetric information component in the IPO.
Hence, their findings indicate that firms going public with VC-backing are less prone to
adverse selection issues. Our paper utilizes the findings by Fitza and Dean (2016), who
suggest that VC-backing represents a more important information channel toward the
financial market than the identity and abilities of the underwriter, by exploring whether VC-
backing is more significant than a firm-bank relationship or prospectus transparency for
underpricing.
       Research by Cai, Helwege and Warga (2007) on underpricing in the U.S. corporate
bond market indicates that more opaque firms have more underpriced bond issues, and that
initial bond offerings are more underpriced than seasoned bond offerings. They suggest that
their results stem from informational frictions between the issuing firm, the underwriter and
investors. As further evidence for the asymmetric information theory, they find that the most
underpriced bond offerings are the initial bond offerings of private firms, i.e., potentially the
first public issue ever by a firm. Our paper expands the analysis of Cai et al. (2007) by
contributing to the findings that opaque firms are greater victims of underpriced issues. Firms
in our sample that have not recorded any bank loans and/or debt issues prior to their IPO
should exhibit higher underpricing due to greater ex ante uncertainty, similar to the findings
of Cai et al. (2007) on corporate bond offerings. Applying their findings to the concept of the
degree of transparency in IPO prospectuses, firms that ambiguously describe the use of IPO
proceeds should experience higher underpricing in their subsequent IPO, and firms that
precisely outline the ventures and investments it has intended to undertake with the proceeds
should experience lower underpricing. Hence, we extend the findings by Cai et al. (2007) in
the dimension of applying its framework on IPOs and combining it with the examination of
IPO prospectuses.

                                        4
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

                                     II. Hypothesis

A. Relationship with a potential underwriter prior to the IPO

IPO underpricing can be defined as a wedge between the offer price and the “fair” firm value
which is revealed by the market post-offering. Ljungqvist (2007) sets forth four main
headings under which the theories of underpricing can be grouped based on the existing
research: asymmetric information, institutional explanations, control theories, and behavior
theories. Further, Ljungqvist argues that the best established models explaining underpricing
are those based on asymmetric information, i.e., differences in levels of information held by
the issuing firm, underwriter and investors. Hence, for the research purposes of this paper,
uncertainty of the true value of a company going public will be hypothesized to be the core
catalyst for the IPO underpricing phenomenon.
       The theoretical models of asymmetric information in IPO underpricing differ in the
assumed information structure between the issuing firm, the underwriter and the investors. It
has been shown that banks which have provided credit to a firm through a loan and/or debt
issue are able to obtain information that might not be available to other parties in the market
(Campbell and Kracaw, 1980; Fama, 1985; Diamond, 1991). The bank is likely to have
attained fundamental information about the issuing firm through the historical relationship
because of increased incentives for tighter monitoring and due diligence. Repeated interaction
with a firm should facilitate continuous transmission of information to the underwriter about
the firm’s projects, management team and business outlooks. There are at least three
explanations that should be considered when analyzing the effect of these firm-underwriter
relationships, each linked with an assumption about which market participants are informed
about the fair market value of the firm going public. Each of these three cases will be
discussed below.
        Firstly, the underwriter does not need to incentivize informed investors with low-
priced shares to reveal their private information on the fair market value of the firm because
the underwriter holds superior information itself. This should work against models for IPO
underpricing presented by Benveniste and Spindt (1989) and Benveniste and Wilhelm (1990),
who assume that both the underwriting bank and the firm are uninformed about the firm’s
true value, but that there are some investors who repeatedly interact with the investment bank
who are better informed about the firm’s prospects. It is expected that a firm-underwriter
relationship will lead to lower underpricing because the underwriter does not need to
compensate informed investors for truthfully revealing their private information before the
offer price is finalized, as is assumed in these models.
        Secondly, it is expected that these relationships enable high-quality firms to avoid
IPO underpricing as a signaling instrument of high firm quality, as is set forth in the signaling
games by Allen and Faulhaber (1989), Grinblatt and Hwang (1989), and Welch (1989, 1992).
In these models, they assume that the issuing firm is the only informed party in the IPO, and
that underpricing is the costly signal that high-quality firms choose to separate themselves
from low-quality firms. In our hypothesis, high-quality firms would not need to make this
costly choice because market participants are aware of the underwriter’s information
advantage due to the firm-underwriter relationship. And since high-quality firms know that
investors can see the nature of this relationship, the signaling mechanism of high firm quality
is shifted from underpriced shares to the firm-bank relationship. This incentivizes the
underwriter to price the issue close to the firm’s fair value because its reputation is at a larger
stake than it would have been without the pre-existing relationship with the issuing firm.
       Thirdly, Rock (1986) assumes that only a random group of investors are informed
about the firm’s value, but that neither the firm nor its underwriting bank, nor the remaining

                                        5
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

investors know the firm’s true value. Since firms need participation from both informed and
uninformed investors in the IPO market, underpricing works as a means for retaining
uninformed investors in investing in IPOs. Here, underpricing compensates the uninformed
investors for their biased purchases of lower value firms, investors who otherwise would be
subject to the “winner’s curse”. However, since all investors, informed or uninformed, know
that the price set by the underwriter reveals an approximate fair market price of the firm’s
shares, uninformed investors should not require any compensation for participating in the
IPO market. Since all market participants can identify the nature of the firm-underwriter
relationship, the information asymmetry between informed and uninformed investors should
be abated.
       In accordance with the above, our first hypothesis is the following: In cases where the
firm going public has a relationship with a potential underwriter prior to the IPO, the
asymmetric information between market participants is expected to be low, and this, in turn,
should cause these firms to experience lower IPO underpricing, ceteris paribus.

B. Transparency in the “Use of Proceeds” section in the IPO prospectus

Further, we aim to investigate the impact of accurately reporting the intended use of capital
raised through the equity issue. If a firm discloses its intentions for its use of proceeds, and
these intentions are clearly defined, precise and truthful, then the information asymmetry
between the issuing company and market participants should, at least to some extent, be
reduced. With the introduction of the European Commission’s 2003/71 directive, companies
planning to do an initial public offering on the European market are required to provide a
certain level of information on its intended use of proceeds (2022). However, the degree of
specificity in the “Use of Proceeds” section of the IPO prospectus might vary between firms.
Hence, our second hypothesis is the following: Firms which accurately describe the planned
allocation of IPO proceeds between different projects and ventures should experience lower
IPO underpricing than firms that do not provide such detailed information. Transparency in
the IPO prospectus should therefore have a negative correlation with IPO underpricing.
       Accordingly, our proposed hypotheses are as follows: Firms that do not have a
recorded bank loan and/or debt issue with a potential IPO underwriter and vaguely describe
their intentions with the use of raised capital should exhibit greatest IPO underpricing. For
these firms, market participants cannot infer information from the firm-bank relationship, nor
can they deduce much information from the “Use of Proceeds” section in the IPO prospectus.
On the opposite side of these dimensions, we find firms that display the combination of a
recorded loan and/or debt issue with a bank that could take the firm public in the subsequent
IPO and include rigorous explanations of what the IPO proceeds shall be used for. On
average, firms in this group should be the least underpriced because market participants can
obtain better information about the true firm value from both the firm-bank relationship and
the IPO prospectus. For firms that have a relationship and are not transparent in the
prospectus, and for firms that do not have a relationship while being transparent in the
prospectus, we assume that firm-bank relationships are better channels of information
transmission than the “Use of proceeds” section in IPO prospectuses due to two reasons: a
firm-bank relationship enables a more critical examination and due diligence of the firm.
Also, the above assumption is reasonable given the limited capacity of the “Use of Proceeds”
section of an IPO prospectus versus the extensive potential of information transmission in a
firm-bank relationship.
       Table I below presents a summary of the hypotheses of this paper. The dataset that we
introduce in this paper, discussed in the next section, enables us to test these hypotheses.

                                        6
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

                                       Table I
     Does a pre-IPO banking relationship with a potential underwriter affect IPO
      underpricing? Does IPO prospectus transparency affect IPO underpricing?
                          The hypotheses of the paper

                 Does the firm have a pre-IPO relationship with a potential underwriter?

                                     Yes No
                              Transparent IPO prospectus? Transparent IPO prospectus?
                           Yes No Yes No
Asymmetric information Lower Low High Higher
Underpricing Lower Low High Higher

                                    III. Method

A. Data description

We extract data on firms that have successfully completed an initial public offering on one of
                                               3
the stock exchanges in our sample countries over the time period 2000 to 2021. The IPO
data is extracted from the Refinitiv SDC Platinum platform. Our initial sample consists of
5,084 IPOs. From the IPO sample we exclude ADRs, financial institutions, real estate
investment trusts (REITs), closed-end funds, private placements, rights issues and unit issues.
Also, we exclude firms that have withdrawn from their IPO and firms that have registered for
an IPO, but not successfully completed the offering.
       Next, we extract all debt issues and loans recorded in the SDC Platinum platform
starting 10 years prior to the starting date of the IPO sample. Here, it is assumed that the
information gain of a loan or debt issue is decreasing over time as it gets older. Hence, our
first observation in the debt dataset is in 1990 and the final is in 2021. As a preliminary filter,
we apply a constraint to the dataset that restricts our sample to only include IPO firms that
have a recorded debt issue and/or loan recorded in the debt dataset. This reduces the number
of IPO firms to 340. Further, to establish a pre-existing bank relationship, we identify each
firm’s respective IPO issue date and debt issue/loan date. Some firms have been granted
loans and/or issued debt after their IPO and are thereby irrelevant for the testing of our first
hypothesis. We therefore exclude them from our dataset, which reduces the treated sample of
IPO firms to 260.
       Research on IPOs has traditionally measured underpricing as a relative measure
where the difference between the offer price and the first-day close price is divided by the
offer price and multiplied by 100. Another measure of underpricing widely used in the
literature is to calculate the “money left on the table”, i.e., the cost of underpricing to the
firm. An implicit assumption in this definition is that the aftermarket demand is price-
inelastic, which means shares sold at the offer price could have been sold at the aftermarket
price. Out of these two definitions, this paper uses the former one to measure the effect of
pre-existing banking relationships with a potential underwriter and prospectus transparency
on IPO underpricing. In well-developed capital markets, such as the Western and Nordic
European markets, that do not have strict restrictions on intraday stock price fluctuations, IPO

3
 Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Finland, Iceland, Germany, the UK and France

                                        7
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

underpricing can be measured by the close price on the first day of trading as the full extent
of underpricing becomes evident relatively quickly (Ljungkvist, 2007). This paper follows
this tradition, which results in the following definition of underpricing for firm i:

                                                  (𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡−𝑑𝑎𝑦 𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑖−𝑂𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑖)
               𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 =                               × 100
                                                                                       𝑂𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑖

where the offer price is retrieved from SDC Platinum, and the first-day close price is taken
from SDC Platinum, Compustat and the Swedish House of Finance’s FinBas database.

B. The firm-bank relationship

To identify the first two subgroups that are to be examined, we define a categorical variable
named Could. If the firm had a pre-existing relationship with one or more banks that had the
capabilities of managing IPOs, then we ascribe that company to the Could = 1 group. If the
company had a pre-existing relationship with a bank, but the bank did not have the capability
to take the company public, then we ascribe that company to the Could = 0 group.
       In our final sample, most firms have had a loan/debt issue arranged by at least one
bank with IPO capabilities, which differs from the US where there are more banks that do not
underwrite IPOs (Schenone, 2004). Therefore, few firms end up in the Could = 0 category,
which results in a weak comparison between the groups. To create a more appropriate control
group to the treatment group (Could = 1), we find the firms, out of those that did not have a
relationship prior to the IPO, that are the most similar to the treatment group based on
financial firm characteristics and IPO characteristics. To do this, we utilize the propensity
score matching technique. This enables us to compare IPO underpricing between firms with a
relationship bank that could take the company public with similar firms without a pre-
existing banking relationship.

C. Establishing a control group

The sample of IPO firms without a pre-existing banking relationship amounts to 3,561. To
construct the control group, we extract data on financial firm characteristics from Compustat
and SDC Platinum that former research has indicated have a significant effect on IPO
underpricing. These characteristics are: revenue, EBIT, total assets, cash and cash
equivalents, shareholder’s equity, long-term debt, and net cash flow from operating activities.
In addition, we gather IPO characteristics from the SDC Platinum platform. These IPO
characteristics include principal amount and total proceeds. The financial firm characteristics
and IPO characteristics enable us to determine which of the firms without a pre-existing
banking relationship that should be matched with the firms in the treatment sample.
       Since the IPOs in our sample involve different currencies and occur at different dates,
all nominal values are normalized to beginning-of-year 2021 Euro to make the propensity
score matching feasible across countries and years. Data on exchange rates for the respective
currencies are collected from Eurostat (2022). From The World Bank’s international financial
statistics data files, we extract the Euro Area inflation measured by the consumer price index
from 1999 to the beginning of 2021 (2020). The propensity score matching procedure renders
a control group consisting of 260 firms, which together with the treatment group creates a
final sample of 520 firms.
       Figure AI in the Appendix reports the sample distribution of observations across
propensity scores for unmatched treated units, matched treated units, matched control units
and unmatched control units. For visual inspection of means in matched observations for each

                                        8
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

specific IPO characteristic and firm characteristic across the propensity score distribution, see
Figure AII and Figure AIII in the Appendix.

D. Descriptive statistics

Descriptive statistics over the firms in the Could = 1 and Could = 0 groups are presented in
Table II. Firms with an established relationship with a potential underwriter issue lower
principal amounts and obtain lower total proceeds. These differences are significant at the 1%
level. The table displays that firms with established banking relationships are larger in
general, but these differences are not statistically significant for total assets, equity, long-term
debt, cash, revenue, EBIT and net cash flow. Unsurprisingly, the leverage ratio (long-term
debt / total assets) is higher for firms in the Could = 1 group at the 1% level. Furthermore, the
EBIT-margin (EBIT / revenue) is higher at the 5% level. To account for these differences
between the treatment group and the control group, we will include the IPO characteristics
and the firm characteristics when testing the hypothesis.

                                       Table II
    Summary statistics for IPO characteristics and firm characteristics at IPO date
Table II summarizes IPO characteristics collected from SDC Platinum and financial firm
characteristics extracted from SDC Platinum and Compustat. The categorical variable Could equals 1
if the IPO firm could have gone public with the bank it had previously received a loan from and/or
used as the underwriter in a debt issue, and 0 otherwise. A more detailed description of the categorical
variable is provided in Section III.B. The values in the table are reported in 2021 Euro millions. F-
tests reveal that the variances of the populations in the two groups are heteroscedastic. T-tests of equal
means are therefore conducted on the condition of heteroscedastic variance between the Could = 1
and Could = 0 groups. Standard deviations are reported in brackets.

 Mean 2021 Euro millions Could = 1 Could = 0

 IPO characteristics
 Principal amount*** 345.74                      610.33
                                                    (553.74)                       (980.79)
 Proceeds amount all markets*** 515.18                      793.52
                                                     (987.89)                       (1159.87)
 Firm characteristics
 Total assets 6279.38                      2973.61
                                                  (31827.31)                    (17931.44)
 Equity 990.02                      589.74
                                                  (2940.95)                     (2860.99)
 Long-term debt 2750.68                      709.28
                                                   (24071.91)                     (3794.13)
 Cash 135.41                     170.91
                                                     (947.76)                       (676.60)
 Revenue 2406.28                     1725.60
                                                    (6511.76)                      (7226.11)

                                        9
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

 EBIT 355.93                      175.29
                                                    (1887.98)                      (663.61)
 Net cash flow 255.78                      145.61
                                                    (1737.93)                      (618.09)
 (Long-term debt / Total assets)*** 0.29                          0.15
                                                       (0.52)                          (0.33)
 (Cash / Total assets) 0.06                          1.16
                                                      (0.51)                         (12.40)
 (EBIT / Revenue)** 0.10                         -0.49
                                                     (0.65)                         (4.41)
 (Net cash flow / EBIT) 0.89                         0.52
                                                    (12.85)                        (8.59)
 Number of observations 260 (50%) 260 (50%)
 *Significantly different at 10%, **Significantly different at 5%, ***Significantly different at 1%.
 Standard deviations in brackets.

E. Creating the Transparency variable

We create a categorical variable equal to 1 if the firm going public is transparent in their “Use
of Proceeds” section in the prospectus published prior to the IPO, and equal to 0 otherwise.
Our definition of transparent is a firm which, in its IPO prospectus, describes the use of
proceeds in a way such that it is clear what the firm will use the proceeds for, for instance by
including specific projects or investments and the amount or share of the proceeds that will
be allocated to each specified area. In contrast, a non-transparent firm is one that writes a
generic use of proceeds section with vague descriptions that are open for interpretation and
that could imply many different scenarios. The following extract illustrates a firm in the
Transparency = 1 group:

        “[...] We currently intend to use these net proceeds in the following order of priority:
       (i) between €120 million and €140 million to fund our organic growth plan in the
        midterm including the market introduction and implementation (roll-out) strategy of
       our omnichannel model, investments in our technology platform and logistics
       automation and expansion, (ii) €30.0 to €35.0 million for the repayment of a bridge
        loan facility in the amount of €35.0 million (together with accrued (yet unpaid)
        interest, fees, costs and expenses) granted to the Company by Barclays and JIL, (iii)
        up to €30 million flexibility for strategic investments to drive current international
       market growth and expand tech leadership, (iv) the remainder of the net proceeds
        from the Offering, if any, for general corporate purposes.” (Mister Spex, 2021).

The next example represents a Transparency = 0 firm:

       “We intend to use the net offering proceeds to fund future capital expenditures and
        potential acquisitions, to repay short-term debt, and for working capital and other
       general corporate purposes.” (Infineon Technologies AG, 2001)

                                        10
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

F. Underpricing across the Could and Transparency categories

Next, we estimate the average underpricing across the two groups based on the Could
variable. Panel A of Table III displays that the average underpricing for firms with a pre-IPO
banking relationship with a potential underwriter is 21.29%, and 52.15% for firms without a
relationship. A t-test of equal means between the two groups indicates that the difference in
average IPO underpricing is statistically significant at the 1% level.

                                       Table III
               Underpricing across Could and Transparency categories
Underpricing is computed as the difference between the offer price and the first trading day close
                                             a
price, divided by the offer price . Offer prices are retrieved from SDC Platinum and close prices are
extracted from SDC Platinum, Compustat and the Swedish House of Finance’s FinBas. The Could =
1 group comprises firms that, prior to their IPO, had a relationship with a bank through a loan or debt
issue where the bank could also have been underwriting the subsequent IPO. In the Could = 0 group,
the firms have no pre-existing banking relationship. T-test of equal means in IPO underpricing across
the two categorical groups created with the Could variable provide a p-value of 0.01%, indicating that
IPO underpricing is different between firms belonging to the Could = 1 group and firms belonging to
the Could = 0 group at the 1% significance level in our sample. We further create a categorical
variable to examine the effect of accurately and precisely describing the intended use of IPO proceeds
in the IPO prospectus, labeled Transparency. This variable is created with data gathered from IPO
prospectuses published by firms going public during our sample period.

Panel A: Underpricing for firms with and without an underwriter relationship prior to the IPO

Underpricing Could = 1 Could = 0

Mean*** 21.29 52.15

(Standard deviation) (85.59) (95.60)

Min -98.47 -98.86

Max 606.18 1116.15

Median 14.31 47.80

No. of observations 260 260

Sample 50% 50%

***Significantly different at 1%

       Panel B: Underpricing for firms with and without transparent IPO prospectuses

Underpricing Transparency = 1 Transparency = 0

Mean 32.81 26.65

                                        11
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

(Standard deviation) (37.42) (97.79)

Min -88.66 -98.86

Max 123.85 660.51

Median 28.85 21.25

No. of observations 114 209

Sample (%) 22% 40%

             Panel C: Underpricing across Could and Transparency subgroups

Underpricing Could = 1 Could = 0

            Transparency = 1 Transparency = 0 Transparency = 1 Transparency = 0

Mean 14.48 17.36 49.89 42.91
(Standard
                   (23.09) (102.58) (40.21) (87.07)
deviation)
Min -60.75 -98.47 -88.66 -98.86

Max 71.01 606.18 123.85 660.51

Median 17.17 10.97 63.20 37.45
No. of
                   55 133 59 76
observations
Sample 11% 26% 11% 14%
a

In Panel B, the same procedure is undertaken for the Transparency variable. The descriptive
statistics indicate that the mean IPO underpricing for firms that precisely describe their
intended use of proceeds in the IPO prospectus is higher than for firms that use vague
descriptions, something which stands in contradiction to our proposed hypothesis. Our data
suggests that the mean underpricing for firms that belong to the Transparency = 1 group is
32.18% while the mean underpricing for firms that belong to the Transparency = 0 group is
26.65%. Note however, that this difference is not statistically significant, and that there is a
certain amount of missing data on IPO prospectuses in our final data sample, which might
render these averages unrepresentative for the true mean. Firms that went public in the
earliest years in our sample, especially in the year 2000, are overrepresented in the group of
firms for which we are unable to obtain IPO prospectuses. It must therefore be mentioned that
the results of the Transparency variable might be skewed.
       Panel C displays the mean IPO underpricing across our four categorical groups. As
outlined in the hypothesis, Panel C indicates that the group of firms that are least prone to

                                        12
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

IPO underpricing on average are firms that combine having a relationship with a bank that
could take them public and including accurate descriptions of the intended use of proceeds in
the IPO prospectus. These firms experience a level of IPO underpricing equal to 14.48% on
average in our data sample. The differences between the Transparency subgroups within each
Could category are inconsistent. In the Could = 1 group, transparent firms seem to exhibit
lower underpricing than non-transparent firms. However, in the Could = 0 group, the
opposite appears to be the case. Hence, the preliminary results of the Transparency variable
are inconclusive, consistent with the findings in Panel B.

G. Correlation between the independent variables

To see how the different explanatory variables correlate with each other and to avoid issues
with multicollinearity, we create a correlation matrix including all independent variables,
displayed in Table IV. Principal amount in this market and Proceeds amount in this market,
as well as Principal amount all markets and Proceeds amount all markets correlate perfectly.
Therefore, we exclude Principal amount all markets and Proceeds amount in this market to
mitigate multicollinearity problems in the regression presented in Section IV.
       Some variables have a correlation greater than 0.8, which implies a considerable risk
of multicollinearity (Principal amount in this market and Proceeds all markets have a
correlation of 0.823, Revenue and Equity have a correlation of 0.829, and Long-term debt and
Total assets have a correlation of 0.852). Nevertheless, these variables are likely to have such
an economic significance for the testing of our hypotheses that we choose not to exclude
them.

                                        13
       The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

             e
                                                                                                                                         -
            Revenu

       in our sample.
                                                                                                                               -
            NetCashFlow                                                                        0.181
       firms

                                                                                                                      -
       for the EBIT                                                                            0.293  0.612
       s

                                                                                                            -
       statisticLongterm-  debt                                                                   0.187  0.566  0.131

                                                                                     8     8
        criptive                                                                            -
             Cash                                                             0.505  0.202  0.50   0.24
       des
       the
                                                                                         -
             Equity                                                      0.329  0.313  0.507  0.341  0.829
       based on

                                                                                 -
             TotalAssets                                             0.601  0.425  0.852  0.332  0.460  0.513

 IV
                      s
                                                                       -
Tablecluded variables areamountall mkt                                   0.252 0.401  0.150  0.038  0.245  0.053  0.455
       in     Proceeds
   Correlation matrixThe
         .
                                                                                     7
                                              -                                         220    03
                 mount inthis mkt                            0.823  0.238 0.345  0.150  0.040  0.      0.      0.454
            Proceedsa

              p.        s                                                                                    5
                                             -                00)
                    all mkt
      dependent variablesPrincamount                       0.823  (1.0    0.252 0.401  0.150  0.038  0.245  0.053  0.45
       in

               cp.
       etween                     -
                mount mkt             0.823         0.823  0.238 0.345  0.150  0.040  0.220  0.037  0.454
             Prina  in this                      (1.000)

      relation bld                                                                  9      4
                            -                                    064
              Cou                0.164-       0.128-       0.164-       0.128-       0.    0.069  0.022-       0.05    0.06   0.042  0.050

       reports the cor                           mount
      le                          amountarket amount               sets
                                                   l
      tab                       pa                                                term debt      sh Flow
                                                                                            -
      The                          this m          this market
                          Could Princiin  Principalall marketsProceeds ani    Proceeds amountall marketsTotal AsEquity Cash   Long  EBIT  Net Ca Revenue

                                            14
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

    IV. The effect of pre-existing underwriter relationships and transparency in IPO
                        prospectuses on IPO underpricing

Table III above presents univariate results of IPO underpricing for firms with a pre-existing
relationship with a potential underwriter and for firms without such a relationship, and for
firms that provide precise descriptions of intended use of raised IPO proceeds and for firms
that do not. Table III indicates that the mean IPO underpricing for firms that have an
underwriter relationship prior to its IPO and for firms that do not have such a relationship is
significantly different at the 1% level. However, the results in Table III do not indicate the
effect of the independent variables on underpricing, nor do they control for IPO
characteristics, financial firm characteristics and other factors that former research has
indicated have significant effects on IPO underpricing. In part A, we examine whether there
is an effect of having a pre-existing banking relationship with a potential underwriter on IPO
underpricing. In part B, we investigate the effect of precise descriptions in the “Use of
Proceeds” section in a firm’s IPO prospectus on IPO underpricing. We perform these
analyses by means of multivariate regressions.

A. The effect of pre-IPO underwriter relationships on IPO underpricing

To examine the hypothesized effect of having an underwriter relationship prior to the IPO on
the extent of IPO underpricing, we estimate a regression of the following form:

Regression equation I:
                 𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑𝑖 + 𝛽𝐼𝑃𝑂𝐼𝑃𝑂 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑠𝑖
                                    + 𝛽𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑠𝑖 + 𝛽𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠 + 𝜖𝑖

If the hypothesis presented in Section II is supported by the data, the regression should result
in the following: 𝛽𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑 should be negative and statistically and economically significant. The
intuition follows the reasoning presented in the hypothesis: because market participants can
identify the firm-bank relationship and infer that the bank has superior information,
underpricing should be reduced because the underwriter does not need to incentivize
informed investors to truthfully reveal their information on firm value. Also, since the market
knows that the underwriter is informed, incentives are higher for the underwriter to set the
offer price close to the fair market price because its reputation is at greater stake. And finally,
since all investors, informed and uninformed, know that the offer price is relatively close to
the true firm value, uninformed investors will not be subject to the same extent of adverse
selection problems in IPOs. Hence, asymmetric information between the issuing firm, the
underwriter and investors should be mitigated for firms that have a relationship with a
prospective IPO underwriter, consequently leading to lower IPO underpricing for these firms.
        The results from Regression equation I presented above are reported in Table V. It is
important to mention that the observable control variables included in the models are
normalized to Euro billions, meaning that each coefficient of correlation should be
interpreted in conjunction with the fact that larger increases in variables are required for each
coefficient to be economically significant. The observable explanatory firm variables we
include in our regression are: the logarithm of total assets, equity, cash, long-term debt,
EBIT, net cash flow and revenue. We presume that the most relevant IPO characteristics to
control for are principal amount and total IPO proceeds, the latter of which is labeled
“proceeds amount all markets” in the regression table below. The basic model, displayed in
column 1, indicates that IPO underpricing might be reduced as a result of having been

                                        15
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

granted a loan and/or issued debt with a bank that could take the firm public. The coefficient
on Could is negative and statistically significant at the 5% level (𝛽𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑 = −21.38, t-statistic =
−2.45, and p-value = 0.0147). Hence, our data suggests that firms with a pre-existing
relationship with a potential underwriter face about 21% less IPO underpricing than firms
without these relationships. Again, note that the correlation coefficients reported in Table V
are displayed in percentage terms, suggesting firms that belong to the Could = 1 group have
considerably lower levels of IPO underpricing, thus making the coefficient on Could both
economically and statistically significant.
        Further, Table V indicates that firms that are able to gain large total IPO proceeds are
more underpriced than firms that reach lower levels of total proceeds. This is an interesting
finding because it suggests that even though a firm is able to gather a large pool of funds in
their offering, it will not necessarily be associated with lower levels of IPO underpricing
(𝛽𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑠 𝑎𝑚𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 𝑎𝑙𝑙 𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡𝑠 = 9.83, t-statistic = 2.02, and p-value = 0.0435). Consistent with former
research, see for instance Ritter (1991), we find that firm size, here proxied by the logarithm
of total assets, is negatively associated with IPO underpricing (𝛽𝐿𝑜𝑔(𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠) = −16.07, t-statistic =
−2.88, and p-value = 0.0041). Moreover, our data suggests that firms generating larger EBIT
have lower levels of IPO underpricing (𝛽𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑇 = −7.43, t-statistic = −3.83, and p-value = 0.0001).
Another finding is that net cash flow has a positive, statistically and economically significant
coefficient (𝛽𝑁𝑒𝑡 𝑐𝑎𝑠ℎ 𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤 = 20.06, t-statistic = 2.83, and p-value = 0.0049). Schenone (2004) finds
similar results in an investigation of IPO underpricing on a sample of US firms that went
public between 1998 and 2000. She proposes that investors become wary of the reasons for
the offering and demand larger premiums because they suspect a higher risk of wasteful
spending. Thus, it may be that the positive correlation between IPO underpricing and net cash
flow in our data is an expression of the “free cash flow hypothesis”, i.e., the view that
wasteful spending is more likely to occur when the firm has excess cash over what is required
to make all net present value-positive investments and repay all debt claimants (Berk,
DeMarzo, 2017). We also find statistically and economically significant negative correlations
with IPO underpricing for equity and cash (𝛽𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑡𝑦 = −3.87, t-statistic = −2.32, and p-value =
0.0210, 𝛽𝐶𝑎𝑠ℎ = −12.26, t-statistic = −2.64, and p-value = 0.0084). For long-term debt, we find a
statistically but not economically significant negative correlation with underpricing
(𝛽𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔−𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑚 𝑑𝑒𝑏𝑡 = −0.57, t-statistic = −2.03, and p-value = 0.0433).

                                   Table V
   The impact of pre-IPO banking relationships with a potential underwriter on IPO
                                underpricing
This table presents OLS estimates of the following regression equation:

                       𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑𝑖 + 𝛽𝐼𝑃𝑂𝐼𝑃𝑂 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑠𝑖
                                         +𝛽𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑠𝑖 + 𝛽𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠 + 𝜖𝑖

The dependent variable is Underpricing. Could equals 1 if the firm has a pre-existing banking
relationship with a prospective underwriter, and 0 otherwise. Column 1 presents the basic regression
model. In column 2, we control for firm size by using a flexible firm-size specification: we replace
Total assets with a categorical variable equal to 1 if the size of the firm’s total assets is greater than
the sample median, and equal to 0 if it is smaller than the sample median. Column 3 includes
industry-fixed effects on the basis of the first of the four digits in the SIC codes. Column 4 includes a
binary variable equal to 1 for those firms that were VC backed at the time of the IPO, and equal to 0
otherwise. The numbers below are presented in percentage units, and variables are in Euro billions.
Robust standard errors are reported in brackets.

                                        16
  The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

                                Basic            Size        Industry F.E.     VC backed
                                      (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)

Asymmetric information

                                                    **                     **                     **                     **
Could -21.38           -19.79           -20.42           -20.99
                                   (8.74)            (9.17)            (8.78)            (8.68)

IPO characteristics

Principal amount 5.09            4.14            4.93            5.04
                                   (6.31)            (6.36)            (6.74)            (6.29)

                                                  **                      *                      *                     **
Proceeds amount all              9.83             8.99             9.38            9.99
markets                           (4.86)            (4.96)            (5.00)            (4.86)

Firm characteristics

                                                   ***                                           ***                    ***
Log (assets) -16.07                             -15.97           -16.45
                                   (5.58)                              (5.44)            (5.75)

                                                                          ***
Size -27.39
                                                    (8.02)

                                                   **                     ***                    **                     **
Equity -3.87            -4.59             -4.10            -3.97
                                  (1.67)            (1.64)            (1.71)            (1.68)

                                                   ***                     **                     **                    ***
Cash -12.26           -11.40           -11.23          -12.40
                                   (4.63)            (4.50)            (4.53)            (4.73)

VC backed -12.09
                                                                                         (8.94)

                                                   **                     **                                            **
Long-term debt -0.57            -0.63             -0.44            -0.58
                                   (0.28)            (0.28)            (0.35)            (0.28)

                                                  ***                    ***                    ***                    ***
EBIT -7.43            -7.17            -7.49            -7.56
                                   (1.94)            (1.99)            (1.92)            (1.97)

                                                   ***                    ***                    ***                    ***
Net cash flow 20.06           20.01           20.42           20.37
                                   (7.09)            (7.46)            (7.20)            (7.23)

Revenue 0.61            0.41            0.63            0.64
                                   (0.68)            (0.65)            (0.69)            (0.68)

Flexible firm size No Yes No No

Year fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes

Observations 520 520 520 520

  2
R                             0.18 0.18 0.19 0.19

            2
Adjusted R                      0.13 0.13 0.12 0.13

Residual std. error 85.69 85.97 86.15 85.71

                                       17
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

                                (df = 488) (df = 488) (df = 480) (df = 487)

                                                   ***                    ***                    ***                    ***
 F Statistic 3.53             3.41             2.85             3.45
                               (df = 31; 488)    (df = 31; 488)    (df = 39; 480)    (df = 32; 487)

 *Significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%. Robust standard errors in brackets.

                 A.1. Robustness of the results from Regression equation I
This section tests the robustness of the basic regression model in Table V. It might be that the
effect of having a relationship with a potential underwriter on IPO underpricing is driven by
characteristics not accounted for in the basic model reported in column 1 of Table V.
Therefore, we add several control variables to our basic model in order to mitigate omitted
variable bias and obtain more robust results. In addition to year-fixed effects, which is
already implemented to our basic model, we include the following control variables in the
regression model: size-, industry-, and VC-effects.

A.1.1. Additional control for the firm size impact on IPO underpricing
Due to a great amount of research that has documented the impact of firm size on IPO
underpricing, it is necessary to expose our basic model to a flexible firm size specification.
Therefore, we replace the logarithm of total assets variable with a categorical variable equal
to 1 if the size of the firm’s total assets is greater than the sample median, and equal to 0 if it
is smaller than the sample median. The results of this regression model are reported in
column 2 of Table V. The findings suggest that our hypothesis is robust to this specification
of firm size. Our data indicates that having a relationship with a potential underwriter prior to
the firm’s public listing is associated with around 20% lower IPO underpricing on a 5% level
of significance (𝛽𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑 = −19.79, t-statistic = −2.16, and p-value = 0.0315). Thus, the results of
the basic regression model in column 1 is supported by the regression model which includes
the flexible firm size specification.

A.1.2. Controlling for systemic differences between industries
In column 3 of Table V, the regression includes a variable based on the first digit of the
firms’ SIC codes in our sample. It might be that firms in certain industries display lower
underpricing and are inherently more prone to end up in the Could = 1 category, or vice
versa. For instance, high-technology firms are generally more human capital-intensive and
less likely to have large tangible assets on their balance sheets (Schenone, 2004). They are,
therefore, less likely to obtain loans/issue debt, and conversely, more likely to end up in the
Could = 0 category. This could be problematic for the analysis if they are simultaneously
more underpriced as this could lead to biased inferences of the coefficient on Could. The
results from the regression in column 3 do not change vastly from the basic model reported in
column 1 of Table V. The coefficient on Could still suggests that firms with a relationship
with a bank that could take them public in a subsequent IPO face approximately 20% less
underpricing than firms without such a relationship. Accordingly, the inclusion of industry-
fixed effects does not alter the economic magnitude nor the statistical significance of Could at
the 5% level (𝛽𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑 = −20.42, t-statistic = −2.33, and p-value = 0.0204).

A.1.3. Venture capital backed IPOs
As discussed in the literature review section, Fitza and Dean (2016) find results suggesting

                                        18
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

that venture capital-backing explains 20.07% of the variance in IPO underpricing and
propose that VC-backing is of greater importance than the underwriter. In column 4 of Table
V, we control for this by constructing a binary variable equal to 1 if the firm was backed by a
venture capital firm at the time of the IPO, and 0 otherwise. From the regression, it seems that
being backed by a venture capital firm at the time of the IPO does not affect IPO
underpricing on any statistical significance level less than 10% (𝛽𝑉𝐶 = −12.09, t-statistic =
−1.35, and p-value = 0.1771 ). However, it should be recognized that the sign of the coefficient
on VC backed is negative, indicating that our findings are consistent with Fitza and Dean
(2016) had there been more statistical significance. The coefficient on Could is still
significant at the 5% level and maintains its economic magnitude (𝛽𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑 = −20.99, t-statistic =
−2.42, and p-value = 0.0160). Overall, the results are robust when controlling for VC-backing.

A.1.4. Controlling for country-fixed effects
As a final control to Regression equation I, we include country-fixed effects to account for
the variation between countries in our sample. It might be that the selection into the two
Could categories is correlated with which country the firm is based. Given that the hypothesis
on Could holds in the country-fixed effects models, we have a stronger point of evidence to
show that a pre-existing relationship with a potential underwriter is associated with lower
levels of IPO underpricing within countries, not only on an aggregate level. For this purpose,
we create categorical variables for the countries in our data sample.
       The results are reported in Table VI. Column 1 presents regression estimates of a
model which builds on the basic regression from Table V, with the addition of a variable
accounting for country-fixed effects. The coefficient on Could remains negative but is
statistically insignificant (𝛽𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑 = −2.32, t-statistic = −0.13, and p-value = 0.8940). Hence, the
results in column 1 in Table VI do not support the results found in Table V above, but are
consistent with the predicted sign of the Could coefficient. However, certain financial firm
characteristics remain statistically significant and have economic magnitude:
(𝛽𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑠 𝑎𝑚𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 𝑎𝑙𝑙 𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡𝑠 = 9.39, t-statistic = 1.99 , and p-value = 0.0473, 𝛽𝐿𝑜𝑔 (𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠) = −16.35, t-
statistic = −2.85, and p-value = 0.0045, 𝛽𝐶𝑎𝑠ℎ = −10.92, t-statistic = −2.09 , and p-value =
0.0374, 𝛽𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑇 = −7.94, t-statistic = −3.27 , and p-value = 0.0012, 𝛽𝑁𝑒𝑡 𝑐𝑎𝑠ℎ 𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤 = 19.33, t-statistic
= 2.41 , and p-value = 0.0164).
       To further investigate how the hypothesis holds under different geographical areas,
we divide the total dataset into two subsections: We isolate all firms that have successfully
completed an IPO on one of the stock exchanges in Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Finland and
Iceland from firms that went public in the United Kingdom, Germany or France. The reason
for bundling the countries into two groups is that some countries would be irrelevant to
present in isolation due to them having few observations, either in total or in any of the Could
subgroups. Thus, presenting regression estimates on a country level would not be fruitful. In
column 2, we use the same regression as in column 1, but apply it on the subsample of Nordic
firms and control for country-fixed effects. The results show that the coefficient on Could
changes sign and becomes statistically insignificant (𝛽𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑 = 28.09, t-statistic = 0.61, and p-
value = 0.5440). In column 3, we conduct the same methodology as we did on Nordic firms
but apply it to firms that have gone public in either the United Kingdom, Germany, or France.
In this model, the coefficient on Could is negative and statistically insignificant (𝛽𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑 =
−5.94, t-statistic = −0.30, and p-value = 0.7641). As a result, the hypothesis on Could does not
hold when accounting for country-fixed effects. Therefore, it is plausible that the regressions
presented in Table V, which do not include country-fixed effects, are subject to omitted
variable bias.

                                        19
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

                                    Table VI
   The impact of pre-IPO banking relationships with a potential underwriter on IPO
                   underpricing: Controlling for country-fixed effects
This table presents OLS estimates of the basic regression model, but in addition to IPO variables, firm
variables, and year-fixed effects, we include controls for country-fixed effects:

                       𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑𝑖 + 𝛽𝐼𝑃𝑂𝐼𝑃𝑂 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑠𝑖
                                         +𝛽𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑠𝑖 + 𝛽𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠 + 𝜖𝑖

The dependent variable is Underpricing. Could equals 1 if the firm has a pre-existing banking
relationship with a potential underwriter, and 0 otherwise. Column 1 presents estimates of the basic
model where we run a regression on the total sample of firms, i.e., on firms from all countries in our
sample, but we include controls for country-fixed effects. Column 2 presents regression estimates of
the same model to the one presented in column 1, but instead it is applied on the subsample of firms
that have gone public on one of the stock exchanges in Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Finland or
Iceland. Column 3 presents the estimates of the same regression model applied to the subsample of
firms that have gone public on one of the stock exchanges in the United Kingdom, Germany or
France. Year-fixed effects are included in all models reported in the table. The numbers below are
presented in percentage units, and variables are in Euro billions. Robust standard errors are reported in
brackets.

                                Basic                  Nordic        Germany, the UK and
                                 - all countries -                countries                France
                                        (1)                         (2)                      (3)
Asymmetric information
Could -2.32                     28.09                  -5.94
                                   (17.43)                    (46.08)                (19.79)
 IPO characteristics
Principal amount 1.22                     32.19                 -1.02
                                    (5.96)                    (118.35)                (5.98)
                                                     **
Proceeds amount all                9.39                    -43.93                 7.06
markets                          (4.72)                  (83.33)                (4.88)

 Firm characteristics

Log (assets)       ***                                                **
                                    -16.35                      -28.77                 -13.67
                                     (5.73)                     (26.02)                 (6.51)
Equity -2.72                      4.45                  -0.66
                                     (1.96)                     (9.07)                  (1.20)

 Cash        **                          **
                                  -10.92                    42.32                  -6.07
                                     (5.23)                     (20.24)                 (5.63)

Long-term debt      *
                                      -0.56                       1.16                   -0.33
                                     (0.31)                    (10.18)                 (0.35)

EBIT      ***
                                 -7.94                      5.19                  8.58
                                     (2.43)                     (6.71)                  (8.42)

Net cash flow      **                         **
                                19.33                   24.10                 0.67
                                     (8.03)                    (10.38)                 (5.78)

Revenue                               **
                                     0.81                     -11.38                  -0.42
                                     (0.66)                     (5.00)                  (0.78)

                                        20
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

Flexible firm size No No No
Year fixed effects Yes Yes Yes
Observations 520 106 414
  2
R                              0.21 0.43 0.13
            2
Adjusted R                        0.14 0.16 0.06
Residual Std. Error 85.14 (df = 481) 120.36 (df = 71) 74.231 (df = 380)
                                                    ***                                 *                             ***
                                 3.27                     1.57                 1.75
 F Statistic
                                 (df = 38; 481)              (df = 34; 71)           (df = 33; 380)
 *Significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%. Robust standard errors in brackets.

B. The effect of transparency in the IPO prospectus on underpricing

The results in Table V and Table VI address the first part of the hypothesis, i.e., firms with a
pre-IPO relationship with a potential underwriter should experience less underpricing than
firms without such a relationship. Here, we examine the second part of the hypothesis by
looking at whether transparency, defined as a binary variable equal to 1 if the firm in its IPO
prospectus accurately describes its intended use of proceeds, influences IPO underpricing.
We do this by adding the categorical variable Transparency to Regression equation I, such
that it interacts with the categorical variable Could. Accordingly, we estimate a regression of
the following form:

Regression equation II:

    𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑𝑖 + 𝛽𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦𝑖
                        + 𝛽𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑∙𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑𝑖 ∙ 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦𝑖 + 𝛽𝐼𝑃𝑂𝐼𝑃𝑂 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑠𝑖
                      + 𝛽𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑠𝑖 + 𝛽𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠 + 𝜖𝑖

The results from Regression equation II presented above are reported in Table VII. As
previously mentioned, the observable control variables included are in Euro billions, meaning
that each estimated coefficient of correlation should be interpreted in conjunction with the
fact that larger increases in variables are required for each coefficient to be economically
significant. The observable explanatory firm variables we include in this regression are the
same as in Regression equation I, except for the categorical variable Transparency and the
interaction variable Could ∙ Transparency.
       The basic model, displayed in column 1, indicates that the coefficient of the variable
Could is not statistically significant, but the economic magnitude remains in essence (𝛽𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑 =
−14.37, t-statistic = −1.01, and p-value = 0.3116). The coefficient of the Transparency variable
is positive and statistically insignificant (𝛽𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦 = 0.90, t-statistic = 0.08 , and p-value =
0.9374 ). The coefficient of the interaction variable Could ∙ Transparency is negative and
greater than the Could variable, which contradicts the hypothesis that firms with the
combination of a pre-IPO relationship with a potential underwriter and a transparent use of
proceeds section in the IPO prospectus should have lower underpricing than those with the
relationship only. However, the coefficient does not have the statistical significance required
for any claims to be made (𝛽𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑∙𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦 = −7.81, t-statistic = −0.51, and p-value =
0.6090). When controlling for firm size, industry-fixed effects and VC backing, the sign of the
coefficients of Could and Could ∙ Transparency do not shift and are still not statistically
significant.

                                        21
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

       Table VII indicates that certain coefficients are robust when extending Regression
equation I with the Transparency variable: coefficients of Proceeds amount all markets, Net
Cash Flow and EBIT keep their statistical significance at the 1% level and their economic
magnitudes prevail (𝛽𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑠 𝑎𝑚𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡 𝑎𝑙𝑙 𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡𝑠 = 19.16, t-statistic = 3.40 , and p-value = 0.0008,
𝛽𝑁𝑒𝑡 𝐶𝑎𝑠ℎ 𝐹𝑙𝑜𝑤 = 21.27, t-statistic = 2.94 , and p-value = 0.0035, 𝛽𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑇 = −8.05, t-statistic = −3.49 ,
and p-value = 0.0006).

                                    Table VII
 The effect of transparency in IPO prospectus and pre-IPO underwriter relationship on
                              IPO underpricing
This table presents OLS estimates of the following regression equation:

  𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑𝑖 + 𝛽𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦𝑖 + 𝛽𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑 ∙ 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑑𝑖 ∙ 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦𝑖
                   + 𝛽𝐼𝑃𝑂𝐼𝑃𝑂 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑠𝑖 + 𝛽𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑠𝑖 + 𝛽𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠 + 𝜖𝑖

The dependent variable is Underpricing. Could equals 1 if the firm has a pre-existing banking
relationship with a prospective underwriter, and 0 otherwise. This regression includes an interactive
variable which is a product of Could and Transparency. Transparency is a categorical variable equal
to 1 if the firm, in its IPO prospectus, describes the use of proceeds in a specific and accurate manner,
and equal to 0 otherwise. Column 1 presents the basic regression model. In column 2, we control for
firm size by using a flexible firm-size specification: we replace Total assets with a categorical
variable equal to 1 if the size of the firm’s total assets is greater than the sample median, and equal to
0 if it is smaller than the sample median. Column 3 includes industry-fixed effects on the basis of the
first of the four digits in the SIC codes. Column 4 includes a binary variable equal to 1 for those firms
that were VC backed at the time of the IPO, and equal to 0 otherwise. The numbers below are
presented in percentage units, and variables are in Euro billions. Robust standard errors are reported in
brackets.

                                   Basic           Size        Industry F.E.     VC backed
                                         (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)

 Asymmetric information

 Could -14.37           -9.68           -14.05          -14.17
                                    (14.18)          (14.61)          (15.20)          (14.13)

 Transparency 0.90            4.51            1.48            0.90
                                    (11.46)          (10.98)          (12.06)          (11.48)

 Could ∙ Transparency -7.81           -11.61           -8.24            -7.71
                                    (15.26)          (15.55)          (16.77)          (15.30)

 IPO characteristics

 Principal amount -3.88            -3.91            -3.40            -3.73
                                      (6.98)           (6.84)           (7.14)           (6.93)

                                                      ***                   ***                   ***                   ***
 Proceeds amount all markets 19.16          19.71          18.23          19.08
                                     (5.63)           (5.68)           (5.85)           (5.66)

 Firm characteristics

                                                *        *        *
 Log (assets) -10.67                           -10.81           -10.93

                                        22
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

                                     (5.68) (5.86) (6.08)

                                                                              **
 Size -27.75
                                                     (12.38)

                                                       **                    ***                    **                    **
 Equity -4.91            -5.14            -5.01            -4.93
                                     (1.97)           (1.92)           (1.96)           (1.99)

                                                       **                    **                   ***                    **
 Cash -12.27          -11.67           -9.66           -12.28
                                     (4.89)           (4.85)           (3.73)           (4.92)

 VC backed -4.20
                                                                                        (11.70)

                                                       *                     *                                           *
 Long-term debt -0.45            -0.46            -0.08           -0.46
                                      (0.25)           (0.26)           (0.15)           (0.25)

                                                      ***                   ***                   ***                   ***
 EBIT -8.05            -7.96            -7.98            -8.09
                                     (2.31)           (2.31)           (2.23)           (2.33)

                                                      ***                   ***                   ***                   ***
 Net cash flow 21.27          21.32          21.80          21.39
                                     (7.24)           (7.53)           (6.97)           (7.26)

 Revenue 0.65           0.42           0.48           0.64
                                      (0.77)           (0.74)           (0.83)           (0.77)

 Flexible firm size No Yes No No

 Year fixed effect Yes Yes Yes Yes

 Observations 323 323 323 323

   2
 R                               0.27 0.28 0.28 0.27

             2
 Adjusted R                        0.19 0.20 0.17 0.18

 Residual std. error 73.74           73.17           74.32           73.86
                                     (df = 289)       (df = 289)       (df = 281)       (df = 288)

                                                      ***                   ***                   ***                   ***
 F Statistic 3.22            3.41            2.64            3.12
                                  (df = 33; 289)   (df = 33; 289)   (df = 41; 281)   (df = 34; 288)

 *Significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%. Robust standard errors in brackets.

                                    V. Discussion

The results of Section IV.A. indicate that we cannot make any inferences on the effect of
banking relationships with a potential underwriter prior to the firm’s offering on IPO
underpricing. It seems, based on our data sample, that the hypothesis that firm-bank
relationships mitigate asymmetric information and thus reduce IPO underpricing does not
hold when controlling for variations between countries. Consequently, it is plausible that the
regressions presented in Table V, which omits the country-fixed effects, are subject to biased
coefficient estimates. Nevertheless, the regressions that control for country-fixed effects
display interesting findings which can have implications for firms that consider going public
in the Nordics, Germany, France or the UK. Certain financial firm characteristics seem to

                                        23
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

enable firms going public to suffer less from IPO underpricing. This raises the question of
why these characteristics might be better mitigators of asymmetric information than firm-
bank relationships. We propose two possible explanations for this finding:
       (1) In the hypothesis, we assume a high degree of efficiency in the financial market,
where investors integrate all existing information into their decision-making. However, it
might be that investors in practice do not find relationships with a potential IPO underwriter
to provide sufficiently large information gains for it to be a worthwhile factor to consider.
Alternatively, it might be that investors do not even contemplate the relationships at all. If
this is true, i.e., either investors do not find relationships to reveal any significant
informational advantage or they do not consider relationships at all, the effect of relationships
on IPO underpricing might be irrelevant due to “self-fulfilling prophecy” problems: it could
be that investors’ low expectations on the information gain from firm-bank relationships
make the theoretical effect disappear. Hence, the assumptions underlying our first hypothesis
are potentially unrealistic.
       (2) Also, the results indicate that investors possibly learn more from financial firm
characteristics than from pre-IPO relationships with a potential underwriter. This might not
be so surprising given that firm characteristics constitute a more established and explicit
source of information for the estimation of a firm’s true value. Firm valuation is commonly
based on expected future performance and thus, the financial firm characteristics of today
constitute the foundation for the estimation of the firm’s true value. Firm-bank relationships
with a potential underwriter on the other hand, although possibly signaling that the offer price
is an accurate reflection of the firm’s true value, does not in itself provide any tangible
numbers that can be used directly in an estimation. Hence, it is reasonable that financial firm
characteristics are better at mitigating asymmetric information problems in IPOs.
       The results in Section IV.B. show that we cannot make any claims on the effect of
transparency in the “Use of Proceeds” section in the prospectus on IPO underpricing. The
“Use of Proceeds” section in an IPO prospectus is a relatively shallow and limited source of
information, usually restricted to a few paragraphs. Furthermore, it might be that this set of
information is not something that investors generally consider at all. Considering this, it
seems reasonable that other sources of information are better mitigators of asymmetric
information and subsequently IPO underpricing. Therefore, it is logical that our data supports
that certain financial firm characteristics are the most prominent factors affecting
underpricing.

                                  VI. Conclusion

The principal purpose of this paper has been to examine whether having a pre-IPO banking
relationship with a potential underwriter and being transparent in the “Use of Proceeds”
section in the IPO prospectus mitigate asymmetric information problems experienced by
firms issuing equity in an IPO. Given that asymmetric information is the main explanation for
IPO underpricing, then firms with an established relationship with a potential underwriter
and/or a transparent prospectus should experience less underpricing on average. We test the
first hypothesis by comparing firms that have obtained loans and/or issued debt prior to the
IPO, with firms that have not. The second hypothesis we test by examining the degree of
accuracy and precision in the IPO prospectuses. The insufficient findings reported here
inhibits support for any of the hypotheses outlined in this paper. However, the results reveal
that certain financial firm characteristics, including total assets, EBIT and cash, can reduce
IPO underpricing. These insights can constitute practical points of reference for IPO market
participants in the Nordics, Germany, the UK and France.

                                        24
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

                                   References

Allen, F., Faulhaber, G.R., 1989, Signaling by underpricing in the IPO market, Journal of Financial
        Economics 23, 303–323.
Angrist, J., D., Pischke, J., 2009, Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s Companion
         (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ).
Beatty, R.P., Ritter, J.R., 1986, Investment Banking, Reputation, and the Underpricing of Initial
        Public Offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 15, 213-232.
Benveniste, L.M., Spindt, P.A., 1989, How investment bankers determine the offer price and
        allocation of new issues, Journal of Financial Economics 24, 343–361.
Benveniste, L.M., Wilhelm Jr., W.J., 1990, A comparative analysis of IPO proceeds under alternative
        regulatory environments, Journal of Financial Economics 28, 173–207.
Berk, J., DeMarzo, P., 2017, Corporate Finance (Pearson Education Limited, Essex).
Cai, N., Helwege, J., Warga, A., 2007, Underpricing in the Corporate Bond Market, The Review of
        financial studies 20, 2021-2046.
Campbell, T. S., Kracaw, W. A., 1980, Information Production, Market Signaling, and the Theory of
        Financial Intermediation, The Journal of Finance 35, 863-882.
Diamond, D., W., 1991, Monitoring and Reputation: The Choice between Bank Loans and Directly
        Placed Debt, Journal of Political Economy 99, 689-721.
Duarte-Silva, T., 2010, The market for certification by external parties: Evidence from underwriting
        and banking relationships, Journal of Financial Economics 98, 568–582.
Ellul, A., Pagano, M., 2006, IPO Underpricing and After-Market Liquidity, The Review of financial
        studies 19, 381-421.
Eurostat, 2022, Euro/ECU exchange rates - annual data.
Fama, E., F., 1985, What's different about banks?, Journal of Monetary Economics 15, 29-39.
Fitza, M., Dean, T., J., 2016, How much do VCS and underwriters matter? A comparative
        investigation of venture capitalist and underwriter effects on IPO underpricing, Venture
        Capital 18, 95-114.
Grinblatt, M., Hwang, C.Y., 1989, Signaling and the pricing of new issues, Journal of Finance 44,
       393–420.
Infineon Technologies AG, 2001, The European Securities and Markets Authority,
        Prospectus register.
Ljungqvist, A., 2007, IPO Underpricing, Handbook of Corporate Finance, Vol. 1, 5-17.
Massa, M., Rehman, Z., 2008, Information flows within financial conglomerates: Evidence from the
        banks–mutual funds relation, Journal of Financial Economics 86, 288-306.
Mister Spex SE, 2021, The European Securities and Markets Authority, Prospectus register.
Ritter, J.R., 1991, The Long-Run Performance of Initial Public Offerings, The Journal of Finance,
        46,3-27.
Rock, K., 1986, Why new issues are underpriced, Journal of Financial Economics 15, 187–212.

                                        25
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

Schenone, C., 2004, The Effect of Banking Relationships on the Firm’s IPO Underpricing, Journal of
        Finance 6, 2903-2958.
The European Parliament and the Council of the European Union, 2022, Directive 2003/71/EC of
       the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 November 2003 on the prospectus to be
        published when securities are offered to the public or admitted to trading and amending
       Directive 2001/34/EC.
The World Bank, 2022, Inflation, consumer prices (annual %) - Euro area. International Monetary
        Fund, International Financial Statistics and data files.
Welch, I., 1989, Seasoned offerings, imitation costs, and the underpricing of initial public offerings,
        Journal of Finance 44, 421–449.
Welch, I., 1992, Sequential sales, learning and cascades, Journal of Finance 47, 695–732.
Westerholm, P.J., 2007, Industry Clustering in Nordic Initial Public Offering Markets, International
       Review of Finance 6, 25–41.

                                        26
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

                                Appendix

Figure AI indicates that unmatched control units are clustered around lower levels of the
propensity score distribution, and matched control units are dispersed more evenly across
propensity scores. The propensity scores for matched treated units and for matched control
units indicate that the treatment group and the control group have similar distributions.

                                 Figure AI
 The sample distribution of propensity scores across unmatched treated units, matched
           treated units, matched control units and unmatched control units
This figure presents the distribution of propensity scores across IPO-firms allocated to groups based
on the Could dummy variable as defined in Section III.B. The propensity score matching method
matches propensity scores of treated units and control units, resulting in a minimized distance
between the propensity score of matched treated units and matched control units. The figure shows
that matched observations in treated and control groups are distributed evenly across the propensity
score interval. Further, the unmatched control units are all concentrated at the lower end of the
propensity score distribution.

                                       Figure AII
 Mean in IPO characteristic covariates against the level of propensity score for treated
                                and control groups
The two diagrams below each plot the mean (solid lines) of an IPO characteristic against the
estimated propensity score for IPO-firms with a pre-existing banking relationship with a potential
underwriter and IPO-firms without such relationships, that is, the Could dummy variable as defined in
Section III.B. Ideally, the means of the control group and the treated group should be near each other
at each level of propensity score. The left diagram below indicates that the principal amount in IPOs
for firms in both groups are fairly similar for all propensity scores, especially for scores below 0.75.
The diagram to the right, which shows the mean proceeds amount, displays an even more profound
clustering of firms than the diagram depicting principal amount. However, the two diagrams also
reflect that there are fundamental differences in IPO characteristics between the two groups, which is
supported by Table II. More specifically, Table II depicts that principal amount and proceeds amount
between the groups belonging to the Could = 1 group and Could = 0 group are different at the 1%

                                        27
   The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

significance level. The units on the y-axis are normalized to 2021 Euro millions.

                                       Figure AIII
 Mean in firm characteristic covariates against the level of propensity score for treated
                                and control groups
The seven diagrams below each plot the mean (solid lines) of a firm characteristic against the
estimated propensity score for IPO firms with a pre-existing banking relationship with a potential
underwriter and IPO-firms without such relationships, that is, the Could dummy variable as defined in
Section III.B. Matching done well should lead to little difference in means for the treatment and
control group for each level of estimated propensity score. The diagrams below indicate that most
firm characteristics are similar for treated IPO-firms and control IPO-firms. It should be noted
however, that means are not equal across all propensity scores for both groups, something which is in
conjunction with what is reflected in Table II. The units on the y-axis are normalized to 2021 Euro
millions.

                                        28
The Effect of Banking Relationships and Prospectus Transparency on IPO Underpricing

                                     29