ACTIVE VERSUS PASSIVE

DOES INCREASED INVESTMENTS IN PASSIVE FUNDS  HAVE
AN EFFECT ON ACTIVE FUND PERFORMANCE?

ELLIOT CORELL

JACOB HJELMSTEDT

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2022
Active versus Passive
Does increased investments in passive funds have an effect on active fund performance?

Abstract:
In recent decades, there has been a shift towards investing in passively managed funds.
Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) describe in their theoretical paper how the share of uninformed
investors is positively correlated to the utility of being informed. Our hypothesis, based on
Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) is that the excess returns of actively managed funds are
positively correlated to the market proportion of passively invested capital. Using a bivariate
regression model, we perform an empirical analysis of whether the excess performance of
actively managed U.S. funds and the market proportion of passively invested capital are
correlated. Our analysis did not find any significant results of the correlation existing when
analyzing the entire sample of funds.  When analyzing the correlation using smaller
subsamples of funds, we found some results indicating a negative correlation, contrary to our
hypotheses.

Keywords:
   Index fund, Mutual fund, alpha, passive investment, active investment
Authors:
   Elliot Corell (24604)
   Jacob Hjelmstedt (24685)
Tutors:
   Peter Alexander Aleksziev, Visiting Teacher, Department of Finance
Examiner:
   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance
Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Elliot Corell and Jacob Hjelmstedt, 2022
 1.    Introduction
     1.1.    Background
Recent decades have seen a shift in the allocation of capital invested in actively managed
funds compared to passively managed funds. In the U.S., passively managed funds went from
making up only 2% of the market in 1993 to over 40% in 2021.  The trend has been ongoing
for a long time following influential research (Carhart, 1997) (Malkiel, 1995) (Jensen, 1968)
being critical to the value added by active fund managers. After the 2008 financial crisis
where actively managed funds faced especially large losses (Morningstar, 2019), the market
proportion of passive investments increased more rapidly.

Figure 1:

Authors’ visualization of morningstar direct data
Figure 1 illustrates the market proportion of passively invested capital in the U.S. market. On the left axis is the market
proportion of passively invested capital expressed in percent. On the right axis is the aggregate TNA of all actively and
passively managed funds respectively each year expressed in billions of dollars. The analysis in this paper will cover the
period 2011-2021.

One of the most influential papers on active fund performance provides data suggesting that
the managers’ stockpicking talents have no explanatory value for the persistent success of
funds but possibly for persistent underperformance of funds (Carhart, 1997). Other research
shows that active fund managers have stockpicking skills that allows them to hold stocks that
outperform the market, although the actively managed funds still underperform the market
due to costs such as high transaction fees and other expenses (Wermers, 2000).

Under the assumption that the efficient market hypothesis holds, there should be no possible
value to be added by active fund managers as the markets are informationally efficient, prices
perfectly reflect all available information, and there is nothing to be gained by gathering
information. It has however been reasoned that such markets are impossible due to the
Grossman-Stiglitz paradox as there would be no reason to gather information, and prices
could as such not perfectly reflect all available information (Grossman & Stiglitz, 1980).
Instead, it is possible that while the financial markets are mostly informationally efficient,
price irregularities can appear for shorter periods of time for investors gathering information
to exploit (Malkiel, 2003) in accordance with the equilibrium for disequilibrium model
(Grossman & Stiglitz, 1980).

The recent trend of increasingly passive investing could result in the market prices not fully
reflecting all available information if it meant that the proportion of informed investors
compared to uninformed investors decreased (Grossman & Stiglitz, 1980).  There would then
be a less efficient market where exploitable price irregularities may appear more often.
Arbitrage opportunities emerging from passively managed funds has also been the topic of
more recent research. Ben-David, Franzoni and Moussawi (2018) explore in a recent article
how passively managed ETFs increase the volatility of the underlying assets and how active
investors may exploit the arbitrage opportunities that emerge from this practice.
 2.    Literature  &  Theoretical  background
     2.1.    Active  Management Ability
There has been a lot of research done investigating whether or not managers of actively
managed funds add any value. One of the most influential early papers on the subject is
Jensen (1968), where, for the first time, fund managers are not only compared to other fund
managers in order to find out if some managers perform better than others, but are instead
compared to an absolute measure to find out if they, on aggregate, add any value at all. The
results of this paper are very critical towards the value added by fund managers as it finds
that, not only, do fund managers as an aggregate underperform the market, but there is in
addition no individual manager who significantly outperforms what would be expected from
a random chance (Jensen, 1968).

Following Jensen’s research, other papers came to similar critical conclusions regarding the
value added by fund managers. Malkiel (1995), after a wave of research positive to active
fund management, researched the subject taking into account survivorship bias, which he
deemed more important than others had estimated.  The paper reaches the conclusion that
active fund managers on aggregate underperform and that even though considerable
performance persistence was observed in the 70s, there was no consistency in the 80s
(Malkiel, 1995). In the cases where actively managed funds outperformed the market, it was
found that other factors besides manager talents could explain the persistent overperformance
and that only persistent underperformance remained an anomaly (Carhart, 1997).

Another strand of the research, on the other hand, provides evidence in support of active fund
managers possessing some stock-picking talents. Grinblatt and Titman (1989, 1993),
Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers (1995) and Daniel et al. (1997) all find that mutual funds tend
to select stocks that outperform both the market and passive benchmarks of stocks with
similar characteristics.  What differs between this strand of research and research critical of
active fund management is that those critical of active fund management analyze the entire
fund portfolio return whilst those showing stock-picking skills of fund managers analyze only
the individual equity holdings of funds.

Finally, Wermers (2000) attempts to bridge the gap between the two aforementioned strands
of research analyzing both equity holdings of mutual funds, their gross returns, as well as
their net returns to investors. By merging the CRSP database with the CDA Investment
Technologies database, Wermers (2000) is able to decompose mutual fund returns into
stock-picking talent, characteristic selectivity, timing of the stocks held, trading costs and
expenses.  The main finding of the paper is that the gross returns of equity in mutual funds do
outperform the market, but the net returns to investors still underperform due to transaction
costs, expenses and other holdings (Wermers, 2000).

      2.2.    Efficient  Markets  &  Passive  Investing
A common assumption in finance is that the efficient market hypothesis holds, that markets
are informationally efficient and prices of securities perfectly reflect all available
information. Such markets are proven to be an impossibility by the Grossman-Stiglitz
paradox as there would be no profit to be gained by gathering information and as such no
new information would be gathered (Grossman & Stiglitz, 1980).  They instead propose a
model where there is an equilibrium for disequilibrium so that prices only partially reflect the
information of informed individuals so that those who spend resources to obtain information
are compensated (Grossman & Stiglitz, 1980).  This prediction is supported by Malkiel (2003)
where he concludes that pricing irregularities may appear and even persist under short
periods of time for arbitrageurs to take advantage of as markets cannot be perfectly
informationally efficient (Malkiel, 2003). In their model, Grossman and Stiglitz (1980)
predict that as the share of uninformed investors rises, the utility of gathering information to
become an informed investor increases.

The upwards trend in passive investing’s effect on market efficiency has been investigated by
Ben-David et al. (2018). In their paper they provide data suggesting that exchange traded
funds (ETFs) increase the volatility of the underlying asset (Ben-David et al., 2018). In
addition, they explain how this might be exploited by investors to earn arbitrage profits
(Ben-David et al., 2018).  The research by Ben-David et al. (2018) suggests a way in which an
increase in passive investing may benefit active investors, as reasoned by Grossman and
Stiglitz (1980). Other research made on the same topic has taken a theoretical approach and
has arrived at an opposite conclusion (Bhattacharya & O’Hara, 2018) (Malamud, 2016).
Bhattacharya and O’Hara (2018) find that while ETF trading may lead to pricing distortions
in individual securities, it will, on aggregate, move prices closer to fundamentals. In a similar
vein, Malamud (2016) reasons how ETFs may reduce volatility and comovement of some
assets.

Another recent paper written on the subject of the impact of shifting towards passive
investing is Anadu et al. (2020).  Their paper describes the effect that the shift from active to
passive investing seen in recent decades has on different index-inclusion effects and financial
stability. Anadu et al. (2020) elaborate on the effects on volatility, described by Ben-David et
al. (2018), Bhattacharya and O’Hara (2018), and Malamud (2016), that ETFs have and also
discuss the effects that a shift to passive investing has on valuation, liquidity, comovement of
returns and comovement of liquidity. Anadu et al. (2020) find mixed results on the impact
that the shift towards passive investing has had on these different index inclusion effects.
Some mechanisms associated with increased passive investing have increased the index
inclusion effects or affected financial stability negatively, whilst others have done the
opposite (Anadu et al., 2020).
 3.   Research  Question

In this paper we examine historical data on the excess performance of actively managed U.S.
mutual funds in relation to the performance of the two U.S. stock indices S&P 500 and
NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ/ARCA which, like in previous research, are used as an estimate for
the performance of passive investing (Wermers, 2000).  This data is examined in correlation to
the proportions of U.S. capital that are invested actively and passively respectively during the
same time period.

While the performance and value addition of active fund managers has been thoroughly
researched (Jensen, 1968) (Carhart, 1997) (Wermers, 2000) as well as how increased passive
investing may affect the underlying assets (Ben-David et al., 2018) (Anadu et al., 2020)
(Bhattacharya & O’Hara, 2018), there has, to our knowledge, not been any research
examining if actively managed funds perform better when the market proportion of passively
invested capital increases.  This leads us to in this paper attempt to answer the research
question:

     Is the performance of actively managed funds correlated to the market proportion of
                                  passively invested capital?

In investigating this question, we add to existing literature by testing whether the positive
relationship between the share of uninformed, passive, investors and utility for becoming
informed (Grossman & Stiglitz, 1980) exists in practice. We also add a nuance to the
extensive previous research done on the subject of performance of actively managed funds by
examining whether an outside factor has an effect on their performance.  The results of our
research could also shed light on the observed cyclical nature of the outperformance of active
funds relative to passive funds (Hartford Funds, 2022).

Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) reason that as the share of uninformed investors in the market
increases, the utility of spending resources to become informed increases. As passively
managed funds do not gather any information about their investments, but instead only
respond to market prices, they represent the uninformed investors from Grossman and Stiglitz
(1980) in this paper. In our paper, we estimate the share of uninformed investors by the share
of passively invested capital in the market. Additionally, Malkiel (2003) argues, contrary to
the efficient market hypothesis, that exploitable price irregularities appearing for short
periods of time are possible.  That view is substantiated by the results from the empirical work
of Ben-David et al. (2018). As such, we hypothesize that an increasingly large market
proportion of passively invested capital should result in actively managed funds reaping
higher rewards for staying informed.
 4.   Methodology

To examine if a relationship exists between the market share of passively invested capital and
the performance of actively managed funds, our main analysis consists of two bivariate
regression between the two factors.  The first model regresses the excess return of actively
managed funds relative to S&P 500 over the market proportion of passively invested capital
and the second model regresses the excess return of actively managed funds relative to the
NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ/ARCA index from CRSP over the market proportion of passively
invested capital. In the regressions, the standard errors for the excess returns of active funds
are likely related to specific years and as such we cluster  the standard errors yearly in
accordance with Petersen (2009).

In addition to the regressions in our main analysis, we run additional regressions where our
sample has been divided into different subsamples. In the first one of the additional analyses
the sample is divided based on historical returns, and in the second one, the sample is divided
by Morningstar category. In the third additional analyses, the sample is divided based on
whether or not the fund is a fund of funds. Like our main analysis, additional analyses are
done twice where the excess returns of active funds are first relative to the S&P 500 index
and then the NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ/ARCA index. The standard errors are clustered by
year in the additional analyses as well.

      4.1.    Market  Proportion  of  Passively  Invested  Capital

The first variable needed to run our main regression is the average annual market proportion
of passively invested capital in the U.S. (𝑀𝑃 ). Using the data retrieved from Morningstar
                                                                                     𝑇
Direct, we calculate this proportion by dividing the average annual aggregate total net assets
(TNA) in passively managed U.S. funds ( 𝐼𝐹 ) by  the average annual aggregate  TNA of all
                                                                                    𝑇
funds. In this equation, the total  TNA of all U.S. funds is made up of 𝐼𝐹  and 𝐴𝐹 , the
                                                                                                       𝑇            𝑇
average annual aggregate TNA of all actively managed U.S. funds.
      4.2.    Returns  of  Indices

To obtain the annual returns of the index, the monthly returns have been compounded for
each year. The annual returns from passive investing have, based on Wermers (2000), been
estimated by using the annual returns ( 𝑅    ) from the S&P 500 index and the
                                                                        𝐼𝐹,  𝑇
NYSE/AMEX/Nasdaq/ARCA index as proxies. Like Wermers (2000) we use simple returns
in our analysis.  The returns of the indexes, downloaded from CRSP, are expressed in monthly
returns ( 𝑟   ) , and have been compounded monthly  to obtain the annual returns ( 𝑅    ).
                𝐼𝐹,  𝑡                                                                                                           𝐼𝐹,  𝑇

     4.3.    Performance  of Actively  Managed  Funds

The performance of actively managed funds is estimated by the excess returns of actively
managed funds ( 𝑅        ). 𝑅        is  the actively managed funds return ( 𝑅    ) above  the
                                𝐸𝑥𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠,  𝑇       𝐸𝑥𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠,  𝑇                                                               𝐴𝐹,  𝑇
returns of passive investing ( 𝑅    ).  The excess  return ( 𝑅        ) is calculated for each active
                                                      𝐼𝐹,  𝑇                                     𝐸𝑥𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠,  𝑇
fund existing in year  T.  The returns from the actively managed funds are expressed annually
when downloaded from Morningstar Direct.

     4.4.    Historical  Returns  of Actively  Managed  Funds

The compounded historical return (𝑅           ) used in one of our additional analyses is
                                                                                𝐴𝐹,  𝐻𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙
calculated by compounding the annual return of an individual actively managed fund ( 𝑅    )
                                                                                                                                                 𝐴𝐹,  𝑇
over the years 2011, 2012 and 2013.  The historical return is calculated for all actively
managed funds in our dataset which have returns in all three of those years.
 5.    Data
      5.1.    Data  Collection
We collected the historical data on U.S. mutual funds from Morningstar Direct. The dataset
from Morningstar Direct covers annual data on fund returns as well as what percentage of
their assets are allocated to U.S. equity, U.S. bonds, bonds and cash in 2021 for U.S. mutual
funds between January 1, 2011 and December 31, 2021. In addition, the dataset shows if the
fund is actively or passively managed, whether or not the fund is a fund of funds as well as
what Morningstar category the fund has.  The annual returns given by Morningstar Direct are
expressed net of any management, administrative or 12b-1 fees, and other costs taken out of
fund assets but they do not account for any sales charges.  The Morningstar Direct dataset
used for data on mutual funds does have a survivorship bias, meaning that it only includes
funds still surviving at the end of 2021.

As our estimation of the performance of passive investing is based on Wermers (2000), the
data collection for the returns of passive indices was obtained from the same source, CRSP.
From CRSP we obtained value weighted monthly returns including dividends for both the
S&P 500 Index and the NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ/ARCA index between January 1, 2011 and
December 31, 2021.

The data on the proportions of actively and passively invested capital in the market was
gathered from Morningstar Direct. From Morningstar Direct, we collected data on the
average annual aggregate TNA of all U.S. funds between 1993 and 2021, split into actively
and passively managed funds.

     5.2.    Sample
To only include relevant funds, some of the mutual funds gathered from Morningstar Direct
have been excluded from our analysis.

To only obtain funds that are actively managed, we have excluded all mutual funds that are
not categorized as having an active management approach on Morningstar Direct. For the
mutual funds to be comparable to the U.S. stock indices, and for it to be possible to evaluate
the performance of the managers, we have excluded funds such as international funds and
bond funds that typically hold or trade only small amounts of U.S. equity (Wermers, 2000).
Those funds were excluded by removing all funds with less than 50% of assets allocated to
U.S. equity in 2021. After excluding these funds from our dataset, we arrive at a number of
funds existing for every year during the period January 1, 2011 to December 31, 2021
displayed in Table 1.

           5.2.1.    Sample  Split  1:  Historical  performers
To extend our analysis we analyzed the historical performance of all funds existing
2011-2021. We calculate the compounded, historical return for the period 2011-2013 and
conduct regressions with the four (4) new subsamples for the period 2014-2021. 1)  The full
2014-2021 sample for reference, 2)  The top 25 % historical performers of active funds
existing 2011-2021. 3)  The bottom 25 % historical performers of active funds existing
2011-2021, and 4) the middle 50 % performers of active funds existing 2011-2021. The full
sample in this analysis differs from the sample in the main regressions in two ways. First of
all, it only covers the period 2014-2021 instead of 2011-2021. Secondly, It only contains
funds which have historical returns in the years 2011-2013. After excluding these funds from
our dataset, we arrive at a number of funds existing for every year during the period January
1, 2014 to December 31, 2021 displayed in Table 2. As only funds with returns in 2011, 2012
and 2013 are included in this sample and since our dataset has a survivorship bias, the
number of funds in each subsample does not change over the years.
           5.2.2.    Sample  Split  2:  Morningstar  categories
In the second additional analysis, our sample is divided into subsamples based on their
Morningstar categories. After exclusions, our dataset contains actively managed funds with
43 different Morningstar categories.  These categories were grouped into seven (7) different
Morningstar category groups based on how they invest. The groups are 1) US Large-Cap
Equity, 2) US Medium-Cap Equity, 3) US Small-Cap Equity, 4) US Unknown Equity, 5)
World Equity, 6) Sector and 7) Target Date. The funds in the US Large-Cap Equity, US
Medium-Cap Equity and US Small-Cap Equity groups invest in the equity of large, medium
and small U.S. companies respectively.  The funds in the US Unknown Equity group invest in
the equity of U.S. companies without having a certain size criteria. The funds in the World
Equity group invests in equity from companies from all over the world, although due to our
exclusion criterias, they all have over 50% of funds allocated to U.S. equity.  The funds in the
Sector group invest in equity within a certain sector.  The funds in the  Target Date group all
invest to achieve an optimal risk return blend with a certain future target date in mind. After
excluding these funds from our dataset, we arrive at a number of funds existing for every year
during the period January 1, 2011 to December 31, 2021 displayed in Table 3.

           5.2.3.    Sample  Split  3:  Fund  of  Funds
As  a  third  additional  analysis,  we  divide  our  original  sample  into  two  (2)  different
subsamples  based  on  whether  or  not  the  fund  is  a  fund  of  funds.  Using  the  binary  fund
of  funds  status  provided  by  Morningstar  Direct,  the  full  dataset  is  divided  into  1)
Funds  of  Funds  and  2) All  Funds  Excluding  Funds  of  Funds.  After excluding these
funds from our dataset, we arrive at a number of funds existing for every year during the
period January 1, 2011 to December 31, 2021 displayed in Table 4.
      5.3.    Variables
We have performed our bivariate regressions using a formula defined as following:

The dependent variable in our bivariate regressions, the excess return of active funds relative
to the proxies for index funds (the first proxy is the S&P 500 index and the second proxy is
the CRSP NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ/ARCA index) is expressed as an annual percentage. The
excess return in regression one is calculated as the annual return of each active fund
subtracted with the annual return of the S&P 500 Index return for each period,  T.  The excess
return in regression two is calculated as the annual return of each active fund subtracted with
the annual return of the NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ/ARCA index from CRSP each period, T.
The independent variable is the market proportion of passive investments and is the same in
both regressions. It is calculated as the amount invested in passively managed funds divided
with the sum invested in actively managed funds and passively managed funds for each
period. In both bivariate regressions, the dependent and explanatory variables are expressed
as percentages.
      5.4.    Descriptive  Statistics

Table 5 displays the summary statistics for the variables used in our bivariate regression
model, distributed over the time period 2011-2021.  The market proportion of passively
invested capital increases each year of our analysis with it holding a 22,78% share in 2011
and a 44,81% share in 2021.  The number of actively managed funds in our sample has also
increased each year of our analysis from 3759 in 2011 to 4660 in 2021. In our regressions,
fund level excess returns are used.  The averages of the fund level excess returns for each
given year are presented in table 5.  The average excess return of the actively managed funds
in relation to the stock indices used for passive investments showed mixed results with some
years showing the actively managed funds yielding higher returns and some years showing
them yielding lower returns.
 6.    Empirical Analysis
     6.1.    Main  Regression

The results of the bivariate regression analysis for actively managed funds’ excess return in
relation to both the S&P 500 index and the NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ/ARCA index against
the market proportion of passively invested capital for the period 2011-2021 are shown in
table 6.  The regression generates similar results when the market proportion of passively
invested capital is regressed with the excess return of active funds relative to the two
respective indices. Regression 1 (S&P500), generates an estimate for the MP coefficient of
-0,198, similar to the -0,199 estimate of regression 2 (NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ/ARCA). The
adjusted R-squared of regression 1 is 0,014 and the regression 2 adjusted R-squared is 0,012.
Finally, both regressions have a slightly positive estimate for the intercept, 0,059 in
regression 1 and 0,076 in regression 2. However, both regressions have high p-values for both
the estimate of the MP coefficient as well as the estimate of the intercept. As such, the results
from our two main regressions are not significant and there are no takeaways from the results
other than that it is not significant.

      6.2.    Additional  Regressions
           6.2.1.    Subsample:  Historical  Returns,  2014-2021
To extend our analysis, we divide our main sample into subsamples based on the funds
historical performance i.e. the funds compounded return for the period 2011-2013. We create
four subsamples, 1) all active mutual funds existing 2014-2021, 2) top 25 % historical
performers, 3) Bottom 25 % historical performers, 4) Middle 50 % historical performers.
In the S&P 500 regressions of the subsamples based on historical returns, presented in table
7, we find that the market proportion of passively invested capital is negatively correlated
with the excess return of active funds for the period 2014-2021 in the cases where the results
are significant.  The MP coefficient is -0,723 for the full sample and it is significant at the 10
% level.  The regression for the full sample had an adjusted R squared of 0,09.  The results
from subsamples 2 and 3 suggests that the top 25 % historically performing funds are
negatively correlated to the market proportion of passive investments, as their coefficient is
-0,639 significant at the 5 % level with an adjusted R squared of 0,071, and the bottom 25 %
are also negatively correlated with a coefficient of -0,829 significant at the 20 % level with an
adjusted R squared of 0,094. Finally the middle 50% of funds based on historical
performance had an MP estimate of -0,711 significant at the 20% level and an adjusted R
squared of 0,101. All four of the regressions generated significant positive estimates for the
intercept of the model.  The estimate for the intercept of the full sample is 0,267 and is
significant at the 10% level.  The estimate for the intercept of the top 25% is 0,245 and is
significant at the 5% level.  The estimate for the intercept of the bottom 25% is 0,292 and is
significant at the 20% level.  The estimate for the intercept of the middle 50% is 0,266 and is
significant at the 10% level.  These estimates for the intercept being positive suggest that on
average, active funds outperform passive indices when MP  is 0.
In the NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ/ARCA subsample regressions, presented in table 8, the
results are not as significant as in the regressions of active funds excess returns relative to the
S&P 500 index. The subsample for top 25 % performers is significant at the 20% level, with
results similar to those of the S&P 500 regression, with a MP coefficient of -0,645 and an
adjusted R squared of 0,067. All other estimates for the MP coefficient in this set of
regressions are not significant. However, in these regressions we find three significant
positive estimates for the intercept as well.  The full sample has an estimate for the intercept
of 0,286, significant at the 20% level.  The top 25% sample has an estimate for the intercept of
0,264, significant at the 10% level.  The middle 50% sample has an estimate for the intercept
of 0,285, significant at the 20% level. Once again, these results of the intercepts suggest that
on average, active funds outperform passive indices when MP  is 0.

           6.2.2.    Subsample:  Morningstar  Categories,  2011-2021
For our second additional regression, our original sample has been divided into different
subsamples based on their Morningstar category. Our original sample contained funds
belonging to 43 different Morningstar categories which have been grouped based on their
investment strategies to form 7 subsamples 1) US Large-Cap Equity, 2) US Medium-Cap
Equity, 3) US Small-Cap Equity, 4) US Unknown Equity, 5) World Equity, 6) Sector, 7)
Target Date.
When divided into these subsamples, most of the generated results are not significant and
there is as such nothing to interpret based on those results. However, table 9 shows that when
the excess return is relative to the S&P 500 index, the estimate for the MP coefficient in the
US Small-Cap Equity subsample is significant at the 20% level. That MP estimate has a value
of -0,248 and the regression has an adjusted R-squared of 0,021.  This indicates that the
market proportion of passive investments and the excess returns of funds investing in U.S.
Small-Cap Equity relative to the S&P 500 index have a negative relationship.  These results
should however be interpreted carefully as a significance on the 20% level is relatively weak.

In addition, both table 9 and table 10 show a strong significance for the estimates of the MP
coefficient and the intercept in the Target Date subsample. In both regressions, this subsample
has a positive MP coefficient and a negative intercept, both of which have p-values showing
that the estimates are significant at the 5% level. In addition, the adjusted r-squared of the
first regression is 0,914 and that of the second regression is 0,965, indicating a strong
explanatory value of the market proportion on the excess returns. However, while both
regressions have 104 observations, the funds present in this subsample only have returns
documented in 2020 and 2021.  This is an issue as we have clustered the standard errors by
year, and even if clustered on the correct dimension, too few clusters will create biased
standard errors and a too small confidence interval (Petersen, 2009). As there are only two
clusters in the target date category, the bias will be very large (Petersen, 2009).

          6.2.3.    Subsample:  Fund  of  Funds,  2011-2021
For our third additional regression analysis, we have divided our original sample based on
whether or not the fund is a fund of funds. Based on the fund of funds status in the
Morningstar Direct database, our sample has been divided into 2 subsamples 1) Funds of
Funds and 2) All Funds Excluding Funds of Funds.

When the original sample is divided based on whether or not the fund is a fund of funds, the
regressions do not generate any significant results in either of the subsamples, no matter
which of the two passive indexes the returns of the active funds are relative to. As such there
are no conclusions to be drawn from these regressions apart from that the results are not
significant.
 7.   Discussion  &  Implications

Due to the low significance in both of the main regression analyses, we cannot reject that the
share of passively invested capital in the market is negatively or not correlated to excess
returns of actively managed funds. In our additional regression analyses, we do however find
some significant results. In our subsamples based on historical returns, we find significant
results indicating a negative relationship between the market proportion of passive
investments and the excess return of actively managed funds relative to passive indices. In
the regression analysis where the sample has been divided by morningstar category, however,
we find that that same relationship is positive for actively managed funds investing to achieve
a perfect blend of risk and return for a target date in the future. As previously discussed, due
to the target date funds only having returns for 2020 and 2021, those results are biased and
have a too small confidence interval (Petersen, 2009).

The simplest answer as to why our main regression is not significant is that the market
proportion has no effect on the excess returns of actively managed funds.  There are, however,
other possible reasons as to why the results were not significant which leave room for the
market proportion of passively managed investments to have an impact on the excess returns
of actively managed funds. One aspect of our research that could cause our main regression
to not be significant is the broad scope of the dependent variable, the excess return of actively
managed funds. There are many factors, such as momentum (Jegadeesh & Titman, 1993),
turnover ratio (Wermers, 2000), size and book-to-market equity (Carhart, 1997), affecting the
excess returns. It is as such possible that the market proportion of passively invested capital
does in fact affect the excess returns but that the magnitude of the effect is much smaller
relative to the other factors, resulting in its effect not being distinguishable as the other
variables are not included. If that were the case, having dependent factors directly
representing the stock picking talents of the active fund managers, such as the characteristic
selectivity measure and characteristic timing measure from Wermers (2000) might more
accurately capture the effect that the market proportion has on the performance of the fund.
Alternatively, the other factors could be included into the regression to distinguish what each
factor’s effect on the excess return is.

The significant estimates for the MP coefficient from our first subsample tests are negative,
contrary to our hypotheses as well as what would be expected based on Grossman and
Stiglitz (1980).  The results do however raise the question of causality in the relationship
between the market proportion and excess returns. As we, with our data, were unable to
research causality in our investigated relationship, we were limited to examining the
correlation. With this in mind, it is possible that, rather than the increasing market proportion
causing the excess returns to decrease, there is a reverse causality where the decreasing
excess returns of active funds are what drives the increasing market proportion of actively
invested capital. If actively managed funds underperform as described by, amongst others,
Carhart (1997), then more investors would opt to instead invest their capital through passive
vessels for investments.

Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) do however provide some possible instances that could result in
a scenario such as the one observed in our first subsample tests. First of all, if the cost of
information increased, the equilibrium share of informed investors would decrease and more
investors would then choose to be uninformed. If the cost of information increased at one, or
multiple, points of our time period, you would observe a transitional period where the share
of uninformed investors increases and the excess returns of informed investors decreases. In
addition, if the quality of the information gathered by informed individuals increases, the
whole price system would become more informative, increasing the utility of both informed
and uninformed investors, which has an ambiguous effect on the equilibrium share of
informed investors where it could both increase and decrease. Finally, the degree of noise
interfering with the information conveyed by the price system has an inverse relationship
with how informative the price system is, meaning that if the degree of noise decreases, the
price system will become more informative and the utility of being uninformed increases. If
any of these three scenarios did occur, it could have affected the equilibrium share of
informed investors during the analyzed time period and our observations could be explained
within the equilibrium for disequilibrium model (Grossman & Stiglitz, 1980).

Finally, our dataset having a survivorship bias may have had major effects on our results.
Malkiel (1995) establishes that survivorship bias in the data used for analysis of mutual fund
performance can have a significant impact on the results.  The survivorship bias will create a
positive bias on the historical returns. With our analyzed time period stretching from 2011 to
current day (2021), the bias will be the greatest in the early years and decrease as it
approaches the present day.  This may explain two of the odd findings in our analysis. First of
all we find that the intercept for our regressions is positive when it is significant.  This implies
that, contrary to what is commonly accepted and found in previous research (Jensen, 1968)
(Carhart, 1997) (Wermers, 2000), on average, actively managed funds net of management
and administration fees outperform passive indices when there is no effect from the market
proportion. With the survivorship bias in mind, this result is however not as odd as it creates a
bias in favor of actively managed funds. Secondly, it is also possible that the survivorship
bias may have affected the MP coefficient being negative in our significant results as the
magnitude of the survivorship bias would be expected to be greater in the earlier years of the
analysis. With the market proportion of passively managed capital increasing every year of
our analysis compared to the previous year, the magnitude of the survivorship bias would be
expected to have a negative relationship with the market proportion.
 8.    Limitations

As established in the discussion, there are multiple factors affecting the excess return apart
from the market proportion. With these factors not being included in our regression, there is a
strong possibility that our analysis has an omitted variable bias where the effect of these
omitted variables are attributed to the market proportion. Including factors such as the
momentum (Jegadeesh & Titman, 1993) or turnover ratio (Wermers, 2000) into our model
could have decreased this bias. Although, due to lack of data we are unable to include them in
this paper. However, it is not certain that the inclusion of these factors would result in a lower
omitted variable bias, as it is also a possibility that the omitted variable bias would increase
as we do not know the complete set of variables affecting the excess return (Clarke, 2005).

The results in our paper should be interpreted very carefully as the survivorship bias in our
data could have a significant impact on the results (Malkiel, 1995).  The Morningstar Direct
database from which the data on the mutual funds is collected, is not survivorship bias free
for the time period that we analyze which likely has an impact on our results.

The time periods we could analyze in our research were limited by what data the databases
we had access to had. We used Morningstar Direct to gather the data needed to calculate the
market proportions of passively invested capital each year.  That dataset, however, only
extended back to 1993 for its first year of data and then continued on up until 2021.  This
meant that we were unable to analyze the same time period as Wermers (2000). The
timeframe of Morningstar Direct datasets limited us further as their data on the returns of
U.S. mutual funds only stretched back to 2011, meaning that in the end our analysis covered
the time period 2011-2021.

We were further limited as we did not have access to the CDA database used by Wermers
(2000) to create the combined database of mutual funds. Without the data from this database,
we could not recreate the characteristic selection and characteristic timing measures
(Wermers, 2000) which more accurately represents the stock picking talents. As we could not
analyze the same time period as Wermers (2000), the lack of access to the CDA database
meant that we were limited to using excess returns of actively managed funds relative to the
returns of passive investing as an estimate of the performance of active fund managers.
The annual returns given by Morningstar Direct are expressed net of any management,
administrative or 12b-1 fees, and other costs taken out of fund assets but they do not account
for any sales charges. Fees such as these are important to take into account when evaluating
active fund performance as active funds outperform passive investments before they are
applied but not after in Wermers (2000) paper. While it does have an impact on our data that
these fees are included, as they undermine the performance of active fund managers, we
assume that these fees remain constant over our 11 year period. As we do not evaluate
whether or not active fund managers outperform the market, but rather whether or not their
performance varies depending on the market proportion of passive investments, the fees
should not affect our analysis as long as they remain constant.
 9.    Further Analysis

To extend upon our studied variable, it could be interesting to calculate the measures used in
Wermers (2000), i.e. CS, CT and AS and determine whether any of those measures
specifically can be explained by the market proportion of passive investments. Furthermore,
an interesting extension of the analysis could be to test if the Carhart Measure is correlated to
the market proportion of passively invested capital.  The Carhart alpha is not as broad of a
measure as the excess return of active funds which could increase the significance in an
analysis of the market proportion of passive investments effect.

Our research only calculating the correlation between the two factors leaves some questions
unanswered. One of the questions raised from our research is whether the market proportion
of passive investments in fact affect the excess return negatively or if the inverse is true that
the decreasing excess returns are what causes the market proportion to rise. New research
using more extensive data over a longer time period aimed to answer this question would be a
very interesting addition to our research.

According to Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), an increased proportion of uninformed investors
would only affect the performance of informed investors indirectly through the decreased
informational efficiency of the market. It would therefore be an interesting extension to
instead of examining excess returns, a symptom of informational efficiency, examine a factor
measuring informational efficiency directly in relation to the market proportion of passive
investments.

To further investigate whether or not the equilibrium for disequilibrium model (Grossman &
Stiglitz, 1980) holds despite our observations, examining factors such as cost of information,
noise in the price system and quality of information would be interesting. All of these three
factors could move the equilibrium share of informed investors (Grossman & Stiglitz, 1980)
and could explain why some of our observations are not in accordance with the equilibrium
for disequilibrium model.
References

Anadu, K., Kruttli, M., McCabe, P & Osambela, E.,  The Shift From Active to Passive
Investing: Potential Risks to Financial Stability?  Financial Analysts Journal, May. Vol 76(4).

Bhattacharya, A. & O’Hara, M., 2020. ETFs and Systemic Risks.  CFA Institute Research
Foundation Brief, January, 2020.

Ben-David, I., Franzoni, F. & Moussawi, R., 2018. Do ETFs Increase Volatility?  The Journal
of Finance, December, Vol. 73(6).

Carhart, M. M., 1997. On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance.  The Journal of Finance,
March, Vol. 52(1).

Clarke, K., 2005. The Phantom Menace: Omitted Variable Bias in Econometric Research.
Conflict Management and Peace Science, Vol. 22(4).

Daniel, K., Grinblatt, M., Titman, S. & Wermers, R., 1997. Measuring Mutual Fund
Performance with Characteristic-Based Benchmarks.  The Journal of Finance, July,  Vol.
52(3).

Grinblatt, M. & Titman, S., 1989. An Analysis of Quarterly Portfolio Holdings.  The Journal
of Business, July,  Vol. 62(3).

Grinblatt, M. & Titman, S., 1993. Performance Measurements Without Benchmarks: An
Examination of Mutual Fund Returns.  The Journal of  Business, January, Vol. 66(1).

Grinblatt, M., Titman, S. & Wermers, R., 1995. Momentum Investment Strategies, Portfolio
Performance, and Herding: A Study of Mutual Fund Behavior.  The American Economic
Review, December, Vol. 85(5).

Grossman, S. J. & Stiglitz, J. E., 1980. On the Impossibility of Informationally Efficient
Markets.  The American Economic Review, June, Vol.  70(3).
Hartford Funds (2022, February).  The Cyclical Nature of  Active & Passive Investing:
https://www.hartfordfunds.com/dam/en/docs/pub/whitepapers/WP287.pdf

Jegadeesh, N & Titman, S., 1993. Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers:
Implications for Stock Market Efficiency.  The Journal  of Finance, March, Vol 48(1).

Jensen, M. C., 1968. The Performance of Mutual Funds in the Period 1945-1964.  The
Journal of Finance, May, Vol. 23(2).

Malamud, S., 2016. A Dynamic Equilibrium Model of ETFs. CEPR Discussion Paper No.
DP11469.

Malkiel, B. G., 1995. Returns from Investing in Equity Mutual Funds.  The Journal of
Finance. June, Vol. 50(2).

Malkiel, B. G., 2003.  The Efficient Market Hypothesis and Its Critics.  Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Winter, Vol. 17(1).

Morningstar (2019, June 12).  A Look at the Road to  Asset Parity Between Passive and Active
U.S. Funds:  https://www.morningstar.com/insights/2019/06/12/asset-parity

Petersen, M., 2009. Estimating Standard Errors in Finance Panel Data Sets: Comparing
Approaches,  The Review of Financial Studies, January,  Vol. 22(1).

Wermers, R., 2000. Mutual Fund Performance: An Empirical Decomposition into
Stock-Picking Talent, Style, Transactions Costs, and Expenses.  The Journal of Finance,
August, Vol. 55(4).