TO DISCLOSE, OR NOT TO
DISCLOSE, THAT IS THE
QUESTION

THE IMPACT OF ESG DISCLOSURE ON RETAIL INVESTORS
IN AN IPO SETTING

ALFRED HOLMBERG

RICHARD HAIMOV

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2022
To Disclose, or Not to Disclose, That Is the Question: The Impact of ESG Disclosure
on Retail Investors in an IPO Setting

Abstract:

   With limited research covering how the willingness to invest among retail investors
   is affected by IPO candidates disclosing their ESG information, this paper aims to
   contribute to the literature by using data obtained from an online questionnaire.
   Using the questionnaire, an experiment is constructed to investigate the investment
   decisions of retail investors when confronted with companies that disclose various
   ESG information to different extents in an IPO setting. At a 5% significance level,
   the results point in the direction that ESG disclosure gives an IPO candidate an
   advantage in attracting retail investors if the candidate’s ESG performance is better
   than the performance of its peer. However, disclosure exhibits no advantages if the
   underlying ESG performance of the IPO candidate is relatively poor. This therefore
   denounces the idea that a decrease in the degree of information asymmetry is always
   valued by retail investors. Moreover, this paper could not find any difference in the
   importance placed by retail investors on the different individual dimensions that
   make up ESG.

Keywords:

   ESG, Disclosure, Information asymmetry, IPO, Retail investors

Authors:

   Alfred Holmberg (24735)

   Richard Haimov (24737)

Tutors:

   Marieke Bos, Deputy Director & Researcher, Swedish House of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance, SSE

Acknowledgments:

   We would like to thank our tutor Marieke Bos for her excellent guidance, inspiration,
   and continuous feedback, as well as everyone who took their time to participate in
   our experiment and contribute to the study.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Alfred Holmberg and Richard Haimov, 2022

                                      2
                          1. Introduction

1.1. Background and Research Question

As a part of the global push toward sustainable transformation, investors exhibit a
growing interest in sustainable investment (SI), with global sustainable assets under
management having grown from USD 13.6 trillion to USD 35.3 trillion between 2012
and 2020, making up 35.9% of all assets under management globally (GSIA, 2013; GSIA
2021). Simultaneously, the global Initial Public Offering (IPO) activity has been on a
steady rise since 2019, with 2021 being a record year for IPO markets, delivering 2,682
IPOs and raising USD 608 billion (Newman and Picard, 2022; EY, 2022). Taking these
trends into account, this paper aims to study if sustainability, measured through ESG
performance, has any impact on IPOs on the level of retail investors, by setting the
following research question:

         In conjunction with an IPO, how does disclosure of information about
       the IPO candidate’s performance in regard to environmental, social, and
        governance (ESG) affect retail investors' willingness to invest? Is ESG
        information disclosure beneficial for the IPO candidate, and if so, does it
           depend on how well the candidate performs in regard to the ESG
           criteria? Also, which ESG factors are the most important to retail
                                      investors?

Retail investors are of particular interest as they seem to play an important role in the
financial markets, including the IPO markets. Cook, Kieschnick and Van Ness (2006)
argue that attracting retail investors is key for a successful IPO, as those tend to be more
bullish and increase valuations, therefore enabling institutional investors to make
satisfactory trades in conjunction with the IPO. Also, given the aforementioned rise in
interest for SI, it is reasonable to assume that a company undergoing an IPO, would find
it easier to attract retail investors by levering on the rising interest for SI, through the
disclosure of information about its own ESG performance. However, the literature
covering retail investors’ interest in ESG information disclosure and SI in IPO settings is
to our knowledge non-existent. Instead, there is related literature on these topics that is
primarily concentrated on pension- and mutual funds rather than direct equity
investments.

Therefore, by answering the set research question, this study has the potential of guiding
IPO candidates in how they should communicate with retail investors to increase their
willingness to invest, and in effect optimize the performance of their IPO, with
consideration taken to the quality of their own and peer companies’ ESG performance.

From prior studies and data, it is supported that institutional investors value good ESG
performance and disclosure of information about the ESG performance of a company. In
fact, institutional investors demand more ESG information than is currently available. A
recent CFA Institute survey among quantitative analysts and portfolio managers shows
that 52% agree that regulators should mandate firms to make ESG disclosures and 63%
argue that regulators should promote the development of ESG disclosure standards (Singh
and Peters, 2019). This demand can be explained by the fact that there is an especially
prominent information asymmetry problem for companies that are undergoing an IPO, as
the process involves the delivery of large amounts of information to the public. The
disclosure of ESG information could therefore potentially be beneficial in such settings

                                      3
and alleviate some of the information asymmetry, subsequently resulting in more accurate
firm valuations and lower underpricing (Fenili and Raimondo, 2021). Similarly, El
Ghoul, Guedhami, Kwok and Mishra (2011) provide another argument for disclosing
information about a company’s good sustainability performance. They find that firms that
perform well in regard to CSR will get more attention from the media which will reduce
the information asymmetry compared to firms that perform poorly in regard to CSR,
ceteris paribus.

Besides the information asymmetry problem, existing research has identified several
other reasons why investors perceive a value in sustainable performance. Experiments
suggest that investors perceive a positive correlation between sustainability and future
performance (Hartzmark and Sussman, 2019), which is also supported by Friede, Busch
and Bassen (2015). By performing an analysis of about 2,200 individual studies. Friede
et al. (2015) conclude that circa 90% of these studies find a nonnegative relation between
the performance on ESG criteria and corporate financial performance (CFP), of which
the majority of the studies find a positive ESG-CFP relation. Additionally identified
drivers of interest for SI, include the view that consideration for sustainability in
investments is an alternative form of risk management (Lenssen, Dentchev and Roger,
2014); expectations from markets and clients of financial institutions and corporations to
devote more attention to sustainability (Sheth, Sethia and Srinivas, 2011); and a genuine
interest among investors to create and preserve value for future generations (Lagoarde-
Segot and Paranque, 2018).

1.2. Methodology Introduction

In order to answer the research question, a quantitative research approach is used, with
the main data source consisting of an experiment based on an online self-completion
questionnaire (see Appendix 6 - The Questionnaire). The self-completion questionnaire
is deemed appropriate as it is one of the most common tools in social scientific research
(Bryman and Bell, 2011) and offers a wide range of advantages for controlling the
experiment environment. Benefits include establishing an anonymous setting, where the
test subject can feel more confident about answering truthfully (Bryman and Bell, 2019).
Thereby the risk of interviewer effects that may influence or alter the way the test subject
responds, due to the characteristics of the interviewer or the pressure to adhere to social
norms (Kreuter, 2008), is largely mitigated. This aspect is particularly important in our
case considering that the test subjects may feel that they have to show a positive attitude
towards SI in order to be in compliance with social norms.

In turn, taking into consideration the limited amount of time and resources at hand, while
at the same time ensuring a frictionless procedure for the test subject, it has been decided
to distribute the survey online. Online distribution also makes it easier to reach out across
the entire country to the population of Swedish retail investors. The Swedish population
of retail investors is specifically deemed as appropriate for the study, as the interest in
stock investments among private persons in Sweden is high, giving rise to a large and
diverse population. According to Euroclear Sweden (2021), by the end of 2020,
approximately 2.1 million Swedes owned stocks in Swedish companies, with the number
of Swedish retail investors having grown for a fifth consecutive year. Thus, the total
number of retail investors made up roughly 20% of the country’s population, together
owning ca. 1.1 billion SEK in equity capital. Also, the population of retail investors has
been shown to be fairly equally divided in terms of gender, with circa 1.3 million men
and circa 0.8 million women. Additionally, limiting the study’s scope to Sweden allows

                                      4
it to partly rely on convenience and snowball sampling methods (Bryman and Bell, 2011),
and finding test subjects by putting to use existing contact networks and spreading
invitations through word-of-mouth. Again, given the resource and time constraints, such
sampling methods have been assessed as appropriate.

Ultimately, the questionnaire was distributed to contacts on social media outlets such as
Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat, and LinkedIn, as well as among work colleagues via e-
mail. Furthermore, an invite to the survey was also sent to professionals employed at the
Swedish House of Finance, as well as posted on a Swedish forum for economy-interested
people, “Rika tillsammans”, and a Facebook group for individuals with an interest in
stocks and savings, “Aktier och Sparande”. In this way, more test subjects from the target
population could be captured, while the geographic location of the sample became more
diversified across the country. In total, 152 fully completed responses were collected by
such means, of which 28 were from the Swedish House of Finance, 23 from "Rika
tillsammans", and 7 from "Aktier och Sparande”.

1.3. Brief Results

The results of the self-completion questionnaire point towards the conclusion that
disclosure of ESG information and consequently the mitigation of information
asymmetry is not always to the benefit of the IPO candidate. The benefit of information
disclosure seems to vary depending on the quality of the disclosing candidate’s ESG
performance compared to the peer company. In instances where test subjects have to
choose between two IPO candidates that both perform poorly in regard to the ESG
criteria, with one of the companies disclosing the poor performance and the other omitting
ESG information, test subjects prefer to a larger degree the latter company and thus prefer
the company with a higher degree of information asymmetry. This result is rather striking
since it is in contrast with Baker, Boulton, Braga-Alves and Morey (2021) given their
finding that a lower degree of information asymmetry leads to a lower degree of
underpricing of an IPO, which in turn could suggest a higher attractiveness to investors.

However, in test groups where the test subjects are presented with a pair of IPO candidates
where one of the companies exhibits a good ESG performance against a poor ESG-
performing alternative, the results suggest that retail investors prefer the good ESG
performer, no matter whether the other company openly discloses its poor ESG
performance or not. In aggregate, the results might indicate that retail investors do not
value information asymmetry mitigation very highly in itself but are mostly concerned
with the appearance of the IPO candidates’ ESG performance. I.e., if the performance of
the candidate is relatively better than its peer’s, then disclosure is preferred over non-
disclosure. This result therefore points in the direction of studies such as Lagerkvist,
Edenbrandt, Tibbelin and Wahlstedt (2020) as well as Apostolakis, Kraanen and van Dijk
(2016) since they also find that when confronted with a sustainable investment and a non-
sustainable investment, retail investors prefer the sustainable investment to a larger
degree.

Finally, this study cannot show with statistical significance that retail investors view any
of the E, S, and G factors as more important and worth particular consideration when
making real-life investment decisions. But the results show that retail investors view the
performance on the three ESG factors as more important for their investment decision-
making than public disclosure of ESG information.

                                      5
                   2. Literature Overview

Beginning by looking at the literature related to the relationship between disclosure of
ESG risks and IPO underpricing, Baker et al. (2021) find that higher ESG government
ratings (as defined by MSCI) lead to a lower degree of information asymmetry in an IPO
setting. Consequently, they find a negative relationship between the ESG Government
rating and the underpricing of the IPO, leading to a relationship where a higher ESG
Government rating leads to less information asymmetry which in turn leads to a smaller
degree of underpricing in IPOs. By studying IPO underpricing, it is implied that Baker et
al. (2021) primarily capture the effects of institutional investors’ decisions for IPOs. This
thesis contributes here by firstly shifting the focus to retail investors and secondly
narrowing the scope from involving ESG government ratings to emphasizing an IPO
candidate’s own ESG performance instead, and how that affects retail investors’
willingness to invest.

Furthermore, since this thesis explicitly aims to observe the interests of retail investors
when confronted with investments with varying degrees of ESG disclosure and
performance, literature related to retail investors’ choices between conventional- and
sustainable investments has been reviewed. To begin with, Lagerkvist et al. (2020) find,
among other things, that funds using sustainable investment strategies are on average
preferred over conventional funds by retail investors in Sweden. Relating to the same
subject, Apostolakis et al. (2016) find that a majority of the respondents of their study
prefer a socially responsible portfolio over a conventional portfolio when observing the
choices of Dutch pension savers. However, one can observe that both the above papers
use investment funds instead of individual equity for their experiments and thus this thesis
further contributes by looking at individual equity instead of looking at portfolios of
several different companies.

As to which dimension of ESG is seen as most important by retail investors, the research
community is divided. Some, for instance the aforementioned Lagerkvist et al. (2020)
find that the environmental aspect is preferred over social and governance factors. Others,
for instance Pérez-Gladish, Benson and Faff (2012) find that, on the contrary, social
concerns are more important compared to environmental ones when looking at the
sentiments of Australian socially responsible investors. In this aspect, our study primarily
brings more data into this realm of research. Given that there is no consensus regarding
which dimension of ESG is perceived as the most important one, and that this also can
potentially vary between geographical regions, our thesis has the potential of bringing
more clarity to this question.

To summarize, this thesis contributes to the literature mainly in three ways: Firstly, by
looking particularly at retail investors’ investment decisions in an IPO setting with
varying degrees of ESG disclosure. Secondly, it also contributes by augmenting current
research on retail investors' preferences for sustainable investments by looking at equity
investments rather than pension funds/mutual funds. Lastly, it cultivates the literature
focused on the importance placed by retail investors on the different dimensions that
comprise ESG.

                                      6
                       3. Hypotheses

Based on the results and conclusions of existing research, it is anticipated that retail
investors exhibit a higher willingness to invest in IPO candidates that disclose their ESG
information, ceteris paribus. In addition, it is expected that the willingness to invest
increases even more for an IPO candidate that performs well in regard to the ESG factors.
Based on the above expectations, the following two hypotheses have been formulated for
this study:

       H1: When making equity investment decisions for IPO candidates, a majority of
       retail investors prefer to invest in IPO candidates that disclose information about
       their performance on the ESG factors, rather than IPO candidates that avoid
       disclosing this information.

       H2: A majority of retail investors prefer to invest in IPO candidates that perform
       relatively well in terms of the ESG factors, rather than otherwise comparable IPO
       candidates that perform relatively poorly in terms of ESG.

Based on these two hypotheses, it also follows that an IPO candidate that both discloses
its ESG information and perform relatively well in terms of ESG attracts retail investors
to the highest extent of all other possible combinations of disclosure and ESG
performance.

       H3: When making their investment decision, retail investors consider the
       environmental factor as the most important one in the ESG framework.

The above hypothesis is based on the fact that similarly to Lagerkvist et al. (2020), this
study involves Swedish retail investors.

Subsequently, if the above hypotheses are proven, it would suggest that in order to
increase the attractivity of an IPO candidate for retail investors, the company undergoing
the IPO should among other measures aim to disclose its performance regarding the ESG
criteria and ideally also make improvements in the ESG performance; particularly when
it comes to the IPO candidate’s environmental impact.

                4. Theoretical Frameworks

4.1. ESG versus SRI

With a global increase in awareness of sustainable development, more and more people
have started to look for ways to improve and change the world toward a more sustainable
direction. One way that has been identified is to create change by investing in companies
and organizations that prioritize sustainability. This has led to several different strategies
used to find and analyze companies on their sustainability efforts, two such strategies are
SRI and ESG investing. Even though there are no exact definitions of these strategies, an
effort has been made to highlight some of the key differences between them.

ESG investing refers to when the investor evaluates a company based on how it performs
and works with the three factors that comprise the ESG framework (Environmental,

                                      7
Social, Governance), with the belief that companies that perform well in these areas will
deliver better financial returns (CFA Institute, n.d.). Although ESG investing has evolved
out of SRI, one of the main differences between the two is that SRI is often used as a tool
for screening, where some industries such as classic “sin” industries (e.g., tobacco and
gambling) are excluded from portfolios (Michelson, Wailes, van der Laan and Frost,
2004). ESG investing, however, can be used to evaluate any company in any industry
based on how it performs and works with the three metrics. As such, one using ESG
investing might decide to invest in a tobacco company if it performs better in regard to
ESG compared to its competitors (S&P Global, 2020). The core aspects of the three ESG
factors can be summarized as (MSCI, n.d.):

        Environmental: Refers to a company’s efforts in areas, such as climate change,
        use and management of natural resources, air and water pollution, and waste
      management.

       Social: Refers to a company’s efforts in areas, such as the use and handling of
       human capital, safe and responsible products and services, and sourcing of
        materials.

       Governance: Refers to a company’s efforts in areas, such as corporate
       governance and interaction with corporate stakeholders.
4.2. Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)

CSR or Corporate Social Responsibility refers to efforts that companies take to integrate
social and environmental factors into their decision-making processes and business
operations as well as with their stakeholder interactions instead of having a sole focus on
economic factors. It can thus be seen as a management concept where the goal is to create
a balance between these perspectives (UNIDO, n.d.). Compared to ESG investing, CSR
is thus something that is done by the company itself in order to perform better in regard
to the ESG metrics, while ESG investing is a practice most commonly carried out by
investors to evaluate the company based on the ESG metrics and consequently, the
effectiveness of its CSR activities.
4.3. Initial Public Offering (IPO), Information Asymmetry, and
  Voluntary Disclosure

An Initial Public Offering (IPO) is a transaction where a private company offers its shares
to the public market for the first time (Fidelity, n.d.). Due to the nature of an IPO process
being a shift of a company going from private ownership to public ownership, the
information asymmetry between the current private investors of the firm and the wider
public is very substantial, and therefore, voluntary disclosure of private information is a
way for the firm to mitigate the existing information asymmetry (Reber, Gold and Gold,
2021). Balakrishnan, Billings, Kelly and Ljungqvist (2011) also argue that companies
view voluntary disclosure (i.e., voluntarily disclosing information) as extra important
when it comes to reducing information asymmetry for retail investors, given that they are
thought of as being even more uninformed and thus experiencing a larger information
asymmetry than institutional investors.

                                      8
               5. Data and Methodology
5.1. Ideal Empirical Setting

The ideal setting for this thesis would be to test the hypotheses in a real-life scenario. This
could have been done by randomly assigning participants to real-life scenarios where they
have to choose between two different IPO candidates with differing degrees of ESG
information disclosure and performance. The main benefits of choosing such a setting are
that it would be very realistic for the participants, their choices could have an impact on
their future returns, and the companies that they can choose between would not be
hypothetical but instead real operating entities. This would also make the results of the
study more applicable in practice since the results would not be based on hypothetical
scenarios. However, it is very difficult to find the companies to be used in a real-life
setting since they must be of very similar natures yet with different degrees of ESG
information disclosure and performance in order to be able to isolate any potential effects
that arise solely due to the ESG disclosure and ESG performance, rather than any other
factor. Due to the limitations of the ideal empirical setting, it has been chosen to use a
survey with hypothetical scenarios to generate the data needed. The construction of the
survey and the overall experiment is further described below.

5.2. Questionnaire Design

In order to study the behavior of retail investors when they make investment decisions in
conjunction with IPOs, each test subject is introduced to a hypothetical scenario where
he or she has 10,000 SEK available for investment and now has to choose one company
out of two presented, to invest the 10,000 SEK in, with a number of questions following
the exercise. Subsequently, the hypothesis testing is conducted by dividing the test
subjects into four groups, whereas three of these are treatment groups and one is a control
group (see Appendix 5 – The Flow of the Questionnaire).

Considering the complex nature of the task, there is a substantial risk of deteriorating
answer quality due to a drop in the participant’s attention and motivation - a phenomenon
called respondent fatigue (Ben-Nun, 2008; Bryman and Bell, 2011). Therefore, following
the advice of Holyk (2008), the most important section of the questionnaire, i.e., the
presentation of the two IPO candidates is placed at the start of the questionnaire, followed
by the task of choosing one company to invest in, to ensure maximal attention for this
part of the experiment.

Each company is presented using a pre-IPO one-pager. A one-pager presentation is
assessed as sufficient for the purpose of the experiment, as it has been shown that retail
investors largely ignore the IPO prospectus due to it being overwhelmingly long and
difficult to read. Retail investors instead demand summaries of key information and the
most important aspects of the company (Zoe, 2014; Price, 2017). With this in mind, it has
been decided to base the one-pager design on several sections that are usually included in
IPO prospectuses. The Corporate Finance Institute (n.d.) lists the following sections as
usually included in such prospectuses: (i) Overview and history of the company, (ii)
Services/products offered by the company, (iii) Management profile, (iv) Desired deal
structure, (v) Use of proceeds (vi) Security offering details, (vii) Financial information,
and (viii) Risks involved. Based on this list, as well as the IPO prospectus of
RevolutionRace (2021) – an online apparel retailer that completed an IPO on Nasdaq
Stockholm in 2021 – it has been decided to construct the IPO one-pager out of the

                                      9
following sections:

       (i) Overview – similar to “Overview and history of the company”,

       (ii) Management team and business model – similar to “Management profile”,
         “Services/products offered by the company” and “Use of proceeds”,

       (iii) Multiples and key ratios – similar to “Financial information” and to some
       extent, “Overview and history of the company” and,

       (iv) Sales and EBITDA development – similar to “Financial information.”

With the above structure, it can be argued that the IPO one-pagers presented to the test
subjects cover some of the most important information usually included in an IPO
prospectus, from the perspective of a retail investor, while at the same time keeping the
amount of information limited for the purpose of the experiment.

In turn, as the item order in the questionnaire can affect the response and give rise to
measurement errors (Bishop, 2008), the two one-pagers are placed directly after each
other in a randomized order, to avoid any systematic benefit for the company that is
presented first. After having read the company presentations, the test subject is asked to
rank his or her attitude towards each of the two companies according to a five-point
bipolar semantic differential scale, ranging from an “extremely negative” to an
“extremely positive attitude.” Although traditionally, semantic differential measurement
techniques involve seven-point bipolar scales (Stoutenborough, 2008), it has been
decided to apply a more Likert-like (Brill, 2008) five-point scale to simplify the
experience and decrease the risk of respondent fatigue. After considering his or her
attitude, the test subject gets to choose whether to invest the 10,000 SEK in “Company
A” or “Company B”, with the order of the choices being randomized in order to avoid
primacy effects – the tendency for respondents to choose the first choice that is presented
(Lee, 2008).

Additionally, if the test subject is presented with an ESG profiled IPO candidate, he or
she has to specify how important the “E” (emission levels, material, pesticide, and water
usage), “S” (consideration for human rights, safe workplaces, and fair wages), and “G”
(diversity of the company’s management team) dimensions of the company as well as the
company’s financial development and expansion plan were for the test subject’s
investment choice. This question is asked to potentially analyze deeper how important
the three ESG dimensions are for the investor relative to the traditional financial factors.
To measure the importance of the four factors, it was initially planned to use a five-point
Likert scale. However, considering the tendency of questionnaire respondents to agree
with presented statements regardless of their content – the so-called acquiescence bias
(Maitland, 2008; Brill, 2008), it has been decided to use an unbalanced scale that
measures the degree of importance of the factors, going from not important at all to
extremely important, rather than unimportant versus important, which is the case with a
balanced Likert scale (Brill, 2008). Additionally, “I do not know” has been added as an
answer option in order to prevent respondents from feeling forced to answer arbitrarily if
they for instance do not understand the question or do not have any opinion.

Moreover, to test the third hypothesis (H3), all participants no matter of group belonging
are asked to state how important they consider the “E”, “S”, and “G” dimensions to be

                                     10
when making real-life investment decisions. In addition, along with the ESG dimensions,
all the participants are also asked to state how important they consider the public
disclosure of information about the company’s ESG performance to be when making real-
life investment decisions. This is made to study if there are any potential discrepancies
between how important disclosure and the ESG dimensions are considered to be, as well
as relating the stated importance to the investment choices made by the participants
previously. The degree of importance is measured using the same unbalanced scale as
explained above. For both questions, in the first distribution round covering 117
participants, the order of the dimension statements is fixed. However, considering the
possibility that various response order effects, such as the primacy or recency effect may
favor either the first or last presented statements (Holbrook, 2008), the order of the
statements is randomized in the second distribution to control for such effects. The second
distribution round includes an additional 35 participants.

Finally, the respondents are provided with questions related to demographics: age,
gender, and the frequency with which one makes stock investments as a private person.
The purpose of the data collected in this section is to use it as control variables in further
tests. The demographics section is concluded by a final control question that asks about
what one had to do in the questionnaire, to control for the participants’ attention and sort
out potential participants that did not pay attention to the questionnaire.

5.3. Experiment Design

To test the three hypotheses, eight company one-pagers (two each for the four different
test groups) have been created, presenting three self-defined categories of IPO candidates
(see Appendix 4 – Categories of IPO Candidates and Their One-Pager Presentations):

       A “non-disclose and non-ESG company” (see Figure 5 in Appendix 4): This
       type of company does not consider any ESG criteria at all, with no disclosure of
       information about the company’s relatively poor ESG performance either. In line
       with this, the described mission and corporate values reflect primarily the
       ambition of delivering financial growth and creating shareholder value. In
        addition, there is no management diversity either, with the entire C-suite
       consisting of men with traditionally Swedish-sounding names.

       A “disclose and non-ESG company” (see Figure 6 in Appendix 4): Similarly,
       to the previous company type, no consideration is taken to ESG in the business
       operations and the C-suite management consists only of men with Swedish
       sounding names. However, in contrast to the previous category, the information
       about the relatively poor ESG performance is disclosed openly. The disclosure is
       made in a checklist manner relative to the one-pager of the company that is
       performing relatively well in terms of ESG in order to set a clear contrast between
       the two companies for the test subject. Also, three metrics in the "multiples and
        key ratios" section of the one-pager are substituted for ESG-relevant metrics.

      A “disclose and ESG company” (see Figure 7 in Appendix 4): A company
       from this category is supposed to perform relatively well in terms of ESG and
       disclose the information about its performance. This is communicated through the
       three ESG ratios in the “multiples and key ratios” section, as well as in the
        business model description and the vision, mission, and values of the company.

                                     11
Note that there is no “non-disclose and ESG company” since it follows that if a company
does not disclose any ESG information, it is also impossible for an investor to infer if the
company is an "ESG” or “non-ESG” type of a company. Consequently, it is assumed that
investors perceive a company that avoids disclosing any ESG information as a “non-
ESG” company per default. Note that this assumption is made solely for the purpose of
keeping the naming convention and categorization used in this thesis uniform and
logically consequent. The assumption has no impact on the one-pager design whatsoever.

The test subjects are randomly assigned to each test group (see Appendix 5 - The Flow
of the Questionnaire) in order to allow for a true experiment where it is possible to
compare the effects in the three treatment groups (Knapp, 2008). The test subjects in the
control group get to choose between two “non-disclose and non-ESG" types of companies
to control for the absence of any effects on investor preferences other than those induced
by the introduction of treatments, i.e., information disclosure and relatively good ESG
performance in the respective treatment groups.

In the first treatment group, the first hypothesis (H1) is tested by offering the test subjects
to either invest in a “non-disclose and non-ESG” or a “disclose and non-ESG” type of
company. The aim is to test for the presence of an effect on investors’ preferences
sourcing exclusively from the introduction of ESG information disclosure.

Going further, the second treatment group tests the second hypothesis (H2) by only
adding good ESG performance to the treatment and studying its effect on investors’
preferences. Accordingly, the test subjects have then to choose between investing in a
“disclose and non-ESG” or a “disclose and ESG” company.

Finally, the third treatment group combines both ESG information disclosure and
relatively good ESG performance to provide a more nuanced picture and study the
presence of any additional effects on investors’ preferences stemming from a larger
contrast between the two companies. The test is conducted by letting the test subjects
choose between a “non-disclose and non-ESG” or a “disclose and ESG” company.

                               Table 1: The Test Groups of the Experiment

                         Company A Company B              Treatment variable

Control group "non-disclose and non-ESG"  "non-disclose and non-ESG"             N/A

Treatment group 1 "non-disclose and non-ESG"     "disclose and non-ESG"         ESG info. disclosure

Treatment group 2 "disclose and non-ESG"        "disclose and ESG"            ESG performance

Treatment group 3 "non-disclose and non-ESG"       "disclose and ESG"         Disclosure & performance

An overview of the four test groups used in the experiment together with the treatments applied in each of the test
groups

                                     12
5.4. Variables

Treatment variables:

    1. If the company discloses information regarding its ESG performance or omits it

    2. If the company is performing relatively well or poorly on the ESG criteria

Control variables:

    1. Gender

   2. Age group

    3. Private investment frequency

   4. Importance of environmental aspects (ImpE)

    5. Importance of social aspects (ImpS)

   6. Importance of governance aspects (ImpG)

    7. Importance of disclosure of ESG information (ImpDiscl)

Dependent variables:

    1. How positive or negative attitudes the investors express toward each company

    2. Which company the participants choose to invest in
5.5. Statistical Methods

5.5.1. Sample Size Estimation

To start with, an important issue is to determine the appropriate sample size. For this, an
attempt has been made to estimate the population effect size of offering an ESG-profiled
investment alternative against a non-ESG-profiled alternative. In accordance with Ellis
(2010), the d “family” of effect sizes has been chosen as an appropriate set of effect
measures for this study, as the study’s main aim is to analyze the difference between
groups, rather than measuring the strength of a relationship or correlation.

When studying Dutch pension beneficiaries’ willingness to invest in socially responsible
portfolios, Apostolakis et al. (2016) find that 54.47% of the 637 survey respondents prefer
the SRI portfolio to the conventional portfolio, given that no additional costs are incurred.
This result is similar to the findings of Borgers and Pownall (2014), who find that 54.59%
of the 1,766 respondents prefer a socially screened pension investment portfolio to their
current pension portfolio. Moreover, Barreda-Tarrazona, Matallín-Sáez and Balaguer-
Franch (2011) study the fund-investment choices of 129 Spanish students where the
participants can choose between a socially responsible fund (SR fund) and a non-socially
responsible fund (non-SR fund). The authors find that when the information regarding if
the fund is SR is evident, the non-SR fund receives 3.96% less in invested capital than in
the case when the SR information is not evident, consequently this also implies that the
SR fund receives 3.96% more in invested capital when SR information is made evident
to the participants.

                                     13
To convert the findings of Apostolakis et al. (2016) into a relative risk ratio, first, assume
a hypothetical second group where the respondents must choose between two identical
conventional portfolios. In such a case, it is likely that the distribution would be 50%
between each portfolio. By changing the characteristics of one of the conventional
portfolios, for it to become an SRI portfolio, the proportion increases to 54.47% in favor
of the SRI portfolio. The relative risk ratio is therefore: 0.5447/0.5 = 1.0894 which yields
an effect of 8.94%. Doing the same for Borgers and Pownall (2014) we end up with a
relative risk ratio of: 0.5459/0.5 = 1.0918 which yields an effect size of 9.18%. Finally,
for the study by Barreda-Tarrazona et al. (2011), we construct a relative risk ratio by
comparing the investments made into the SR fund before its SR information is evident
(25.67%) and compare it to when the SR information is revealed (29.63%). This gives us
a relative risk ratio of 0.2963/0.2567 ≈ 1.1543 which yields an effect size of circa 15.43%.

Prior studies related to the choice between conventional- and SR funds thus suggest that
there is an effect on retail investors' preferences when introducing a sustainable
investment alternative. Therefore, it can be derived that a similar effect should exist when
retail investors select individual companies to invest in and have to choose between a
conventional (non-ESG) company and a sustainability-focused company (ESG).
However, as the previous studies are not conducted on the exact same subject, it is not
reasonable to assume that the relevant effect size for this study is equivalent. Following
the advice of Ellis (2010), the anticipated effect of the introduction of an ESG-profiled
company in the treatment groups is therefore estimated conservatively by choosing the
prior study that has yielded the lowest effect size, i.e., the study by Apostolakis et al.
(2016) yielding an effect size of 8.94%.

Given this effect size, the analytical program G*Power (Faul, 2007) has been used to
calculate the sample size needed for our experiment. As this study examines the
differences in preferences within the different groups, it has been chosen to use the
statistical test “Generic binomial test” from the “Exact” test family. For the control group,
a two-tail test has been used to see if there is any difference in preference between the
two companies within the group, both on the upside and downside. For the treatment
groups, it has been decided to instead use one-tail tests since it is wanted to test if the
preference for one of the IPO candidates is higher than for the other. For instance, by
comparing ESG to non-ESG, it is aimed to test if the willingness to invest in the ESG
company is higher than for the non-ESG company. Furthermore, a significance level of
0.05 and a power of 0.8 are used. The reason behind these levels is that a power of 0.8
has been proposed as a good level since it leads to a reasonable balance between making
a Type I and Type II error (Ellis, 2010; Cohen, 1988). Cohen (1988) also advises that the
beta-to-alpha ratio should be 4:1 since making a Type I error should be considered more
severe than making a Type II error and thus, by choosing an alpha of 0.05 and power of
0.8 the beta-to-alpha ratio of 4:1 holds. In addition, setting the significance level to 0.05
is the most common approach (Noymer, 2008).

Given these inputs, the total sample size required for the control group is 989 participants.
For the treatment groups, the total sample size required is 777 participants (see Appendix
1 – A Priori Sample Size Estimation).

                                     14
5.5.2. Result Analysis Methods

5.5.2.1. Hypothesis Testing

In order to test the hypotheses, multiple statistical tests are applied to the two dependent
variables as well as four of the control variables (ImpE, ImpS, ImpG, and ImpDiscl) with
the aim of finding statistically significant effects at the 0.05 significance level.

Sign tests are conducted using SPSS for each group to test for differences in attitude
among the population, for the companies shown in the groups, i.e., to test the first
dependent variable: “how positive or negative attitude the investors express towards each
company.” Given that the participant gives each company shown to him/her an attitude
score of 1-5, the sign test can be used to see if there is any significant difference in attitude
toward each company in the population of Swedish retail investors, analyzing both
negative and positive differences. For the control group, a two-tail test is used to test if
there is any difference in the attitude at all between the two companies in the control
group, while for the treatment groups, one tail tests are used instead, to see if the
population’s attitude towards a specific company is higher (Newbold, Carlson and
Thorne, 2020).

To test the second dependent variable (which company the participants chose to invest
in), we use a one-sample binomial test in SPSS. Since the participants are asked to choose
one of two companies to invest in, the outcome is binary in nature with a binomial
distribution of the results. Therefore, a one-sample binomial test appropriately analyzes
the probabilities with which each company is chosen and thus, the population proportion
that would choose Company A and Company B. The analysis is made by testing the null
hypothesis, which says that the population proportion that invests in either company is
0.5 (i.e., equal probabilities). If the null hypothesis can be rejected based on the sample
data, it may be shown that the population as a whole is more likely to invest in one of the
two companies. Moreover, the result of the one-sample binomial test is further illustrated
with confidence intervals for the probability, based on three different computation
methods: (1) Clopper-Pearson (exact), (2) Jeffreys, and (3) Likelihood ratio (IBM, 2021).

Finally, in order to see if there is any statistically significant difference in the importance
given to the control variables ImpE, ImpS, ImpG, and ImpDiscl by retail investors, the
related-samples Friedman’s two-way ANOVA by ranks test has been used. This test is
deemed usable since it is a non-parametric test, which allows for testing differences in
the distribution of ordinal data for multiple variables (MacFarland, Thomas, and Yates,
2016).

5.5.2.2. Testing for Potential Measurement Errors

Furthermore, as mentioned previously in 5.2. Questionnaire Design there is a potential
issue with primacy or recency effects in the measurement of how important retail
investors perceive the environmental, social, and governance factors as well as ESG
information disclosure to be when making real-life investment decisions. Therefore,
before analyzing in detail the results for these factors, they are first tested for the presence
of any such effects. For this purpose, a Mann-Whitney U test is performed on the
importance scores given to each factor, comparing the results from the two questionnaire
distributions with each other (see 6.3. Issues Related to the Measurement of the
Importance of the ESG Factors and ESG Information Disclosure for Retail Investors).
The Mann-Whitney U test has been deemed applicable since the two questionnaire

                                     15
distributions can be seen as independent random samples and it is of importance to test if
the means of these samples are the same at a 0.05 significance level (Newbold et al.,
2020). The importance scores for the analyzed factors are defined by the following
variables.

       ImpE: How important a company’s environmental impact is for one’s real-life
        investment decisions (1-5).

       ImpS: How important a company's consideration of social issues is for one's real-
        life investment decisions (1-5).

       ImpG: How important a company’s governance is for one’s real-life investment
        decisions (1-5).

        ImpDiscl: How important it is for one’s real-life investment decisions that a
        company publicly discloses information about its ESG performance (1-5).

Going further, primacy and recency effects are not the only potential sources of
measurement errors when it comes to the importance score variables. Another issue might
be context effects in which prior sections of the questionnaire affect the response of the
test subjects (Holyk, 2008). Context effects can be especially prominent in treatment
groups 2 and 3, as the test subjects there are presented with an ESG-profiled IPO
candidate and subsequently asked if certain ESG aspects are important for their decision
of an IPO candidate. Likewise, the test subjects in the control group should be least
affected by potential context effects. Therefore, in a similar manner as for the primacy
and recency effects, the presence of context effects is tested using a Kruskal-Wallis test,
comparing the distribution of the importance scores (ImpE, ImpS, ImpG, and ImpDiscl)
across all test groups simultaneously, as well as comparing each individually with the
corresponding results in the control group. The reason why the Kruskal-Wallis test has
been deemed appropriate in this case instead of the Mann-Whitney U test is that the
Kruskal-Wallis test makes it possible to test the null hypothesis that the means of multiple
independent random samples drawn from one population are the same rather than only
two independent random samples (Newbold et al., 2020).

5.5.2.3. Multiple Linear Regression Modelling

Four multiple linear regressions have been run to further examine the relationship
between the obtained attitude score for each IPO candidate in the four tests groups, the
applied treatment variables, and the control variables, incorporating perceived importance
of the ESG factors and the disclosure of ESG information for the respondents’ real-life
investment decision-making as well as the observed demographics. In this way, it can be
seen whether the applied treatments or any of the other control variables have a positive
or negative effect on the attitude toward the IPO candidates.

The multiple linear regression model is formulated as follows:

         𝑌𝑖 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1𝑡1,𝑖 + 𝛽2𝑡2,𝑖 + 𝛾1𝑥1,𝑖 + ⋯ + 𝛾4𝑥4,𝑖 + 𝛿1𝑎1,𝑖 + ⋯ + 𝛿3𝑎3,𝑖 + 𝜃1𝑔1,𝑖
                       + 𝜃2𝑔2,𝑖 + 𝜗1𝑝1,𝑖 + ⋯ + 𝜗7𝑝7,𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖

where,

𝑌𝑖 = the attitude score of an IPO candidate

                                     16
𝛼 = the intercept of the slope

𝛽𝑖 = the impact of 𝑡𝑖 on the dependent variable

𝑡𝑖 = a dummy variable representing the applied treatments of ESG information disclosure
and ESG performance, with

        𝑡1 = 1 if “disclose” and 𝑡1 = 0 if otherwise (“non-disclose”)

        𝑡2 = 1 if “ESG” and 𝑡2 = 0 if otherwise (“non-ESG”)

𝛾𝑖 = the impact of 𝑥𝑖 on the dependent variable

𝑥𝑖 = the assigned importance to four factors affecting real-life investment decisions:
ImpE, ImpS, ImpG and ImpDiscl

𝛿𝑖 = the impact of 𝑎𝑖 on the dependent variable

𝑎𝑖 = a dummy variable representing the age group, with

        𝑎1 = 1 if “0-19 years old” and 𝑎1 = 0 if otherwise

        𝑎2 = 1 if “20-39 years old” and 𝑎1 = 0 if otherwise

        𝑎3 = 1 if “40-59 years old” and 𝑎1 = 0 if otherwise

𝜃𝑖 = the impact of 𝑔𝑖 on the dependent variable

𝑔𝑖 = a dummy variable representing the gender, with

        𝑔1 = 1 if “male” and 𝑔1 = 0 if otherwise

        𝑔2 = 1 if “female” and 𝑔2 = 0 if otherwise

𝜗𝑖 = the impact of 𝑝𝑖 on the dependent variable

𝑝𝑖 = a dummy variable representing the private investment activity, with

        𝑝1 = 1 if “never” and 𝑝1 = 0 if otherwise

        𝑝2 = 1 if “less than once a year” and 𝑝2 = 0 if otherwise

        𝑝3 = 1 if “once a year” and 𝑝3 = 0 if otherwise

        𝑝4 = 1 if “once a half-year” and 𝑝4 = 0 if otherwise

        𝑝5 = 1 if “once a quarter” and 𝑝5 = 0 if otherwise

        𝑝6 = 1 if “once a month” and 𝑝6 = 0 if otherwise

        𝑝7 = 1 if “more than once a month” and 𝑝7 = 0 if otherwise

𝜀𝑖 = the error term

Furthermore, the dependent variable of attitude score of an IPO candidate (𝑌𝑖) is divided
between the four test groups, so that:

                                     17
𝑌𝐶 = the attitude score of an IPO candidate in the control group

𝑌1 = the attitude score of an IPO candidate in treatment group 1

𝑌2 = the attitude score of an IPO candidate in treatment group 2

𝑌3 = the attitude score of an IPO candidate in treatment group 3

                    6. Results and analysis
6.1. The Acquired Sample and Its Representativeness of the Wider
  Population

In total, 346 participants have been registered, of which 189 did not finish the
questionnaire and 5 answered wrongly on the control question. Consequently, these
participants are excluded, leaving a total of 152 participants in the study, of whom 102
(67.1%) are men and 49 (32.2%) are women (see Appendix 2 – Demographics of the
Questionnaire Participants). This gender distribution is relatively in line with the overall
Swedish population of retail investors, where roughly 62% are men (Euroclear Sweden,
2021). However, the age distribution is heavily skewed towards individuals between the
age of 20-39 years, who constitute 85.5% of all the participants, in contrast to the circa
14% share in the overall population (Euroclear Sweden, 2021). The skewness in the age
distribution is most likely a consequence of the reliance on convenience and snowball
sampling methods. Furthermore, the acquired sample seems to have succeeded in
targeting the population of retail investors, as only 6.6% responded that they never make
private stock investments, while a majority of the participants (63.2%) make investments
once a quarter or more frequently. For further empirical analysis, it has been decided to
include the participants that have yet never engaged in stock investments, because the
general interest for investments is rather high among the population in Sweden, given the
relatively large population of retail investors, and the chances are therefore high that these
individuals will start investing in the foreseeable future; especially considering that 8 of
these 10 participants are between 20-39 years old.
6.2. Investment Choices and Attitude Scores

                                            Table 2: Analysis of the Investment Choices Using Confidence Intervals and Binomial Testing

                       CONTROL GROUP               TREATMENT 1                TREATMENT 2 TREATMENT 3

Investment choices Company A Company B Total Company A Company B Total Company A Company B Total Company A Company B Total

Sample count 21 16 37 24 8 32 9 43 52 3 28 31

Sample proportion (%) 56.8% 43.2% 100.0% 75.0% 25.0% 100.0% 17.3% 82.7% 100.0% 9.7% 90.3% 100.0%

95% confidence intervals

Clopper-Pearson 0.395 - 0.729 0.271 - 0.605 0.566 - 0.886 0.115 - 0.434 0.082 - 0.303 0.697 - 0.918 0.020 - 0.258 0.742 - 0.980

Jeffreys 0.408 - 0.717 0.289 - 0.592 0.583 - 0.874 0.126 - 0.417 0.089 - 0.292 0.708 - 0.911 0.028 - 0.236 0.764 - 0.972

Likelihood 0.407 - 0.719 0.281 - 0.593 0.584 - 0.877 0.123 - 0.416 0.087 - 0.290 0.710 - 0.913 0.025 - 0.232 0.768 - 0.975

Average 0.403 - 0.722 0.278 - 0.597 0.578 - 0.879 0.121 - 0.422 0.086 - 0.295 0.705 - 0.914 0.024 - 0.242 0.758 - 0.976

Hypothesis testing p (2-sided) Decision p (2-sided) Decision p (2-sided) Decision p (2-sided)       Decision

                                                  Retain the null                            Reject the null                            Reject the null                            Reject the null
One-sample binomial test 0.511         0.008         <0.001         <0.001
                                hypothesis  hypothesis   hypothesis   hypothesis

An overview of the investment choices made in each test group, the sample proportion, 95% confidence intervals for the population proportion, and the conclusions of one-sample binomial tests
on the null hypothesis that the population distribution is in each case equally splitted between Company A and B.

                                     18
                                 Table 3: Analysis of Attitude Scores Using Confidence Intervals and Sign Testing

                      CONTROL GROUP         TREATMENT 1 TREATMENT 2           TREATMENT 3

Attitude score (1-5) Company A Company B Company A Company B Company A Company B Company A Company B

Sample mean 3.486 3.324 3.281 2.469 2.327 3.712 2.774 4.161

Sample std. deviation 0.607 0.530 0.729 1.218 1.098 0.957 0.884 0.735

95% confidence interval 3.284 - 3.689 3.148 - 3.501 3.018 - 3.544 2.030 - 2.908 2.021 - 2.633 3.445 - 3.978 2.450 - 3.098 3.892 - 4.431

Hypothesis testing p (2-sided) Decision p (2-sided) Decision p (2-sided) Decision p (2-sided) Decision

                                              Retain the null                  Reject the null                  Reject the null                  Reject the null
Related-samples sign test 0.180             0.031            <0.001                 <0.001
                                   hypothesis                hypothesis       hypothesis       hypothesis

Related-samples Wilcoxon                 Retain the null                 Reject the null                 Reject the null                 Reject the null
                       0.186             0.009            <0.001                 <0.001
signed rank test hypothesis      hypothesis       hypothesis       hypothesis

An overview of the descriptive statistics of the attitude scores for each company in the test groups, corresponding 95% confidence intervals for the
population mean, and the conclusions of related-samples sign tests and Wilcoxon signed rank tests respectively, on the null hypothesis that there is no
population-wide difference in attitude towards Company A and B in the case of each test group.

To begin with, before analyzing the variables and answering the outlined hypotheses, it
is important to note that the results seem to support that the one-pager design does not
include extraneous variables that could significantly affect the test subjects’ choice of
company to invest in. The absence of such components in the design is supported by the
results from the control group, where two companies of the same type (“non-disclose and
non-ESG”) are presented. Although the descriptive statistics for both the attitude score
and investment choice vary slightly in favor of Company A, subsequent two-sided
hypothesis testing shows that the sample data fails to support the existence of differences
in neither the probability of choosing either company to invest in (see Table 2) nor the
attitude toward each company (see Table 3), at the 0.05 significance level.

Going further, the results from treatment group 1 are in conflict with hypothesis 1 (H1).
Initially, it was hypothesized that the disclosure of ESG information will benefit an IPO
candidate. However, out of the 32 participants in treatment group 1, 24 test subjects (75%)
chose Company A. This allows a rejection of the null hypothesis that each company may
be chosen with equal probabilities, using a binomial test that has given a p-value of 0.004
for the one-sided alternative that the “non-disclose and non-ESG” company is chosen
with a higher probability. In the wider population, a 95% confidence interval suggests
that the probability of choosing the “non-disclose and non-ESG” company instead of the
“disclose and non-ESG” company, ranges between 57.8% – 87.9%.

The higher preference for the “non-disclose and non-ESG” company is further confirmed
when measuring the attitude towards the IPO candidates. The test subjects in treatment
group 1 express a higher average attitude score for the “non-disclose and non-ESG”
company (Company A), at 3.281 in contrast to 2.469 for the “disclose and non-ESG”
company (Company B). Furthermore, by conducting both a sign test and a Wilcoxon
signed rank test, the null hypothesis stating that the median of differences between the
attitude score for the “non-disclose and non-ESG” company and the “disclose and non-
ESG” company equals to zero, is rejected. In fact, data supports the one-sided alternative
that the attitude score is higher for the “non-disclose and non-ESG” company at a 0.05
significance level (a p-value of 0.0155 for the sign test and a p-value of 0.0045 for the
Wilcoxon signed rank test).

Analyzing the results from treatment group 2, the results seem to support the second

                                     19
hypothesis (H2). According to H2, retail investors prefer to a larger degree to invest in an
IPO candidate that performs well in regard to the ESG criteria compared to a similar peer
that performs relatively poorly. In turn, looking at the investment choices made, 43 out
of the 52 test subjects (82.7%) chose to invest in the “disclose and ESG” company’s IPO.
Consequently, the use of a one-sample binomial test results in the rejection of the null
hypothesis saying that each company is chosen with equal probabilities. Instead, at a 0.05
significance level (p-value < 0.001), data supports the one-sided alternative that the
probability of a retail investor choosing the “disclose and ESG” company is higher than
for the “disclose and non-ESG” company. Correspondingly, a 95% confidence interval
suggests that the population-wide probability of choosing the “disclose and ESG”
company instead of the “disclose and non-ESG” company, lies between 70.5% – 91.4%.

This outcome is also supported by the attitude scores for each company in treatment group
2. On average, the test subjects express a higher attitude towards the “disclose and ESG”
company (Company B) than towards the “disclose and non-ESG” company (Company
A), with average attitude scores of 3.712 and 2.327 respectively. As per treatment group
1, conducting both a sign test and a Wilcoxon signed rank test leads to the rejection of
the null hypothesis in both cases, supporting the one-sided alternative that the attitude
score is higher for the “disclose and ESG” company at a 0.05 significance level (p-value
< 0.001 in each test).

Continuing with treatment group 3, the results suggest that the test subjects are less in
favor of the “non-disclose and non-ESG” company (Company A) compared to the
“disclose and ESG” company (Company B) as is also outlined by the combination of the
first and the second hypotheses (H1 and H2). The distribution of investment decisions
ends up with 28 of the 31 test subjects (90.3%) choosing to invest in the “disclose and
ESG” company. Subsequently, the one-sample binomial test also rejects the null
hypothesis at a 0.05 significance level (p-value < 0.001) in favor of the one-sided
alternative that the probability of a retail investor choosing to invest in the “disclose and
ESG” company is higher than for the “non-disclose and non-ESG” company. The
corresponding population-wide probability of choosing the “disclose and ESG” company
instead of the “non-disclose and non-ESG” company, lies between 75.8% - 97.6% at a
95% confidence level.

Once again, the investment choice distribution is also reflected by the attitude score
assigned to each company. The “non-disclose and non-ESG” company receives an
average attitude score of 2.774 compared to the corresponding score of 4.161 for the
“disclose and ESG” company. Furthermore, the sign test and the Wilcoxon ranked sign
test lead to a rejection of the null hypothesis in both cases and thus support at the 0.05
significance level (p-value < 0.001 for both tests) the one-sided alternative that the
attitude score for the “disclose and ESG” company is higher than for the “non-disclose
and non-ESG company.”
6.3. Issues Related to the Measurement of the Importance of the ESG
   Factors and ESG Information Disclosure for Retail Investors

As mentioned before (see 5.5.2. Result Analysis Methods), any conclusions regarding
how important retail investors perceive the ESG factors (environment, social, and
governance), as well as information disclosure regarding a company’s ESG performance
in conjunction with real-life investment decisions, cannot be made until the potential
issues that are related to the measurement of these factors are tested using a Mann-

                                     20
Whitney U test.

         Table 4: Analysis of Distribution Differences for Importance Scores Using Confidence Intervals and Mann-Whitney U Testing

                           DISTRIBUTION 1 (non-randomized order), n = 116 DISTRIBUTION 2 (randomized order), n = 36

Importance score (1-5) Mean Std. deviation 95% confidence interval Mean Std. deviation 95% confidence interval

ImpE 3.250 1.078 3.052 - 3.448 3.000 1.287 2.564 - 3.436

ImpS 3.388 1.178 3.171 - 3.605 3.083 1.381 2.616 - 3.551

ImpG 3.259 1.259 3.027 - 3.490 3.167 1.276 2.735 - 3.598

ImpDiscl 2.707 1.408 2.448 - 2.966 2.556 1.382 2.088 - 3.023

Hypthesis testing (independent-
                                          p (2-sided)                   Decision
samples Mann-Whitney U test)

ImpE 0.357          Retain the null hypothesis

ImpS 0.282          Retain the null hypothesis

ImpG 0.594          Retain the null hypothesis

ImpDiscl 0.539           Retain the null hypothesis

An overview of the descriptive statistics of the importance scores for four factors in conjunction with real-life investment decision-making, corresponding
95% confidence intervals for the population mean, and the conclusions for independent-samples Mann-Whitney U tests of the null hypotheses that the
distribution of each variable is the same across the two questionnaire distributions.

Studying the results of the Mann-Whitney U tests (see Table 4), it becomes evident that
the sample data is not sufficient to support a rejection of the null hypothesis, that there is
a difference in the distribution of each importance score variable between the two
questionnaire distributions, at the 0.05 significance level. This conclusion suggests that
the risk of measurement errors due to any primacy or recency effects that may stem from
the non-randomized order of the presentation of the factors in the first questionnaire
distribution, should not be noteworthy. Simultaneously, it is important to note that the
second questionnaire distribution has not succeeded in gathering as many respondents as
the first questionnaire distribution, which is among other things reflected in the broader
confidence intervals. Therefore, it would be desirable to have more data from the second
questionnaire distribution to fully ensure the absence of primacy and/or recency effects.

Again, as mentioned in 5.5.2. Result Analysis Methods, a Kruskal-Wallis test has been
used to test for any potential context effects and the result of this can be found below.

                                     21
                                          Table 5: Analysis of Distribution Differences for Importance Scores Using Confidence Intervals and Kruskal-Wallis Testing

                          CONTROL GROUP TREATMENT 1                 TREATMENT 2 TREATMENT 3

Importance score (1-5) Mean Std. deviation 95% CI Mean Std. deviation 95% CI Mean Std. deviation 95% CI Mean Std. deviation 95% CI

ImpE 3.108 0.994 2.777 - 3.440 3.156 1.139 2.746 - 3.567 3.154 1.289 2.795 - 3.513 3.387 1.022 3.012 - 3.762

ImpS 3.432 1.119 3.059 - 3.806 3.500 1.136 3.090 - 3.910 3.096 1.418 2.701 - 3.491 3.355 1.112 2.947 - 3.763

ImpG 3.459 1.070 3.103 - 3.816 3.156 1.298 2.688 - 3.624 3.038 1.371 2.657 - 3.420 3.387 1.230 2.936 - 3.838

ImpDiscl 2.757 1.011 2.420 - 3.094 3.125 1.454 2.601 - 3.649 2.596 1.472 2.186 - 3.006 2.226 1.521 1.668 - 2.784

Hypthesis testing (independent-
                                   p (2-sided)            Decision
samples Kruskal- Wallis test)

ImpE 0.747     Retain the null hypothesis

ImpS 0.578     Retain the null hypothesis

ImpG 0.420     Retain the null hypothesis

ImpDiscl 0.090     Retain the null hypothesis

Pairwise comparisons (control
                                                          p (2-sided) Decision          p (2-sided) Decision          p (2-sided)         Decision
group vs. treatment group 1-3)

ImpE 0.737 Retain the null hypothesis     0.672 Retain the null hypothesis     0.277     Retain the null hypothesis

ImpS 0.727 Retain the null hypothesis     0.327 Retain the null hypothesis     0.800     Retain the null hypothesis

ImpG 0.328 Retain the null hypothesis     0.135 Retain the null hypothesis     0.823     Retain the null hypothesis

ImpDiscl 0.188 Retain the null hypothesis 0.832 Retain the null hypothesis     0.188    Retain the null hypothesis

An overview of the descriptive statistics of the importance scores for four factors in conjunction with real-life investment decision-making, corresponding 95% confidence intervals for the population mean, and the
conclusions for independent-samples Kruskal-Wallis test of the null hypotheses that the distribution of each variable is the same across all four test groups. Additionally, a related pairwise comparison is made, testing the
null hypothesis that the distribution of the variables in each test group is equal to the distribution of corresponding variables in the control group.

As seen in Table 5, the Kruskal-Wallis test cannot find sufficient data to support the
presence of differences in the distribution of the importance score variables in any of the
four test groups when examining all the four test groups together, nor when making
pairwise comparisons of the control group to each treatment group. Therefore, potential
measurement errors stemming from context effects can also be disregarded in further
analyses.
6.4. The Importance of the ESG Factors and ESG Information
   Disclosure for Retail Investors

As neither any primacy, recency nor context effects can be detected in prior tests, the
responses regarding the importance of each ESG factor and ESG disclosure in
conjunction with making real-life investment decisions, are now pooled together and a
Friedman’s two-way ANOVA by ranks is implemented to test for differences in the
distribution of the responses for each importance score variable.

                                 Table 6: Analysis of Importance Scores Using Confidence Intervals and Friedman's Two-Way ANOVA Testing

                                     Descriptives                 p (2-sided)                        adj. p-value* Decision regarding the null hypothesis

Importance score (1-5) Mean 95% CI ImpE ImpS ImpG ImpDiscl ImpE ImpS ImpG ImpDiscl ImpE ImpS ImpG ImpDiscl

ImpE 3.191 3.009 - 3.372 - 0.339 0.491 0.005 - 1.000 1.000 0.031 - Retain Retain Reject

ImpS 3.316 3.119 - 3.513 0.339 - 0.790 <0.001 1.000 - 1.000 0.001 Retain - Retain Reject

ImpG 3.237 3.035 - 3.439 0.491 0.790 - <0.001 1.000 1.000 - 0.003 Retain Retain - Reject

ImpDiscl 2.671 2.447 - 2.895 0.005 <0.001 <0.001 - 0.031 0.001 0.003 - Reject Reject Reject -

Hypothesis testing (related-samples
Friedman's two-way ANOVA by ranks)

p (2-sided)                                             <0.001

Decision                                        Reject the null hypothesis

* p-values have been adjusted by the Bonferroni correction for multiple tests

An overview of the descriptive statistics of the aggregate importance scores for four factors in conjunction with real-life investment decision-making, as well as the conclusions for related-samples
Friedman's two-way ANOVA by ranks of the null hypotheses that the distributions of the four ESG importance score variables are the same. Additionally, related pairwise comparisons are also
presented.

                                     22
Figure 1-4: The figures illustrate the distribution of aggregate responses collected for the variables ImpE,
ImpS, ImpG, and ImpDiscl.

As seen in Table 6 above, Friedman’s two-way ANOVA by ranks supports that there is
a statistically significant difference between the response distribution for the importance
of each ESG factor and for the importance of ESG information disclosure. Thus, the
results imply that the test subjects consider the company’s performance in regard to the
ESG factors as more important than the company's disclosure of ESG information when
making real-life investment decisions. This can also be illustrated by Figures 1-4, which
show the answer distribution of each variable, with the importance scores assigned to the
ESG factors having a noteworthy different distribution than the importance score for ESG
information disclosure. However, Friedman's two-way ANOVA by ranks fails to support
any significant distribution difference between the individual ESG factors, thus leaving
the evaluation of the third hypothesis (H3) non-conclusive.
6.5. The Treatments’ Effect on the Attitude Scores

The full results of the multiple linear regression models that estimate the potential effect
of the treatments on the attitude scores can be found in Appendix 3 – Multiple Linear
Regression Results. To summarize, at a 0.05 significance level, the regressions find a
statistically significant negative effect of solely disclosing ESG information (when the
ESG performance is relatively poor) on the expressed attitude in treatment group 1, with
a coefficient estimate, 𝛽1 = −0.812 and a 95% confidence interval of −1.333 ≤ 𝛽1 ≤
−0.292. Similarly, there is a statistically significant positive effect of disclosing a
relatively good ESG performance when the alternative IPO candidate also discloses ESG
information, but the ESG performance is relatively poor (treatment group 2). For this
case, the regression gives a positive coefficient estimate of 𝛽2 = 1.385 in a 95%
confidence interval of 0.976 ≤ 𝛽2 ≤ 1.793. Similarly, the regression for treatment group
3 identifies a positive effect on attitude when showing a relatively good ESG performance
simultaneously as the alternative candidate does neither perform relatively well in terms
of ESG nor discloses information about it. The estimated coefficient corresponds to 𝛽3 =

                                     23
 1.387 in a 95% confidence interval of 0.978 ≤ 𝛽3 ≤ 1.796.

                      7. Discussion
7.1. The Implications of the Results

In general, the results are partly in line with prior studies on similar topics, with some
notable deviations. As can be seen from the rejection of the first hypothesis (H1), it seems
that disclosure of ESG information in itself is not beneficial to the IPO candidate if the
candidate is not performing relatively better than its peer. This therefore leads to the
implication that if an IPO candidate is not performing relatively better than its peer in
regard to ESG and its peer is not disclosing their ESG information, there is no positive
effect from choosing to reduce information asymmetry by disclosing the relatively poor
ESG information. Instead, it would be better to do as the peer and not disclose any ESG
information. This is interesting since that would entail that retail investors prefer to invest
in an IPO candidate whose ESG performance they do not know over a candidate whose
ESG performance is known to be relatively poor.

Accordingly, the above results suggest that retail investors do not always value the
information asymmetry mitigation that is achieved with the disclosure of ESG
information, something that is in contrast with the findings of Baker et al. (2021) given
their findings that a lower degree of information asymmetry leads to a lower degree of
underpricing, which in turn may suggest that information asymmetry mitigation typically
increases the attractiveness of an IPO. In addition, this insight is also supported by the
result of asking the test subjects directly about the importance of ESG information
disclosure in conjunction with real-life investment decision-making, which shows a
relatively low importance assigned to ESG information disclosure.

Yet, as follows from the confirmation of the second hypothesis (H2), if the IPO candidate
exhibits a good ESG performance relative to its peer, the results of this study support the
fact that the candidate should disclose its ESG information since the candidate will then
be preferred over the peer that discloses their relatively poor ESG information.
Furthermore, following the results of treatment group 3, disclosure of good ESG
performance is also beneficial if the peer chooses not to disclose their ESG information
at all, something that might also support an earlier assumption made in this thesis, namely
that retail investors perceive an IPO candidate that chooses to omit the ESG information
as a company with rather poor ESG performance.

Consequently, it seems that the first hypothesis (H1) only holds true if the IPO candidate
has a good ESG performance relative to its peer, and that IPO candidates with relatively
poor ESG performance should not disclose their ESG information. In turn, this conclusion
seems to be derived from the fact that the second hypothesis (H2) holds true, i.e., that
retail investors prefer good ESG performance over poor ESG performance - a result that
is largely in line with the findings of Lagerkvist et al. (2020) and Apostolakis et al. (2016).

Furthermore, considering which of the ESG components retail investors actually value
the most, this study cannot identify any significant results, although, on the sample level,
the S factor has gained the highest mean score in line with the findings of Pérez-Gladish,
Benson and Faff (2012). Still, due to the absence of significant results, this question
remains open for further research.

                                     24
7.1.1. Potentially Different Outcomes of ESG Information Disclosure for “non-
ESG” IPO Candidates Depending on the Peer Landscape

By examining closer the results of investment choices and attitude scores as presented in
Table 2 and 3 respectively, a deviation can be observed for the “disclose and non-ESG
company.” As earlier elaborated on, disclosure does not benefit a “non-ESG” IPO
candidate against other “non-disclosing and non-ESG” peers, as shown in treatment
group 1. Yet, when comparing treatment groups 2 and 3 with each other, an opposite
effect is potentially traced. In treatment group 2, 17.3% of the test subjects have chosen
to invest in the “disclose and non-ESG company” over the “disclose and ESG company”,
while in treatment group 3, the “non-disclose and non-ESG company” was preferred over
the “disclose and ESG company” by only 9.7% of the respondents. This relationship can
therefore potentially indicate that disclosure of ESG information gives an IPO candidate
an advantage when placed against an alternative that is publicly known to perform
relatively better in regard to ESG. Furthermore, the case is made more complicated by
the fact that even though a larger share chose the “disclose and non-ESG company” than
the “non-disclose and non-ESG company” in their respective treatment groups, the “non-
disclose and non-ESG company” still have gotten a higher mean attitude score of 2.774
compared to 2.327 for the “disclose and non-ESG company.”

Could these findings imply that when presented with a relatively good ESG performing
alternative, retail investors actually make themselves aware of the information asymmetry
problem and therefore to a larger extent choose the “disclose and non-ESG company”?
This, even though they have a more positive attitude towards the “non-disclose and non-
ESG company” due to it being perceived as relatively better in terms of ESG? This
interpretation cannot be statistically proven by this study, as both the investment choice
proportions’ and attitude scores’ 95% confidence intervals in treatment groups 2 and 3
substantially overlap with each other and no significant difference cannot be shown for
the overall population. Yet, this opens up for an interesting new research question that
could lay the ground for further studies.
7.2. Are the Results Generalizable?

Given the fact that the obtained sample sizes are too small in combination with the fact
that the sample is skewed in favor of the younger segment of the population, it is
doubtable whether the results are generalizable in a larger context. In addition, the
generalizability of the study is limited by the scope being narrowed down to the clothing
industry. Further studies are therefore needed to test if the results still hold when larger
and more representative samples are used as well as different industries being considered.
However, this study’s results might give a hint of what can be found in a sufficiently
powered sample.
7.3. Limitations

7.3.1. Limitations of the Questionnaire

In order to fit the needed information into the one-pagers, the font size for the main text
had to be rather small (9 points), which especially for participants answering the survey
on their mobile phones, might have been so difficult to read that it might have contributed
to respondent fatigue, disincentivizing them from completing the questionnaire. In order
to counteract these negative effects, participants have been advised to complete the survey

                                     25
on a computer, and it has also been decided to place the one-pagers at the beginning of
the questionnaire to limit the potential effects of respondent fatigue.

Furthermore, the order of the one-pagers shown to the participant, as well as the order of
the answers to what company to invest in was randomized, which in some cases could
have led to the order of the one-pagers shown being different from the order of the answer
alternatives to the question of which company to invest in. For instance, if the participant
was shown the one-pager of Company B before the one-pager of Company A, the
participant might have believed that the order of the question regarding which company
to invest in was the same, i.e., that the alternative to invest in Company B came before
Company A, even though this might not have been the case since the order was
randomized. Consequently, this might potentially have led to measurement errors where
the participant would have wanted to invest in Company B but instead chose to invest in
Company A and vice versa.

Related to the above limitation is the fact that the participant had to choose one of the two
companies to invest in, whereas some participants might have been indifferent between
the two companies or would not have wanted to invest in any of them. A solution to this
limitation would have been to introduce more options such as the option to not invest in
any of the companies, to invest an equal amount into both companies, or by having the
participants choose a percentage amount to invest in each company. However, by letting
the participant state their attitude toward each company, this limitation is somewhat
relaxed since the participant could then give both companies the same attitude score,
which then acts as a significant input for the analysis in this study, potentially showing
that respondents do not particularly favor any of the companies even though the
distribution of investment choices differs.

Moreover, with the format of the questionnaire being an online survey, fewer people of
older age (especially 60-79 and 80+ years of age) might have been able to answer the
questionnaire than if a non-online format would have been used as a complement to the
online format. This is because the online format might have led to a limitation in
technological literacy, where participants of older age might not be as familiar with
technology as younger participants and might therefore have been hindered in answering
the survey. Furthermore, the fact that the questionnaire was only available in English
might have had a similar effect, where people of older age and in general people with an
insufficient proficiency in English might have had an impaired ability to complete the
questionnaire. During the process of collecting responses to the questionnaire, numerous
respondents gave feedback regarding that they wished to participate but either could not
or felt discouraged to complete the questionnaire because it was in English instead of
Swedish. This issue is significant, especially considering that the study is aimed
specifically at the Swedish population of retail investors.

7.3.2. Limitations of the Study in General

In order to increase the response rate, it has been decided to reward participants who
completed the questionnaire with the opportunity of winning a prize of 1,000 SEK.
However, it could have been wiser to create a reward contingent on the performance of
the participant to increase motivation and incentivize meticulousness in the answering
process, since that would reduce the risk of participants answering the questionnaire
hastily and negligently.

Looking at the control variables, the study could have included more control variables

                                     26
that would have been interesting to control for, especially considering the rather
homogenous pool of participants that resulted from most of the participants being in our
acquaintanceship. Control variables that could for instance have been good to include are
the level of education and industry of employment since these variables may impact how
individual retail investors view and evaluate investments, as well as affect their set of
values that they take into consideration when making investment decisions. In addition,
by including such control variables, the obtained sample can be made even more
accurately representative of the wider population.
7.4. Future Research

This study showcases that for the clothing industry specifically, ESG performance of the
IPO candidate and subsequent disclosure of this information have to varying extents an
effect on the decisions taken by retail investors. For future research, a natural continuation
of this study would be to expand the scope to other industries in order to study if the
effects found in this thesis can be found for other industries. In particular, it would be
interesting to see the results from a study using an industry that is in itself considered
more (or less) sustainable than the clothing industry. Would the results using this more
(or less) sustainable industry be the same as when using the clothing industry? Perhaps,
given the intrinsic (non-) sustainability of the industry itself, retail investors would not
consider the ESG performance of the individual IPO candidates as much as for the
clothing industry and vice versa.

Another interesting direction for future research would be to shift the focus more
narrowly toward the poorly ESG-performing IPO candidates. Unfortunately for this
thesis, not enough data was gathered in order to see if the poorly performing candidate
should indeed disclose or not disclose when put up against a relatively good performing
candidate that does disclose. Thus, it would be interesting to expand the sample size
sufficiently and use treatments where a relatively poorly performing IPO candidate is
compared to a broad array of different alternative IPO candidates. For instance, if the
alternative is performing relatively well in regard to ESG and also discloses this, should
the poorly performing candidate disclose or withhold its ESG information?

                      8. Conclusions

In conclusion, this study shows that the disclosure of ESG information does not have a
certain and one-sided impact on retail investors’ willingness to invest in an IPO candidate.
Retail investors' willingness to invest depends substantially on whether the disclosed ESG
information shows that the IPO candidates have relatively good or poor performance
compared to its peer. As is shown in this study, if the IPO candidate performs well in
terms of ESG compared to its peers, then it is also beneficial for the candidate to publicly
disclose the information about its ESG performance and become known as a good ESG-
performer, as it attracts retail investors. This decision is beneficial regardless of the peers’
own decisions on this matter. However, when the ESG performance of the IPO candidate
is relatively poor, the optimal decision concerning disclosure may vary depending on the
peer universe. If other peers refrain from disclosing any ESG information, then so should
the IPO candidate in question do as well. Yet, there are also some statistically
insignificant indications that disclosure could be beneficial if the peers are relatively good
ESG-performers and disclose that publicly. This part requires specifically designated

                                     27
further studies with larger samples that could establish whether the observed benefit really
is insignificant or not.

Finally, regarding which of the ESG factors that are more important to retail investors,
no conclusion can be made since no significant results can be found on whether any of
the aspects of E, S, and G are more important to retail investors. Therefore, as long as no
further studies are made on this topic, we suggest that an IPO candidate that wishes to
improve its ESG performance should put equal efforts into each of the three factors rather
than prioritize one of them only.

                           9. References

Apostolakis, George, Frido Kraanen, and Gert van Dijk, 2016, Examining pension
beneficiaries’ willingness to pay for a socially responsible and impact investment
portfolio: A case study in the Dutch healthcare sector, Journal of Behavioral and
Experimental Finance 11, 27-43.

Baker, Edward D., Thomas J. Boulton, Marcus V. Braga-Alves, and Mathew R. Morey,
2021, ESG government risk and international IPO underpricing, Journal of Corporate
Finance 67, 101913.

Balakrishnan, Karthik, Mary Brooke Billings, Bryan T. Kelly, and Alexander
Ljungqvist, 2013, Shaping Liquidity: On the Causal Effects of Voluntary Disclosure,
Journal of Finance, Forthcoming, 1-56.

Barreda-Tarrazona, Iván, Juan Carlos Matallín-Sáez, and M. Rosario Balaguer-Franch,
2011, Measuring Investors’ Socially Responsible Preferences in Mutual Funds, Journal
of Business Ethics, 103:305-330.

Ben-Nun, Pazit, 2008, Respondent Fatigue, in Paul J. Lavrakas, ed.: Encyclopedia of
Survey Research Methods, Vol. 1 & 2 (Sage Publications, Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA).

Bishop, George F, 2008, Item Order Randomization, in Paul J. Lavrakas, ed.:
Encyclopedia of Survey Research Methods, Vol. 1 & 2 (Sage Publications, Inc.,
Thousand Oaks, CA).

Borgers, Adrian C. T., and Rachel A. J. Pownall, 2014, Attitudes towards socially and
environmentally responsible investment, Journal of Behavioral and Experimental
Finance 1, 27-44.

Brill, Jonathan E, 2008, Likert Scale, in Paul J. Lavrakas, ed.: Encyclopedia of Survey
Research Methods, Vol. 1 & 2 (Sage Publications, Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA).

                                                                                th
Bryman, Alan, and Edward Bell, 2019, Social Research Methods, 5  Canadian ed.
(Oxford University Press, Don Mills, ON).

                                                                                rd
Bryman, Alan, and Emma Bell, 2011, Business Research Methods, 3  ed. (Oxford
University Press, New York, NY).

Charted Financial Analyst (CFA) Institute, n.d., ESG Investing and Analysis, Retrieved:

                                     28
2022-03-22. https://www.cfainstitute.org/en/research/esg-investing

                                                                              nd
Cohen, J., 1988, Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences, 2  ed.
(Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ)

Cook, Douglas O., Robert Kieschnick, and Robert A. Van Ness, 2006, On the
marketing of IPOs, Journal of Financial Economics 82, 35-61.

Corporate Finance Institute (CFI), n.d., Prospectus, Retrieved: 2022-03-21.
https://corporatefinanceinstitute.com/resources/data/public-filings/prospectus/

El Ghoul, Sadok, Omrane Guedhami, Chuck C.Y. Kwok, and Dev R. Mishra, 2011,
Does corporate social responsibility affect the cost of capital? Journal of Banking &
Finance 35, 2388-2406.

Ellis, Paul D, 2010, The Essential Guide to Effect Sizes: Statistical Power, Meta-
Analysis, and the Interpretation of Research Results (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge).

Ernst & Young Global Limited (EY), 2022, Global IPO market experiences significant
slowdown in Q1 2022, Retrieved: 2022-05-01.
https://www.ey.com/en_gl/news/2022/03/global-ipo-market-experiences-significant-
slowdown-in-q1-2022?fbclid=IwAR0c_Hif2vRIp6DL-pP25B-
EEtyNw86uUqU7cxUhiDtV2XbADUFZ7jjpBiY

Euroclear Sweden AB, 2021, Aktieägandet i Sverige 2020.

Faul, F., Erdfelder, A.-G. E., Lang, and A. Buchner, 2007, G*Power 3: A flexible
statistical power analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences,
Behavior Research Methods 39, 175-191.

Fenili, Alessandro, and Carlo Raimondo, 2021, ESG and the Pricing of IPOs: Does
Sustainability Matter, Working Paper, Social Science Research Network (SSRN).

Fidelity Investments Inc. n.d., Investing in IPOs and other equity new issue offerings,
Retrieved: 2022-03-22. https://www.fidelity.com/learning-center/trading-
investing/trading/investing-in-ipos

Friede, Gunnar, Timo Bush, and Alexander Bassen, 2015, ESG and financial
performance: aggregated evidence from more than 2000 empirical studies, Journal of
Sustainable Finance & Investment 5(4), 210-233.

Global Sustainable Investment Alliance (GSIA), 2013, Global Sustainable Investment
Review 2012.

Global Sustainable Investment Alliance (GSIA), 2021, Global Sustainable Investment
Review 2020.

Hartzmark, Samuel M., and Abigail B. Sussman, 2019, Do Investors Value
Sustainability? A Natural Experiment Examining Ranking and Fund Flows, Journal of
Finance 74(6), 2789-2837.

                                     29
Holbrook, Allyson, 2008, Response Order Effects, in Paul J. Lavrakas, ed.:
Encyclopedia of Survey Research Methods, Vol. 1 & 2 (Sage Publications, Inc.,
Thousand Oaks, CA).

Holyk, Gregory G., 2008, Context Effect, in Paul J. Lavrakas, ed.: Encyclopedia of
Survey Research Methods, Vol. 1 & 2 (Sage Publications, Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA).

Holyk, Gregory G., 2008, Questionnaire Design, in Paul J. Lavrakas, ed.: Encyclopedia
of Survey Research Methods, Vol. 1 & 2 (Sage Publications, Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA).

International Business Machines Corporation (IBM), 2021, Binomial Test Options
(One-Sample Nonparametric Tests), Retrieved: 2022-03-27.
https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/spss-statistics/28.0.0?topic=tests-binomial-test-options-
one-sample-nonparametric

Knapp, Thomas R., 2008, Random Assignment, in Paul J. Lavrakas, ed.: Encyclopedia
of Survey Research Methods, Vol. 1 & 2 (Sage Publications, Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA).

Kreuter, Frauke, 2008, Interviewer Effects, in Paul J. Lavrakas, ed.: Encyclopedia of
Survey Research Methods, Vol. 1 & 2 (Sage Publications, Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA).

Lagerkvist, C. J., A. K. Edenbrandt, I. Tibbelin, and Y. Wahlstedt, 2020, Preferences for
sustainable and responsible equity funds – A choice experiment with Swedish private
investors, Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Finance 28, 100406.

Lagoarde-Segot, Thomas and Bernard Paranque, 2018, Finance and sustainability: From
ideology to utopia, International Review of Financial Analysis 55, 80-92.

Lee, Geon, 2008, Mode-related Error, in Paul J. Lavrakas, ed.: Encyclopedia of Survey
Research Methods, Vol. 1 & 2 (Sage Publications, Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA).

Lenssen, Joris-Johann, Nikolay A. Dentchev, and Ludwig Roger, 2014, Sustainability,
risk management and governance: towards an integrative approach, Corporate
Governance 14(5), 670-684.

MacFarland, Thomas, W., and Jan M. Yates, 2016, Introduction to Nonparametric
Statistics for the Biological Sciences Using R (Springer Nature, Berlin).

Maitland, Aaron, 2008, Attitude Measurement, in Paul J. Lavrakas, ed.: Encyclopedia
of Survey Research Methods, Vol. 1 & 2 (Sage Publications, Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA).

Michelson, G., N. Wailes, S. van der Laan, and G. Frost, 2004, Ethical investment
processes and outcomes, Journal of Business Ethics 52(1), 1-10.

Morgan Stanley Capital International Inc. (MSCI), n.d., The Evolution of ESG
Investing, Retrieved: 2022-03-22. https://www.msci.com/esg-101-what-is-
esg/evolution-of-esg-investing

Newbold, Paul, William L. Carlson, and Betty M. Thorne, 2020, Statistics for Business
                     th
and Economics, 9  Global ed. (Pearson Education Limited, Harlow).

Newman, Stuart, and Nadja Picard, 2022, Global IPO Watch 2021: A PwC Global IPO

                                     30
Centre publication, PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC).

Noymer, Andrew, 2008, Alpha, Significance Level of Test, in Paul J. Lavrakas, ed.:
Encyclopedia of Survey Research Methods, Vol. 1 & 2 (Sage Publications, Inc.,
Thousand Oaks, CA).

Pérez-Gladish, Blanca, Karen Benson, and Robert Faff, 2012, Profiling socially
responsible investors: Australian evidence, Australian Journal of Management 37(2),
189-209.

Price, John, 2018, IPOs: How do investors decide? Governance directions 69(10), 584-
585.

Reber, Beat, Agnes Gold, and Stefan Gold, 2021, ESG Disclosure and Idiosyncratic
Risk in Initial Public Offerings, Journal of Business Ethics.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-021-04847-8

RevolutionRace (RVRC), 2021, Invitation to Acquire Shares in RVRC Holding AB
(publ), IPO prospectus.

Sheth, Jagdish N., Nirmal K. Setia, and Shanthi Srinivas, 2011, Mindful consumption: a
customer-centric approach to sustainability, Journal of the Academy of Marketing
Science 39, 21-39.

Singh, Mohini, and Sandra Peters, 2019, The Case for Quarterly and Environmental,
Social, and Governance Reporting, The CFA Institute.

Stoutenborough, James W., 2008, Semantic Differential Technique, in Paul J. Lavrakas,
ed.: Encyclopedia of Survey Research Methods, Vol. 1 & 2 (Sage Publications, Inc.,
Thousand Oaks, CA).

S&P Global Inc., 2020, What is the difference between ESG investing and socially
responsible investing? Retrieved: 2022-03-27. https://www.spglobal.com/en/research-
insights/articles/what-is-the-difference-between-esg-investing-and-socially-responsible-
investing

United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), n.d., Corporate social
responsibility for market integration, Retrieved: 2022-03-21.
https://www.unido.org/our-focus/advancing-economic-competitiveness/competitive-
trade-capacities-and-corporate-responsibility/corporate-social-responsibility-market-
integration

Zoe, Thomas, 2014, US disclosure overload hurts retail investors, International
                                              th
Financial Law Review, May 7 .

                                     31
         Appendix 1 – A Priori Sample Size Estimation

Control Group:

[1] -- Wednesday, April 20, 2022 -- 18:53:31
Exact - • Generic binomial test

Options: α balancing: α/2 on each side

Analysis: A priori: Compute required sample size
Input: Tail(s) = Two
              Proportion p2 = 0.5447
              α err prob = 0.05
              Power (1-β err prob) = 0.8
              Proportion p1 = 0.5
Output: Lower critical N = 463
              Upper critical N = 526
              Total sample size = 989
              Actual power = 0.8005630
              Actual α = 0.0486136

Treatment Group 1-3:

[2] -- Wednesday, April 20, 2022 -- 18:53:42
Exact - • Generic binomial test

Analysis: A priori: Compute required sample size
Input: Tail(s) = One
              Proportion p2 = 0.5447
              α err prob = 0.05
              Power (1-β err prob) = 0.8
              Proportion p1 = 0.5
Output: Lower critical N = 412
              Upper critical N = 412
              Total sample size = 777
              Actual power = 0.8010633
              Actual α = 0.0494157

                                     32
Appendix 2 – Demographics of the Questionnaire Participants

                                                Table 7: Demographics of the Questionnaire Participants

                          AGGREGATED     CONTROL GROUP TREATMENT 1      TREATMENT 2 TREATMENT 3

Age                       Count Proportion (%)  Count Proportion (%) Count Proportion (%) Count Proportion (%) Count Proportion (%)

0 - 19 years                     6        3.9%     1 2.7% 2 6.3% 2 3.8% 1 3.2%

20 - 39 years                   130       85.5%    35 94.6% 26 81.3% 42 80.8% 27 87.1%

40 - 59 years                    14        9.2%     0 0.0% 4 12.5% 7 13.5% 3 9.7%

60 - 79 years                    2        1.3%     1 2.7% 0 0.0% 1 1.9% 0 0.0%

80+ years                      0        0.0%     0 0.0% 0 0.0% 0 0.0% 0 0.0%

Total 152      100.0%    37 100.0% 32 100.0% 52 100.0% 31      100.0%

Gender                     Count Proportion (%)  Count Proportion (%) Count Proportion (%) Count Proportion (%) Count Proportion (%)

Male 102 67.1% 28 75.7% 22 68.8% 35 67.3% 17 54.8%

Female 49 32.2% 9 24.3% 10 31.3% 16 30.8% 14 45.2%

Prefer not to say 1 0.7% 0 0.0% 0 0.0% 1 1.9% 0 0.0%

Total 152 100.0% 37 100.0% 32 100.0% 52 100.0% 31      100.0%

Frequency of private stock investmentsCount Proportion (%)  Count Proportion (%) Count Proportion (%) Count Proportion (%) Count Proportion (%)

Prefer not to say 5 3.3% 0 0.0% 1 3.1% 2 3.8% 2 6.5%

Never 10 6.6% 4 10.8% 4 12.5% 1 1.9% 1 3.2%

Less than once a year 12 7.9% 2 5.4% 3 9.4% 4 7.7% 3 9.7%

Once a year 10 6.6% 1 2.7% 3 9.4% 2 3.8% 4 12.9%

Once a half-year 19 12.5% 2 5.4% 4 12.5% 10 19.2% 3 9.7%

Once a quarter 32 21.1% 10 27.0% 4 12.5% 10 19.2% 8 25.8%

Once a month 42 27.6% 16 43.2% 7 21.9% 11 21.2% 8 25.8%

More than once a month 22 14.5% 2 5.4% 6 18.8% 12 23.1% 2 6.5%

Total 152 100.0% 37 100.0% 32 100.0% 52 100.0% 31      100.0%

An overview of the demographical distribution in the sample as a whole, as well as split among the individual test groups

                                     33
       Appendix 3 – Multiple Linear Regression Results

                       Table 8: Muliple Linear Regression of the Attitude Score in the Control Group

               CONTROL GROUP                             Attitude score of an IPO candidate

                   Predictors Coefficient estimates 95% confidence interval p

Intercept (α) 2.623 1.650 - 3.596 <0.001

Dummy - Applied treatment: "disclose" (t1) n.a. n.a. n.a.

Dummy - Applied treatment: "ESG" (t2) n.a. n.a. n.a.

ImpE (x1) -0.022 (-0.221) - 0.177 0.826

ImpS (x2) -0.052 (-0.218) - 0.114 0.531

ImpG (x3) -0.050 (-0.241) - 0.142 0.606

ImpDiscl (x4) 0.184 0.004 - 0.364 0.045

Dummy - Age group: 0-19 years (a1) -0.259 (-1.716) - 1.198 0.723

Dummy - Age group: 20-39 years (a2) 0.815 (-0.124) - 1.755 0.088

Dummy - Age group: 40-59 years (a3) n.a. n.a. n.a.

Dummy - Gender: male (g1) n.a. n.a. n.a.

Dummy - Gender: female (g2) -0.158 (-0.487) - 0.171 0.340

Dummy - Private investment activity: never (p1) 0.331 (-0.202) - 0.864 0.219

Dummy - Private investment activity: less than once a year (p2) -0.582 (-1.210) - 0.046 0.069

Dummy - Private investment activity: once a year (p3) 0.192 (-0.684) - 1.068 0.663

Dummy - Private investment activity: once a half-year (p4) -0.504 (-1.172) - 0.164 0.136

Dummy - Private investment activity: once a quarter (p5) -0.114 (-0.447) - 0.220 0.498

Dummy - Private investment activity: once a month (p6) n.a. n.a. n.a.

Dummy - Private investment activity: more than once a month (p7) 0.321 (-0.509) - 1.152 0.442

Observations 74

 2   2
R / R adjusted 0.244 / 0.080

A regression table for the dependent variable of attitude score, with the two applied treatment variables, the E,S,G and disclosure
importance scores, and the demographics as independent variables together predicting the dependent variable of attitude score for a "non-
disclose and non-ESG" IPO candidate in the control group.

                                     34
                       Table 9: Muliple Linear Regression of the Attitude Score in Treatment Group 1

             TREATMENT GROUP 1                            Attitude score of an IPO candidate

                   Predictors Coefficient estimates 95% confidence interval p

Intercept (α) 2.804 1.028 - 4.580 0.003

Dummy - Applied treatment: "disclose" (t1) -0.812 (-1.333) - (-0.292) 0.003

Dummy - Applied treatment: "ESG" (t2) n.a. n.a. n.a.

ImpE (x1) -0.276 (-0.731) - 0.180 0.229

ImpS (x2) 0.053 (-0.582) - 0.688 0.868

ImpG (x3) -0.163 (-0.537) - 0.211 0.385

ImpDiscl (x4) 0.217 (-0.060) - 0.493 0.122

Dummy - Age group: 0-19 years (a1) -1.029 (-2.385) - 0.327 0.133

Dummy - Age group: 20-39 years (a2) n.a. n.a. n.a.

Dummy - Age group: 40-59 years (a3) -0.151 (-1.524) - 1.221 0.825

Dummy - Gender: male (g1) n.a. n.a. n.a.

Dummy - Gender: female (g2) -0.422 (-1.214) - 0.370 0.290

Dummy - Private investment activity: never (p1) 1.192 (-0.722) - 3.107 0.217

Dummy - Private investment activity: less than once a year (p2) 1.288 (-1.017) - 3.593 0.267

Dummy - Private investment activity: once a year (p3) 1.413 (-0.684) - 3.510 0.182

Dummy - Private investment activity: once a half-year (p4) 0.897 (-0.942) - 2.736 0.332

Dummy - Private investment activity: once a quarter (p5) 1.136 (-1.065) - 3.337 0.304

Dummy - Private investment activity: once a month (p6) 1.372 (-0.509) - 3.254 0.149

Dummy - Private investment activity: more than once a month (p7) 1.380 (-0.329) - 3.089 0.111

Observations 64

 2   2
R / R adjusted 0.295 / 0.075

A regression table for the dependent variable of attitude score, with the two applied treatment variables, the E,S,G and disclosure
importance scores, and the demographics as independent variables together predicting the dependent variable of attitude score for a
"disclose and non-ESG" IPO candidate in treatment group 1.

                                     35
                      Table 10: Muliple Linear Regression of the Attitude Score in Treatment Group 2

             TREATMENT GROUP 2                            Attitude score of an IPO candidate

                   Predictors Coefficient estimates 95% confidence interval p

Intercept (α) 3.589 1.004 - 6.173 0.007

Dummy - Applied treatment: "disclose" (t1) n.a. n.a. n.a.

Dummy - Applied treatment: "ESG" (t2) 1.385 0.976 - 1.793 <0.001

ImpE (x1) -0.098 (-0.388) - 0.192 0.504

ImpS (x2) 0.073 (-0.174) - 0.321 0.558

ImpG (x3) -0.092 (-0.406) - 0.222 0.563

ImpDiscl (x4) 0.132 (-0.046) - 0.309 0.144

Dummy - Age group: 0-19 years (a1) -0.303 (-2.855) - 2.248 0.814

Dummy - Age group: 20-39 years (a2) 0.435 (-1.937) - 2.806 0.717

Dummy - Age group: 40-59 years (a3) 0.311 (-2.177) - 2.800 0.804

Dummy - Gender: male (g1) -1.933 (-3.973) - 0.107 0.063

Dummy - Gender: female (g2) -1.715 (-3.818) - 0.387 0.108

Dummy - Private investment activity: never (p1) 0.359 (-1.932) - 2.649 0.756

Dummy - Private investment activity: less than once a year (p2) 0.372 (-1.508) - 2.253 0.695

Dummy - Private investment activity: once a year (p3) 0.176 (-1.918) - 2.269 0.868

Dummy - Private investment activity: once a half-year (p4) -0.104 (-1.879) - 1.671 0.908

Dummy - Private investment activity: once a quarter (p5) 0.565 (-1.232) - 2.361 0.534

Dummy - Private investment activity: once a month (p6) 0.177 (-1.657) - 2.010 0.849

Dummy - Private investment activity: more than once a month (p7) 0.161 (-1.572) - 1.894 0.854

Observations 104

 2   2
R / R adjusted 0.402 / 0.283

A regression table for the dependent variable of attitude score, with the two applied treatment variables, the E,S,G and disclosure
importance scores, and the demographics as independent variables together predicting the dependent variable of attitude score for a
"disclose and ESG" IPO candidate in treatment group 2.

                                     36
                      Table 11: Muliple Linear Regression of the Attitude Score in Treatment Group 3

             TREATMENT GROUP 3                            Attitude score of an IPO candidate

                   Predictors Coefficient estimates 95% confidence interval p

Intercept (α) 1.835 0.519 - 3.151 0.007

Dummy - Applied treatment: "disclose" (t1) n.a. n.a. n.a.

Dummy - Applied treatment: "ESG" (t2) 1.387 0.978 - 1.796 <0.001

ImpE (x1) 0.091 (-0.289) - 0.470 0.633

ImpS (x2) -0.162 (-0.506) - 0.181 0.347

ImpG (x3) 0.047 (-0.253) - 0.347 0.755

ImpDiscl (x4) 0.014 (-0.167) - 0.196 0.876

Dummy - Age group: 0-19 years (a1) -0.323 (-2.690) - 2.043 0.784

Dummy - Age group: 20-39 years (a2) n.a. n.a. n.a.

Dummy - Age group: 40-59 years (a3) -0.452 (-1.244) - 0.340 0.256

Dummy - Gender: male (g1) n.a. n.a. n.a.

Dummy - Gender: female (g2) -0.004 (-0.645) - 0.638 0.990

Dummy - Private investment activity: never (p1) 1.815 0.196 - 3.434 0.029

Dummy - Private investment activity: less than once a year (p2) 0.899 (-0.393) - 2.191 0.168

Dummy - Private investment activity: once a year (p3) 1.695 0.344 - 3.046 0.015

Dummy - Private investment activity: once a half-year (p4) 1.057 (-0.434) - 2.548 0.160

Dummy - Private investment activity: once a quarter (p5) 0.901 (-0.145) - 1.948 0.090

Dummy - Private investment activity: once a month (p6) 0.925 (-0.307) - 2.157 0.137

Dummy - Private investment activity: more than once a month (p7) 1.623 0.382 - 2.863 0.011

Observations 62

 2   2
R / R adjusted 0.351 / 0.310

A regression table for the dependent variable of attitude score, with the two applied treatment variables, the E,S,G and disclosure
importance scores, and the demographics as independent variables together predicting the dependent variable of attitude score for a
"disclose and ESG" IPO candidate in treatment group 3.

                                     37
Appendix 4 – Categories of IPO Candidates and Their One-Pager
                     Presentations

Figure 5: Example of a “non-disclose and non-ESG company” One-Pager

The figure below shows a one-pager used in the questionnaire to present an IPO
candidate that neither considers ESG in its business nor discloses any information
regarding its poor ESG performance.

                                     38
Figure 6: Example of a “disclose and non-ESG company” One-Pager

The figure below shows a one-pager used in the questionnaire to present an IPO
candidate that does not consider ESG in its business but discloses information regarding
its poor ESG performance.

                                     39
Figure 7: Example of a “disclose and ESG company” One-Pager

The figure below shows a one-pager used in the questionnaire to present an IPO
candidate that considers ESG in its business and discloses the information regarding its
good ESG performance.

                                     40
         Appendix 5 – The Flow of the Questionnaire

Figure 8: The Structure of the Self-Completion Questionnaire Used for the
Experiment

The figure below shows how the self-completion questionnaire was structured, starting
with a randomization for the allocation of participants to the 4 test groups, two
subsequent blocks, each specially designated for the test subjects in treatment groups 2
and 3, as well as joint blocks with follow-up questions towards the conclusion of the
questionnaire.

.

                                     41
                      Appendix 6 – The Questionnaire

INTRO

 Dear participant,

 Thank you for taking the time and contributing to our study!

 Your answers are completely anonymous and cannot be traced back to you. If you
 wish, you can exit the survey at any time. Please note that if you want to participate in
 the lottery, you have to submit your phone number at the end of the survey. This is for
 us to be able to send you the prize money via Swish, in case you win the lottery. Your
 phone number will not be used for any other purposes than that. You can find more
 information about the lottery at the end of the survey.

 If you have any question regarding the study, feel free to contact us on
 24735@student.hhs.se or 24737@student.hhs.se.

 Best regards,
 Alfred and Richard

 Block 1.1 (Control Group)

 Assume a hypothetical scenario where you have 10,000 SEK that you want to invest
 by buying shares in a company in the clothing industry. Currently, two companies that
 operate in the clothing industry are listing their shares on the public stock market, i.e.
 going through an IPO. These companies will be presented to you in the next section.

 Read the company presentations thoroughly and choose ONE of the two firms to
 invest 10,000 SEK into, and answer the subsequent questions.

                                              42
43
Please rank your attitude towards the two companies on a scale of 1-5, with 1 being
extremely negative and 5 being extremely positive.

                          Extremely negative Extremely positive
                            1 2 3 4 5
 Company A
 Company B

Which company do you choose to invest 10,000 SEK into?

   Company A
   Company B

Block 1.2 (Treatment group 1: Non-Disclose Non-ESG vs. Disclose Non-ESG)

Assume a hypothetical scenario where you have 10,000 SEK that you want to invest
by buying shares in a company in the clothing industry. Currently, two companies that
operate in the clothing industry are listing their shares on the public stock market, i.e.
going through an IPO. These companies will be presented to you in the next section.

Read the company presentations thoroughly and choose ONE of the two firms to
invest 10,000 SEK into, and answer the subsequent questions.

                                             44
45
Please rank your attitude towards the two companies on a scale of 1-5, with 1 being
extremely negative and 5 being extremely positive.

                     Extremely negative Extremely positive
                         1 2 3 4 5
 Company A
 Company B

Which company do you choose to invest 10,000 SEK into?

   Company A

   Company B

Block 1.3 (Treatment Group 2: Disclose Non-ESG vs. Disclose ESG)

Assume a hypothetical scenario where you have 10,000 SEK that you want to invest
by buying shares in a company in the clothing industry. Currently, two companies that
operate in the clothing industry are listing their shares on the public stock market, i.e.
going through an IPO. These companies will be presented to you in the next section.

                                             46
Read the company presentations thoroughly and choose ONE of the two firms to
invest 10,000 SEK into, and answer the subsequent questions.

                                             47
Please rank your attitude towards the two companies on a scale of 1-5, with 1 being
extremely negative and 5 being extremely positive.

                     Extremely negative Extremely positive
                         1 2 3 4 5
 Company A
 Company B

Which company do you choose to invest 10,000 SEK into?

   Company A
   Company B

Block 1.4 (Treatment Group 3: Non-Disclose Non-ESG vs. Disclose ESG)

Assume a hypothetical scenario where you have 10,000 SEK that you want to invest
by buying shares in a company in the clothing industry. Currently, two companies that
operate in the clothing industry are listing their shares on the public stock market, i.e.
going through an IPO. These companies will be presented to you in the next section.

Read the company presentations thoroughly and choose ONE of the two firms to
invest 10,000 SEK into, and answer the subsequent questions.

                                             48
49
Please rank your attitude towards the two companies on a scale of 1-5, with 1 being
extremely negative and 5 being extremely positive.

                     Extremely negative Extremely positive
                         1 2 3 4 5
 Company A
 Company B

Which company do you choose to invest 10,000 SEK into?

   Company A
   Company B

                                             50
Block 1.3.1

You will now be presented with a list of 4 factors. Please indicate how important you
each factor was for your choice of company in the previous exercise.

                             I do not  Not at all   Slightly   Moderately    Very    Extremely
                            know   important  important   important  important  important
 The company's financial
 development and
 expansion plans
 The company's emission
 levels, material, pesticide
 & water usage
 The company's
 consideration for human
 rights, safe workplaces &
 fair wages
 The gender and
 background diversity of
 the company's
 management team

Block 1.4.1

You will now be presented with a list of 4 factors. Please indicate how important you
each factor was for your choice of company in the previous exercise.

                             I do not  Not at all   Slightly   Moderately    Very    Extremely
                            know   important  important   important  important  important
 The company's financial
 development and
 expansion plans
 The company's emission
 levels, material, pesticide
 & water usage
 The company's
 consideration for human
 rights, safe workplaces &
 fair wages
 The gender and
 background diversity of
 the company's
 management team

                                             51
Block 2

You will now be presented with 4 different factors. Please indicate how important you
consider these factors to be when you decide which companies to invest your money
into in real life.

                             I do not  Not at all   Slightly   Moderately    Very    Extremely
                            know   important  important   important  important  important
 The company's impact
 on the environment, e.g.
 via pollution, energy &
 resource use, waste
 management, etc.
 The company's
 consideration for social
 issues, e.g. labor
 standards, human &
 employee rights, gender
 & diversity, etc.
 The company's
 governance, e.g. board
 composition, stance on
 bribery & corruption,
 lobbying & political
 contributions, etc.
 The company discloses
 information about its
 ESG-efforts publicly

                                             52
Block 3

Please select your age group.

    0-19 years old

    20-39 years old

    40-59 years old
    60-79 years old

    80+ years old

What is your gender?

   Male
   Female

    Non-binary / third gender
    Prefer not to say

How frequently do you as a private person make stock investments?

                                    Less                                More
                       Prefer           than           Once a                   than
                        not to           once a  Once a   half-   Once a  Once a  once a
                        say Never   year    year    year   quarter  month  month
 Frequency

What were you asked to do in this survey?

    Choose a bank to borrow 10,000 SEK from.

    Choose a semester trip to spend 10,000 SEK on.

    Choose one company to invest 10,000 SEK into.

                                             53
Block 4

If you would like to participate in our lottery and get the chance to win 1,000 SEK,
please submit your phone number down below. Your phone number will only be used
to send you the prize money via Swish (only available to Swedish residents), if and
only if, you win the lottery. PLEASE DO NOT FORGET TO CONTINUE TO THE
NEXT SECTION IN ORDER FOR YOUR ANSWERS TO BE SUBMITTED.

By entering my phone number below, I confirm my wish to participate in the
lottery.Only Swedish phone numbers are eligible!

                                        Powered by Qualtrics

                                             54