RAISING  CAPITAL  DURING A CRISIS

      AN  INVESTIGATION  ON  MARKET  REACTIONS  TO  EQUITY
      RAISES   THROUGH   RIGHTS   OFFERINGS   AND   PRIVATE
      PLACEMENTS IN PUBLIC EQUITY  BEFORE AND DURING THE
     PANDEMIC

     MELKER HÜBSCH

      NILS MÅRDING

        Bachelor Thesis

        Stockholm School of Economics

       2022
Raising  Capital During a Crisis: An Investigation  on Market Reactions to Equity
Raises Through  Rights Offerings and  Private  Placements in Public Equity Before
and During the Pandemic.
Abstract:

   This study examines returns following announcement of upcoming private placements
   and rights offerings, before and during the Covid-19 pandemic, to measure  investor
   preferences  in  method  of equity financing.  The results  produced  did not differ
   significantly between the time periods. An  increase in preferences for  private
   placements in public equity over rights offerings was  noted but  could not be
   statistically proven.  We used a  matching algorithm to identify  announcements and
   corresponding  returns of companies that shared similar  qualities, a method that we
   believe can be expanded upon to  yield more elaborate and significant results in  future
   applications.

Keywords:

   Private  Placements  in Public Equity, Rights Offerings, Market Sentiment, Covid-19,
  Machine Learning

Authors:

   Melker Hübsch (24831)
   Nils Mårding  (24655)

Tutors:

Zhang Ye,  Assistant Professor in Finance
Examiner:

Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis

Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Melker Hübsch and Nils Mårding, 2022

                                   1
1.  Introduction & Background

The Covid-19 pandemic impacted the world in many ways, and the financial markets
were no exception. The spread of the virus and the following economic impact created
considerable uncertainty.  Governments and central banks  responded in numerous ways
to maintain economic and financial stability, wherein several actions were directed  to
ensure continued liquidity and predictability  in financial markets. This paper aims to
investigate  whether  investor  preferences regarding equity financing  changed during the
pandemic  as opposed  to the years before it.  We  measure the relative returns  of  matched
pairs of  private placements in public equity (“PIPEs”) and rights  offerings,  which
aggregated provide how  the transactions were received in the market before and during
the pandemic.  If relative  reactions change significantly, this should imply a shift in
preferences, with  implications on how investors interpret signals implied by the offerings
regarding, among other things, corporate governance, investment opportunities, and  firm
financial health.  It is  our hope that  such insight  can be leveraged  to better understand
investor behavior in  times of uncertainty.

Earlier papers have examined the performance of companies announcing PIPEs and rights
offerings, upon which we extend the existing research by  adding a  temporal  comparative
dimension, as well as a larger emphasis on comparing returns through matching. We also
conduct  four regressions, one on each final  dataset, to control the integrity  of  transaction
type as key in explaining announcement day returns.

The  study did not produce  statistically  significant  changes  in relative returns between the
two time periods examined.  We can therefore not with certainty  conclude  that investor
preferences regarding method of equity financing changed during the pandemic, though
the results indicate that such a shift did take place in favor of PIPEs.  Both average and
median relative returns  yield this implication, supported  by a  strong performance of
PIPEs during the pandemic which was not counteracted by a similarly strong trend among
rights  offerings.  The volatile markets of the pandemic  might have valued the signaling
made available by PIPEs.  It is possible that an improved  matching algorithm and
corresponding larger final datasets would produce  similar results at  significant levels.

  1.1   Private Placements in Public Equity

PIPEs are  a  way of raising capital through the issuance of primary equity to a select group of
investors. Non-participating shareholders, which in publicly traded firms are the majority, thus

                                   2
suffer from dilution. The firm issuing equity can, together with its advisors, effectively choose its
new shareholders. This, in conjunction with their relative time advantage due to a discretionary
book building process as opposed to a subscription  period, makes them a preferable method of
raising capital when the firm in question desires flexibility. The ability to control what new
shareholders gain influence in the company has several implications. Firstly, it allows  the
selection of strategically more advantageous shareholders, with regards to stated intentions,
investment horizon,  reputation,  and expertise. Secondly, this power to select investors allows
management to shift the distribution of votes in what direction they deem desirable, thus entailing
effects on corporate governance-related matters. This stems from that the capital raised is
distributed among a smaller number of investors, resulting in  those investors  partaking to greater
extents acquire considerable voting rights. The selective targeting of investors enables companies
and potential investors to enter discussions during the book building process, before public
announcements of upcoming transactions. While no binding agreements are to be reached before
such announcements, details and corresponding intentions can be indicated. PIPEs are common
among relatively smaller firms that seek quick access to capital and lower issuance costs. These
lower costs are offset by higher expected returns from investors in  contrast to other forms of
equity financing  (Lim et al., 2021).

  1.2   Rights Offerings

Rights offerings are a more conventional method for raising capital via primary equity, wherein
existing shareholders receive subscription rights at a predetermined pro rata number which in turn
is based on shareholding at a set and publicly announced date. Subscription rights can in turn be
traded during a subscription period, after which the rights can be exchanged for the right to
subscribe for new shares at a fixed exchange rate. This method of equity issue allows existing
shareholders to preserve their ownership share, as subscribing the entire stock of subscription
rights given pro rata fully protects from dilution.  Transactions  can be structured in several ways,
with  or without underwriting and guarantors, including solutions where the transaction is not
carried through if a certain threshold of subscribed shares is not reached, that a subscription period
where no subscription rights are needed to subscribe for new shares is held after the initial
subscription period, or that the transaction is completed regardless of participation. Rights
offerings entail a more complicated structuring process than PIPEs as the timeline of any given
transaction is longer and includes a  significantly larger number of participants. As opposed to

                                   3
PIPEs, changes in shareholding structure  are  decided by the market rather than the issuing firm,
since firms do not control what investors hold subscription rights at the control date.

  1.3   Signaling Through Financing

The matter of asymmetric information is highly present in the context of equity issues, stemming
from the superior insight and understanding of the firm in question that management possesses as
compared outside investors. As illustrated by Akerlof (1970), the effects of a seller and buyer not
acting upon the same level of information creates the risk of no buyer being willing to pay more
than the expected value in the worst state. In terms of equity, this would imply that investors
would in theory only participate in an offering of new equity if the worst possible expected return
would be positive.  Myers & Majluf,  (1984)  elaborate on this reasoning, pointing out that
management that operate with the aim to maximize shareholder value will choose financing
alternatives in a certain order based wherein equity is to be used as a last resort, preceded by
retained earnings and debt, known as the pecking order hypothesis. This reasoning is based on
several considerations, but most relevant for this paper are the implications of information
asymmetry. In an effort to minimize cost of capital, management is only incentivized to issue
equity when no other financing is available at reasonable conditions, or when the share price is
exceeding levels that can be motivated by intrinsic value.  Both  conclusions imply that the
announcement of an equity issue signals to investors that the outlook of the firm has hindered it
from financing operations or new projects through other means, or that the implied valuation of
the offering exceeds intrinsic value. The pecking order hypothesis does not differentiate between
different types of equity offerings, but rather the different levels of information asymmetry in
terms of investment opportunities and firm health. For the sake of this paper, such reasoning could
be applied to the market reaction to announcements of PIPEs and rights offerings, wherein shifts
in relative reactions in the market could imply a corresponding shift in either how signals are
interpreted among investors, or what  details  the choice of equity offering signals to investors.

  1.4   Financial Markets during Covid-19

Relevant for this paper, and a significant basis for the reasoning on possible shifts in investor
sentiment, are the market conditions that have prevailed in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic.
As yields (CNBC, 2022)  and stock indices dropped (S&P Dow Jones Indices, 2022),  The Federal
Reserve countered by announcing decreases to the federal fund’s rate on two occasions, on the

                                   4
third and fifteenth of March 2020, of which the latter was accompanied by the announcement of
an expansion of the Federal Reserve balance sheet through asset purchases. These and other
measures taken were intended to provide sufficient liquidity and demand in the financial markets
to ensure their continued functioning, to in turn support economic outlook (The Federal Reserve,
2020). The asset purchases were as significant in magnitude and at their most intensive during the
remainder of March until early June, though the program of quantitative easing is still ongoing as
of March 2022 (The Federal Reserve, 2022).

Considering  the market uncertainty and government and central bank stimulus,   Jha, Liu and
Manela  (2021)  investigate  sentiment  towards  finance  during  natural  disasters,  including
epidemics, using data from 1870 to 2009. By combining quantified linguistic trends in literature
and natural disaster data, general interest and sentiment towards the financial markets are
estimated  to decrease and worsen following their occurrence. This shift is counteracted by
positive stock market performance induced by large government and central bank interventions.
When applying this methodology to finance sentiment in the US during the Covid-19  pandemic,
the authors find a noticeable decrease following the outbreak of the pandemic, followed by a
rebound shortly after. They relate this to the strong performance of the generally  forward-looking
equity   markets,   which   through   government   intervention-induced   performance   regained
legitimacy. They conclude by pointing out a weak but positive correlation between fiscal
responses to the pandemic and news-based finance sentiment. The initial decrease and subsequent
increase of trust in the financial markets among the public is mirrored by the development of
sentiment among institutional investors, as highlighted by BCG’s series of surveys Covid-19
Investor Pulse Check (2020, 2021). In its early editions, a majority of investors expressed a
pessimistic outlook for the remainder of the year. Investors sought firms that could act with
flexibility, with a majority seeking revised earnings guidance as well as transparent and increased
communication on short-term plans. A majority also expressed that firms should prioritize
investments rather than margin retention or expansion, as well as dividends and share repurchases.
Initial preferences for financing were in line with the pecking order hypothesis. By the end of
2020, on the other hand, only a quarter of respondents were bearish, with an increasing share
expecting positive developments from the economy and the stock market. The sentiment towards
issuing equity as a means for financing investments had also grown more positive,  equaling
preference for debt. Institutional participants in the market thus revised their expectations upward,
with an increased emphasis on the  importance  of equity financing.

                                   5
2.  Literature

(Andriosopoulos & Panetsidou, 2021) evaluate announcement returns as well as long-term share
price performance of  companies issuing equity via PIPEs during the period 1995-2015, taking
details on geography and the structure of the transactions into consideration. They find that
announcements of traditional PIPEs of common stock in the United States on average yield a
positive abnormal return of 2.03%, statistically significant at the 1% level. The other forms of
PIPEs accounted for generally result in inferior announcement returns, apart from PIPEs of non-
convertible debt and preferred stock as well as structured PIPEs of floating convertibles. Long-
term share price performance was found to be significantly negative following PIPEs. They also
conclude that firms issuing stock through PIPEs repeatedly see less positive market reactions on
announcement. Announcement returns have decreased globally over time after 2005, though to a
lesser extent in the US as compared to non-US markets. It is concluded that a growing proportion
of PIPEs are issued by smaller firms that to an increasing extent have worse financial
fundamentals. Furthermore, when controlling for differences in regulatory environments and
government corruption, markets performing better in such regard also see greater announcement
returns, implying a link between perceived quality of investor protection and market sentiment.
Finally, Andriosopoulos and Panetsidou find an increasing use of PIPEs among smaller firms in
the  latter  half of their studied  period, 2005-2015. These findings are highly relevant to us as we
would expect to see similar patterns in returns following announcements of PIPEs. Though we
are investigating the returns on the first trading day after announcement as opposed to the longer
time periods of their study, we can examine the implied signaling and market interpretation of
such signals.  If there is a significant shift in market reception, this could imply that market
sentiment has changed.

Chen et al., (2010) investigate the rationale behind firms’ choices between PIPEs and SEOs. They
conclude that PIPEs are more likely to be used if a  company has poor operational performance
and higher levels of information asymmetry between company management and outside
investors, thus having limited access to capital markets. PIPEs are in that regard to be considered
a last resort for firms seeking equity financing. It is also concluded that, in terms of valuation,
there is a positive correlation between use of PIPEs and stock undervaluation, implying that firms
turn to private investors with the expectation that they will conduct a due diligence process which
will reflect the intrinsic value of the company. Lastly, it is concluded that PIPEs are chosen due
to a relative cost advantage in issuance-related costs. The authors also investigate returns in
relation to SEOs and PIPEs around announcement as well as in the long-term. Returns around

                                   6
announcements were found to be significantly positive for PIPEs and negative for SEOs. They
relate this to the undervaluation of the share price that PIPEs may signal. Long-term returns were
negative for both methods, with PIPEs performing worse than SEOs. As these results are
comparative in nature, they provide valuable guidance on the patterns of returns that we can
expect to find in the data. As with the article by Andriosopoulos and Panetsidou (2021), we can
benchmark our findings against this previous research to examine whether the market perceives
the announcements of equity offerings differently during the particular market conditions of the
pandemic.  The article also provides a  strong baseline for a continued interpretation of market
reactions to equity issuances, especially with regards to the matters of performance and valuation
and the choice of financing.

White & Lusztig,  (1980)  investigate  the effects on share price that  announcements of rights
offerings entail. They conclude, through a regression model, that returns upon announcement of
upcoming rights offerings on average are significantly negative. They defer further investigation
as to why the market typically reacts negatively to such announcements to further research, but
assess that rights offerings are interpreted as negative signals by investors. They also examine
potential differences between returns following announcement and returns of the same stock five
trading days after announcement. They conclude that these do not differ to an extent that is
significant  and interpret this as a sign that investors assimilate information conveyed by
announcements quickly, implying support for the efficient capital market hypothesis. While the
article, and the data upon which it is based, is old, its conclusions on market reaction to
announcements of rights offerings is relevant to our paper. We expect our findings on returns
following announcements of rights offerings to align  with the findings of White and Lusztig, as
well as Chen et al. (2010). We hope to expand on these insights by contrasting the magnitude of
market reaction with those of PIPEs during the different time periods.

It is our aim to expand on the existing literature on market reactions to equity offerings along a
temporal dimension, by examining price movements during the pandemic, while expanding on
the matter by adding a comparative dimension between the two financing methods. In this way,
we hope to yield  new insights into the implications of choice of financing based on an evaluation
from a signaling perspective. Furthermore, it is our ambition to provide additional understanding
of the market conditions by evaluating and interpreting the results in a brief discussion based on
signaling theory.

                                   7
3.  Research Question

In light of the uncertainty in the financial markets during the pandemic, the significant
interventions conducted by the federal government, and those conducted by the Federal Reserve,
we aim to investigate whether market sentiment shifted in terms of preference for type of equity
financing during Covid-19. This has implications along two dimensions, namely what the choice
between rights offerings and PIPEs signals to investors, as well as how these signals are valued
by investors. The research question is  therefore as follows:

How did investor sentiment regarding equity financing change during the Covid-19 pandemic,
and what are the implications of such a potential change?

                                   8
4.  Method

   4.1 Testing for Difference

     4.1.1  Z-test to find  difference  in means

In order to find a significant answer to our research question, the aim of our method  is  to  provide
an answer to whether the market valued any of the two transaction types higher during the Covid-
19 crisis than what it did before. Our method will therefore look at the  market return on the first
day after an announced transaction. However, in order for us to determine if the sentiment
changed,  we must look at the difference in returns between companies who announced a PIPE
and companies who announced a rights offering during the one of the two periods. To reach such
an answer,  we  apply a method  which  based on  the matching of  companies,  or in  this case,
transactions,  as used  by  Datta et  al. (2001).  We thus  create  four  samples  of transactions: PIPEs
in the US and Canada announced between 1/7/2018  -  30/6/2019, PIPEs in the US and Canada
announced between 1/7/2020  -  30/6/2021,  Rights  Offerings  announced in the US and Canada
between 1/7/2018  -  30/6/2019, and  Rights  Offerings  which were announced between 1/7/2020  -
30/6/2021. The PIPEs’ returns are compared to the returns of the rights offers for each period by
subtracting the prior from the latter, which creates two new samples of differences during the two
periods. We can perform a  Z-test  with the null-hypothesis:

                                 𝐻!:  𝜇"!#$/#&  =  𝜇"!"!/"#

In order to determine if the two  samples  are different from each other  based on the mean of the
samples.  The null-hypothesis can then be rejected based on the probability of achieving a certain
Z-score. The Z-score is calculated by:

                      '𝑋)"!#$/#&  − 𝑋)"!"!/"#+ − (𝜇"!#$/#&  − 𝜇"!"!/"#)
                𝑍  =
                                       "          "
                                          𝜎"!#$/#&    𝜎"!"!/"#
                      .      +
                                          𝑛"!#$/#&   𝑛"!"!/"#

Based on the p-value generated from the test, we can either reject our null-hypothesis or not, and
thus determine if the differences in returns between the two periods are different or not.

                                   9
     4.1.2   Mood’s Median test.

Furthermore, in order to test  if the medians  of the  differences in first day after announcement
returns are  different,  we use  the non-parametric  Mood’s  Median Test.  In our  calculations we  will
have two  samples, differences in first day  after announcement returns 2018/19  and 2020/21. The
number of entries from each list that is greater than the median  is entered into  the first row of a
table, and the number of entries equal or below the respective medians are entered into the second
row  of the  table.  In order to get the final  p-value  that tells if the medians are  different or not, a
Chi-squared test is performed on the table. The  test-statistic  is  calculated:

                                                          "
                                         ,   *
                                          4𝑛'(  − 𝐸6'𝑛'(+7
                              "
                𝜒 =  3 3
                                                    𝐸6'𝑛'(+
                                    '+# (+#

                                                                                                       ,!    *"
Where  𝑟, 𝑐  is the rows and  columns  in the table,  and  𝐸6'𝑛'(+  =  𝑛'𝑝<- 𝑝<. +  =  𝑛 4 7 4  7  =
                                                                        /    /
,!∗*"
    . With the degrees of  freedom  being  𝑑𝑓  =  (𝑟  − 1)(𝑐  − 1).  Finally,  the  p-value is
 /
calculated  by comparing the  test statistic with the  chi-squared distribution.

  4.2  Assumptions

In order to complete the Z-test, three assumptions have to be tested. Firstly, the  samples  must be
independent from each other. Second, the samples must be large (n ≥ 30) and preferably normally
distributed (although not an important assumption if the samples are large).  As the Mood’s
Median test  is a non-parametric  test it does not  assume  normality. However, it does assume that
the  samples  follow  two distributions with the same shape.

Furthermore, we assume that the returns are an indicator of market sentiment. This means that we
assume that the return  cannot  be explained by another factor, such as industry effect nor time
specific effects. As the dataset  is represented by transactions  announced  over the course of 12
months,  we assume that the randomization  solves the potential problem of time specific effects
over the whole  dataset, such as news stories that might affect the daily returns or macro-events
that would affect overall daily market returns.

                                  10
   4.3  The Matching  Problem

Due to the  heterogeneity  among companies in  the original four  samples, the data  must  be sorted
in a way that generates the most representative  samples  possible. The problem is that the return
after an announced PIPE and an announced rights offerings  will be vastly different if the
companies themselves are vastly different.  Since smaller companies are potentially more
dependent on the transaction, an announcement might cause a far bigger reaction in the market
return than what the announcement of an equal transaction would for a large company. Therefore,
it is necessary to match the companies who announced a  rights  offering  in 2018/19 to similar
companies who announced a PIPE in 2018/19, as illustrated in fig  1.

fig 1. Illustration of the matching-problem. It is evident that Rn  would be the best match for P1

     4.3.1   K-Means++ Machine  Learning Algorithm

In order to solve the matching-problem,  we are using the  K-Means++ algorithm  (Arthur &
Vassilvitskii, 2007), which is an improved version of the  K-Means algorithm. The K-Means
algorithm divides a set of data points into clusters of points which are similar to each other based
on the  selected  properties of the data. First, the algorithm chooses an initial  𝐾  centers  𝐶  =
{𝑐!, … , 𝑐"}  .  Then for every  𝑖  ∈  {1, … , 𝐾}  it changes  𝐶#  in order for the data points  𝜒  to be closer

                                                                                   !
to the centers  based on the  Euclidean  distance to each point from the  center  𝐶: 𝑐#  =    ∑ &∈( 𝑥,
                                                                                                                   |%!|
where the  Euclidean  distance  is calculated by:

                                  11
                                        /
                                       "                 "
                          ‖𝑎 − 𝑏‖" =  3(𝑎'  − 𝑏')
                                              '+#

The algorithm returns the clusters that have the minimum sum of squared distances, i.e.,  the
cluster of points which are most  like  each other.  However, the K-Means algorithm shares two
common problems for any machine learning  algorithm,  speed,  and accuracy. For the K-Means

                                       )
algorithm, given a set of  𝑛  data points  𝜒  ⊂  ℝ , it chooses  𝐾  centers  𝐶  to  minimize the function:

                                                      "
                         𝜙  =  3 min‖𝑥 − 𝑐‖
                                          *∈2
                                   3∈4

The steps are repeated until  𝐶  no longer changes.  This results in the optimization problem being
NP-hard. The variable  𝜙  refers to the corresponding potential.  The K-Means algorithm chooses
the starting center point at random, which thus increases the difficulty of the optimization problem
making  it NP-Hard.  The K-Means++  algorithm, on the other hand, is  Θ log(𝐾) −competitive,
meaning that the  solution is  at most  8(ln 𝑘  + 2)  times  the potential  of the best solution.  The
algorithm works by initially choosing  a center  𝑐!  uniformly at random from  𝜒, however it then

                                                            *
goes on to choose the next center  𝑐#, selecting  𝑐#  =  𝑥  ∈  𝜒,  with  the  probability:

                                                       5 "
                                             𝐷(𝑥 )
                                    ∑    𝐷(𝑥)"
                                    3∈4

where  𝐷(𝑥)  is the  shortest  distance from  the data point to the  closest  center.  These steps are
repeated until  𝐾  centers are created, where it continues with the traditional K-Means  algorithm.
By adding this simple randomized seeding algorithm to the  original  K-Means  algorithm,  Arthur
and Vassilvitskii proves that the K-Means++  algorithm  is a  faster and more accurate way of
creating clusters.

     4.3.2   Matching the  datasets

In order to find similar companies between  our Rights Offerings 2018/19 and PIPEs 2018/19 and
between Rights Offerings 2020/21 and PIPEs 2020/21,  we run the machine  learning algorithm
(K-Means++)  with  1,000  iterations  based  on  market  capitalization  and  transaction  size.
Furthermore, we run a meta-algorithm, Multi K-Means++ that runs 1,000 trials of the K-Means++
and chooses the best trails.  These two steps will create four sets of clusters, one  for each dataset.
Then, in order to find the matched transactions, we overlap the  rights  offerings  clusters  with the
PIPE  clusters from the equivalent time period  such as:  𝐶𝑙+,+-  =  {𝑐𝑙.!, … , 𝑐𝑙."}  and  𝐶𝑙/0  =

                                  12
{𝑐𝑙1!, … , 𝑐𝑙1"}.  The cross  section  between the sets will  equal all transactions which could be  seen
as  matched  𝑀 for each  time period  𝑗  =  {2018/19,  2020/21}:

                        𝑀67"  =  𝐶𝑙67"  ∩  𝐶𝑙898: (   𝑀67"  ∈  𝐶𝑙67"

                      𝑀898:"  =  𝐶𝑙898:"  ∩  𝐶𝑙67"   𝑀898:"  ∈  𝐶𝑙898:"

By taking the  post-announcement  returns from  𝑀/0"  and  subtracting  the first day  after

announcement returns from  𝑀+,+-" , we create  two  new datasets of matched  returns. The cross

sections  are  approximated by  making an  ellipse  from  a  cluster  by subtracting the centroid’s,  or
the  final center of the cluster’s,  market cap from the  maximum  market  cap as the  major  axis  of
the  ellipse.  Similarly,  the  semi-minor  axis  is  calculated by  subtracting the  centroid’s transaction
size from the cluster’s maximum transaction  size.

To check if two ellipses intersect, the program begins to estimate their shape with two rectangles.
If  a  rectangle  intersects  another ellipse, it  calculates the probability that the  intersected points are
also a  part of the  ellipse,  and not  in  the area between the ellipse and the rectangle. This results in
a  time-conserving  and  unaltering  method to  find  the  intersected area, opposing the  potential
method of calculating the intersections  using linear algebra.  Naturally, the  method results in an
approximation  of  the  cross  section  instead  of  a  perfect  match,  however  it  reduces  the
computational power  needed to run multiple trials efficiently.

The  complete  algorithm  is  summarized  below:

    1.   Read data files.
    2.   Run K-Means++ and Multi K-Means++ to create clusters of the datasets.
    3.   Approximate clusters with ellipses.
    4.   Check if the ellipses from one datasets overlap with the ellipses from another dataset.
    5.   Extract the points in the cross sections from the intersected ellipses.
    6.   Create new dataset with the transactions that are found by the points that are in the cross
        sections, i.e., the  samples  of matched transactions.

                                  13
     4.3.3   Finding  the optimal K

The  K-Means++  machine learning algorithm  comes  with a  limitation  in  relying on how  many
clusters 𝐾  to create. A potential solution to finding an appropriate value for 𝐾  is to use the Elbow
Method, where the  squared sum of the distances  (SSD)  to the centroid for each  optimal cluster is
plotted  for each  𝐾, in a range of  𝑛  values of  𝐾. Where  the SSD is calculated  for each point  𝑝  ∈
𝐶𝑙2  where  𝐶𝑙2  =  {𝑐𝑙!, … , 𝑐𝑙" }:

                                 /  ;
                                                        "
                        𝑆𝑆𝐷  = 3 3'𝑝(  − 𝑐𝑙(+
                                                                                           '
                                       '+# (+#

The graph that is generated will have  points  where the  trend breaks (i.e.,  the elbow of the graph),
which is a  potential  optimal value for  𝐾.

    4.3.4  Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test for Normality

In  order to test  the  assumption of normality  we use a  Kolmogorov-Smirnov  test, which  test how
well a  dataset is fitted to a  specified distribution.  We use the method  described by  Marsaglia &
Marsaglia  (2004)  for a one-sample KS-test  evaluating  the null-hypothesis that  a population
follows a  certain  distribution.   We are  therefore  using the method to test if the  population  of
differences   during   period   𝑖  =  {2018/19,  2020/21}     follows   a   given   distribution:

              3
𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓#~𝒩(𝜇, 𝜎 ).  The test  statistic  is defined as:

                              𝐷/  =  sup|𝐹/(𝑥) − 𝐹(𝑥)|
                                      3

where  𝐹  is the  expected distribution and  𝐹4  is the  empirical  distribution.  The test  statistic
Pr(𝐷4  <  𝑑)  is evaluated  by the following method:

    567
𝑑  =     where k is a positive integer and 0  ≤  ℎ  <  1
     4

                 4!                                                         4
Pr(𝐷4  <  𝑑)  =   # 𝑡55  where  𝑡55  is the  𝑘, 𝑘  element  of the  matrix  𝑇  =  𝐻
             4

𝐻  is a  𝑚 × 𝑚  matrix where  𝑚  =  2𝑘 − 1  whose general form can be inferred from  the case of

            !
𝑚  =  6, ℎ  ≤  :
            3

                                  14
                             #
                   (1 − ℎ )/1!    1     0     0     0     0
                        ⎡       "                                            ⎤
                   ⎢(1 − ℎ )/2!   1/1!    1      0      0      0 ⎥
                             <
                   ⎢(1 − ℎ )/3!   1/2!   1/1!    1      0      0 ⎥
               𝐻  = ⎢      =                                     ⎥
                   (1 − ℎ )/4!   1/3!   1/2!   1/1!    1      0
                        ⎢       >                                            ⎥
                   ⎢(1 − ℎ )/5!   1/4!   1/3!   1/2!   1/1!    1 ⎥
                             ?
                   ⎣(1 − ℎ )/6!   1/5!   1/4!   1/3!   1/2!   1/1!⎦

As  described by  Marsaglia & Marsaglia.  The  Kolmogorov Smirnov test enables us to test  if our
differences in first day after announcement  returns follow a  normal distribution, which is
preferred  but not necessary for the Z-test.

     4.3.5   OLS-Regression  to  test our assumptions

In order to  test our  assumption  that  the returns are an effect of the  announcement  of a transaction,
and not an effect of for instance industry effects or time-specific events we use an Ordinary Least
Square  regression  (OLS)  with the depending variable  𝑌#  representing  the first day after
announcement  returns,  𝑋#,2   are  the  dependent  variables,  𝛽#   are  the  dependent  variables'
coefficients  and  𝜖#  are  the error terms.  The  regression is then  described by:

            𝑌!           1   𝑋##   𝑋"#   …   𝑋A#        𝛽!          𝜖#
            𝑌#           1   𝑋#"   𝑋""   …   𝑋A"        𝛽#          𝜖"
      d g   = d               g  d  g   + d ⋮ g
            ⋮           1    ⋮      ⋮    ⋯     ⋮          ⋮
           𝑌/          1   𝑋#/   𝑋"/   …   𝑋A/        𝛽/          𝜖/  /×#
              /×#                            /×A      /×#

The method estimates the coefficients by  minimizing  the  sum of squared residuals, where the
vector of  the residuals  𝑒  is  calculated:

                                    𝑒  =  𝑦  − 𝑋𝛽n

                                                     *   3
The  sum of squared residuals  will then be  (𝑒 𝑒) :

                                               𝑒#
                                               𝑒"
     𝑆𝑆𝑅  =  (𝑒#   𝑒"   ⋯   𝑒/)#×/ d  g    =  (𝑒#  ∗ 𝑒#  + 𝑒"  ∗ 𝑒"  + ⋯ + 𝑒/  ∗ 𝑒/)
                                                  ⋮
                                     𝑒/  /×#

                                  15
Our dependent variables are transaction size, date, and industry for each individual company. The
date  and industry  variables are expressed as  dummy variables for each month  and industry
respectively. As a result of the use of dummy variables, we need to solve the dummy variable trap
by removing one dummy for each set of dummies. The dummy variable trap means that there will
be  perfect  multicollinearity  if  they are not removed  since it  would be possible to exactly predict
one value  of the  dummies based on the others.

                                  16
5.  Data Description

The following section describes the method for gathering and delimiting the data used in the
quantitative analysis conducted. Section 5.1. summarizes the sample used. The subsections to 5.2.
elaborate on the variables used in the matching performed.

  5.1   Summary of Sample

The relevant data was sourced from S&P Global via their Capital IQ platform. We deemed the
use of a single database appropriate so as to minimize any potential systematic disruptions or
errors that would hinder comparability. The data was sourced using the transaction screener and
yielded a total of 7,373 transactions, after eliminations of missing values and duplicates. Of these,
1,206  and 1,541  were PIPEs and rights offerings, respectively, announced during the first time
period.  The corresponding  numbers for the later time period were  1,659  and  2,967.  The  time
periods  were set to 1/7/2018  -  30/6/2019 and 1/7/2020  -  30/6/2021,  based on their deemed fit as
representative for market conditions before and during the  circumstances that affected markets in
the wake of the pandemic, as elaborated in Section 1.4. Only transactions that were  labeled as
either PIPEs or rights offerings have been considered. We have only used the returns following
transactions for companies listed in the United States and Canada. This was done based on shared
similarities in regulatory framework and capital market behavior, a reasoning based on the
conclusions made by Andriosopoulos & Panetsidou (2021). Having run the  matching algorithm,
elaborated further in section 6.,  the sample had been  narrowed down to  an average of  60
transactions  per iteration  in the first time period, while  an  average of  around 200  per iteration
remained in the later time period.  The  variability  in size and  difference  between iterations and
time periods stems from the algorithm finding slightly different  transactions in each iteration, and
on  consistently deem  transactions  announced  in the  later time period more similar an  thus
matchable.

In summary, we included transactions that were i) announced during our selected time periods,
ii) were classified as either PIPEs or rights offerings, iii) announced by companies listed in the
United  States  or  Canada,  iv)  has  available  returns  for  the  first  trading  day  following
announcement. The subsequent matching was done by the matching algorithm which matched a)
PIPEs and rights  offerings with announcements during b) the same period and with similar c)
market capitalizations and d) transaction sizes.

                                  17
In the controlling regressions, the same datasets were used, but with additional variables. In this
implementation, the sets were  the four  lists of matched transactions, one for each transaction type
and time period. Each time period was structured into its 12 months, with the intention to test for
potential significance in the specific month of the announcement. Each issuing firm was also
classified as active within an industry, retrieved from Capital IQ. Returns on announcement were
chosen as the dependent variable,  to  measure investor sentiment and reception  of  the news.

  5.2   Variables

    5.2.1  Transaction Type

The primary variable for comparing PIPEs and rights offerings is naturally a differentiator
regarding  the type of transactions. We have only used transactions which upon announcement
could be classified as either a  PIPE or a rights offering in the Capital IQ database, excluding any
other forms of transactions as well as hybrid solutions. This entails that there exists a considerable
heterogeneity in the sample, as firms and advisors are able to design the details of  transactions
with significant discretion. While this heterogeneity does influence average returns within
transaction types, as pointed out by Andriosopoulos & Panetsidou (2021), we limit our scope to
only considering the broad classifications of PIPEs and  rights offerings.

     5.2.2  Transaction Size

We consider the size of the transactions relevant, expressed as millions of USD. The reasoning is
that the signaling from the announcement of an upcoming equity transaction is influenced by the
stated size of raised capital. This is due to the implications of the need for capital, wherein a larger
need for equity financing should signal financial weakness in accordance with signaling theory.
By matching transactions by transaction size, we hope to reduce the influence of this signaling so
as to better capture the effects of choice of transaction type.  The variable is also used in  in the
controlling regression, in order to capture a particular dependence on capital needs.

    5.2.3  Market Capitalization

Market capitalization at the time of announcement should carry importance in how the market
perceives the news of equity financing, as a higher market value should imply a larger and more
stable organization and lower price volatility. As market reactions vary in magnitude depending
on market capitalization, we deem it as material to match transactions using this metric. By
matching transactions similar in both transaction size and market capitalization, we get an implicit

                                  18
match on the relative size of the deal value, with the ambition to rid the data of biases related to
relative size.

    5.2.4  Announcement Return

For each transaction conducted in the studied time periods, Capital IQ provides the return
expressed in percent of the first trading day following announcement to the public. The percentage
change in share price acts as an approximation of how the news was received by the investor
collective. While the return could be adjusted by the return of a relevant index that would
represent the broader market, we decided to not do this with the reasoning that such altering would
require a subjective decision on what index to use, which further also would discriminate certain
sectors and market capitalizations over others. Instead, we hope that a large set of matched pairs
would compensate for any systematic market movements that coincided with the trading day
following announcement.

     5.2.5   Month of Announcement

The month in which an announcement was made was structured as 11 dummy variables so as to
not assign numerical values to any particular month. This yielded a total of 12 outcomes, wherein
all 11 variables being set to zero means that the announcement and corresponding return occurred
in  December. As the specific time and date of the announcement was retrieved from Capital IQ,
each announcement and corresponding return could be assigned a month which in turn
corresponded to one outcome in terms of the dummy variables. As both time periods correspond
to 12 months, this method was applicable for both periods. In this way, a possible trend between
months and returns could be illustrated. The idea was that a particular pattern could indicate a
dependence on factors beyond transaction type, as well as to capture intra-period variations.

     5.2.6   Industry of Issuer

Each issuing company could be assigned  an  industry definition by Capital IQ.  These were then
condensed  into a  selection of  broader  industries.  With  16  industries in total, this yielded  15
dummy variables. It should be noted that the industries provided by the Capital IQ database likely
are blunt in the sense that they do not account for any potential heterogeneity in operations. Each
issuing firm is thus only classified as active within one single industry. The issue is partly resolved
by broader definitions, yet these are still limiting for potential  conglomerates  or other  companies

                                  19
active in more than one industry.  The reasoning behind the inclusion of industry as a dependent
variable is the potential differences in implications of the announcement of an upcoming equity
financing transaction based on industry.

                                  20
6.  Results & Discussion

   6.1.  Descriptive Statistics

To generate the clusters to match the data point, the number of clusters has to be decided for each
dataset. The elbow method shows the optimal  K  when run for each set and resulted in the
following number of clusters: K=13  for Rights Offerings 2018/2019, K=11  for Rights Offerings
2020/21, K=10  for  PIPE 2018/2019 and  K=13  PIPE 2020/2021.  A potential case could be made
for K-values  around  8 as the trends break there as well. However, in order to differentiate our
clusters  enough, we have  chosen  the  later  break in  trend.  Figure 2-5 shows  the elbow graphs for
each dataset.

                               Rights Offerings 18/19

             2.50E+10

             2.00E+10

             1.50E+10

         SSD
             1.00E+10

             5.00E+09

             0.00E+00
                      5   7   9  11  13  15  17  19  21  23  25  27  29  31  33  35  37  39  41  43  45
                                       K - Number of Clusters

fig 2. Shows the elbow-graph for Rights Offerings 2018/2019. Sum of Squared Distances are plotted on the
Y-axis, and K is plotted on the X-axis.

                                  21
                               Rights Offerings 20/21

             8.00E+10

             7.00E+10
             6.00E+10

             5.00E+10
             4.00E+10
         SSD
             3.00E+10

             2.00E+10
             1.00E+10

             0.00E+00
                      5   7   9  11  13  15  17  19  21  23  25  27  29  31  33  35  37  39  41  43  45
                                       K - Number of Clusters

fig 3. Shows the elbow-graph for Rights Offerings 2020/2021. Sum of Squared Distances are plotted on the
Y-axis, and K is plotted on the X-axis.

                      Private Placements in Public Equity 18/19

             1.60E+10

             1.40E+10

             1.20E+10

             1.00E+10

             8.00E+09
         SSD
             6.00E+09

             4.00E+09

             2.00E+09

             0.00E+00
                      5   7   9  11  13  15  17  19  21  23  25  27  29  31  33  35  37  39  41  43  45
                                       K - Number of Clusters

fig 4. Shows the elbow-graph for PIPEs 2018/2019. Sum of Squared Distances are plotted on the Y-axis,
and K is plotted on the X-axis.

                                  22
                      Private Placements in Public Equity 20/21

             1.60E+10

             1.40E+10
             1.20E+10

             1.00E+10
             8.00E+09
         SSD
             6.00E+09

             4.00E+09
             2.00E+09

             0.00E+00
                      5   7   9  11  13  15  17  19  21  23  25  27  29  31  33  35  37  39  41  43  45
                                       K - Number of Clusters

fig 5. Shows the elbow-graph for PIPEs 2020/2021. Sum of Squared Distances are plotted on the Y-axis,
and K is plotted on the X-axis.

Figure 6 describes the first day return after announcements for the data sets. The means increase
substantially for PIPEs between the two periods, although the medians experience a lesser
increase which indicates a higher variance during the COVID-19 period (2020/2021). However,
based on the medians alone, it is  indicated  that the returns from  rights  offerings decreased from
2018/2019 to 2020/2021 while the returns increased for PIPEs.

    RO 18/19           RO20/21          PIPE 18/19         PIPE 20/21

  Mean    Median      Mean    Median      Mean    Median      Mean    Median
 -4.29%    -2.33%      -2.49%    -2.80%      2.60%    0.38%       7.38%    0.60%

fig  6. Shows the Mean and Median first day  returns  after announcement  for each dataset.

The summary of the tests carried out on the difference in returns from the matched sets of
transactions are presented in fig.7 below.  Since the K-Means++ algorithm does not return a static
set of transactions, the table below shows the 1st, 2nd and 3rd quartile as well as the average of
the results gathered from  250  runs of the algorithm. The Z-value and the P-value connected to it
shows how likely it is that the  means  of the  samples  of differences in returns between 2018/2019
and 2020/2021 are the same. As evident from the low median p-value (2nd quartile) we can  only
reject the null-hypothesis that the two  samples  are in fact the same  at a 11.5% significance level.

                                  23
Furthermore, the  p-value from the Mood’s Median test  is not significant enough in order for us
to  reject the null hypothesis that the medians  are  in  fact the same.

Since the relative returns are calculated by taking the returns from rights offerings and subtracting
the matched return from the PIPE during the same period, the relative result is an expression of
the difference in potential return an investor can capture by holding either share on announcement.
A larger difference implies a greater relative return within the matched pair.  As illustrated in
fig.7, the negative mean and median returns are the result of returns of PIPEs on average
exceeding the returns of the matched rights offerings.  Similarly,  to the summary of returns from
the full datasets, does the mean and median differ. The median is seen as the more important
indicator of the market sentiment due to the potential of extreme values affecting the mean  of
both samples and shows that the absolute value of differences increased during the Covid-19 time
period. Furthermore, the fact that the median of the returns becomes more negative for each
quartile indicates that the returns from the PIPEs increased more than the returns from the  rights
offerings.

              Summary of Statistics on Differences in Returns (RO-PIPE)

                           3rd Quartile    2nd Quartile    1st Quartile    Average
 Z-Value                         1.685           1.199          0.777      1.209
 P-Value (Z-test)                   0.207           0.115          0.046       0.143

 Mood's P-Value                  0.321           0.321          0.314       0.319

 Mean 18/19                     -3.35%          -3.82%         -4.18%      -3.53%
 Mean 20/21                     -6.10%          -6.95%         -7.90%      -6.79%
 Median 18/19                    -2.53%          -2.98%         -3.41%      -2.79%
 Median 20/21                    -3.83%          -4.96%         -5.77%      -4.49%

 P-Value (KS-test) 18/19            0.000           0.000          0.000       0.000
 P-Value (KS-test) 20/21            0.000           0.000          0.000       0.000

fig 7. Shows summarized statistics from the tests on the differences from the matched transactions from 250
runs

                                  24
Fig 7. also shows the p-values from the Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests  to  test our assumptions
regarding normality. The p-value is approximately zero for both periods which shows that it is
almost certain that the  samples  are not normally distributed. This test underlines the importance
of having larger datasets in order to get a statistically valid result.

Fig 8. describes the summarized statistics from four OLS-regressions carried out on the matched
transactions from the  RO18, RO20, PIPE18  and  PIPE20  datasets. The regressions are run 100
times on the matched sets. The adjusted R Squared values show that the regressions do not have
a high explanatory value which tells us that our assumption that the returns is  based on the
announced transactions, and not due to transactions size, industry effects and dates  is potentially
correct.  However, the  possibility  remains that the returns could be explained by an unknown
variable, although unlikely.  Furthermore,  the  F-statistics and the associated P-values shows that
we are unable to reject the null-hypothesis that all factors to the  variable  could be equal to zero.
Thus,  the OLS-regressions further strengthen our assumption that the return is a reaction to the
announcement of a transaction and not based on other factors such as industry effects or time
specific events.  This is further confirmed by the regressions based on  either  only dates, industry
or another combination  of the  variables  found in the  Appendix (Appendix  B-F).

                                  25
                                  Summary of OLS-Regressions

                          R Squared    Adj. R Squared           F Statistric    P-Value

 RO18/19 3rd Quartile            0.624             0.280                0.081   1.000

 RO18/19 2nd Quartile            0.565             0.196                0.072   1.000

 RO18/19 1st Quartile            0.507             0.080                0.060   1.000

 Average                          0.562            0.180                0.068    1.000

 RO20/21 3rd Quartile            0.174             0.024                0.035   1.000

 RO20/21 2nd Quartile            0.157             0.004                0.032   1.000

 RO20/21 1st Quartile             0.138  -           0.025                 0.028   1.000

 Average                          0.159            0.001                0.036    0.999

 PIPE18/19 3rd Quartile           0.290  -           0.143                 0.117   1.000

 PIPE18/19 2nd Quartile          0.290  -           0.143                 0.117   1.000

 PIPE18/19 1st Quartile           0.290  -           0.143                 0.117   1.000

 Average                          0.290   -           0.143                 0.107    1.000

 PIPE20/21 3rd  Quartile           0.098  -          0.026                 0.234   0.993

 PIPE20/21 2nd Quartile          0.098  -           0.026                 0.234   0.993

 PIPE20/21 1st Quartile           0.098  -          0.026                 0.234   0.993

 Average                          0.097   -           0.026                 0.220    0.993

fig 8. Shows summarized statistics from the OLS-regressions carried out on the matched datasets.

                                  26
   6.2   Discussion

      6.2.1   Market Reactions on Announcement

Neither the increase in average, nor median, returns on announcement could be proven significant.
This  means that any discussion and implication based on the results should be interpreted as
indicative  and  be subject to  adequate  skepticism.  Nevertheless,  both  average and median return
yield results that, while not significant, provide a foundation for discussion on a potential increase
in preference  towards PIPEs over rights offerings.  While the general trend was, as with broader
investor sentiment, a more optimistic market, our matched data shows a particular preference for
PIPEs over rights offerings in the time period encompassing the pandemic. The matched returns
for the first period yielded an average difference between PIPEs and rights offerings of  3.54%, a
number that increased to  6.79%  in the market affected by the economic effects of the pandemic.
The corresponding numbers for the medians were  2.79 and 4.49.  The increase was smaller in the
median, implying a  notable  volatility  in returns. Also noteworthy is the decrease in the median
for rights offerings alone,  which in conjunction with a slight increase in the median of PIPEs
resulted in the increase in  relative returns. In terms of averages, both transaction types were
received with more optimism in the market, but the increase was greater for PIPEs. When returns
are considered in both matched and de-matched form, the development is clarified. The relative
returns increased as a consequence of the returns following announcements of PIPEs increasing
to a greater extent than those for rights offerings, though both transactions were received more
positively. Investor sentiment regarding methods of equity financing can be interpreted as having
shifted towards a preference for PIPEs over rights offerings  during the Covid-19 pandemic,
though this  development cannot be significantly proven.

The  indicated  increase in relative preference for PIPEs over rights offerings demands several
considerations on the matter of implications.  It  is  unlikely  that a possible  shift was  due to an
arbitrary shift in preferences among the larger investor collective. It is possible that the
announcement returns, and thus investor sentiment, reflects what the method of financing signals.
Signaling theory predicts that a firm issuing equity implicitly signals that the valuation of the firm
exceeds its intrinsic value, as the cost of equity exceeds the cost of capital of both retained
earnings and debt. The fact that the market on average responds negatively to rights offerings,
and  positively  to  PIPEs,  implies  a  discrimination  between  equity  issuances  and  thus  a
problematization of the typical three-step pecking order in signaling theory. What our data
indicates, though not significantly,  is that this tendency was reinforced in the wake of the
pandemic, as the relative returns of PIPEs over rights offerings increased. The matter of
information asymmetry, which is a key feature in signaling theory, could provide a partial
explanation for this shift.

                                  27
The investigated transaction types exhibit substantial differences with regard to how, and what,
information is distributed. Rights offerings cater to all existing shareholders, while PIPEs target
a select group of large and often institutional investors, with no necessary consideration for
whether they own shares prior to the issue. The prior thus entails a careful consideration of what
is communicated, as the information is made public. PIPEs allow for more discretion, allowing
the use of NDAs and selective communication. While fewer investors partake in the information
given,  the information can be of higher level of detail. Participating investors in PIPEs are
therefore better informed than the broader investor collective of rights offerings. It is thus possible
that the announcement of an upcoming PIPE signals the trust of major and informed investors in
the issuing company, as PIPEs often are backed by indicated demand. The broader investor base
might interpret this as a signal of quality, relying on the judgment of the selected investors that
have indicated intentions to subscribe for shares.  While rights offerings can carry a similar
mechanism in the form of subscription commitments,  these  are  meant as  guarantees  for  the deal
and do not signal confidence in the same way.  Non-participating investors in PIPEs could have
valued the signaled support from informed investors more during the pandemic, in response to
market uncertainty. This would also be in line with the implied undervaluation that PIPEs signal
according to Chen et al. (2010), as the valuation-related effects would be magnified by
institutional investor due diligence,  providing confidence  in a volatile  market. Rights offerings
do not allow for similar due diligence beyond what is explicitly stated in the publicly available
marketing materials. Similar signaling, i.e., support from knowledgeable investors, would only
become public on the close of the transactions. The pattern of stronger returns upon announcement
of PIPEs might thus have been reinforced by investors finding the support of larger select
investors as  a more positive signaling device during the pandemic than in the earlier time period.

The implications of each method of equity financing could also be considered from a perspective
of corporate governance. As illustrated by Lim et al. (2021), PIPEs allow  companies to choose
their new shareholders with considerable discretion. But the concentration of these new
shareholders could also act as a commitment device to management teams to act in the best
interest of shareholders. While rights offerings allow for existing shareholders to protect against
dilution, and PIPEs do not, the latter generally  entail the addition or expansion of a smaller group
of shareholders with considerable interest in the continued performance of the company. Rights
offerings also allow for the concentration of votes, but the outcome is not known until the
transaction is finalized. As with the matter of due diligence discussed previously,  investors can
get indications of the outcome of PIPEs at announcement to a larger extent than with rights
offerings, and can thus interpret signals on future ownership distributions immediately. The
potential  shift towards a favoring of PIPEs could therefore be related to the expectations among
investors on the implications of the new shareholder structure, and more specifically that an
addition of relatively influential owners might have been preferred during the pandemic. It is
possible that the inclusion of more knowledgeable or experienced major investors conveyed a
sense of security in a company’s continued governance in the uncertainty of the pandemic, and

                                  28
similarly that improved governance would ensure correct use of funds and further investments in
the prevailing environment of easily accessible capital.

To conclude the possible implications from the test for difference between average relative returns
between PIPEs and rights offerings over  the two time periods, we find that returns on average
increased for both methods of equity financing, but that preferences shifted towards PIPEs. This
can be the partial result of the strengths that PIPEs are able to convey were appreciated during the
pandemic, namely the confidence of informed investors and potential positive effects on corporate
governance of the issuing companies.  It should once again be  noted, however, that these
implications are based on patterns that are not significantly proven by our applied method and are
thus only indicative rather than  proven.

     6.2.2   Implication  of  Controlling  Regression

As illustrated in figure. 8., the combined explanatory value of month of announcement,
transaction  size, and  industry of the issuer cannot be assumed to be different from zero. This
implies that these factors, while limited in scope,  are not sufficient in explaining the shift in
relative returns between the two time periods.  While this  does not prove that the transaction type
used is the  primary reason for  returns,  the result also leaves little room for  interpretation  on
changes to market sentiment and preferences for financing.

                                  29
7.  Conclusion

This paper has  examined  the market reception and subsequent returns following
announcements of  upcoming equity raises via PIPEs and rights offerings,  before  and
during the Covid-19 pandemic. The results indicated a shift in preferences towards PIPEs
over rights offerings during the pandemic,  though this  change could not be statistically
proven.  An indicated shift  in the observed direction  can be  illuminated  with signaling
theory, wherein PIPEs  can be considered to better  convey confidence from  informed and
reputable investors, as well as  advantageous  effects on  corporate  governance.  The
superior performance of PIPEs was expected, as it  is line with previous studies, but an
implied increase in relative returns would indicate that PIPEs  entail characteristics that
were valued to a greater extent by the market during the pandemic.  In order to  provide a
finalizing answer to  how  investor sentiment on equity financing  changed, further studies
must be conducted.

                                  30
8.  Limitations & Further Research

The above presented study of shifts in investor  sentiment on methods of equity financing has not
considered  the qualitative aspects of the companies and transactions in the sample. This means
that the data might capture announcement returns that deviate from what should be considered
representative in  several  aspects. The data has not been structured to  consider  any potential
previous issuances of equity, nor debt, prior to the collected announcement which might influence
its reception. Returns have not been adjusted for market return on the relevant date, which would
isolate the effect of the announcement better. The operational health and the specifics of
transaction structure beyond transaction type have not been considered, which could prove
significant as in line with Andriosopoulos & Panetsidou (2021). We believe that the addition of
these variables in structuring the samples, as well as the matching algorithm, could yield
interesting and valuable insights.  If the study were to be  recreated,  we suggest  improving the
matching algorithm in order  to account for these variables. As the  K-Means++ algorithm is not
limited by the amount of dimensions, but limited by all dimensions 𝑑  ∈  ℝ, further improvements
to the method should  aim  to  solve the problem of creating a  relative  scale  on which to value the
industries.  Furthermore, as previously  explained,  the  cross sections are  approximated in the
current algorithm  to  save time.  Thus, future replications of the study  are  encouraged to create a
more  sophisticated algorithm that can calculate intersections with  the correct  linear algebra while
keeping  the optimization problem  simple.  Lastly, the  K-value could be  calculated  using  an
evolutionary machine  learning  algorithm, where the fitness method is  represented by the
silhouette method for choosing an optimal K-value, thus  calculating a  more  exact  value.

                                  31
9.  Bibliography

Akerlof, G. A. (1970). The Market for “Lemons”: Quality Uncertainty and the Market

    Mechanism. Macmillan Education UK. 10.1007/978-1-349-24002-9_9

Andriosopoulos, D., & Panetsidou, S. (2021). A global analysis of Private

    Investments in Public Equity. Journal of Corporate Finance (Amsterdam,

    Netherlands), 6910.1016/j.jcorpfin.2020.101832

Arthur, D.,  & Vassilvitskii, S. (Jan 07, 2007). k-means. Paper presented at the 1027-

    1035. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id&#61;1283494

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Decisions Regarding Monetary

    Policy Implementation. 03/03/2020.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Decisions Regarding Monetary

    Policy Implementation. 15/03/2020.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. “Credit and Liquidity Programs

    and the Balance Sheet.” Federalreserve.Gov, 13 May 2022,

      www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_recenttrends.htm.

Boston Consulting Group. BCG Investors Perspectives Series, Pulse Check #1, 3, 7,

     9, 13, 15.  https://www.bcg.com/publications/2020/covid-investor-pulse-

    survey/overview

                                  32
Chen, H., Dai, N., & Schatzberg, J. D. (2010). The choice of equity selling

    mechanisms: PIPEs versus SEOs. Journal of Corporate Finance (Amsterdam,

     Netherlands), 16(1), 104-119. 10.1016/j.jcorpfin.2009.08.003

CNBC. “U.S. 10 Year Treasury.” CNBC, 13 May 2022,

     www.cnbc.com/quotes/US10Y.

Datta, S., Iskandar-Datta, M., & Raman, K. (2001). Executive Compensation and

     Corporate Acquisition Decisions. The Journal of Finance (New York), 56(6),

    2299-2336. 10.1111/0022-1082.00406

Deutsche Börse Group. “STOXX Europe 600.” Qontigo, 15 May 2022,

     www.stoxx.com/index-details?symbol=SXXP.

Jha, M., Liu, H., & Manela, A. (2021). Natural Disaster Effects on Popular Sentiment

     Toward Finance. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 56(7), 2584-

    2604. 10.1017/S0022109021000466

Lim, J., Schwert, M., & Weisbach, M. S. (2021). The economics of PIPEs. Journal of

     Financial Intermediation, 45, 100832. https://doi-

    org.ez.hhs.se/10.1016/j.jfi.2019.100832

Marsaglia, G., & Marsaglia, J. (2004). Evaluating the Anderson-Darling Distribution.

     Journal of Statistical Software, 9(2), 1-5. 10.18637/jss.v009.i02

                                  33
Myers, S. C., & Majluf, N. S. (1984). Corporate financing and investment decisions

     when firms have information that investors do not have. Elsevier BV.

    10.1016/0304-405x(84)90023-0

S&P Dow Jones Indices. “S&P 500.” S&P Global, 13 May 2022,

     www.spglobal.com/spdji/en/indices/equity/sp-500/#overview.

White, R. W., & Lusztig, P. A. (1980). The Price Effects of Rights Offerings. Journal of

     Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 15(1), 25-40. 10.2307/2979017

                                  34
Appendix

   Appendix  A.  Industries in datasets

                            Rights Offerings  Rights Offerings   PIPE      PIPE
 Industry classifications        18/19           20/21            18/19      20/21

 Consumer Discretionary                    67              163         73         114
 Consumer Staples                         35               73         39          56
 Copper                                 15               22         19         10
 Education Services                        10               26          6           3
 Energy                                 79              149         57         60
 Financials                               151              219        235         496
 Health Care                             713             1435        354         359
 Industrials                              100              337        144         185
 Information Technology                    78              158         95         137
 Materials                                 58               91         87         107
 Media and Entertainment                   31               92         61          94
 Mortgage Real Estate
 Investment Trusts                         55                0          0           0
 Oil and Gas distribution                    10                0          1           1
 Real Estate                              133              182         29          33
 Specialized Consumer Goods                 2               12          0          0
 Utilities                                   4                 7          6           4

                                  35
  Appendix  B.  OLS-regression on  only  industries

Summary of OLS-Regressions

                         R Squared    Adj. R Squared            F Statistric   P-Value

RO18/19 3rd Quartile            0.385             0.234                0.000    1.000

RO18/19 2nd Quartile            0.385             0.160                0.000    1.000

RO18/19 1st Quartile             0.385             0.097   -             0.000    1.000

Average                          0.385             0.177    -              0.000     1.000

RO20/21 3rd Quartile            0.058  -           0.027                 0.000    1.000

RO20/21 2nd Quartile            0.058  -          0.037                 0.000    1.000

RO20/21 1st Quartile             0.058  -           0.045                 0.000    1.000

Average                           0.058   -           0.034    -              0.000     1.000

PIPE18/19 3rd Quartile           0.148   -           0.061   -              0.000    1.000

PIPE18/19 2nd Quartile          0.148   -           0.061   -              0.000    1.000

PIPE18/19 1st Quartile           0.148   -           0.061   -              0.000    1.000

Average                           0.148   -           0.061    -              0.000     1.000

PIPE20/21 3rd  Quartile           0.025  -          0.055                 0.000    1.000

PIPE20/21 2nd Quartile          0.025  -           0.055                 0.000    1.000

PIPE20/21 1st Quartile           0.025  -           0.055                 0.000    1.000
Average                          0.025   -           0.055                 0.000     1.000

                                  36
  Appendix  C.  OLS-regression  on  dates  only

Summary of OLS-Regressions

                         R Squared    Adj. R Squared           F Statistric   P-Value

RO18/19 3rd Quartile            0.248             0.056                0.100   1.000

RO18/19 2nd Quartile            0.203  -          0.006                 0.000   1.000

RO18/19 1st Quartile             0.151  -           0.080                 0.000   1.000

Average                          0.208   -           0.005                 0.028    1.000

RO20/21 3rd Quartile            0.116             0.061                0.000   1.000

RO20/21 2nd Quartile            0.103             0.047                0.000   1.000

RO20/21 1st Quartile            0.075             0.017                0.000   1.000

Average                        0.099            0.041               0.012    1.000

PIPE18/19 3rd Quartile          0.236             0.083                0.000   1.000

PIPE18/19 2nd Quartile          0.236             0.083                0.000   1.000

PIPE18/19 1st Quartile           0.236             0.083                0.000   1.000

Average                          0.236             0.083                 0.025    1.000

PIPE20/21 3rd Quartile          0.063             0.022                0.100   1.000

PIPE20/21 2nd Quartile          0.063             0.022                0.100   1.000

PIPE20/21 1st Quartile           0.063             0.022                0.100   1.000

Average                          0.063            0.022                0.101    1.000

                                  37
  Appendix  D.  OLS-regression on  industries and  dates

Summary of OLS-Regressions

                         R Squared    Adj. R Squared           F Statistric   P-Value

RO18/19 3rd Quartile            0.595             0.286                0.000   1.000

RO18/19 2nd Quartile            0.543             0.180                0.000   1.000

RO18/19 1st Quartile            0.476             0.066                0.000   1.000

Average                          0.542            0.174                0.011    1.000

RO20/21 3rd Quartile            0.175             0.031                0.000   1.000

RO20/21 2nd Quartile            0.157             0.013   -             0.000    1.000

RO20/21 1st Quartile             0.144   -           0.003   -              0.000    1.000

Average                          0.160            0.011                0.009    1.000

PIPE18/19 3rd Quartile           0.288  -           0.118                 0.000   1.000

PIPE18/19 2nd Quartile          0.288  -           0.118                 0.000   1.000

PIPE18/19 1st Quartile           0.288  -           0.118                 0.000   1.000

Average                          0.288   -           0.118                 0.009    1.000

PIPE20/21 3rd  Quartile           0.097  -          0.023                 0.049   1.000

PIPE20/21 2nd Quartile          0.097  -           0.023                 0.049   1.000

PIPE20/21 1st Quartile           0.097  -           0.023                 0.049   1.000

Average                          0.097   -           0.023                 0.049    1.000

                                  38
  Appendix  E.  OLS-regression  on  industries  and  transaction  sizes

Summary of OLS-Regressions

                         R Squared    Adj. R Squared          F Statistric   P-Value

RO18/19 3rd Quartile            0.623             0.280                0.080  1.000

RO18/19 2nd Quartile            0.563             0.195                0.071  1.000

RO18/19 1st Quartile            0.510             0.079                0.060  1.000

Average                          0.561            0.179                0.067   1.000

RO20/21 3rd Quartile            0.172             0.020                0.035  1.000

RO20/21 2nd Quartile            0.156             0.002                0.032  1.000

RO20/21 1st Quartile             0.138  -           0.026                 0.028  1.000

Average                          0.158   -           0.002                 0.036   0.999

PIPE18/19 3rd Quartile           0.290  -           0.143                 0.117  1.000

PIPE18/19 2nd Quartile          0.290  -           0.143                 0.117  1.000

PIPE18/19 1st Quartile           0.290  -           0.143                 0.117  1.000

Average                          0.290   -           0.143                 0.108   1.000

PIPE20/21 3rd Quartile           0.098  -           0.026                 0.234  0.993

PIPE20/21 2nd Quartile          0.098  -           0.026                 0.234  0.993

PIPE20/21 1st Quartile           0.098  -           0.026                 0.234  0.993

Average                          0.097   -           0.026                 0.218   0.994

                                  39
   Appendix  F.  OLS-regression on  dates and  transaction sizes

Summary of OLS-Regressions

                         R Squared    Adj. R Squared        F Statistric     P-Value

RO18/19 3rd Quartile            0.302             0.098               0.079  1.000

RO18/19 2nd Quartile            0.242             0.010               0.069  1.000

RO18/19 1st Quartile             0.184  -           0.066                0.052  1.000

Average                          0.243            0.016                0.066  1.000

RO20/21 3rd Quartile            0.128             0.068               0.034  1.000

RO20/21 2nd Quartile            0.107             0.049               0.033  1.000

RO20/21 1st Quartile            0.086             0.024               0.026  1.000

Average                          0.107            0.044                0.030  1.000

PIPE18/19 3rd Quartile          0.247             0.079               0.117  1.000

PIPE18/19 2nd Quartile          0.247             0.079               0.117  1.000

PIPE18/19 1st Quartile           0.247             0.079               0.117  1.000

Average                          0.247             0.079                0.112  0.999

PIPE20/21 3rd Quartile          0.063             0.018               0.234  0.992

PIPE20/21 2nd Quartile          0.063             0.018               0.234  0.992

PIPE20/21 1st Quartile           0.063             0.018               0.234  0.992

Average                          0.063             0.018                0.223  0.993

                                  40