RATIONAL EXUBERANCE

HEDGE FUND TRADING STRATEGY IN BUBBLES

JACOB GREN

ELIN SÖDERLUND

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2022
Rational Exuberance: Hedge fund trading strategy in bubbles

Abstract:

This paper examines hedge fund trading strategy in seven bubbles and concludes that
hedge funds apply different strategies for different bubbles. We analyze hedge funds’
long positions in bubble stocks. Further, we run a regression to account for any short
positions. We conclude that, in some bubbles, hedge funds acted in accordance with the
efficient market hypothesis by helping bring overvalued stocks back to their
fundamentals. However, in other bubbles, hedge funds invested a larger proportion of
their portfolio in bubble stocks than the weight the stocks held in the market portfolio,
implying that hedge funds were riding these bubbles. This is coherent with studies finding
that rational arbitrageurs can benefit from investing in mispriced securities due to
limitations to arbitrage. Using a stock-by-stock analysis, we find some evidence that
hedge funds anticipated stocks’ price peaks and started decreasing their positions before
the bubbles burst. However, this trading strategy is not consistent for all bubbles. We
contribute to previous research on hedge fund trading strategy by delimiting our scope to
solely investigate general trading strategy of hedge funds in bubbles.

Keywords:

   Hedge Funds, Stock Bubbles, Positive Feedback Strategy, Mispriced Securities

Authors:

   Jacob Gren (24600)

   Elin Söderlund (24691)

Tutors:

   Riccardo Sabbatucci, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Acknowledgements:

   We would like to express our appreciation to Rafael La Porta, professor of Economics
   at Brown University, for valuable insights on our thesis and Riccardo Sabbatucci for
   useful help with data gathering and valuable suggestions during the entire process.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Jacob Gren and Elin Söderlund, 2022
                                     I. Introduction

The well-known technology bubble arose in the early 2000s, causing technology stock
prices to rise far above their fundamental values. Brunnermeier and Nagel (2004)
conclude in their study Hedge Funds and the Technology Bubble that instead of acting as
a correcting force reverting overvalued stocks back to their fundamentals, hedge funds
exacerbated the technology bubble by employing positive feedback trading strategies.
That is, continuing to buy bubble stocks when the prices rose. Hence, they disagree with
the efficient market hypothesis, which states that riskless arbitrage opportunities and other
kinds of mispricings will be eliminated by rational arbitrageurs who are able to perfectly
hedge their trades (Fama, 1970). Our study investigates hedge funds’ trading strategy in
seven different bubbles based on Fama and French (1997) industry classifications to
examine whether any general trading strategy among hedge funds exists during bubbles,
and whether they exacerbate, rather than correct, potential mispricings. The bubbles we
study include the steel and coal bubbles in 2008, and the computer software, computer
hardware, electronic equipment, steel, and measurement & control equipment bubbles in
2000. We define our research question as:

 Do hedge funds exacerbate bubbles through positive feedback trading strategies rather
 than acting as rational arbitrageurs and reverting prices back to their fundamentals?

Between 1990-2007, the hedge industry was subject to rapid development, which often
is referred to as the hedge fund boom. During this period, the number of hedge funds grew
from 530 to 7,634 funds and assets under management from USD 39 billion to USD 1.9
trillion (Stowell, 2012). According to Private Fund Statistics by the SEC (2021), the
number of funds amounted to 9,457 in the first quarter of 2021, with more than USD 4.5
trillion of assets managed worldwide (Statista, 2022). Brunnermeier and Nagel (2004)
state that hedge funds are presumably closest to the ideal of rational arbitrageurs
compared to other investor types. However, not least due to hedge funds’ trading strategy
during the technology bubble, doubt exists on whether hedge funds act as a correcting
force on stock prices when mispricings arise. Some factors they mention that can limit
the ability of rational arbitrageurs include noise trader risk and synchronization risks.

While studies based on hedge funds’ holdings are unusual due to the limited access to
reliable hedge fund data, several previous studies in addition to Brunnermeier and Nagel
(2004), exist. Common previous research areas on whether hedge funds correct
mispricing include rational arbitrageurs, the efficient market hypothesis, and limits on
arbitrage (Akbas, Armstrong, Sorescu and Subrahmanyam, 2015; Fung and Hsieh, 2000;
Abreu and Brunnermeier, 2002; DeLong, Shleifer, Summers and Waldmann, 1990).
However, previous research on whether hedge funds have a general trading strategy in
bubbles is limited, which is why we delimit our scope to solely investigate hedge funds’
trading strategy in bubbles.

To answer our research question, we follow Brunnermeier and Nagel’s (2004)
methodology which they have divided into three parts. First, to study the proportion of
hedge funds’ long positions invested in bubble stock, we use the SEC 13F filings, where
all institutional investment managers with more than USD 100 million in assets under
management are required to disclose their quarterly long equity holdings (SEC Form

                                                                      1
      1
13F) . We compare this proportion to the weight these stocks held in the market portfolio
to examine whether hedge funds, to a more significant extent, invested in bubble stocks
and how that proportion changed during the bubble period. Second, we run a regression
to test if our findings hold even when including hedge fund’s short positions. Lastly, we
study if hedge funds were aware of the bubbles and managed to time their exits in
individual stocks before the price peaks and subsequent crashes through an event-study
framework.

Our study finds that hedge funds do not always ride bubbles. When looking at the hedge
funds’ long holdings results, we identify two main trading strategies employed by our
sample of hedge funds. During the run-ups to the coal bubble in 2008 and the electronic
equipment bubble in 2000, the hedge funds held a greater proportion of their stock
holdings in bubble stocks than the market portfolio. We interpret this as the hedge funds
riding the bubble, as they increased their exposure when the price run-ups began and
decreased them before the bubble burst. However, during the steel bubble in 2008 and the
computer software and hardware bubbles in 2000, we find our sample of hedge funds
employed the opposite strategy. The hedge funds instead attacked the bubbles by
decreasing their holdings in the bubble stocks during the price run-up. The reason why
our sample of hedge funds ride some bubbles and attack others is unclear, but we
speculate that it could be due to different bubble or industry characteristics.

Second, due to data and method limitations, we are unable to strengthen these findings
by analyzing the net weights held by our sample of hedge funds in the bubbles. Due to
the large discrepancy between our long-only proportions and net weights, we run several
robustness checks where we divide the bubbles into two time-periods, add noise to the
returns and broaden the number of stocks included in each bubble. However, none of
these tests provide net weights that are more aligned with the proportions found in the
long-only analysis.

Lastly, by analyzing hedge funds timing exposure in individual stocks, we provide some
evidence that our sample of hedge funds understood that the bubbles existed. That enabled
them to capture the price run-ups and avoid the subsequent crashes in individual stocks.
The bubbles that support this finding are the steel bubble in 2008, and the measurement
& control equipment, electronic equipment and steel bubbles in 2000. During these
bubbles, our sample of hedge funds managed to decrease their share of equity held in the
quarter prior to the price peak. The computer hardware and computer software bubbles
provide some evidence of the contrary, as the hedge funds either kept their share of the
equity constant or increased it, despite the bubble bursting.

Altogether, in two of seven bubbles, we find that the hedge funds seemingly rode the
bubbles. However, we also find that hedge funds chose to attack three bubbles by
decreasing their holdings in the bubble industry. Hence, our overall results diverge from
the findings of Brunnermeier and Nagel (2004). Although we cannot conclude hedge
funds’ general trading strategy during bubbles due to diverging results, our study opens
up for interesting discussions of why hedge funds employ different trading strategies in
different bubbles. Two commonly mentioned reasons explaining why hedge funds ride

1
 Form 13F is provided on the SEC website and includes a list of reporting requirements in the application
form, which we use as a reference.
                                                                      2
bubbles relate to synchronization risk discussed in Abreu and Brunnermeier (2002) and
fundamental risk discussed in Wurgler and Zhuravskaya (2002). Further, our results that
demonstrate that hedge funds chose to attack bubbles are in line with the efficient market
hypothesis, (Fama, 1970), and findings by Akbas, et al. (2015) and Fung and Hsieh
(2000).

We divide the remaining part of our study into the following sections. Section II presents
previous literature on hedge funds’ trading strategy and how our study contributes to the
current literature. Section III is our data section and presents our bubbles identification,
hedge fund holding data, market data, summary statistics, and data limitations. Section
IV investigates hedge funds’ long-only holdings in the bubbles and includes an analysis
of net holdings. Both parts are structured in three main subsections: methodology,
empirical results, and analysis. Section V is structured in the same way as Section IV and
investigates whether hedge funds were able to successfully anticipate the crash in
individual stocks and exit their positions before. In Section VI, we provide a future
research analysis. Section VII concludes our findings.

                                 II. Literature review

Whether hedge funds act as a correcting force by reverting stock prices back to
fundamentals is a doubted area. To research hedge funds’ general trading strategy in
bubbles, we need a definition of bubbles and previous research on hedge funds’ trading
strategy. The closest literature for our study is Hedge Funds and the Technology Bubble
by Brunnermeier and Nagel’s (2004), published in the Journal of Finance.

A. Hedge fund trading strategy

According to the efficient market hypothesis, stocks always trade at fair value (Fama
1970). That is because whenever stock mispricing occurs, there will be rational
arbitrageurs who revert prices back to their fundamentals. According to Akbas et al.
(2015), in the aggregate, money flowing to hedge funds helps correct stock mispricing.
Hence, hedge funds serve as rational arbitrageurs. This view is strengthened by Cao,
Chen, Goetzmann and Liang (2018) who show that hedge funds buy undervalued stocks
and help stock prices revert back to the security market plane, thereby correcting stock
mispricings. However, multiple studies have found the opposite. For example, Abreu and
Brunnermeier (2002) find that a single rational arbitrageur may benefit from staying
invested in a mispricing until a more coordinated attack by many arbitrageurs occurs due
to synchronization risk. DeLong et al. (1990) prove that when positive feedback traders
exist, informed rational speculators can destabilize prices and drive them above their
fundamental values. These two studies indicate that when stock prices do not trade at their
fundamental value, rational arbitrageurs such as hedge funds may sometimes exacerbate
the mispricings rather than correct them.

Many of the studies mentioned above refer to Brunnermeier and Nagel’s (2004) paper.
By analyzing the technology bubble in the 2000s, Brunnermeier and Nagel conclude that
hedge funds exacerbated the bubble by riding it rather than acting as informed investors
and reverting prices back to their fundamentals. Further, they conclude that among the
sample of hedge funds they studied, Tiger management was the only fund that did not
survive the technology bubble. It was also the fund with the lowest exposure to
                                                                      3
technology stocks. Griffin, Harris, Shu, and Topaloglu (2011) find similar results for the
technology bubble and challenge the essential part of market efficiency that sophisticated
investors always seek to correct mispricing. Fung and Hsieh (2000) contradict this finding
and show that hedge funds do not use positive feedback trading strategies. Further, they
find little evidence that hedge funds systematically cause market prices to deviate from
fundamentals.

B. Bubble definition

The American economist Euguene Fama argues that bubbles do not exist. He disagrees
with the definition of a bubble which implies that a predictable substantial price decline
occurs after an irrational strong price increase. That is because no valid evidence on
predictable price declines exists, hence the definition of “bubbles” is based on beliefs
rather than reliable evidence. Further, he contradicts the argument that price declines
during a bubble should be viewed as market correction of unreasonable price increases
by arguing that it is unclear which part, the up or the down, of the bubble that is irrational.
(Fama 2014)

Greenwood, Shleifer, and You (2019) assess Fama’s claim in their paper Bubbles for
Fama, published in the Journal of Financial Economics. They agree with Fama’s
statement that a substantial industry portfolio price increase does not, on average, foresee
a sharp industry portfolio price decline. However, they find that the probability of a crash
is remarkably higher after a sharp industry portfolio price increase and that typical
characteristics during a price run-up can help predict a possible crash and future returns.
Hence, investors can use such attributes as indicators of bubbles, helping them time the
bubble and earn superior returns. Their paper also identifies all US industries’ price run-
ups followed by a crash between 1928 and 2012 based on Fama and French (1997) 49
industry classifications. Since we study hedge funds’ trading strategy in bubbles, we use
Greenwood et al.’s identification of bubbles.

C. Our contribution

Common previous research areas regarding hedge funds’ trading strategy include studies
on rational arbitrageurs, the efficient hypothesis, and limits on arbitrage. (Akbas, et al.,
2015; Fung and Hsieh, 2000; Abreu and Brunnermeier, 2002; DeLong et al. 1990)
However, to our knowledge, previous research on whether hedge funds have a general
trading strategy in bubbles is limited, which is why we delimit our scope to solely
investigating trading strategy during bubbles. By applying a similar methodology as
Brunnermeier and Nagel (2004) did on the technology bubble, but instead using seven
other bubbles identified by Greenwood et al. (2019), we provide a new dimension to the
research of hedge funds that can be applied to future analyses on hedge fund trading
strategy during bubbles. Creating some predictability regarding hedge fund trading
strategy in bubbles could play a role in handling future bubbles where hedge funds’
behavior will affect financial markets due to their strong linkages to the global financial
system (King and Maier, 2009).

                                                                      4
                                     III. Data

We obtain data on hedge fund holdings using 13F filings which have been consolidated
by Thomson Refinitiv and WhaleWisdom. To access specific stock and returns data, we
use the CRSP database.

A. Identifying bubbles

The first step to test whether hedge funds in general ride bubbles or revert prices back to
fundamentals is to identify a sample of bubbles. We use the paper Bubbles for Fama
written by Greenwood et al. (2019). This paper is based on Fama and French 49 industry
classifications and identifies all price run-ups between 1928 and 2012 followed by a
crash. They define an industry price run-up as raw returns of more than 100% in the past
two years, 100% net of market returns in the past two years, and at least 100% returns on
a five-year horizon. A crash is defined as a downturn of at least 40% within two years
from the initial price run-up. We delimit our choice of bubbles to US industries, totaling
21 different price run-up episodes followed by a crash between 1928 and 2012. Due to
the limited availability of hedge fund data before the 1990s, we exclude bubbles before
1995.

Our final sample of bubbles amounts to seven and occurs in two different time-periods:
1999-2000 and 2007-2008. Five of them occurred in 1999-2000, consisting of the
computer hardware industry with 190 firms crashing in the third quarter of 2000, the
computer software with 551 firms crashing in the first quarter of 2000, the electronic
equipment industry with 347 firms crashing in the first quarter of 2000, the steel industry
with 77 firms crashing in the third quarter of 2000, and the measurement & control
equipment industry with 127 firms crashing in the first quarter of 2000. The two
remaining bubbles in 2007-2008 include the steel industry, with 48 firms crashing in the
second quarter of 2008, and the coal industry, with 13 firms crashing in the second quarter
of 2008. (Greenwood et al., 2019)

Our method of identifying bubble stocks differs from Brunnermeier and Nagel’s (2004)
methodology. They divide all stocks on Nasdaq into five quintiles based on their price to
sales ratio and define all stocks within the highest quintile as technology stocks. They
validate their methodology by comparing their sample of stocks to Lewellen (2003) and
find that 90% of internet stocks are included in the highest P/S quintile. Using Fama &
French industries rather than broader price-fundamental ratios such as P/S, we identify
more specific bubble segments. Another benefit is that this method allows us to analyze
multiple bubbles that occurred during the same time-period individually.

B. Hedge fund data

   1. Hedge fund holding data

To identify hedge funds’ holdings during the two time-periods, we use 13F forms filed
by the hedge funds. Form 13F is a SEC regulation that forces all institutional investment
managers based in the US with assets under management exceeding USD 100 million to
disclose their quarterly long equity holdings (SEC Form 13F). Hence, we limit our sample
of hedge funds to US based firms only. However, short positions are exempted from Form

                                                                      5
13F leading to an incomplete picture of the entire portfolio holdings. 13F forms shall be
filed within 45 days after the last day of the calendar quarter, implying that funds have
more than a month to change their holdings before filing the 13F (Shi, 2017; SEC Form
13F). We use Thomson Refinitiv to gain access to the consolidated holdings. For the
bubbles in 2008, we obtain an initial sample consisting of roughly 2800 funds.

An issue with Form 13F is that the reporting institution is the manager and not the
individual fund. As a result, investment advisors who manage both a mutual- and a hedge
fund report the entire business’ holdings, rather than reporting the holdings of the hedge
fund and mutual fund separately. To cope with this limitation, we use the WhaleWisdom
database as it enables us to filter the data on different types of investment advisors and
delimit the data to only include hedge funds. Further, we only include hedge funds defined
as large or mega according to WhaleWisdom, meaning their holdings have a market value
of more than USD 10 billion dollars. For the steel and coal bubbles in 2008, we first
identify large and mega hedge funds in Q1 2006. We then cross-check them with the large
and mega hedge funds in Q2 2006 and Q1 2008 to guarantee that the hedge funds existed
and were classified as large or mega during the entire bubble. We get a sample of 37
hedge funds. As a last step, we match the sample of hedge funds with the fund managers
available in the 13F data to generate a final sample of 11 hedge funds: Barrow Hanley
Mewhinney & Straus, D. E. Shaw & Co, Dimensional Fund Advisors, Geode Capital
Management, Harris Associates, Jennison Associates, Marsico Capital Management,
Eaton Vance Management, Oppenheimer Funds, Renaissance Technologies Corporation
and Wellington Management Company. Instead of using the manager name which
changes during the time-period, we use the manager number provided in the 13F filings.

Selecting hedge funds for the bubbles in the year 2000 was difficult due to inadequate
access to data. On WhaleWisdom, we only have access to data from the first quarter of
2001, which enables us to only look at the largest hedge funds at that time. We then have
to assume that these hedge funds were large and active from 1998 through 2001. The
subsample of hedge funds in this time-period is similar to the sample of 2007-2008 and
includes 12 funds: Invesco Capital Management, Wellington Management Company,
Iridian Asset Management, Oppenheimer Funds, Jennison Associates, Neuberger
Berman, Dimensional Fund Advisors, Barrow Hanley Mewhinney & Straus, Eaton,
Vance Management, Loomis, Sayles & Company, Fred Alger Management, and Mackay
Shields. Again, we use manager number instead of manager name since the manager
numbers are more consistent.

Having identified our samples of managers, we delimit their holdings. The first step is to
remove all fund holdings not being listed on either Nasdaq, AMEX or NYSE.
Additionally, we only keep holdings in common stocks to avoid looking at exchange-
traded funds for example. That proved difficult for the holdings before 1999 as the stocks
lacked an exchange code to identify where they were traded. Hence, we remove these
criterions for the sample of hedge funds selected for the bubbles in the year 2000.

   2. Hedge fund return data

Except for the information in Form 13F, hedge funds are not required by law to file any
other information about their portfolio. Therefore, finding data on, for instance, portfolio
returns is challenging. Some funds disclose information to commercial databases, such as
                                                                      6
Hedge Fund Research and TASS, but the information is limited. (Agarwal, Jiang, Tang
and Yang, 2013; Barth, Joenvaara, Kauppila and Wermers, 2021) However, using the
WhaleWisdom database, we can access performance data for hedge funds from 2001 and
onwards, which implies we do not have performance estimates the bubbles in 2000. The
manager performance on WhaleWidsom is generated through backtesting, which means
they are estimated by creating a copy-cat portfolio replicating each hedge fund’s top 20
holdings using the same weight as the manager and looking at the result of said portfolio.
Further, hedge fund performance is generated annually using this method. To identify
returns of quarter t, we look at the difference between the yearly returns found in quarter
t and the yearly returns found in quarter t-1 to generate an estimate of quarterly returns.

C. Market Data

To compare hedge funds’ holdings with the market portfolio, we generate a market
portfolio based on all stocks trading on Nasdaq, AMEX, and NYSE. We calculate the
market capitalization for each stock based on the latest number of shares outstanding and
the last price close. For some stocks, that price is missing. For these stocks, we follow
CRSPs recommendation by using the last closing price available instead. Since we
classify identified bubbles using Fama & French 49 industry codes, we map each stock
to one of these industries, which enables us to calculate the share of the market portfolio
that constituted bubble stocks in each quarter. To generate market returns, we use CRSP’s
monthly index, which we compound into quarterly returns.

D. Summary Statistics

Tables 1 and 2 summarize the hedge fund holding data for our sample of hedge funds.
The first column specifies the number of hedge funds that reported holdings in each
quarter. We have holding data for 11 hedge funds for the bubbles in 2008 and 12 hedge
funds for the bubbles in 2000. Looking at table 2, we find that we are missing data from
one fund during 1998. The fund missing is Oppenheimer Funds, and the reason behind it
is unclear. It could be that the fund changed manager number during this period or that
their holdings did not reach the USD 100 million threshold required to file 13F reports
during 1998.

                                                                      7
                                     Table 1. Summary Statistics 2006-2009
The data for our 11 hedge funds originates from 13F holdings and is compiled by Thomson Refinitiv. The number of hedge
funds column specifies how many fund managers reported in each quarter. The stock holdings are generated by summarizing
the market value of all stocks that satisfy the criteria stated in the text held by our sample of hedge funds during each quarter.
The number of stocks is the number of unique stocks held. Lastly, the aggregate holdings are the summarized holdings of all
reporting hedge funds.

                                                                                                 8
                                     Table 2. Summary Statistics 1998-2002
The data for our 12 hedge funds originates from 13F holdings and is compiled by Thomson Refinitiv. The number of hedge
funds column specifies how many fund managers reported in each specific quarter. We generate the stock holdings by
summarizing the market value of all stocks held by our sample of hedge funds during each quarter. The number of stocks is
the number of unique stocks held. Lastly, the aggregate holdings are the summarized holdings of all reporting hedge funds.

                                                                                                 9
Next, the mean and median stock holdings per hedge fund are reported. Stock holdings are
defined as the total market value of all bubble stock holdings in table 2. In table 1, only common
stocks trading on either Nasdaq, AMEX, or NYSE are included. The mean holdings have
increased between the bubbles in 2000 and the bubbles in 2008, which is natural considering
the overall growth of the hedge fund industry during the same period (Stowell 2012). However,
the mean holdings are large, and the median is lower than the mean, suggesting that the
holdings are skewed to the right with a few funds being significantly larger than the average.

The third set of columns reports the mean and median number of stocks held per hedge fund.
For both of our time-periods, our sample of hedge funds holds a large number of unique stocks,
which is worrisome as active managers such as hedge funds often makes bets on a relatively
small number of stocks or a specific segment in the market. However, in table 1, the mean
number of stocks held is smaller than the median, implying that we have a skewed distribution
to the left. The same finding does not hold for table 2. Overall, we question whether our sample
of selected hedge funds hold too many stocks to plausibly be pure hedge funds and rather are
investment managers managing other forms of funds as well.

Lastly, the aggregate holdings for the entire sample of hedge funds are reported. Table 1 shows
how the aggregate holdings increased to a high of USD 841 million in the second quarter of
2007, and then started decreasing to a low of USD 431 million in the first quarter of 2009. The
same pattern is not found during the bubbles in 2000, where the aggregate hedge fund holdings
reached their peak in the third quarter of 2000, which is when all our identified bubbles have
already burst.

E. Data limitations

Researching hedge funds is challenging due to the limited data availability. With 13F being the
exception, reporting to other sources such as public hedge fund databases, including Lipper
TASS and Hedge Fund Research is voluntary, leading to an incomplete picture of hedge fund
holdings and performance (Agarwal, Jiang, Tang and Yang, 2013; Barth et al., 2021) The best
source available, 13F filings, is only reported quarterly, which gives an inadequate picture of
intra-quarter holdings and hedge fund behavior.

The first limitation of our study is the sample of hedge funds. As previously mentioned, a
limitation of 13F filings is that the reporting institution is the manager, not the specific fund.
We have tried to identify a particular sample of funds that we believe are pure hedge funds, but
since we are dealing with funds from 2006, it is hard to ensure that they did not manage money
using other methods, for example, through a mutual- or industry-specific fund. While all funds
included in the sample are registered as hedge funds in WhaleWisdom’s database, the high
mean holdings and large number of stocks held by our selected funds create doubt regarding
the accuracy of that classification.

A second limitation regards hedge fund performance. Our best estimates for hedge fund returns
are generated by backtesting the long stock positions fund managers held. Estimating results
this way implies that we do not account for any short positions, other derivatives or intra-
quarter movements in holdings. Moreover, the results we have are on a yearly basis and have
been converted to quarterly results, which may reduce accuracy further.

                                                                         10
A final limitation is that we are working with data that is more than 20 years old. As a result,
we have been unable to find any fund performance for the bubbles in the year 2000. Further,
we have had to loosen some of the criterion placed on hedge fund holdings for those bubbles
due to limited data.

                       IV. Hedge fund holdings in bubble stocks

In this section, we aim to determine whether hedge funds ride bubbles as the results found in
Brunnermeier and Nagel (2004) suggest, or if they attack the bubbles by selling their holdings
in the bubble sector or going short against it. We divide the section into three subsections. The
first one investigates hedge funds’ long holdings in bubble stock, the second and third
subsection is an extension of the first one and includes hedge funds’ short positions in bubble
stocks. All subsections are structured in the same way, consisting of methodology, empirical
results, and analysis.

A. Hedge fund long holdings in bubble stocks compared to the market portfolio

   1. Methodology

To measure what proportion of overall stock holdings our sample of hedge funds held in bubble
stocks, we calculate the market value of the bubble stocks in each quarter and compare that
with the market value of their entire stock portfolio in that quarter. We then use the total market
capitalization of bubble stocks in each quarter and compare it with the market capitalization of
all stocks on Nasdaq, AMEX, and NYSE to identify what weight the bubble stocks held in the
market portfolio. We apply the same methodology for all seven bubbles.

    2. Empirical Results

      a) Proportion invested in steel stocks, 2006-2009
Figure 1. The proportion invested in steel stocks in the aggregate hedge fund portfolio
compared to the market portfolio. The hedge fund portfolio proportion is calculated as the
total market value of the holdings in steel stocks, compared to the market value of all holdings.
As a comparison, the weight of steel stocks in the market portfolio is also reported, where the
market portfolio is defined as all the stocks on Nasdaq, AMEX and NYSE.

                                                                         11
Initially, our sample of hedge funds and the market portfolio almost have identical proportions
of their portfolio invested in steel stocks. However, as the price run-up for stocks in the steel
industry began in 2007, our sample of hedge funds behaved differently from the market
portfolio. Instead of drastically increasing their proportion held to mirror the market portfolio,
our hedge funds initially decreased their proportion and then slightly increased it while the
price run-up continued. As a result, when the bubble crashed in the second quarter of 2008, the
hedge funds held less than 1.5% of their holdings in steel stocks, compared to a weight of more
than 2% for the market portfolio. Following the crash, the gap narrows due to the market weight
decreasing substantially more than the hedge fund holdings.

      b) Proportion invested in coal stocks, 2006-2009
Figure 2. The proportion invested in coal stocks in the aggregate hedge fund portfolio
compared to the market portfolio. The hedge fund portfolio proportion is calculated as the
total market value of the holdings in coal stocks, compared to the market value of all holdings.
As a comparison, the weight of coal stocks in the market portfolio is also reported, where the
market portfolio is defined as all the stocks on Nasdaq, AMEX and NYSE.

Compared to the steel bubble in the same time-period, our sample of hedge funds behaved
differently during the price run-up and subsequent crash of stocks in the coal industry. While
holding similar proportions as the market portfolio at the beginning of 2007, the hedge funds
increased their holdings substantially at the end of 2007, to a much larger extent than the weight
increase seen in the market portfolio. The increased exposure became even more significant in
the second quarter of 2008, when hedge funds held nearly 0.8% of their stock holdings in coal
stocks, compared to the market weight of 0.5%. After the crash in the same quarter, the hedge
funds decreased their proportions back in line with the market portfolio.

                                                                         12
      c) Proportion invested in computer hardware, computer software, electronic steel, and
      measurement & control equipment, 1998-2002

Figure 3. The proportion invested in computer hardware stocks in the aggregate hedge fund portfolio
compared to the market portfolio. The hedge fund portfolio proportion is calculated as the total market value
of the holdings in computer hardware stocks, compared to the market value of all holdings. As a comparison, the
weight of computer hardware stocks in the market portfolio is also reported, where the market portfolio is defined
as all the stocks on Nasdaq, AMEX and NYSE.

Figure 4. The weight proportion invested in computer software stocks in the aggregate hedge fund portfolio
compared to the market portfolio. The hedge fund portfolio proportion is calculated as the total market value
of the holdings in computer software stocks, compared to the market value of all holdings. As a comparison, the
weight of computer software stocks in the market portfolio is also reported, where the market portfolio is defined
as all the stocks on Nasdaq, AMEX and NYSE.

                                                                         13
Figure 5. The weight proportion invested in electronic equipment stocks in the aggregate hedge fund
portfolio compared to the market portfolio. The hedge fund portfolio proportion is calculated as the total market
value of the holdings in computer electronic equipment, compared to the market value of all holdings. As a
comparison, the weight of electronic equipment stocks in the market portfolio is also reported, where the market
portfolio is defined as all the stocks on Nasdaq, AMEX and NYSE.

Figures 3, 4 and 5 present how the proportions of hedge funds’ long-only stock holdings in
computer hardware, computer software and electronic equipment changed over the bubble
periods. Further, figures 11 and 12 in the appendix present the same analysis on the steel, and
measurement & control equipment bubbles. In general, our findings of the computer hardware
and software bubbles show that our sample of hedge funds did not increase their holdings in
line with the overall weight in the market portfolio. That implies that they were missing out on
the price run-up but not taking as large losses as the market portfolio when the bubbles burst.
The strategy is different for the remaining three bubbles. In the electronic equipment bubble,
the holding pattern indicates that the hedge funds increased the proportion held during the price
run-up and then decreased that proportion after the crash to a larger extent than the weight of
the stocks in the market portfolio. In figure 11 in the appendix, it is further apparent that our
sample of hedge funds held a larger proportion of their portfolio invested in the steel segment
than the market portfolio. Still, there is no evident sell-off during the entire period. Lastly, as
figure 12 in the appendix shows, the holdings in measurement & control stocks are also
relatively stable and do not move much with the movement of the market portfolio.

    3. Analysis

With our results for the steel bubble in 2008, we conclude that by keeping the share of their
portfolio held in steel stocks constant while the weight increases in the market portfolio, the
hedge funds were abstaining from riding the bubble, which is in line with what the efficient
market hypothesis predicts. We see a similar pattern for computer hardware and software
bubbles. We interpret this finding as our sample of hedge funds attacking the bubbles. By
attacking the bubbles, hedge funds were less exposed to downturns and did not suffer as much
as the market portfolio did when the bubbles burst. However, we also have examples of the
opposite. For instance, in the coal and electronic equipment bubbles, the hedge funds held a
larger proportion of their stock portfolio in bubble stocks than the market, which points to a

                                                                         14
positive feedback trading strategy that contributes to the bubble. We interpret this finding as
the hedge funds riding the bubbles.

Two common aspects discussed in the literature regarding why hedge funds ride bubbles
instead of attacking them are synchronization risk and fundamental risk. According to Abreu
and Brunnermeier (2002), synchronization risk, defined as the coordination required between
investors’ trading behaviors to affect market prices, helps explain why mispricing can persist
at least for a while. Abreu and Brunnermeier (2003) further strengthen the synchronization
aspect in their study by connecting asset bubbles to the coordination-failure model. They
convey that unless many investors decide to correct mispricing by attacking the bubble, it will
continue to grow. Therefore, it can be beneficial for investors to ride bubbles for a while until
there are reasons to believe that other rational arbitrageurs will begin attacking the bubble.
Hence, an explanatory factor for why our sample of hedge funds rode the coal and electronic
equipment bubbles could be due to synchronization risk. The second explanatory factor relates
to fundamental risk. Wurgler and Zhuravskaya (2002) argue that rational arbitrageurs avoid
correcting mispricing when there is an absence of perfect substitutes that can be used to hedge
their trades. A lack of close substitutes leads to a larger fundamental risk that the rational
arbitrageur must bear. Hence, rational arbitrageurs’ risk aversion restrains the aggressiveness,
which during a bubble, would result in riding the bubble instead of attacking it.

One reason why our sample of hedge funds apply different trading strategies for different
bubbles in the same time-period could be industry characteristics, such as the number of stocks
included in the industry. When looking at differences in trading strategy across the two time-
periods, one potential reason could be the differences in the sample of hedge funds used.
However, there is some overlap between the two samples, and we therefore expect the trading
strategy to be relatively similar. Therefore, the differences in trading strategy could rather be
explained by differences in bubble characteristics, such as the external factors causing the
bubble.

Besides the different trading strategies used in different bubbles, another finding is the low
proportions invested in bubble stocks in 2008, both for our sample of hedge funds and for the
market portfolio. During the technology bubble in 2000, Brunnermeier and Nagel (2004)
present that hedge funds held 10-30% of their portfolio in the highest P/S-quintile of Nasdaq
stocks. The corresponding proportion invested in the market portfolio was between 5-20%.
That could be compared to our results for the steel bubble in 2008, where the proportion
invested in steel stocks was 1-2% for both hedge funds and the market portfolio. One reason
for this is the low number of stocks characterized as steel stocks, only amounting to 48 stocks,
which is substantially fewer than one-fifth of all Nasdaq stocks. Further, during the technology
bubble, Brunnermeier and Nagel (2004) present that hedge funds’ proportion invested in the
highest P/S-quintile was larger than the weight those stocks held in the market portfolio during
the entire bubble. Most of our identified stocks in the computer hardware, computer software,
and electronic equipment bubbles in 2000 are probably included in the highest P/S-quintile in
Brunnermeier and Nagel’s paper since 90% of internet stocks were included in the highest P/S-
quintile (Brunnermeier and Nagel, 2004; Lewellen, 2003). Thus, we expect to find similar
results, namely a larger proportion invested in technology stocks for our sample of hedge funds
than the market portfolio during the entire bubble. However, one finding is that our results for
the computer hardware and software bubbles diverge from Brunnermeier and Nagel’s results.
Only our results for the electronic equipment bubble are close to identical to their results.

                                                                         15
B. Hedge fund holdings in bubble stocks, including short positions

With the working hypothesis that hedge funds do not have a general trading strategy in bubbles
but rather apply different strategies to different bubbles, we test that this hypothesis still holds
when accounting for short positions. Due to data limitations outlined above, we only run the
regression on the bubbles in 2008 rather than our entire sample of seven bubbles.

   1. Methodology

To identify short positions, we use an approach similar to Sharpe (1992) and Brunnermeier and
Nagel (2004). We assume that hedge fund returns can be simplified as the weighted returns of
two asset classes plus some idiosyncratic return. For the two bubbles we had returns data on,
namely the coal and steel bubble in 2008, we assume that hedge funds invested their portfolio
into two different asset classes: a market portfolio and a bubble portfolio, which only consists
of stocks in the industry that peaked. The return of the market portfolio 𝑅𝑀 is the value-
weighted return of all stocks on Nasdaq, AMEX, and NYSE. The return of the bubble portfolio
𝑅𝐵 is the return of the stocks included in the relevant Fama & French industry that are listed
on either Nasdaq, AMEX or NYSE. 𝑅𝐵 will either be 𝑅𝑆 or 𝑅𝐶, depending on whether we are
analyzing the steel bubble or coal bubble. We then assume that portfolio managers can allocate
𝑏 to these two asset classes. Assuming that they allocate a fraction g of their portfolio value to
the bubble stocks, the remaining amount (𝑏 − 𝑔) will then be invested in the market portfolio.
Therefore, the return for a hedge fund investing in the bubbles can be written as:

                                  𝑅𝑡 = (𝑏 − 𝑔)𝑅𝑀,𝑡 + 𝑔𝑅𝐵,𝑡 + 𝑒𝑡
                                                                                               ( 1 )

Where 𝑒𝑡 is the idiosyncratic return and 𝑅𝐵 is either 𝑅𝑆 if we consider the steel bubble, or 𝑅𝐶
if we consider the coal bubble.

We have already estimated the proportion of hedge fund long holdings invested in the bubble
stocks, compared to the overall long holdings and the proportion bubble stocks held in the
market portfolio. The weights of the bubble stocks in the market portfolio are denoted 𝑚𝐵, and
can be either 𝑚𝑆 for the steel bubble or 𝑚𝐶 for the coal bubble. This implies that in total, the
hedge fund exposure to bubble stocks will consist of g, which is the proportion they invest in
bubble stocks directly, and (𝑏 − 𝑔) ∗ 𝑚𝐵, which is the indirect exposure they get from
investing in the market portfolio. The latter contains some bubble stocks itself, denoted as 𝑚𝐵.
Thus, the net investment in bubble stocks as a proportion of the total hedge fund portfolio is
𝑔 + (𝑏 − 𝑔)𝑚𝐵. The total net investment in stocks is still 𝑏, which implies that the net
investment in bubble stocks compared to the total investment, after rearranging the terms,
equals:

                                                                       𝑏
                               𝑤𝐵 = 𝑚𝐵 +   (1 − 𝑚𝐵)
                                                     𝑔
                                                                                               ( 2 )

Where 𝑤𝐵 equals the net proportion invested in the bubble stocks and will take the values 𝑤𝑆
and 𝑤𝐶 for the steel and coal bubble, respectively. For a hedge fund that tracks the market
portfolio, 𝑏 = 0 and 𝑔 = 0, which implies that 𝑤𝐵 = 𝑚𝐵.

Next, we aim to estimate 𝑤𝐵. To estimate 𝑏 and 𝑔, we rearrange equation (1) to get the
following equation:
                                                                         16
                            𝑅𝑖,𝑡 = α + β𝑅𝑀,𝑡 + γ(𝑅𝐵,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑀,𝑡) + ϵ𝑡
                                                                                               ( 3 )

Using our assumptions, it is easy to show that 𝛽 = 𝑏 and 𝛾 = 𝑔. (𝑅𝐵,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑀,𝑡) will be
(𝑅𝑆,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑀,𝑡) when analyzing the steel bubble and (𝑅𝐶,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑀,𝑡) when analyzing the coal
bubble. We estimate 𝑏 and 𝑔 by running a panel regression on equation (3), with 𝑅𝑖 being the
quarterly returns between 2007 and 2009 for each of the 11 hedge funds we have included in
our sample. This regression has two independent variables. The first independent variable is
the return on the market portfolio, represented by the value-weighted returns of all stocks listed
on Nasdaq, AMEX, and NYSE. The second independent variable is the excess return of the
stocks included in the relevant bubble industry compared to the market portfolio return. All
variables are standardized, which means that 𝛼 = 0. Since we have returns data for 11 different
hedge funds, a panel regression allows us to attain more specific results than if we would take
the weighted average of the 11 hedge funds since we can increase the number of observations
from 11 to 132.

Our method is a simplification of the diverse and dynamic trading strategies that hedge funds
use. For example, Fung and Hsieh (1997) demonstrates that a linear model is inaccurate for
describing the dynamic trading strategies that hedge funds can use in their trading. However,
it should provide some guidance towards our sample of hedge funds’ exposure to our bubble
sectors.

    2. Empirical results

Table 3. Hedge fund net exposure to the bubble stocks: return regression. This table reports the results of a
panel regression on the quarterly returns of 11 hedge funds during 2007 - 2009 on two independent variables, 𝑅𝑀,
the value-weighted return of the market portfolio, and (𝑅𝐵 − 𝑅𝑀), the excess return of the bubble stocks compared
to the return on the market portfolio. The bubble stocks are defined through Fama & French industry classification.

                                       𝑅𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑅𝑀,𝑡 + 𝛾(𝑅𝐵,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑀,𝑡) + 𝜀𝑡

The t-statistics for the coefficients are reported in parentheses. 𝛽 and 𝛾 are used to estimate 𝑤𝐵, the net weight of
the bubble stocks in the hedge fund portfolios using equation (2).

The regression gives us a beta estimate of 0.51 and gamma estimate of 0.63 for the steel bubble,
translating into a net portfolio weight of 0.44. For the coal bubble, the beta estimate is 0.22,
and the gamma estimate is 0.01, which translates into a net portfolio weight of 0.02. While
both the gamma- and beta estimates are statistically significant at conventional significance
levels for the steel bubble, only the gamma estimate is statistically significant for the coal
bubble. That implies that we cannot draw any conclusions from the results for the coal bubble.
                                                                         17
However, the implied net weight for the steel bubble that these estimates provide are not
sensible compared to the proportions found using long-only holdings. The previous section
concluded that the gross proportions held by hedge funds in steel stocks was roughly 1.5%.
Our results imply that the net proportion, including short positions and derivatives, invested in
steel stocks is 44%, and that the hedge funds hold a net proportion of 56% in the market
portfolio.

    3. Analysis

Rather than strengthening the findings from the analysis on long-only holdings, including short
positions led to portfolio weights that are drastically different from the proportions found in
the long-only section. As a result, despite our findings being statistically significant for the
steel bubble, we cannot confirm our hypothesis that our sample of hedge funds attacked the
steel bubble as we find in the long-only section. Due to a statistically insignificant beta estimate
for the coal bubble, we cannot confirm our hypothesis that they rode that bubble either. Instead,
to identify how our sample of hedge funds changed their holdings during the bubble, we divide
the bubble in two periods, the first six quarters and the last six quarters. The results can be
found in table 6 in the appendix. Now, both the gamma and beta estimates are statistically
significant at conventional significance levels for the steel and the coal bubbles in both periods.
For the steel bubble in the first period, the net portfolio weight is 61% in steel stocks and 39%
in the market portfolio. For the second period, the implied net portfolio weight in steel stocks
is 190% and -90% in the market portfolio. For the coal bubble in the first period, the net
portfolio weight is -109% in coal stocks and 209% in the market portfolio. The implied
portfolio net weight in coal stocks in the second period is 308% and -208% in the market
portfolio. While the weights are still very different from the proportions found in the long-only
section, the results imply that our sample of hedge funds increased the net weight of their
portfolio invested in bubble stocks after compared to before the price peak. This is not in line
with figure 1, where we find that hedge funds decreased their holdings after the price peak.
Therefore, the robustness check does not help provide proof that our findings hold even when
accounting for short positions.

Our inability to generate accurate proportions when accounting for short positions is unclear,
but there are several possible reasons. First, our hedge fund returns have been generated
through backtesting the long-only holdings of hedge fund managers. These returns will not be
the actual returns including short positions. To combat this shortcoming, we did a robustness
check by adding noise to our sample of hedge fund returns, to see whether that affects the
implied portfolio weights. The results are found in table 7 in the appendix, where noise with a
standard deviation of 0.5% has been added. Our results show net weights of 44% in steel stocks
and 66% in the market portfolio for the steel bubble, and 0% in coal stocks and 100% in the
market portfolio for the coal bubble. While both estimates are statistically significant for the
steel bubble, the beta estimate for the coal bubble is not statistically significant, which means
we cannot draw any conclusion about the implied net weight for the coal bubble. However, our
implied net weight for the steel bubble is nearly identical with the implied net weights in table
3. Hence, our results are not sensitive to adding noise to the returns.

A second reason why our results are unrealistic could be our method of classifying bubble
stocks. By defining bubble stocks using Fama & French’ industries rather than looking at a
broader sample of stocks, such as the top quintile of Nasdaq stocks sorted on P/S ratios, we are
examining a significantly smaller sample of stocks. While the methodology used in
Brunnermeier and Nagel (2004) worked well for the broad dot-com bubble with a large number
of stocks included, it proved less beneficial for the smaller steel and coal bubbles. Alas, in the
                                                                         18
next section, we try to combat this issue by applying a different methodology of selecting
stocks to achieve a larger sample of stocks characterized as bubble stocks.

C. Hedge fund holdings using a broader definition of the bubble segment

   1. Methodology

To broaden the sample, we look at which stocks’ returns have been the most sensitive to coal
and steel prices developments, instead of looking at the stocks included in the Fama & French
steel and coal industries. We look at the monthly returns from investing in steel futures and the
monthly price developments of Australian and South African coal from the IMF to accomplish
this. We then compare these returns to the monthly returns of individual stocks and the monthly
market portfolio returns, using the following panel regression:

                                    𝑅𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑅𝑀,𝑡 + 𝛾𝑅𝐵,𝑡 + 𝜀𝑡
                                                                                               ( 4 )

Where 𝑅𝑖 is the return of hedge fund 𝑖, 𝑅𝑀 is the return of the market portfolio, and 𝑅𝐵 is the
monthly returns on steel futures and coal prices, depending on which bubble we are analyzing.
The 𝛽 signifies the stock’s return sensitivity to the market, and the 𝛾 signifies the stock’s return
sensitivity to steel or coal prices. We run the panel regression above with the quarterly returns
between 2007 and 2009 for each of the 11 hedge funds included in our sample. All variables
are standardized, which means that 𝛼 = 0. Next, we divide all stocks into quintiles based on
their 𝛾, which estimates how sensitive the stock’s return is to the price developments of steel
and coal and select the top quintile to include the most sensitive stocks to steel and coal prices.
Using this new sample, we conduct the same analysis on how the proportion of long-only
holdings for hedge funds have changed over the bubble period. We then re-run a panel
regression on equation (3) using the returns of our new sample of bubble stocks instead of the
old sample to control whether our findings for long-only holdings are supported when
accounting for short positions.

    2. Empirical results

      a) Proportion of hedge fund long holdings invested in bubble stocks
When we broaden our sample of stocks, the results in figure 6 show that the proportion of stock
holdings that our sample of hedge funds held in high steel-price sensitive stocks largely
resemble the weights they constitute in the market portfolio. We can no longer distinguish the
difference between how our sample of hedge funds behaved, compared to the overall market
portfolio behavior, which could be due to looking at a larger sample of stocks.

Similarly, in figure 7 we find that the proportions of stock holdings that hedge funds held in
high coal-price sensitive stocks largely resemble the weights held in the market portfolio, albeit
constantly being slightly lower.

                                                                         19
Figure 6. The proportion invested in high steel-price sensitive stocks in the aggregate hedge fund portfolio
compared to the market portfolio. The hedge fund portfolio proportion is calculated as the total market value
of the holdings in the high steel-price sensitivity quintile, compared to the market value of all holdings. As a
comparison, the weight of the stocks in the high steel-price sensitivity quintile in the market portfolio is also
reported, where the market portfolio is defined as all the stocks on Nasdaq, AMEX and NYSE.

Figure 7. The proportion invested in high coal-price sensitive stocks in the aggregate hedge fund portfolio
compared to the market portfolio. The hedge fund portfolio proportion is calculated as the total market value
of the holdings in the high coal-price sensitivity quintile, compared to the market value of all holdings. As a
comparison, the weight of the stocks in the high coal-price sensitivity quintile in the market portfolio is also
reported, where the market portfolio is defined as all the stocks on Nasdaq, AMEX and NYSE.

                                                                         20
      b) Proportion of hedge fund holdings invested in bubbles stocks, including short
      positions

Table 4. Hedge fund net exposure to the bubble stocks: return regression. This table reports the results of a
panel regression on the quarterly returns of 11 hedge funds during 2007 - 2009 on two independent variables, 𝑅𝑀,
the value-weighted return of the market portfolio, and (𝑅𝐵 − 𝑅𝑀), the excess return of the bubble stocks compared
to the return on the market portfolio. The bubble stocks are defined as the stocks in the highest quintile ranked by
how sensitive their returns are compared to the price development of steel and coal, respectively.

                                       𝑅𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑅𝑀,𝑡 + 𝛾(𝑅𝐵,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑀,𝑡) + 𝜀𝑡

The t-statistics for the coefficients are reported in parentheses. 𝛽 and 𝛾 are used to estimate 𝑤𝐵, the net weight
of the bubble stocks in the hedge fund portfolios using equation (2).

Lastly, table 4 depicts the results of the same regression that was used previously, but with
bubble returns defined as the value-weighted results of the quintile of stocks most sensitive to
returns in coal and steel prices, instead of the stocks belonging to the correct Fama & French
industry. The regression gives us a beta estimate of 0.46 and gamma estimate of 0.32 for the
steel bubble, translating into a net portfolio weight of 0.71. For the coal bubble, the beta
estimate is 0.68, and the gamma estimate is -0.07, which translates into a net portfolio weight
of -0.03. While both the gamma- and beta estimates are statistically significant at conventional
significance level for the steel bubble, only the beta estimate is statistically significant for the
coal bubble. That implies that we cannot draw any conclusion from the results for the coal
bubble. Our results imply that the net proportion invested, including short positions and
derivates, invested in steel stocks is 71%, and that the net proportion invested in the market
portfolio is 29%.

    3. Analysis

By increasing the number of stocks included in the bubble segments, we find that the long-only
proportion held in bubble stocks increases to roughly 8% of the total stock holdings. Similarly,
we find that the net weight held in steel stocks increases compared to using a narrower
definition of the bubble segment. Increasing the number of stocks included in the bubble also
brings a loss of specificity, as we find the hedge fund long holdings now largely track the
market portfolio. However, the regression still produces very different net weights compared
to the long-only proportions, which means that increasing the number of stocks included in the
bubble segment does not help us confirm our hypotheses that our sample of hedge funds
attacked the steel bubble and rode the coal bubble.

                                                                         21
                     V. Hedge funds and individual stock timing

Having established partial evidence that our sample of hedge funds was riding two of the
bubbles, we now move to deduce whether they were aware of the bubbles and timed their exit
in individual stocks before the price peaks. This analysis aims to determine that hedge funds
rode the bubble deliberately rather than failing to understand that a bubble had formed.

A. Methodology

To determine whether our sample of hedge funds managed to time their exposure in individual
stocks, we look at the stocks included in the different bubble industries and create a quarterly
total return index for these stocks during the bubble period. We then identify the quarter in
which the stock price peaked, defined as the quarter in which the index took its maximum
value. We apply some bubble-specific constraints. For example, we ignore coal and steel stocks
that peaked before the first quarter of 2007, as that is when the price-run up began, and those
that peaked after 2008. Similarly, for the bubbles in 2000, we disregard stock that peaked before
1999, and after 2000.

We then calculate the proportion of outstanding shares held by hedge funds for each stock and
quarter. To calculate hedge fund holdings in each quarter, we look at the proportion of
outstanding equity that our sample of hedge funds held in our sample, measured by the number
of shares owned compared to overall shares outstanding. The holdings are then value-weighted
based on the total value of the stocks in the aggregate hedge fund portfolio, defined as the
shares owned timed by the share price. Lastly, we align the quarterly series of hedge fund
holdings using an event study framework, where event-time quarter zero is the quarter of the
price peak. Next, we disregard stocks for which we lacked data four quarters before or after the
price peak. Whereas the coal bubble is synchronized with all stocks peaking during the same
quarter, this finding does not hold for all bubbles. For example, table 5 below presents the
distribution of peaks for stocks in the steel bubble in 2008. While a large number of stocks
peaked in the second quarter of 2008, some stocks peaked before that, in 2007. The distribution
of stock peaks for the remaining bubbles can be found in the appendix, table 8 to 12.

Table 5. The distribution of stock peaks for the steel bubble in 2008. For each stock, we construct a returns
index that summarizes the quarterly returns between 2006 and 2009 and determines which quarter end the index
takes its highest value. The table below summarizes the number of peaks during 2007 and 2008.

                                                                         22
B. Empirical results

Figure 8. The average share of equity held by our sample of hedge funds during the individual stock price
peaks in the steel and coal bubbles in 2008. We create a quarterly return index for each stock included in the
bubbles and determine the quarter in which this index peaks. We also calculate the share of equity held, defined
as the proportion of outstanding shares held by our sample of hedge funds for each stock and quarter. For stocks
that peaked in 2007 or 2008, we align the value-weighted holdings in event-time where the quarter the price
peaked is event-time 0.

Figure 8 presents the results for the two bubbles in 2008. For the steel bubble, our sample of
hedge funds on average began to exit their positions and decrease their share of equity held one
quarter before the quarter of the price peak. For the coal bubble, we find that our sample of
hedge funds increased the share of equity held moving up to the peak and then began to sell
their holdings in the quarters after the peak. That is consistent with the findings in figure 2,
which is not surprising considering the synchronization of stock peaks.

                                                                         23
Figure 9. The average share of equity held by our sample of hedge funds during the individual stock price
peaks in the computer hardware, computer software, electronic equipment, and measurement & control
equipment bubbles in 2000. We create a quarterly return index for each stock included in the bubbles and
determine the quarter in which this index peaks. We also calculate the share of equity held, defined as the
proportion of outstanding shares held by our sample of hedge funds for each stock and quarter. For stocks that
peaked in 1999 or 2000, we align the value-weighted holdings in event-time where the quarter the price peaked
is event-time 0.

Figure 10. The average share of equity held by our sample of hedge funds during the individual stock price
peaks in the steel bubble in 2000. We create a quarterly return index for each stock included in the bubbles and
determine the quarter in which this index peaks. We also calculate the share of equity held, defined as the
proportion of outstanding shares held by our sample of hedge funds for each stock and quarter. For stocks that
peaked in 1999 or 2000, we align the value-weighted holdings in event-time where the quarter the price peaked
is event-time 0.

                                                                         24
Figure 9 presents the results for the measurement & control equipment, computer hardware,
electronic equipment, and computer software bubbles in 2000. For the measurement & control
equipment bubble, our sample of hedge funds began to decrease their holdings one quarter
before the quarter of the price peak. They continued to decrease their holdings until one quarter
after the peak and then increased them again. We find a similar behavior during the run-up to
the price peak for stocks in the electronic equipment bubble. However, the behavior differs
after the bubble as our sample of hedge funds continued to decrease their holdings after the
bubble, which is different from the results found for the measurement & control equipment
bubble. For the computer software bubble, we find a different pattern. Instead of decreasing
the holdings before the price peak, our sample of hedge funds began to increase their holdings
in the quarter of the price peak and continued to increase them slightly until two quarters after
the peak. For the computer hardware bubble, our hedge funds held a relatively constant
proportion during the entire bubble. Lastly, in figure 10, we find a sharp decrease in the share
of equity held one quarter prior to the quarter of the price peak in steel stocks.

C. Analysis

The results for the steel bubble in 2008, the measurement & control equipment, electronic
equipment, and steel bubble in 2000 show evidence of our sample of hedge funds being able
to anticipate price peaks in individual stocks and exiting their positions before the downturn.
The two bubbles that diverge from this finding are the computer hardware and computer
software bubbles in 2000. In these bubbles, our sample of hedge funds do not seem to be aware
of the bubble as they either increase their share of equity held, or keep it constant, despite the
price run-up and subsequent crash. The coal bubble in 2008 does not provide further insights
due to the synchronization of the individual stocks. Therefore, we cannot determine whether
our sample of hedge funds timed their exposure in individual stocks.

Including results from both hedge funds’ long positions in bubble stocks and their ability to
time price peaks in individual stocks, we find diverging results. The coal bubble in 2008 and
the electronic equipment bubble in 2000 show the most decisive proof of positive feedback
trading strategies. We interpret these results as our sample of hedge funds being aware of the
bubbles’ existence and that they were about to burst. However, in the steel bubble in 2008, our
sample of hedge funds chose to abstain from taking part in the price run-up, instead attacking
the bubble by decreasing their holdings in the bubble industry and potentially acting as a
correcting force on stock mispricing. The hedge funds also traded against the computer
hardware and software bubbles in 2000 based on their long holdings. However, when including
the stock-by-stock analysis, this pattern is diminished as the hedge funds instead increased the
holdings in computer software stocks before the price peak and maintained a relatively constant
proportion in computer hardware stocks.

                                 VI. Future research

Our considerable data limitations have reduced the accuracy of our results. Thus, for future
research, it would be of great interest to increase the accuracy of our results by accessing a
complete dataset with actual hedge fund returns rather than backtested ones. Other data
improvements are also possible. First, one could analyze a larger data set of hedge funds.
Second, one could run the analysis on hedge funds outside the US and compare hedge funds’
trading strategy during bubbles in different countries. It would also be useful to consider that

                                                                         25
different hedge funds may invest in different types of securities and industries. We also believe
that having the reporting institution for 13F forms be specific funds, rather than investment
managers who may manage different types of funds, could improve the selection of hedge
funds. Finally, we believe that our methodology could be run on a larger or different sample of
bubbles to enhance the scope of our findings.

One yet relatively unexplored bubble is Covid-19. Since Covid-19 has affected industries
differently, it would be interesting to identify whether any bubbles have arisen and study
whether our findings on hedge fund trading strategy are applicable. Another common
discussion area regarding hedge funds, is whether the regulatory framework is sufficient. In
January 2022, the SEC proposed a motion to increase Form PF’s reporting requirement for
certain investment advisors to increase the transparency of investment advisors´ holdings
(SEC, 2022). Given that the SEC will extend the regulatory framework for hedge funds, it
would be interesting to run a similar analysis as we did to see if hedge funds’ trading strategy
are affected.

                                   VII. Conclusion

In conclusion, our findings show some evidence that hedge funds acted as a correcting force
on mispricing in two bubbles. However, the opposite is true for other examined bubbles. Hence,
we cannot draw a general conclusion on hedge funds’ trading strategy in bubbles. According
to the efficient market hypothesis, smart money and rational arbitrageurs such as hedge funds
will act as a correcting force whenever stock prices diverge from their fundamental values
(Fama 1970). This paper tests this notion by analyzing hedge fund strategy during seven
different bubbles including the steel and coal bubble during 2008, and the computer hardware,
computer software, electronic equipment, steel and measurement & control equipment bubbles
in 2000. Our results show that hedge funds apply different strategies for different bubbles. On
the one hand, during the computer hardware and software bubbles in 2000, and steel bubble in
2008, our sample of hedge funds held the bubble stocks to a smaller extent than the market
portfolio. This suggests that they were actively attacking these bubbles. On the other hand, our
sample of hedge funds invested a higher proportion of their portfolio than the market portfolio
during the run-ups to the coal bubble in 2008 and the electronic equipment bubble in 2000.
That suggests that hedge funds were indeed riding those bubbles. We are unable to strengthen
our findings by looking at the net position of hedge funds. Despite several robustness checks,
we cannot identify the reasons behind the large discrepancies between the long-only
proportions and the net weights. Lastly, looking at a stock-by-stock analysis, we find some
evidence that our sample of hedge funds were able to anticipate the price peaks and start selling
off their positions before the bubble burst. However, we also find some evidence of the
contrary, as we have two bubbles where our sample of hedge funds either increased their share
of equity or held it constant despite the bubble bursting. Overall, our results partly diverge from
those found by Brunnermeier and Nagel (2004). We find that hedge funds do not always ride
bubbles, but sometimes choose to attack them, by decreasing their holdings in the relevant
industry. However, our results further partly diverge from Akbas et al. (2015), who show that
money flowing to hedge funds in the aggregate helps correct mispricings, and Fung and Hsieh
(2000), who show that hedge funds do not use positive feedback trading strategies. In general,
hedge funds apply a broad selection of trading strategies, which means that one strategy that
fits an entire sample of hedge funds does not exist.

                                                                         26
                                  VIII. Bibliography

Abreu, Dilip and Markus K. Brunnermeier, 2002, Synchronization risk and delayed arbitrage,
      Journal of Financial Economics 66, 341-360
Abreu, Dilip and Markus K. Brunnermeier, 2003, Bubbles and crashes, Econometrica 71, No.
      1, 173-204
Agarwal, Vikas, Wei Jiang, Yuehua Tang and Baozhong Yang, 2013, Uncovering Hedge
      Fund Skill from the Portfolio Holdings They Hide, Journal of Finance LXVIII,
      No. 2, 739-783
Akbas Ferhat, Will J. Armstrong, Sorin Sorescu, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2015, Smart
     money, dumb money, and capital market anomalies, Journal of Financial
     Economics 118, 355-382
Barth, Daniel, Juha Joenvaara, Mikko Kauppila and Russ Wermers, 2021, The Hedge Fund
      Industry is Bigger (and has Performed Better) Than you Think, Office of
      Financial Research Working paper 20-01
Bradford DeLong, James, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers and Robert J. Waldmann,
      1990, Positive Feedback Investment Strategies and Destabilizing Rational Speculation,
      Journal of Finance 45, No. 2, 379-395
Brunnermeier, Markus K. and Stefan Nagel, 2004, Hedge Funds and the Technology Bubble,
     Journal Of Finance LIX No. 5, 2013-2040
Cao Charles, Yong Chen, William N. Goetzmann and Bing Liang, 2018, Hedge Funds and
      Stock Price Formation, Financial Analysts Journal, A Publication of CFA Institute
      74:3, 54-68
Fama, Eugene F., 1970, Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work,
      Journal of Finance 25, No. 2, 383-417
Fama, Eugene F., 2014, Two Pillars of Asset Pricing, American Economic Review 104(6),
     1467-1485
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1997, Industry costs of equity, Journal of Financial
      Economics 43, 153-193
Fung, William and David A. Hsieh, 1997, Empirical characteristics of dynamic trading
     strategies, The Review of Financial Studies 10, No. 2, 275-302
Fung, William and David A. Hsieh, 2000, Measuring the market impact of hedge funds,
     Journal of Empirical Finance 7, 1-36
Greenwood, Robin, Andrei Shleifer, Yang You, 2019, Bubbles for Fama, Journal of Financial
      Economics 131, 20-43
Griffin, John M., Jeffrey H. Harris, Tao Shu and Selim Topaloglu, 2011, Who Drove and
      Burst the Tech Bubble?, Journal of Finance 66, No. 4, 1251-1290
King, Michael R., Philipp Maier, 2009, Hedge funds and financial stability: Regulating prime
      brokers will mitigate systemic risks, Journal of Financial Stability 5, 283-297
Lewellen, Jonathan, 2003, Discussion of “The Internet Downturn: finding valuation factors in
     Spring 2000”, Journal of Accounting and Economics 34, 237-247
Securities and Exchange Commission Division of Investment Management Analytics Office,
      2021, Private Fund Statistics First Calendar Quarter 2021, 3-4
Securities and Exchange Commission Release 1685 (1-12), Form 13F
Securities and Exchange Commission, 2022, SEC proposes Amendments to Enhance Private
      Fund Reporting. 26 January. Retrieved from SEC:
      https://www.sec.gov/news/press-release/2022-9
Sharpe, William F., 1992, Asset allocation: Management style and performance
      measurement, Journal of Portfolio Management, 7-19
Statista, 2022, Value of assets managed by hedge funds worldwide from 1997 to Q3 2021, 5

                                                                         27
      April. Retrieved from Statista:
      https://www.statista.com/statistics/271771/assets-of-the-hedge-funds-worldwide/
Stowell, David P., 2012, Investment Banks, Hedge Funds and Private Equity, Second
      Edition, (Academic Press, an imprint of Elsevier, Waltham, MA), 219-242
Wurgler, Jeffrey and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, 2002, Does Arbitrage Flatten Demand Curves
      for Stocks?,The Journal of Business Vol. 75, No.4, 583-608
Shi, Zhen, 2017, The impact of portfolio disclosure on hedge fund performance, Journal of
      Financial Economics 126, 36-53

                                                                         28
                                  IX. Appendix

A. Hedge fund holding data

To map each stock in the 13F holdings data to their Fama & French industry, we use the
standard industrial classification (SIC) codes provided in CRSP. To accomplish this, we use
the CUSIP for each stock and cross-reference them with the NCUSIPs found in CRSP, where
NCUSIPs are provided together with individual SIC codes. Next, we use Judson Caskey’s Stata
script for mapping SIC codes to Fama & French industry codes.

B. Long proportions for the bubbles in 2000

Figure 11. The proportion invested in steel stocks in the aggregate hedge fund portfolio compared to the
market portfolio. The hedge fund portfolio proportion is calculated as the total market value of the holdings in
steel stocks, compared to the market value of all holdings. As a comparison, the weight of steel stocks in the
market portfolio is also reported, where the market portfolio is defined as all the stocks on Nasdaq, AMEX and
NYSE.

                                                                         29
Figure 12. The proportion invested in measurement & control stocks in the aggregate hedge fund portfolio
compared to the market portfolio. The hedge fund portfolio proportion is calculated as the total market value
of the holdings in measurement & control stocks, compared to the market value of all holdings. As a comparison,
the weight of measurement & control stock stocks in the market portfolio is also reported, where the market
portfolio is defined as all the stocks on Nasdaq, AMEX and NYSE.

C. Short position robustness checks

Table 6. Hedge fund net exposure to the bubble stocks: return regression. This table reports the results of a
panel regression on the quarterly returns of 11 hedge funds during two time-periods, the first regression is based
on the first quarter of 2007 to the second quarter of 2008. The second regression is based on the third quarter of
2008 to the fourth quarter of 2009. Both regressions have two independent variables, 𝑅𝑀, the value-weighted
return of Nasdaq, AMEX and NYSE, and (𝑅𝐵 − 𝑅𝑀), the excess return of the bubble stocks compared to the
return on the market portfolio. The bubble stocks are defined through Fama & French industry classification.

                                       𝑅𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑅𝑀,𝑡 + 𝛾(𝑅𝐵,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑀,𝑡) + 𝜀𝑡

The t-statistics for the coefficients are reported in parentheses. 𝛽 and 𝛾 are used to estimate 𝑤𝐵, the net weight of
the bubble stocks in the hedge fund portfolio using equation (2).

                                                                         30
Table 7. Hedge fund net exposure to the bubble stocks: return regression. This table reports the results of a
panel regression on the quarterly returns of 11 hedge funds during 2007 - 2009 with some noise 𝜉 added to all
hedge fund returns. The noise has a mean of 0 and a std.dev of 0.5%. The regression is based on two independent
variables, 𝑅𝑀, the value-weighted return of Nasdaq, AMEX and NYSE, and (𝑅𝐵 − 𝑅𝑀), the excess return of the
bubble stocks compared to the return on the market portfolio. The bubble stocks are defined through Fama &
French industry classification.
                                    𝑅𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜉𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑅𝑀,𝑡 + 𝛾(𝑅𝐵,𝑡 − 𝑅𝑀,𝑡) + 𝜀𝑡

The t-statistics for the coefficients are reported in parentheses. 𝛽 and 𝛾 are used to estimate 𝑤𝐵, the net weight
of the bubble stocks in the hedge fund portfolios using equation (2).

D. Hedge funds and individual stock timing

Table 8. The distribution of stock peaks for the computer hardware bubble in 2000. For each stock, we
construct a returns index that summarizes the quarterly returns between 1998 and 2002 and determines which
quarter end the index takes its highest value. The table below summarizes the number of peaks during 1999 and
2000.

                                                                         31
Table 9. The distribution of stock peaks for the computer software bubble in 2000. For each stock, we
construct a returns index that summarizes the quarterly returns between 1998 and 2002 and determines which
quarter end the index takes its highest value. The table below summarizes the number of peaks during 1999 and
2000.

Table 10. The distribution of stock peaks for the electronic equipment bubble in 2000. For each stock, we
construct a returns index that summarizes the quarterly returns between 1998 and 2002 and determines which
quarter end the index takes its highest value. The table below summarizes the number of peaks during 1999 and
2000.

                                                                         32
Table 11. The distribution of stock peaks for the steel bubble in 2000. For each stock, we construct a returns
index that summarizes the quarterly returns between 1998 and 2002 and determines which quarter end the index
takes its highest value. The table below summarizes the number of peaks during 1999 and 2000.

Table 12. The distribution of stock peaks for the measurement & control equipment bubble in 2000. For
each stock, we construct a returns index that summarizes the quarterly returns between 1998 and 2002 and
determines which quarter end the index takes its highest value. The table below summarizes the number of peaks
during 1999 and 2000.

                                                                         33