
A New Era of the Swedish IPO Market? A Study of the Impact of Firm Age on
Underpricing and Long-Run Post-IPO Performance in the Swedish Financial Markets

Abstract:

   Through a quantitative study, we set out to further the understanding of the Swedish IPO
   landscape, aiming to contribute to the partly fragmented literature on the topic. By running
   a multiple ordinary least squares regression and a Mann-Whitney U-test on 260 Swedish
   IPOs listed between 2014 and 2021, we analyse the effects on underpricing and post-IPO
   long-run performance stemming from disparate firm ages. While not statistically
   significant, a pattern of higher first-day returns among young firms can still be observed.
   Our two event variables, i.e., the control variables “Hot market” and “Coronavirus”, are
   shown to significantly impact the level of underpricing prevalent in the Swedish financial
   markets, with the “Hot market” being the most important explanatory factor. In line with
   previous literature, we document that, in general, younger firms tend to exhibit a lower
   post-IPO performance.

Keywords:

   IPO, Underpricing, Long-run performance, Firm age, Hot market.

Authors:

   Henrik Forss (24638)

   Ted Wahlström (24867)

Tutor:

   Ye Zhang, Assistant Professor in Finance, Swedish House of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d'Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance, Stockholm School of
  Economics

Bachelor thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Henrik Forss and Ted Wahlström, 2022
1

1. Introduction

1.1 Background and Research Question

The climate for initial public offerings, especially in Sweden, has been on a tear in recent years. A
large number of newly founded companies have chosen an initial public offering as a strategic
choice of equity funding. This study aims to increase the understanding of how firm age affects
the level of underpricing in an initial public offering and the long-term post-IPO performance.

The market for IPOs in Sweden has experienced substantial growth in recent years, with
innumerable and prominent offerings in 2021 in particular, where companies such as Volvo Cars,
Hemnet, Synsam, and Truecaller have decided to go public. Due to recent years' development,
the incentive to understand the underpricing phenomenon has undeniably increased. In order to
fully understand the significance of the level of underpricing that takes place in the Swedish
financial markets of today, the result must be compared to times of less activity in the markets.
To capture the entire spectrum of the consequences of underpricing, a long-term perspective
that sheds light on the financial post-IPO performance in regard to the overall market
performance should most definitely be included in the analysis.

Many newly started companies, not seldom within the tech sector, have decided to go public
during the last couple of years. Fast-growing companies, driven by new technology and
distribution systems together with easy access to capital, have revolutionised the Swedish service
sector and, followingly, the Swedish financial markets (EY, 2021). Today, the number of what can
be characterised as young firms (see definition below) outweighs the number of old firms which
decide to go public. This distribution was not observable a few years ago, and hence, the interest
to dig into this emerging trend and examine if the underlying dynamics of the financial market
have been affected in any way has heightened.

The Coronavirus hit the global stock market with full power, leading to a significant decline
across the entire financial system. However, even though the virus still affects millions of
people’s lives at the time of conducting this study, the stock markets worldwide, especially in
Europe and the United States, recovered sharply during the second half of 2020 and continued in
the same direction during 2021. The strong market performance and ebullient market sentiment
pushed recent years' increased number of transactional services to a historical peak in 2021, with
over 100 registered IPOs (excluding direct listings and spin-offs) directed to the public in
Sweden alone (Affärsvärlden, 2021). This study will contribute to understanding how the
Coronavirus and the historical peak in activity have affected the decision to go public in recent
years.

Underpricing, defined as the increase between the initial offering price and the stock’s first-day
closing price, is non-existent in an efficient market. However, it is most definitely a recurring
reality in the real world. The issue is partly stemming from the winner’s curse problem evident in
the market for initial public offerings, in which there are two types of investors, namely
sophisticated (informed) and uninformed buyers. As the less informed buyers are worried they
2

might overpay in the transaction, companies might find it increasingly challenging to attract
investors willing to offer a high price, which can incentivise firms to jettison NPV positive
projects (Rock, 1986). These dynamics constitute the foundation of underpricing and are the
points of departure for this study.

The purpose of this thesis is thus to examine if, and if so, to what extent, the firm age has an
impact on the level of underpricing. Furthermore, we aim to combine and extend current studies
on the topic by focusing on potential discrepancies stemming from a hot- and cold IPO
environment, respectively. The study will be conducted on the Swedish IPO market between
2014 and 2021. To answer this, the following research questions will be addressed:

    1) To what extent does firm age affect the level of underpricing?
    2) Can we observe any meaningful differences in a hot compared to a cold IPO environment?

Moreover, we aim to delve deeper into the long-run performance of IPOs, which have
historically been shown to display abnormal returns over time (Ritter, 1991). Studying the
long-run returns of IPOs enables us to understand how fluctuations in the financial markets
influence a firm’s decision to go public. Given the large variations in IPO volume, companies are
likely trying to take advantage of changes in investor optimism as well as overall market
sentiment, something Ritter calls “windows of opportunity“, which might subsequently affect
the long-run performance of the stock. This has profound repercussions for investors and the
capital market and has been a recurring theme, especially in Sweden during our studied time
frame. In addition, the IPO market has been diagnosed with the “hot-issue market
phenomenon”, where different market climates affect financial prices, ultimately putting the
efficiency of the IPO market in question (Shiller, 1990). Finally, previous empirical evidence
indicates a relationship between firm age and market enthusiasm, as long-run underperformance
has been particularly prevalent in younger firms, at least in the US (Ritter, 1991). Thus, in order
to study the potential effects stemming from these anomalies, our third and final research
question is:

    3) Does firm age affect the long-run post-IPO performance?

1.2 Methodology Introduction

The methodology of the data analysis of this study takes its point of departure from two
different perspectives, specifically a short- and long-term perspective, which together provide
insights into companies' market value of equity developments after an initial public offering. To
begin with, a least ordinary squares regression analysis, including key variables such as firm age,
market climate, the Coronavirus, the choice of exchange, and the firm size (measured through
market capitalisation), will determine whether underpricing differs between young and old firms
and if any long term financial performance differences can be observed. In this study, the applied
definition of underpricing is the difference between the offer and the first-day closing prices.
Then, to determine the long-run financial performance of the IPOs, the so-called Buy-and-Hold
Abnormal Returns (BHAR) methodology is applied. This methodology builds on the concept of
buying a stock at the IPO and holding on to it for a specific time period, which in this study is
3

one, two, and three years. The performance is then compared to a benchmark, which in this
study is set to be the OMXSPI index, a market value-weighted index targeting all of the listed
stocks in the Swedish stock market. Finally, the least-square regression analysis will be
complemented by the Mann-Whitney U-test, a nonparametric test that does not require the
sample groups to be normally distributed, to see if a mean value difference in underpricing and
long-run financial performance can be observed between young and old firms. The methodology
is presented in greater detail in Section 4.

1.3 Brief Results

1.3.1 Underpricing

The regression analysis of this study points to a modest difference that is not statistically
significant in the level of underpricing between young and old firms. However, the market
climate for IPOs has been shown to significantly affect the level of underpricing. The difference
in underpricing is, on average, 23.7 % between firms that went public during a hot- respectively
cold IPO climate. This difference is statistically significant at a 1 % level in our test. According to
our Mann-Whitney U-test, a significant difference between underpricing and firm age does not
seem to exist.

1.3.1 Long-Run Performance

The findings from the regression analysis indicate a recurring pattern, as young firms tend to
exhibit a relatively lower BHAR than old companies. However, this result is not statistically
significant, and the overall model exhibits a relatively low R-squared value for all different time
periods. When comparing the difference between young and old firms in terms of the long-run
performance through the nonparametric Mann-Whitney U-test, we can observe a lower mean
rank for young firms in all different time series, with the result being significant at the 5 % level
for the three-year period.

The structure of the remainder of this paper is as follows. Section 2 describes previous studies
on underpricing and long-run performance, emphasising our contribution to the existing
literature. Section 3 describes the sample and data collected for our study. Section 4 outlines the
applied methodology, including both the regression analysis and Mann-Whitney U-test. In
Section 5, the results from our statistical analysis are presented. Section 6 subsequently contains
the discussion regarding our main empirical findings, along with limitations and further research.
Finally, our main conclusions are outlined in Section 7.

2. Literature Overview

Among the closest papers that we have identified for our research is the seminal study conducted
by Ritter (1991), which subsequently is asserted to be of most relevance for our study and the
development of our research questions, in which he examines the level of underpricing for firms
4

going public on the US stock market, as well as the long-run performance of these companies.
Ritter finds evidence for the previously documented “hot-issue market phenomenon” and
discovers a significant pattern between young growth companies, hot markets, and underpricing.
Since Ritter published this study in the Journal of Finance in 1991, both the stock markets and
the economy have radically transformed, not least in the western hemisphere, thus making a
renewal of his work highly essential. This is not least evident in the fact that most firms
characterised as young in Ritter’s study were oil and gas companies.

Helwege and Liang (2004) is another closely related paper. The authors perform a study in which
they put the state of the IPO market itself in the spotlight. They find that firms going public in
hot IPO markets do not tend to be younger than IPOs in cold markets, thus partially
contradicting the popular notion that primarily younger, risky start-ups choose to go public in a
hot market. Loughran and Ritter (2004) also investigate the increased level of underpricing in
what they call the “bubble period”, ultimately deriving the loss in focus on maximising IPO
proceeds to the increased emphasis placed on research coverage. The study also highlights
differences in underpricing stemming from disparate firm ages, arguing that, in general, younger
firms are perceived as riskier, leading these companies to exhibit greater levels of underpricing.

Underpricing is a well-documented phenomenon; however, notoriously difficult to explain.
Well-known theories such as The Winner’s curse theory (Rock, 1986) and the Signalling theory,
developed and elaborated by several researchers, including Allen and Faulhaber (1989), provide
some answers to the issue. However, they are not comprehensive. Due to this, several authors
have tried to generate additional complementary theories, taking a behavioural approach to
explain underpricing. For example, while underwriters benefit from a high offer price, they
nonetheless tend to leave money on the table. According to Loughran and Ritter (2002), this is
due to two reasons. First of all, it is easier to find potential buyers if the offer price is low, and
secondly, it has to do with so-called rent-seeking behaviour, as investors overpay for other
services that the underwriter provides in order to improve their allocation in upcoming IPOs.

Moreover, several studies on factors affecting the long-run IPO performance have previously
been conducted. Derrien (2005) applies the Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns metric to analyse
how investor sentiment affects the long-run performance of IPOs. An 18-month time span is
applied, as well as industry indexes by which the sample is divided. This methodology, based on a
different benchmark and time span, will guide the data analysis for the long-run performance of
our sample. Both Ritter (1991), Loughran and Ritter (2002), as well as Derrien (2005) test for the
correlation between initial return and long-run performance but do not find any significant
explanatory value for the regression coefficient. Therefore, Derrien proposes that firm-specific
variables may affect initial returns; however, they do not influence long-run performance. On the
other hand, Ritter finds evidence that younger companies generally exhibit worse aftermarket
performance. Our study results in terms of firm age affecting underpricing and long
run-performance can be set against this background.

In conclusion, there has been a vast amount of previous research dedicated to the field of IPO
underpricing as well as the post-IPO long-run performance, which is not surprising given the
phenomena's constant and widespread presence in financial markets. Hence, to distinguish our
5

study from previous literature, we will first focus on the possible implications of underpricing
and post-IPO long-run performance stemming from different firm ages. Furthermore, our study
combines and extends previous research by emphasising potential differences in underpricing
and long-run performance of young vis-a-vis old IPOs launched in different market climates. By
applying a different geographical lens through which we perform our study, namely, the
well-developed Swedish stock exchanges, we can thus achieve a more all-encompassing, dynamic,
and widely applicable result. This is not least due to natural reasons stemming from disparities in
composition and size of the US stock market compared to the Swedish ditto. As the lion's share
of previous literature on IPO underpricing and post-IPO long-run performance is concentrated
in the US, more comprehensive and nuanced knowledge of the currently somewhat fragmented
literature on the Swedish IPO landscape is highly called for.

3. Data

This section presents the methods for collecting data and the following variables obtained
through these sources. Section 3.1 introduces the reader to our collected sample of IPOs, while
more specific data regarding the IPOs, the corresponding databases and the included variables
are provided in Section 3.2. Section 3.3 describes and presents various descriptive statistics for
our dataset. Finally, Section 3.4 provides information about the index used for the analysis of the
long-run performance as well as the corresponding database used for that purpose.

3.1 Dataset

In order to find reliable information regarding IPOs on the Swedish stock market during our
selected timeframe, we have used the rigorous database SDC Platinum. While the initial sample
was composed of 305 IPOs, several duplicates, preferred shares, listings on foreign exchanges,
secondary offerings, and spin-offs were included that we subsequently omitted from the studied
sample. Moreover, we precluded IPOs where the database could not produce sufficient or
reliable information. The same is true for our other main database of choice, FinBas.
Extraordinary results in terms of first-day returns have been compared to readily available public
financial information and subsequently excluded if deviant. Thus, after these alterations, a total
number of 260 IPOs, listed from 2014 and onwards, forms the basis for the study’s statistical
analysis. Nasdaq OMX Stockholm, First North, Spotlight (previously Aktietorget), and NGM are
the exchanges on which the sample of IPOs are listed.

3.2 Databases - IPOs

To gather data on historical Swedish IPOs, offer price, and firm age, SDC Platinum has been
used as a database. SDC Platinum is a comprehensive and reputable database that has been used
extensively in previous studies. Furthermore, SDC Platinum has been complemented with
FinBas, another prominent database, in order to receive data on the first-day closing prices of the
individual stocks and their respective market capitalisations. The complete list of our key
6

variables, collected from our two aforementioned primary databases, SDC Platinum and FinBas,
containing corresponding descriptions, are provided in the appendix (see Appendix 1 and 2).

3.3 Sample Statistics

When reviewing our selected sample of IPOs, the bull market of 2021 with a record amount of
listings immediately catches the eye. In sum, 39.23 % of the IPOs in our sample stem from this
time period. Furthermore, the year 2017 is also considered to be a hot market according to our
classification method, and these two time periods subsequently constitute 56.92 % of the IPOs
in our entire sample. Also noteworthy is the temporary cooldown in the markets during the
initial stages of Covid-19, where the spring of 2020 underwent without a single IPO, ultimately
helping to create a backlog of listings launched during the more optimistic market climate of
2021 instead. The following figure illustrates the number of IPOs per calendar year, divided into
young and old firms, as well as the average amount of underpricing per year. As clearly illustrated
in the graph, the hot markets of 2021 and 2017 correspond to periods of higher underpricing.

Figure 1: IPO Distribution and Underpricing Per Year (2014-2021)

Figure 1 illustrates the distribution of IPOs prevalent in our sample for each year, with the bars displaying the
number of offerings for young and old firms, respectively, during each year. The trendline (right axis) illustrates the
average level of underpricing for each year.

For the long-run post-IPO performance analysis, as observable in the graph below, the sample
size decreases as the BHAR-period extends. The graph illustrates an increase in the average
BHAR as the time period prolongs. Moreover, as presented in greater detail in Appendix 8, we
can observe a rather substantial difference in terms of the mean BHAR between young and old
firms for all time periods.
7

Figure 2: Long-Run Sample Distribution and Average BHAR Per Time Period

Figure 2 illustrates the average Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns (“BHAR”) in our sample for the one-, two-, and
three-year time periods. The bars indicate the number of firms, divided into young and old, that were included in the
calculation for each time series. The trendline (right axis) illustrates the average BHAR for each time period.

The following table summarises various descriptive statistics of the levels of underpricing
prevalent in our data set, as well as the corresponding statistics for the Buy-and-Hold Abnormal
Returns. More detailed descriptive statistics for our dependent variables, divided into young and
old firms, can be found in Appendix 7 and 8. Through these descriptive statistics, we can
conclude that underpricing is still a prevalent phenomenon in the Swedish financial markets, with
IPOs on average producing an initial return of 6.2 %. However, this is a rather low figure
compared to previous literature, such as Ritter (1991), where he finds an average level of
underpricing at 16.4 % in the US stock market, perhaps suggesting an improvement in firm
quality and a wholly different financial landscape as of today, potentially stemming from a
reduction in information asymmetry which is further discussed in Section 6. Also striking is the
high variation, evident in the minimum- and maximum figures below, in the long-run
performance within our sample. This is also evident in the relatively high standard deviations
obtained for the Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns, especially for longer time periods, which is
illustrated in Appendix 10.
8

Table 1: Sample Statistics of Underpricing and BHAR
Table 1 illustrates various descriptive statistics of our sample of IPOs for the dependent variables Underpricing and
BHAR. “Underpricing” is defined as the definitive offer price in the IPO compared to the first-day closing price of
the stock. “BHAR” is defined as the Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Return of the stock less the benchmark’s return
during the corresponding time frame. The statistical figures included are the number of observations, the min, 25th
percentile, mean, median, 75th percentile, max, kurtosis, and skewness for our dependent variables underpricing and
Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns.
 Variable N min 25th     mean median 75th      max kurtosis skewness
                                     percentile                           percentile

 Underpricing 260 -82.41 % -8.25 % 6.20 % 1.74 % 17.45 % 175.56 % 7.20 1.62

 BHAR       157 -111.17 % -36.14 % 9.69 % -0.33 % 33.39 % 350.97 % 5.52 1.91
 1-year

 BHAR       135 -122.89 % -40.76 % 26.90 % 9.80 % 48.34 % 713.64 % 11.36 2.88
 2-year

 BHAR       117 -170.72 % -51.25 % 39.15 % -0.66 % 61.67 % 917.09 % 9.97 2.83
 3-year

3.4 Database - Index

We have also used the database Thomson Reuters Eikon. This widely acclaimed database has
been used to gather information regarding the price development of the Swedish stock market,
namely the index OMXSPI. The gathered data will be used to determine the relative long-run
performance of the firms included in our sample. Thomson Reuters Eikon is a reliable database
used to supplement our other databases to receive data regarding the stock market’s development
during the entire time period of our sample. All variables collected from this database and their
accompanying descriptions are provided in Appendix 3.
9

4. Methodology

This section aims to describe the methods and models implemented in our analysis. To begin
with, Section 4.1 describes the general delimitations and definitions inherent in our model.
Furthermore, to answer our research question, we have used calculations to determine
underpricing, which is presented in Section 4.2. The methodology for assessing the long-run
performance of the IPOs in our sample, including the Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns and the
associated benchmark used for determining the relative post-IPO performance, are presented in
Section 4.3. Our methodology for classifying companies as young or old is outlined in Section
4.4, while the procedure for classifying market climates is discussed in Section 4.5. Our method
for delimiting the Coronavirus is outlined in Section 4.6. The regression that we have performed
to answer our research questions is presented and discussed in Section 4.7. Finally, our
Mann-Whitney U-test and the associated methodology for performing this nonparametric test
are outlined in Section 4.8.

4.1 Delimitations

We have chosen to delimitate the study to capture the IPOs in the Swedish stock market that has
taken place between the years 2014 and 2021. This time span has been chosen to be able to
clearly distinguish between a hot- and a cold IPO environment and to gather a sufficiently large
amount of IPOs to make our statistical analysis meaningful. Moreover, we have included a
control variable for the Coronavirus crash. By including an additional time-based variable,
besides the dummy variable for a hot market, we can not only control and test for the most
significant macroeconomic event during our time frame but also get a better grasp of potential
consequences stemming from the pandemic itself.

The stock exchanges that provide the data for our analysis will be Nasdaq OMX Stockholm,
First North, Spotlight Stock Market, and the Nordic Growth Market (NGM). The rationale for
including smaller and more illiquid stock exchanges is to get a comprehensive understanding of
the underpricing prevalent in the Swedish financial markets, as discrepancies could exist both
regarding firm age and overall company composition between exchanges and to capture
potential effects stemming from different firm sizes. Previous studies have shown that
discrepancies in, for example, firm characteristics and size exist between exchanges that might
have a meaningful influence on both underpricing and long-run performance (Ritter, 1991). For
example, 97 out of 163 IPOs on the smaller exchanges were classified as young companies in our
sample. Simultaneously, according to our classification method, only 33 out of the 97 IPOs
conducted on Nasdaq OMX Stockholm during our time frame were considered to be young
firms. Moreover, in order to distinguish between small and large firms, we have implemented a
method in which we divided firms into their respective size-category based on market
capitalisation. By analysing all IPOs during our selected time frame, we have identified an average
market value of the listed companies and consequently delimited firms based on this threshold
level.
10

4.2 Underpricing

Underpricing is calculated as the difference between the definitive offer price in an IPO and the
subsequent first-day closing price, which should be zero according to the efficient market
hypothesis (Shiller, 2003). Otherwise, the firm has “left money on the table” and priced its
offering below its fair value, leaving investors with a positive initial return. Consequently, an IPO
that delivers a negative return on its first day of trading should be characterised as “overpricing”.

While most previous papers have treated underpricing and initial returns as the same thing, some
scholars, such as Derrien (2005), have made a distinction between the two. However, we will treat
underpricing and initial returns as synonyms throughout this study, as they are undeniably
interlinked - underpricing, referring to pricing the IPO below its fair value, is a precursor to the
initial returns, traditionally defined as the subsequent aftermarket stock development (Derrien,
2005). Thus, the formula for computing underpricing for each security is defined as follows:

                                                                                                𝑃
                                                                                                                                        𝑖,𝑡=0
                           𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔 = 𝑃        − 1
                                                                                   𝑖           𝑖, 𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒

4.3 Long-Run Post-IPO Performance

In order to assess the long-run post-IPO performance present in our sample, we will implement
a framework known as Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns. First, we discuss an alternative
measure of long-run performance, which is presented below in Section 4.3.1. In Section 4.3.2, we
first introduce the reader to the concept of BHAR, the Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns, that
will be used to assess the relative long-run performance of the firms in our sample. Then, in
Section 4.3.3, we discuss the benchmark used for our research purposes.

4.3.1 Alternative Measure of Long-Run Performance

The Cumulative Abnormal Returns (CAR) is another metric used for analysing the long-run
financial performance of IPOs. It is based on the arithmetic mean of the sample (instead of the
geometric mean, which is used in the calculation of BHAR) and has been implemented in some
previous studies (Ritter, 1991). The following equation describes the formula used for calculating
CAR:

                                                                                                                         𝑠
                                𝐶𝐴𝑅   = ∑ 𝐴𝑅
                                                                     𝑞, 𝑠                 𝑡
                                                                                  𝑡=𝑞

However, the BHAR metric has been shown to provide numerous benefits, especially when the
calculation is done on a longer horizon, in comparison to CAR, such as a more accurate measure
of investor experience and the elimination of rebalancing bias inherent in CAR, and hence, the
BHAR metric will be applied in this analysis (Barber, Lyon, and Tsai, 1999).
11

4.3.2 Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns

The BHAR methodology is a well-known and frequently applied way of determining the
long-term comparative performance of an IPO. The rationale behind this method is that it will
accurately mirror the return the stock would generate during the time between the IPO and the
end of the chosen time period. While different time frames occur throughout the literature, a
common method is to measure the stock’s performance up to three years after the initial IPO
(Ritter, 1991). If applying a shorter time period, we would not be able to include the long-run
performance, and if applying a longer time period, the sample would be of marginal interest due
to a heavy reduction in size. Thus, we will seek to implement a similar approach to Ritter,
measuring the Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns for one, two, and three years post the IPO.

While Ritter measured the long-run performance based on the first-day closing price, we have
chosen to instead measure the BHAR for the firms in our sample from the definitive offer price.
As the market for IPOs has been particularly buoyant during the last few years, with many
offerings being oversubscribed by investors influenced by the bullish sentiment, the level of
underpricing (as illustrated in Figure 1) has reached relatively high levels. Therefore, we argue
that adjusting for the first-day return would make the view of the long-run performance
somewhat skewed and biased. Moreover, incorporating the first-day returns into the study of
long-run performance aligns with our overarching research purpose and other chosen
methodologies. We have defined one year as a calendar year, in other words, 365 days. If the
365th day is a non-trading day, the last tradable day will provide the corresponding data.

The following equation describes the calculation used for determining the BHAR for the IPOs
in our sample. The BHAR equation consists of two parts. The first one represents the daily
return of the IPO during the specific time period, and the second part represents the return of
the benchmark, in this case, the OMXSPI, during the explicit time period. If the subsequent
difference, the BHAR, is positive, the IPO has outperformed the OMXSPI and vice versa.

                                               𝑇                 𝑇
                     𝐵𝐻𝐴𝑅  = Π   [1 + 𝑟 ] − Π   [1 + 𝐸(𝑟 )]
                                                 𝑖,𝑡         𝑡=1            𝑖,𝑡         𝑡=1                 𝑏,𝑡

The data is, as previously mentioned, obtained for the period 2014-01-01 to 2021-12-31, and
hence the long-run performance will not be able to include all of the IPOs in our sample.
Moreover, due to buyouts, mergers and acquisitions, as well as outright de-listings, some
companies will not be able to provide data for all three time periods, thus slightly reducing the
overall sample.

4.3.3 Benchmark

In this study, the OMXSPI index will constitute the benchmark for calculating BHAR. The
OMXSPI, an index comprising all of the securities listed on the Stockholm Stock Exchange, is
one of the most well-known and followed indexes in Sweden that presents a broad and fair
overview of the development of the Swedish stock market. While Ritter (1991) inter alia
implemented the use of matching firms, i.e., comparing the performance of IPOs to already
12

listed, comparable companies, he also used slightly modified versions of the well-known
NASDAQ Composite and S&P 500 indexes. Derrien (2005), on the other hand, applies industry
indexes as benchmarks. Thus, the choice of benchmark is highly subjective. We have chosen to
compare the long-run performance of the respective firms with a broad index, in line with
previous literature, ensuring an applicable and frictionless test procedure (Ritter, 1991). Given
the relatively small size of the Swedish stock market, it becomes difficult to find a sufficient
quantity of similar companies for a direct comparison. Thus, as the market portfolio, according
to the efficient market hypothesis, is the efficient portfolio, the OMXSPI should serve as a
practical and appropriate benchmark for comparing the long-run post-IPO performance of the
firms in our sample.

The OMXSPI has performed well during the time period relevant to our study, thus providing a
fair and competitive yardstick. Against this background, we believe the OMXSPI is a suitable
benchmark to apply in order to capture the development of the Swedish stock market. The time
period of the analysis is set to be a one-, two-, and three-year time span, respectively.

Figure 3: OMXSPI Development During 2014-2021

Figure 3 illustrates the development of our benchmark of choice, the OMXSPI index, during the years 2014-2021.
The data labels indicate the development of the index during each year. Data for the index is collected from
Thomson Reuters Eikon.

4.4 Firm Age Classification

Over time, different methodologies have been implemented to demarcate a young from an old
firm when classifying IPOs. While alternative approaches range from subjective measures to
dividing companies into different percentiles based on their relative age, we have decided to
implement the pragmatic approach of classifying a company as young if the firm is younger than
the median age of the entire sample, which in our case is 13 years. This method has been used in
13

different studies and is a coherent, logical way of determining the relative age of a firm going
public (Loughran, Ritter, 2004). As we seek to investigate whether the firm age influences the
level of underpricing, it is not the firm’s current age but the age of the company at the time of
the IPO that is the implemented and examined figure.

4.5 Hot Market

Scholars have historically implemented a few different approaches to separate a hot- from a cold
IPO climate within the literature. Some argue in favour of characterising a hot market based on
the quality of the firms that go public, with the signalling theory claiming that higher-quality
firms tend to be overrepresented in hot markets, as their corresponding offer price should be
less affected by adverse selection costs (Welch, 1989). Others argue the opposite (Loughran and
Ritter, 1995) due to a documented lower stock return for firms during a hot IPO market, while
some argue that the main attribute of a hot market is the ebullient investor optimism also
classified as irrationality (Lerner, 1994). We have decided to distinguish between a hot- and a cold
IPO environment by studying the IPO activity since 2014 and demarcating between different
market climates by using the third (upper) quartile of IPOs during this period as the dividing
figure. This is a practical, stringent way of classifying the IPO market, also in line with several
scholars' definitions of a hot IPO market (Helwege and Liang, 2004).

4.6 Coronavirus

While there are several ways of depicting the start and end of the pandemic, in order to receive
such a universal starting point as possible, we estimate the beginning of the pandemic to be the
11th of March 2020, which is the day when the World Health Organisation declared Covid-19 as
a pandemic (Folkhälsomyndigheten, 2020). In contrast, we characterise the pandemic’s ending as
coinciding with the Swedish stock market indexes retaking their pre-pandemic highs. While not
medically correct, since this is a study of the financial markets, we argue that such a classification
strategy is most suitable for our research purposes, as it indicates the swift nature of the
downturn and the investor sentiment at that particular time.

4.7 Least Ordinary Squares Regression

The multiple ordinary least squares (“OLS”) regression is a dominant method in analysing
differences in underpricing and long-run performance stemming from firm characteristics in
previous literature (Ritter, 1991; Derrien, 2005). The method enables us to control for various
exogenous and endogenous factors possibly affecting the dependent variable. Against this
background, we have chosen to conduct an OLS regression to answer our research questions. In
order to fully capture the potential effects stemming from our main variables of focus, that is,
firm age and hot market, as well as to control for the omitted variable bias (OMV) as much as
possible, we will run the regression stepwise. First and foremost, we will run the regression
exclusively with our main control variable, firm age. After adding the dummy variable for a hot
market, we will subsequently include the remaining independent variables. Finally, as our sample
displays some level of heteroscedasticity (see Appendix 14), we will implement the use of robust
standard errors in our analysis.
14

The following table illustrates our chosen independent variables, where the firm age is the focal
point of our statistical analysis in order to answer our research questions.

Table 2: Description of Independent Variables
Table 2 illustrates our chosen independent variables and their associated descriptions. For the dummy variable “Firm
age”, a value of 1 represents young firms, and a value of 0 corresponds to old firms. For the dummy variable “Hot
market”, a value of 1 represents a listing during the time period of either 2021 or 2017, and a value of 0 corresponds
to a listing in one of the other years during our time period. For the dummy variable “Coronavirus”, a value of 1
represents a listing during the initial stages of the pandemic, and a value of 0 if the listing was completed either
before or after that specific time interval. For the dummy variable "Exchange”, a value of 1 represents a listing on
Nasdaq OMX Stockholm, and a value of 0 represents a listing on either First North, Spotlight, or NGM. For the
dummy variable “Firm size”, a value of 1 represents a listing where the company is considered large, and a value of 0
if the company is characterised as small according to our classification method.
 Dummy variable Description

 Firm age                                           A positive beta coefficient implies that young
 (1 or 0)                                              firms experience higher levels of underpricing or
                                                   higher BHAR than old companies, and vice-versa.

 Hot market                                     A positive beta coefficient implies that firms listed
 (1 or 0)                                                during hot markets experience higher levels of
                                                     underpricing or higher BHAR than firms listed
                                                              during cold markets, and vice-versa.

 Coronavirus                                      A positive beta coefficient implies that firms listed
 (1 or 0)                                             during the Coronavirus experience higher levels of
                                                   underpricing or higher BHAR than firms not listed
                                                            during the pandemic, and vice-versa.

 Exchange                                       A positive beta coefficient implies that firms listed
 (1 or 0)                                            on Nasdaq OMX Stockholm experience higher
                                                    levels of underpricing or higher BHAR than firms
                                                         listed on the smaller exchanges, and vice-versa.

 Firm size                                          A positive beta coefficient implies that larger firms
 (1 or 0)                                              experience higher levels of underpricing or higher
                                                    BHAR than smaller companies, and vice-versa.

Thus, in conclusion, our regression analysis for underpricing will be implemented as follows:

 𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔 = α + β (𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝐴𝑔𝑒) + β (𝐻𝑜𝑡 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡) + β (𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑢𝑠) +
                  𝑖      𝑖      1       −           2      −                 3
                       β (𝐸𝑥𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒) + β (𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒) + ε
                               4                      5       −            𝑖
15

To analyse the post-IPO long-run performance of our sample of IPOs, the following regressions
will be carried out to determine the Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns:

 𝐵𝐻𝐴𝑅      = α + β (𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝐴𝑔𝑒) + β (𝐻𝑜𝑡 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡) + β (𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑢𝑠) +
         1 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟, 𝑖      𝑖      1       −             2      −                 3
                      β (𝐸𝑥𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒) + β (𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒) + ε
                              4                      5       −             𝑖

 𝐵𝐻𝐴𝑅       = α + β (𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝐴𝑔𝑒) + β (𝐻𝑜𝑡 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡) + β (𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑢𝑠) +
        2 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑠, 𝑖      𝑖      1       −             2      −                 3
                      β (𝐸𝑥𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒) + β (𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒) + ε
                              4                      5       −             𝑖

 𝐵𝐻𝐴𝑅       = α + β (𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝐴𝑔𝑒) + β (𝐻𝑜𝑡 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡) + β (𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑢𝑠) +
        3 𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑠, 𝑖      𝑖      1       −             2      −                 3
                      β (𝐸𝑥𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒) + β (𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒) + ε
                              4                      5       −             𝑖

4.8 Mann-Whitney U-Test

The collected sample of IPOs is not normally distributed (see Appendix 12 and 13). Thus, to
strengthen the analysis of how the parameter firm age affects underpricing and long-run
performance and generate additional insights to supplement our regression analysis, we
conducted a nonparametric Mann-Whitney U-test. The test does not require the sample to be
normally distributed, and hence, it is a suitable course of action to identify any meaningful
differences in underpricing and long-run performance between the independent samples of
young and old firms. The Mann-Whitney U-test is equivalent to the Wilcoxon Rank-sum test.

The following equations describe the formula used for calculating the Mann-Whitney U-test:

                                                                     𝑛 (𝑛 +1)
                                                                        1   1
                            𝑈  = 𝑛 𝑛  +   2 − 𝑅
                                 1      1 2                  1

                                                                    𝑛 (𝑛 +1)
                                                                      2   2
                            𝑈 = 𝑛 𝑛 +   2 − 𝑅
                                  2      1 2                  2

                                    𝑈 = 𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝑈 , 𝑈 )
                                                    1   2

𝑛  and 𝑛 are the sample size of the respective groups. 𝑅 and 𝑅 are the number of ranks for the
 1 2 1 2
two groups. If 𝑈 < 𝑈   the null hypothesis can be rejected, where 𝑈    can be found in the
                                       𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡
official Mann-Whitney tables list in the case of calculating by hand.
16

5. Results and Analysis

The following section presents the results obtained from our regression analysis, which was
described in Section 4.7 above, as well as the findings obtained from the Mann-Whitney U-test,
described in Section 4.8. We will first present the results from our regression analysis on the
topic of underpricing in Section 5.1. Section 5.2 describes the results from the regression analysis
of BHAR. Next, the following section introduces the reader to our regression analysis conducted
on Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns, with the statistical results obtained from our three
different time periods presented in Section 5.2. We then illustrate the results from the
nonparametric Mann-Whitney U-test for the dependent variable underpricing in Section 5.3,
subsequently describing the results from the same test performed on the dependent variable
BHAR in Section 5.4.

5.1 Regression Analysis - Underpricing

In order to answer our stated research question, we ran a regression analysis. This statistical
analysis examines the relationship between underpricing and our control variables which were
presented above in Section 4.7. As previously mentioned, the regression will first be conducted
using merely our focus variable, that is, firm age. Then, after adding our second variable of focus,
the dummy variable controlling for a hot market, the regression will finally be run with all of our
independent variables. The results are illustrated in Table 3 down below.

Given the initial results obtained and presented in Table 3, we can determine through the
positive Beta-coefficient that a firm being classified as young increased the level of underpricing
by 3.8 % on average. However, as illustrated, this result was not statistically significant. The
dummy variable for a hot market, on the other hand, was the largest explanatory factor of IPO
underpricing within our sample, increasing the level of underpricing by 23.7 % on average with a
significance level of <1 %. Also noteworthy is that the dummy variable controlling for the initial
stages of the pandemic was significant at a 5 % significance level, indicating greater levels of
underpricing for companies listed during this period. However, caution must be applied when
interpreting the result from this parameter, given that only 11 IPOs were included in this variable
with our chosen methodology. In light of this fairly small sample size, the validity of the
statistical significance must be handled vigilantly.

Furthermore, the relatively modest value obtained on the parameter R-squared of 0.058 based on
the entire model is of interest, as it indicates that our control variables did not explain that much
of the observed variance in the dependent variable. This is nonetheless not particularly
surprising, considering the vast amount of components that can affect and influence stock prices,
as well as the delimitation inherent in our implemented model. Nevertheless, we can observe a
relatively large increase in the value of the R-squared figure when adding the dummy variable for
the hot market period to the existing dummy for firm age, indicating that the hot market
contains a relatively high explanatory effect. In summary, we do not find that the firm age
significantly affects the level of underpricing in our sample of IPOs during our selected
timeframe.
17

Table 3: Regression Results With Underpricing as the Dependent Variable for 260 IPOs
During 2014-2021 (OLS)
Table 3 illustrates our multiple regression analysis output, using underpricing as the dependent variable. The sample
consists of 260 firms going public on the Swedish stock market between 2014 and 2021. “Underpricing” is defined
as the definitive offer price in the IPO compared to the first-day closing price of the stock. For the dummy variable
“Firm age”, a value of 1 represents young firms, and a value of 0 corresponds to old firms. For the dummy variable
“Hot market”, a value of 1 represents a listing during the time period of either 2021 or 2017, and a value of 0
corresponds to a listing in one of the other years during our time period. For the dummy variable “Coronavirus”, a
value of 1 represents a listing during the initial stages of the pandemic, and a value of 0 if the listing was completed
either before or after that specific time interval. For the dummy variable "Exchange”, a value of 1 represents a listing
on Nasdaq OMX Stockholm, and a value of 0 represents a listing on either First North, Spotlight, or NGM. For the
dummy variable “Firm size”, a value of 1 represents a listing where the company is considered large, and a value of 0
if the company is characterised as small according to our classification method. “Constant” is the intercept of the
regression model, representing the mean value of the dependent variable when all independent variables are equal to
zero. The output illustrated in the table are the standardised coefficient estimates, “β”, depicting the degree of
change in the dependent variable for every unit of change in the corresponding independent variable. “R-squared”
measures the amount of variance in the dependent variable that the independent variables explain as a group. The
asterisks indicate the level of statistical significance corresponding to the description provided in the table. The
parentheses illustrate the robust standard errors.
 Variable 𝑅                           𝑅                           𝑅
                                    1 2 3

 Firm age 0.017                   0.009                   0.038
                                    (0.038)                    (0.037)                    (0.036)

 Hot market - 0.177***                 0.237***
                                                               (0.036)                    (0.037)

 Coronavirus - - 0.142**
                                                                                          (0.084)

 Exchange - - 0.056
                                                                                          (0.033)

 Firm size - - 0.061
                                                                                          (0.038)

 Constant 0.057**                  -0.002                   -0.072
                                    (0.022)                    (0.029)                    (0.041)

 R-Squared                      0.000                   0.031                   0.058

 Observations                   260                   260                   260

                                    ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1
18

5.2 Regression Analysis - BHAR

To answer our research question regarding the potential effects of firm age on post-IPO
long-run performance, we ran three different stepwise regressions, with the dependent variable
being the one-, two-, and three-year Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns, respectively. Once again,
the regression will first be completed by containing only our main variable of focus, firm age.
Then, after adding our other variable of focus, i.e., the dummy for a hot market, all the remaining
independent variables will be included. Tables 4 to 6, presented below, illustrate the results from
our regression analysis.

Observing Tables 4 to 6, we can conclude that young firms whose IPOs were completed during
hot markets have a negative impact on BHAR for all our different time periods, that is, for the
one-, two-, and three-year analysis when considering the entire model. Furthermore, being
classified as a young firm has a negative impact on all three stepwise regressions for all different
time series, illustrating a recurring theme that younger firms perform worse over time than their
older counterparts. However, this impact is of marginal nature as the P-values are relatively high,
thus not providing any statistical significance. In general, it seems as if the independent variables
do not explain much of the observed long-run performance, given the fairly low R-squared
values obtained in the regressions. While further discussed in Section 6, this result is not
particularly surprising in light of the countless factors affecting stock prices, especially when
measured over longer time periods.

Nonetheless, we can observe an interesting pattern where the R-squared value tends to increase
as more independent variables are included. However, this does not hold to the same extent for
the one-year period, possibly indicating that the somewhat increased underpricing among
younger firms and IPOs conducted during hot markets, as illustrated in the previous section,
might lead to a suboptimal performance during the first year post the offering. Also noteworthy
is that the dummy variable controlling for the Coronavirus was eliminated during the two- and
three-year time periods analysed, as that variable, according to our classification method,
otherwise would have been treated as a constant in the analysis during these years. In summary,
we do not find that the firm age significantly affects the one-, two-, or three-year post-IPO
performance, although a pattern of negative stock development for young firms generally can be
observed.
19

Table 4: Regression Results With BHAR 1-year as the Dependent Variable for 157 IPOs
During 2014-2020 (OLS)
Table 4 illustrates our multiple regression analysis, using Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns (“BHAR”) for one year
as the dependent variable for our sample of Swedish IPOs between 2014 and 2020. “BHAR” is defined as the
Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Return of the stock less the return of the benchmark during the corresponding timeframe.
For the dummy variable “Firm age”, a value of 1 represents young firms, and a value of 0 corresponds to old firms.
For the dummy variable “Hot market”, a value of 1 represents a listing during the time period of either 2021 or
2017, and a value of 0 corresponds to a listing in one of the other years during our time period. For the dummy
variable “Coronavirus”, a value of 1 represents a listing during the initial stages of the pandemic, and a value of 0 if
the listing was completed either before or after that specific time interval. For the dummy variable "Exchange”, a
value of 1 represents a listing on Nasdaq OMX Stockholm, and a value of 0 represents a listing on either First
North, Spotlight, or NGM. For the dummy variable “Firm size”, a value of 1 represents a listing where the company
is considered large, and a value of 0 if the company is characterised as small according to our classification method.
“Constant” is the intercept of the regression model, representing the mean value of the dependent variable when all
independent variables are equal to zero. The output illustrated in the table are the standardised coefficient estimates,
“β”, depicting the degree of change in the dependent variable for every unit of change in the corresponding
independent variable. “R-squared” measures the amount of variance in the dependent variable that the independent
variables explain as a group. The asterisks indicate the level of statistical significance corresponding to the
description provided in the table. The parentheses illustrate the robust standard errors.
 Variable 𝑅                           𝑅                           𝑅
                                    1 2 3

 Firm age -0.102                   -0.101                   -0.101
                                    (0.122)                    (0.124)                    (0.131)

 Hot market - -0.016                   -0.006
                                                               (0.135)                    (0.147)

 Coronavirus - - 0.058
                                                                                          (0.527)

 Exchange - - -0.013
                                                                                          (0.158)

 Firm size - - 0.010
                                                                                          (0.160)

 Constant 0.172**                  0.179*                   0.164
                                    (0.009)                    (0.009)                    (0.144)

 R-Squared                      0.010                   0.011                   0.014

 Observations                   157                   157                   157

                                    ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1
20

Table 5: Regression Results With BHAR 2-year as the Dependent Variable for 135 IPOs
During 2014-2019 (OLS)
Table 5 illustrates our multiple regression analysis, using Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns (“BHAR”) for two years
as the dependent variable for our sample of Swedish IPOs between 2014 and 2019. “BHAR” is defined as the
Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Return of the stock less the return of the benchmark during the corresponding timeframe.
For the dummy variable “Firm age”, a value of 1 represents young firms, and a value of 0 corresponds to old firms.
For the dummy variable “Hot market”, a value of 1 represents a listing during the time period of either 2021 or
2017, and a value of 0 corresponds to a listing in one of the other years during our time period. For the dummy
variable “Coronavirus”, a value of 1 represents a listing during the initial stages of the pandemic, and a value of 0 if
the listing was completed either before or after that specific time interval. For the dummy variable "Exchange”, a
value of 1 represents a listing on Nasdaq OMX Stockholm, and a value of 0 represents a listing on either First
North, Spotlight, or NGM. For the dummy variable “Firm size”, a value of 1 represents a listing where the company
is considered large, and a value of 0 if the company is characterised as small according to our classification method.
“Constant” is the intercept of the regression model, representing the mean value of the dependent variable when all
independent variables are equal to zero. The output illustrated in the table are the standardised coefficient estimates,
“β”, depicting the degree of change in the dependent variable for every unit of change in the corresponding
independent variable. “R-squared” measures the amount of variance in the dependent variable that the independent
variables explain as a group. The asterisks indicate the level of statistical significance corresponding to the
description provided in the table. The parentheses illustrate the robust standard errors.
 Variable 𝑅                           𝑅                           𝑅
                                    1 2 3

 Firm age -0.050                   -0.044                   -0.035
                                    (0.211)                    (0.215)                    (0.201)

 Hot market - -0.101                   -0.095
                                                               (0.195)                    (0.214)

 Coronavirus - - --

 Exchange - - 0.067
                                                                                          (0.246)

 Firm size - - -0.047
                                                                                          (0.274)

 Constant 0.324**                 0.404**                  0.373
                                    (0.132)                    (0.151)                    (0.237)

 R-Squared                      0.003                   0.013                   0.015

 Observations                   135                   135                   135

                                    ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1
21

Table 6: Regression Results With BHAR 3-year as the Dependent Variable for 117 IPOs
During 2014-2018 (OLS)
Table 6 illustrates our multiple regression analysis, using Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns (“BHAR”) for three years
as the dependent variable for our sample of Swedish IPOs between 2014 and 2018. “BHAR” is defined as the
Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Return of the stock less the return of the benchmark during the corresponding timeframe.
For the dummy variable “Firm age”, a value of 1 represents young firms, and a value of 0 corresponds to old firms.
For the dummy variable “Hot market”, a value of 1 represents a listing during the time period of either 2021 or 2017,
and a value of 0 corresponds to a listing in one of the other years during our time period. For the dummy variable
“Coronavirus”, a value of 1 represents a listing during the initial stages of the pandemic, and a value of 0 if the listing
was completed either before or after that specific time interval. For the dummy variable "Exchange”, a value of 1
represents a listing on Nasdaq OMX Stockholm, and a value of 0 represents a listing on either First North, Spotlight,
or NGM. For the dummy variable “Firm size”, a value of 1 represents a listing where the company is considered
large, and a value of 0 if the company is characterised as small according to our classification method. “Constant” is
the intercept of the regression model, representing the mean value of the dependent variable when all independent
variables are equal to zero. The output illustrated in the table are the standardised coefficient estimates, “β”, depicting
the degree of change in the dependent variable for every unit of change in the corresponding independent variable.
“R-squared” measures the amount of variance in the dependent variable that the independent variables explain as a
group. The asterisks indicate the level of statistical significance corresponding to the description provided in the
table. The parentheses illustrate the robust standard errors.
 Variable 𝑅                           𝑅                           𝑅
                                    1 2 3

 Firm age -0.074                   -0.076                   -0.110
                                    (0.317)                    (0.336)                    (0.334)

 Hot market - 0.025                   -0.007
                                                               (0.344)                    (0.371)

 Coronavirus - - –

 Exchange - - 0.018
                                                                                          (0.331)

 Firm size - - -0.138
                                                                                          (0.392)

 Constant 0.503**                 0.472**                 0.788**
                                    (0.188)                    (0.164)                    (0.424)

 R-Squared                      0.005                   0.006                   0.019

 Observations                   117                   117                   117

                                    ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1
22

5.3 Mann-Whitney U-Test - Underpricing

In order to augment our understanding of the level of underpricing prevalent in the Swedish
financial markets and to complement our regression analysis, we ran a Mann-Whitney U-test to
compare two independent groups, that is, young and old firms, against our dependent variable
underpricing. Table 7 illustrates the results obtained from our nonparametric Mann-Whitney
U-test.

According to the results from this test, there is no significant difference in underpricing
stemming from disparate firm ages, evident in the fairly similar mean ranks. Moreover, the
Z-score, which is -0.395, indicates that the groups are relatively evenly distributed. Hence, the
Mann-Whitney U-test does not support any complementary understanding of potential
differences in underpricing between young and old firms.

Table 7: Mann-Whitney U-Test Results With Underpricing as the Dependent Variable for
260 IPOs During 2014-2021
Table 7 illustrates our nonparametric Mann-Whitney U-test conducted on the dependent variable underpricing. The
sample consists of 260 firms going public on the Swedish stock market between 2014 and 2021. “Underpricing” is
defined as the definitive offer price in the IPO compared to the first-day closing price of the stock. For the dummy
variable “Firm age”, a value of 1 represents young firms, and a value of 0 corresponds to old firms. The “Mean
rank” captures the actual result from the test. “P-value” is a probability score used to determine the statistical
significance of an observed effect. “Z-score” is a test variable calculated by comparing the mean rank of one group
to the overall mean rank.
 Variable Mean rank P-value Z-score

 Old firms 132.34 - -

 Young firms 128.66 - -

 Model - 0.693 -0.395

5.4 Mann-Whitney U-Test - BHAR

Once again, we used the Mann-Whitney U-test to complement the regression analysis in the
pursuit of gaining an even more nuanced and comprehensive understanding of the long-run
post-IPO performance in our sample. Tables 8 to 10, presented below, illustrate the empirical
findings from our nonparametric Mann-Whitney U-tests for Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns.

According to the results obtained from the Mann-Whitney U-test, we can observe a noticeable
discrepancy between young and old firms in terms of long-run performance. For the one- and
two-year period, the IPOs defined as young generally perform slightly worse than the IPOs
defined as old, as evident in the higher mean rank among old firms. For example, in Table 8, a
P-value of 0.102 and a Z-score of -1.636 can be observed. This points to a palpable difference in
the distribution between young and old firms regarding the one-year post-IPO performance. In
Table 9, a P-value of 0.180 and a Z-score of -1.342 can be noted, indicating a similar pattern. Yet,
for both the one- and two-year post-IPO performance, the mean ranks of the samples are not
23

statistically significant. However, in Table 10, a P-value of 0.033 and a Z-score of -2.130 can be
observed, which points to a significant difference at a 5 % significance level in mean rank
between young and old firms in terms of the three-year post IPO performance. This result is
interesting to dig into and differs from the result obtained from the regression analysis of the
BHAR, where no significant results could be observed regarding firm age.

Table 8: Mann-Whitney U-Test Results With BHAR 1-year as the Dependent Variable for
157 IPOs During 2014-2018
Table 8 illustrates our nonparametric Mann-Whitney U-test conducted on the dependent variable Buy-and-Hold
Abnormal Returns (“BHAR”) one-year. The sample consists of 157 firms going public on the Swedish stock market
between 2014 and 2018. “Underpricing” is defined as the definitive offer price in the IPO compared to the first-day
closing price of the stock. For the dummy variable “Firm age”, a value of 1 represents young firms, and a value of 0
corresponds to old firms. The “Mean rank” captures the actual result from the test. “P-value” is a probability score
used to determine the statistical significance of an observed effect. “Z-score” is a test variable calculated by
comparing the mean rank of one group to the overall mean rank.
 Variable Mean rank P-value Z-score

 Old firms 85.23 - -

 Young firms 73.32 - -

 Model - 0.102 -1.636

Table 9: Mann-Whitney U-Test Results With BHAR 2-year as the Dependent Variable for
135 IPOs During 2014-2019
Table 9 illustrates our nonparametric Mann-Whitney U-test conducted on the dependent variable Buy-and-Hold
Abnormal Returns (“BHAR”) two-year. The sample consists of 135 firms going public on the Swedish stock market
between 2014 and 2019. “Underpricing” is defined as the definitive offer price in the IPO compared to the first-day
closing price of the stock. For the dummy variable “Firm age”, a value of 1 represents young firms, and a value of 0
corresponds to old firms. The “Mean rank” captures the actual result from the test. “P-value” is a probability score
used to determine the statistical significance of an observed effect. “Z-score” is a test variable calculated by
comparing the mean rank of one group to the overall mean rank.
 Variable Mean rank P-value Z-score

 Old firms 72.16 - -

 Young firms 63.10 - -

 Model - 0.180 -1.342
24

Table 10: Mann-Whitney U-Test Results With BHAR 3-year as the Dependent Variable
for 117 IPOs During 2014-2018
Table 10 illustrates our nonparametric Mann-Whitney U-test conducted on the dependent variable Buy-and-Hold
Abnormal Returns (“BHAR”) three-year. The sample consists of 117 firms going public on the Swedish stock
market between 2014 and 2018. “Underpricing” is defined as the definitive offer price in the IPO compared to the
first-day closing price of the stock. For the dummy variable “Firm age”, a value of 1 represents young firms, and a
value of 0 corresponds to old firms. The “Mean rank” captures the actual result from the test. “P-value” is a
probability score used to determine the statistical significance of an observed effect. “Z-score” is a test variable
calculated by comparing the mean rank of one group to the overall mean rank.
 Variable Mean rank P-value Z-score

 Old firms 65.08 - -

 Young firms 51.66 - -

 Model - 0.033 -2.130

6. Discussion

The following section discusses the empirical results illustrated in Section 5. We will first discuss
the main results from our study of underpricing, both from the regression analysis and the
Mann-Whitney U-test, which is presented in Section 6.1. Then, in Section 6.2, the findings from
our study of long-run post-IPO performance are presented. Finally, the limitations of our study,
along with suggestions for future research, will be presented in Section 6.3.

6.1 Underpricing

As presented in Table 3, we can conclude that the regression analysis does not indicate any
significant relationship between underpricing and firm age, although the positive Beta-coefficient
states that a firm classified as young increases the level of underpricing by 3.8 % on average
when observing the entire model. The dummy variable controlling for a hot issue market stands
out as increasing the level of underpricing by 23.7 % on average at a significance level of 1 %.
Moreover, the variable controlling for the Coronavirus also demonstrates significance at a level
of 5 %. However, the nonparametric Mann-Whitney U-test did not indicate any significant
differences in mean rank between young and old firms, coupled with a Z-score relatively close to
zero, implying that the groups were fairly evenly matched.

The hot market phenomenon is a well-documented issue within the literature. For instance,
scholars have identified bubble periods with greater levels of underpricing (Loughran and Ritter,
2004) and investigated the connection between firm age and hot markets (Helwege and Liang,
2004). Allen and Faulhaber (1989) developed a model to argue that underpricing is most
prevalent at certain times (hot markets) and in certain industries. As previously mentioned, we
can, in line with previous literature, observe an increase in underpricing during hot markets.
While the findings from the OLS regarding firm age do not provide any statistical significance,
we can still observe a pattern of an increased level of underpricing among young firms, in line
25

with previous studies (Ritter, 1991). One of the most common explanations for why
underpricing tends to be elevated among young firms revolves around the fact that they are
usually perceived as riskier (Loughran and Ritter, 2004), leading to what Rock (1986) labels as the
Winner’s curse, where companies find it challenging to attract investors willing to pay a high
price, ultimately leading to higher first-day returns. While this explanation might be rational for
the US stock market, especially during the 1980s to the early 2000s, when a lot of the seminal
studies on IPO underpricing were conducted, it might not be as true for the Swedish financial
markets of today.

Several reasons could explain this potential discrepancy, for instance, the structure and
composition of the Swedish economy and the firms choosing to go public. Sweden has a
well-developed business community, and given the country’s reasonably modest size, companies
are not seldom forced to internationalise early on in their life cycles to stay competitive. This
enables companies to establish resilience. Moreover, the increased transparency and improved
infrastructure surrounding the Swedish financial markets in recent years might have made the
market more efficient, reducing information asymmetry. This might have helped to decrease the
general level of underpricing and increased the scrutiny of younger, smaller firms, which is not
least evident in the fact that 2.7 million Swedes own shares directly through the stock market, an
internationally competitive figure (Euroclear, 2022).

A more accurate explanation of the still prominent feature of underpricing on the Swedish stock
markets might be the theory developed by Welch (1989). He argues that since underpricing
inflicts losses on the existing owners, only good firms are able to recoup these losses when
future, satisfactory performances are realised. Thus, underpricing the offer could serve as a
credible signal to investors that the firm is indeed of high quality. While further studies are
needed to validate this hypothesis, underpricing might also partially stem from companies
seeking to reissue equity, often several times greater than the initial amount raised in the IPO in
the years following the IPO. Rewarding investors with handsome gains in the IPO could thus be
a wise move to satisfy investors, making seasoned equity offerings more likely to be successful
(Welch, 1989).

While many of the firms classified as young in Ritter’s influential study (1991) were active within
the oil and gas industry, the industrial landscape, especially in Sweden, looks radically different
today. Only one IPO included in our sample is conducted within the natural resources industry.
While further discussed in Section 6.3, more research combining firm age and industry in the
Swedish financial markets should give rise to new, valuable insights regarding the IPO landscape.

During the hot IPO markets present in our sample, namely 2017 and 2021, 148 IPOs were
completed (see Appendix 4). This figure constitutes almost 57 % of all IPOs prevalent in our
data set, which is a remarkably high ratio; however, in line with previous literature such as
Helwege and Liang (2004), who states that the discrepancy between a hot and cold IPO market
lies namely in the number of offerings, not company characteristics. Moreover, as previously
noted, these time periods contain high levels of underpricing (as illustrated in Figure 1), also
consistent with previous studies (Loughran and Ritter, 2004; Ritter, 1991). When reviewing our
sample, it is evident that many young firms decided to go public during these ebullient market
26

phases, as 77 out of 130 firms classified as young completed their IPOs in either 2017 or 2021.
Thus, while not significant, the pattern emerging from our regression analysis of an increase in
underpricing from being classified as young can at least partially be attributed to the concepts
discussed by Ritter (1991), namely the “fads” explanation and the “window of opportunity.”
Overoptimistic investors and firms taking advantage of this bullish investor sentiment thus still
seem to have a meaningful impact on the Swedish IPO landscape.

6.2 Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns

As presented in Tables 4-6, we can observe that the R-squared value for the regression model is
low, indicating that the independent variables do not explain the long-run post-IPO performance
very well. This is, however, not especially surprising since the factors affecting a stock’s
performance are extensive, especially during longer periods. In addition, both the independent
variables and the index used in calculating the Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns do not capture
all of the idiosyncratic risks of each IPO. Thus, the almost endless number of factors
determining the stock prices of the IPO sample is challenging to capture in a single model.

Interestingly, in line with most previous literature, such as Ritter (1991), we can generally observe
a negative impact on the long-run post-IPO performance from being classified as a young
company. However, the firm age variable is not statistically significant in our regression analysis,
implying that we cannot draw any extensive conclusions regarding the impact of firm age on
long-run post-IPO performance. This differs from previous literature (Ritter, 1991) that finds a
statistically significant correlation between young firms and generally lower post-IPO
performance. For the Mann-Whitney U-test, a generally lower mean rank in terms of post-IPO
performance can be observed for young companies compared to old ones. This correlation is
statistically significant at a 5 % significance level on a three-year basis. As previously mentioned,
the OMXSPI index does not produce a perfect benchmark that captures specific industry-related
risks. By using a matching firm as a benchmark (Ritter, 1991), it is reasonable to believe that the
result of both the regression model and the Mann-Whitney U-test could differ somewhat from
the results obtained in our study. Nonetheless, the main patterns from our empirical findings are
broadly in line with previous literature.

Both Ritter (1991) and Derrien (2005) find that noise trader sentiment, that is, factors and
decisions not built upon professional advice or financial fundamentals, on average, strongly
impact stock behaviour in and after an initial public offering. This phenomenon generally affects
the pricing of IPOs and the subsequent level of initial return, a return that is not in line with
long-run stock price fundamentals as underwriters and firms take advantage of the bullish
sentiment to extract a higher offer price. The findings from our study indicate a generally
negative trend regarding the correlation between firm age and long-run stock performance. The
opposite correlation can be observed between firm age and underpricing. This result, however,
exhibits the greatest strengths when it comes to BHAR, as the impact on long-run performance
stemming from firm age was significant for the three-year period on the Mann-Whitney U-test.
In other words, the noise sentiment investor demand is consistent with our result in terms of the
effect of firm age, where the trend illustrates that younger firms possess a greater level of
underpricing and generally worse long-run performance.
27

6.3 Limitations and Future Research

This study exhibits several limitations. First of all, the sample is of relatively modest size. A larger
sample, including additional years and periods of hot- and cold markets, may have provided a
more nuanced understanding of the correlation between underpricing, long-run performance
and firm age. In addition, the division into the categories of young and old firms is, while based
on previous literature, still somewhat subjective, and the definition of the period related to the
Coronavirus is also subjective. While some subjectivity is necessary and inevitable when dealing
with these kinds of delimitations, a more standardised and universal definition of firm age, and in
particular the Coronavirus, might aid in creating a more generalisable result. Finally, to our
knowledge, the market size median-based division is not based on any academically proven
guideline.

Future scholars could delve deeper into possible correlations between firm age and industry to
further our research on IPO underpricing and long-run performance in the Swedish financial
markets. While previous papers tend to study either firm age or branch-specific effects on
underpricing and long-run performance, a cross-sectional study combining potential insights
from these areas could give birth to a more nuanced and comprehensive understanding of the
IPO landscape in Sweden. Moreover, while we chose to use a broad market index to measure
long-run performance, future research could augment existing knowledge regarding post-IPO
performance in the Swedish financial markets by implementing various other methodologies for
determining relative stock development. While the comparatively small size of the Swedish stock
market could entail some difficulties, using industry-specific indexes or matching firms might
enhance the relative comparison of a specific IPOs long-term stock development. To fully
capture the differences generated by different benchmarks, we could have, guided by Ritter
(1991), applied various indexes on the same sample to obtain a more refined and dynamic
perspective of the long-run post-IPO performance.

Future researchers might also find it interesting to examine the possible effects of underpricing
and long-run performance between young and old firms based on investor characteristics.
Investigating the different types of investors prevalent in various IPOs might yield interesting
results in terms of whether young or old companies, in general, tend to be backed by private-,
institutional-, private equity-, or venture capital owners and if this subsequently has any influence
on the relative stock performance, both short- and long term. In addition, while we included
event variables (i.e., the dummies for hot markets and the Coronavirus) as a proxy for fixed year
effects, scholars might receive additional insights from having a location-based fixed year effect.
This could, for instance, be a dummy variable taking on the value of 0 if the specific company is
situated in Stockholm and the value of 1 if the firm is not based in Stockholm.

Further research could also be done regarding the Coronavirus. Given its novelty, not many
studies have yet been conducted on the topic; however, the statistically significant result obtained
from our regression analysis of underpricing should give rise to new, complementary inquiries.
Not only are more statistically focused research of interest, but also descriptive studies could be
insightful in order to gain a more enhanced understanding of this phenomenon and the
subsequent consequences for the financial markets.
28

Finally, by extending the time period of the study and adding one or two more exogenous events,
such as the financial crisis of 2008, an interesting comparison with the Coronavirus could have
been laid out to generate insights into how various causes of stock market declines correlate with
the level of underpricing and long-run performance for young and old firms, respectively.

7. Conclusion

Firm characteristics are fundamental in understanding differences in stock performances in the
financial markets. In this study, the choice of firm age has been made to shed light on some
aspects of the decision regarding when in their life cycle a company should choose to go public.
This has been done by analysing differences in initial return, in the form of underpricing, as well
as the one-, two-, and the three-year time period following the IPO. By conducting two different
statistical tests, namely a regression analysis (OLS) and a nonparametric Mann-Whitney U-test,
we have been able to provide some new insights into recent years’ stock price behaviours in the
Swedish stock market. The data analysis indicates that there are indeed differences in IPO
underpricing and long-run stock performance related to disparities in the founding year.

Given that our sample of IPOs is relatively modest, with a large proportion of the offerings
occurring during the hot markets of 2017 and 2021 in particular, discretion must be applied
before drawing any far-reaching generalisable conclusions from the study. Nevertheless, our
general empirical findings, indicating a pattern of increased underpricing and lower post-IPO
long-run performance among young firms and the significant impact on underpricing stemming
from a hot issue market, might have several explanations. While we have argued that the
well-developed Swedish business market of today might point towards an origin more in line
with the signalling theory (Welch, 1989) or investor overoptimism (Ritter, 1991) rather than
younger firms being perceived as riskier, it is difficult, if not impossible, to determine the most
accurate root causes. While the most realistic answer may be a combination of all arguments
mentioned above in Section 6, our results nonetheless shed light on interesting financial
phenomenons with critical implications for both academics and investors and help advance the
body of literature regarding the Swedish IPO landscape.

Looking ahead, the dynamics and characteristics of the financial markets will continue to evolve.
As previously mentioned, younger firms have decided to go public to a larger extent in the last
few years, generally exhibiting greater underpricing and lower long-run performance than their
older counterparts. Whether this trend will be observable, or even heightened, in the future is
difficult to tell and thus calls for renewed studies as society changes and new potential
explanations, where some may take more of a behavioural approach such as the rent-seeking
explanation developed by Loughran and Ritter (2002), are introduced. In addition, the
geopolitical turmoil of 2022, coupled with rising rates and spiralling inflation, have so far
dramatically reduced the number of IPOs conducted on the financial markets across the globe.
Only time can tell if the stage is set for another hot issue market, with the current stalemate
merely creating another backlog of future listings, or if we are headed for a more prolonged
29

period of fewer financial transactions. Nonetheless, studying the characteristics of the firms
choosing to go public and their associated stock performance will be as fascinating and insightful
as ever.
30

References

Affärsvärlden, 2021, IPO-guiden: 2021 - Ett rekordår, December 29.
https://www.affarsvarlden.se/artikel/skyhogt-intresse-for-ipoer-har-flockades-spararna-under-ar
et

Allen, Franklin, and Gerald R Faulhaber, (1989), “Signalling by Underpricing in the IPO
Market.” Journal of Financial Economics23.2: 303–323.

Barber, Brad M, Lyon, John D, and Chih-Ling Tsai, (1999), “Improved Methods for Tests of
Long-Run Abnormal Stock Returns.” The Journal of Finance(New York) 54.1: 165–201.

Derrien, Francois, (2005),“IPO Pricing in ‘Hot’ Market Conditions: Who Leaves Money on the
Table?” The Journal of Finance (New York)60.1: 487–521.

Euroclear, 2022, Starkt aktieintresse under 2021, April 4.
https://www.euroclear.com/sweden/sv/nyheter-och-insikter/pressmeddelanden/Starkt-aktieint
resse-under-2021.html

EY, 2021, IPO Trends Report, March 22.
https://assets.ey.com/content/dam/ey-sites/ey-com/en_gl/topics/ipo/ey-2021-global-ipo-tren
ds-report-v2.pdf

Folkhälsomyndigheten, 2020, Spridningen av Covid-19 är en pandemi, March 11
https://https//www.folkhalsomyndigheten.se/nyheter-och-press/nyhetsarkiv/2020/mars/sprid
ningen-av-covid-19-ar-en-pandemi/

Helwege, Jean, and Nellie Liang, (2004), “Initial Public Offerings in Hot and Cold Markets.”
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis39.3: 541–569.

Lerner, Joshua, (1994), “Venture Capitalists and the Decision to Go Public.” Journal of Financial
Economics 35.3: 293–316.

Loughran, Tim, and Ritter, Jay R, (1995), “The New Issues Puzzle.” The Journal of Finance (New
York) 50.1: 23–51.

Loughran, Tim, and Ritter, Jay R, (2002), “Why Don’t Issuers Get Upset About Leaving Money
on the Table in IPOs?” The Review of Financial Studies15.2: 413–443.

Loughran, Tim, and Ritter, Jay R, (2004), “Why Has IPO Underpricing Changed Over Time?”
Financial Management 33.3: 5–37.

Ritter, Jay R, (1991), “The Long-Run Performance of Initial Public Offerings.” The Journal of
Finance (New York) 46.1: 3–27.
31

Rock, Kevin, (1986), “Why New Issues Are Underpriced.” Journal of Financial Economics 15.1:
187–212.

Shiller, Robert J, (2003), “From Efficient Markets Theory to Behavioural Finance.” The Journal of
Economic Perspectives 17.1: 83–104.

Shiller, Robert J, (1990), “Speculative Prices and Popular Models.” The Journal of Economic
Perspectives 4.2: 55–65.

Welch, Ivo, (1989), “Seasoned Offerings, Imitation Costs, and the Underpricing of Initial Public
Offerings.” The Journal of Finance (New York)44.2: 421–449.

Data Sources

FinBas, Retrieved on March 10, 2022 from:
https://data.houseoffinance.se/finbas/index

Refinitiv SDC Platinum, Retrieved on February 24, 2022 from:
https://www.refinitiv.com/en/products/sdc-platinum-financial-securities

Thomson Reuters Eikon, Retrieved on February 24, 2022 from:
https://www.eikon.thomsonreuters.com/index.html
32

Appendix

Appendix 1: Key Variables from SDC Platinum
Appendix 1 summarises the variables collected from the database SDC Platinum, with the corresponding
description for each variable included.
 Variable Description

 Issue date Pricing date of the issue

 Issuer The name of the issuing company

 Main SIC Code Main SIC code of the issuing company

 Primary exchange The stock exchange where the company's shares is
                                                                                       listed

 Industry The main industry each company operates within

 Offer price The initial stock price offered to investors

 Date founded Date when each company was founded

 ISIN International Securities Identification Number

Appendix 2: Key Variables from FinBas
Appendix 2 summarises the variables collected from the database FinBas, with the corresponding description for
each variable included.
 Variable Description

 ISIN International Securities Identification Number

 Name The name of the issuing company

 Market Capitalisation The company's total market capitalisation

 Last Adjusted last trading price of the stock at the end
                                                                       of the trade day

 Currency Currency equal to the closing price

 Date Date equal to the closing price of each company
33

Appendix 3: Key Variables from Thomson Reuters Eikon
Appendix 3 summarises the variables collected from the database Thomson Reuters Eikon, with the corresponding
description for each variable included.
 Variable Description

 Index The closing price of the OMXSPI index, daily
                                                                               basis

 Turnover - SEK Total value of stocks traded, daily basis

 Date The corresponding date

Appendix 4: Observation Count Control Variables
Appendix 4 illustrates the observation count for all of our control variables included in the statistical analysis. For
the dummy variable “Firm age”, a value of 1 represents young firms, and a value of 0 corresponds to old firms. For
the dummy variable “Hot market”, a value of 1 represents a listing during the time period of either 2021 or 2017,
and a value of 0 corresponds to a listing in one of the other years during our time period. For the dummy variable
“Coronavirus”, a value of 1 represents a listing during the initial stages of the pandemic, and a value of 0 if the
listing was completed either before or after that specific time interval. For the dummy variable "Exchange”, a value
of 1 represents a listing on Nasdaq OMX Stockholm, and a value of 0 represents a listing on either First North,
Spotlight, or NGM. For the dummy variable “Firm size”, a value of 1 represents a listing where the company is
considered large, and a value of 0 if the company is characterised as small according to our classification method.
 Dummy variable Obs

 Young firms (1) 130

 Old firms (0) 130

 Nasdaq OMX Stockholm (1) 97

 Other exchanges (0) 163

 Corona (1) 11

 Corona (0) 249

 Hot market (1) 148

 Hot market (0) 112

 Large firms (1) 130

 Small firms (0) 130
34

Appendix 5: Underpricing - VIF
Appendix 5 illustrates the “VIF”, Variance Inflation Factor, for the control variables present in our regression of
underpricing, and corresponds to Table 3. The VIF shows the amount of multicollinearity in a set of multiple
regression variables. “Underpricing” is defined as the definitive offer price in the IPO compared to the first-day
closing price of the stock. For the dummy variable “Firm age”, a value of 1 represents young firms, and a value of 0
corresponds to old firms. For the dummy variable “Hot market”, a value of 1 represents a listing during the time
period of either 2021 or 2017, and a value of 0 corresponds to a listing in one of the other years during our time
period. For the dummy variable “Coronavirus”, a value of 1 represents a listing during the initial stages of the
pandemic, and a value of 0 if the listing was completed either before or after that specific time interval. For the
dummy variable "Exchange”, a value of 1 represents a listing on Nasdaq OMX Stockholm, and a value of 0
represents a listing on either First North, Spotlight, or NGM. For the dummy variable “Firm size”, a value of 1
represents a listing where the company is considered large, and a value of 0 if the company is characterised as small
according to our classification method.
 Underpricing VIF

 Firm age 1.088

 Hot market 1.153

 Coronavirus 1.070

 Exchange 1.778

 Firm size 1.755

 Average 1.332
35

Appendix 6: BHAR - VIF
Appendix 6 illustrates the “VIF”, Variance Inflation Factor, for the control variables present in our regression of
Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns for the 1-, 2-, and 3-year time period, and corresponds to Tables 4,5, and 6. The
VIF shows the amount of multicollinearity in a set of multiple regression variables. “BHAR” is defined as the
Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Return of the stock less the return of the benchmark during the corresponding timeframe.
For the dummy variable “Firm age”, a value of 1 represents young firms, and a value of 0 corresponds to old firms.
For the dummy variable “Hot market”, a value of 1 represents a listing during the time period of either 2021 or
2017, and a value of 0 corresponds to a listing in one of the other years during our time period. For the dummy
variable “Coronavirus”, a value of 1 represents a listing during the initial stages of the pandemic, and a value of 0 if
the listing was completed either before or after that specific time interval. For the dummy variable "Exchange”, a
value of 1 represents a listing on Nasdaq OMX Stockholm, and a value of 0 represents a listing on either First
North, Spotlight, or NGM. For the dummy variable “Firm size”, a value of 1 represents a listing where the company
is considered large, and a value of 0 if the company is characterised as small according to our classification method.

BHAR 1-year
 Underpricing VIF

 Firm age 1.146

 Hot market 1.108

 Coronavirus 1.050

 Exchange 2.001

 Firm size 1.929

 Average 1.449

BHAR 2-year
 Underpricing VIF

 Firm age 1.132

 Hot market 1.089

 Coronavirus --

 Exchange 2.141

 Firm size 2.039

 Average 1.523
36

BHAR 3-year
 Underpricing VIF

 Firm age 1.140

 Hot market 1.108

 Coronavirus --

 Exchange 2.387

 Firm size 2.329

 Average 1.628

Appendix 7: Descriptive Statistics - Underpricing
Appendix 7 illustrates various descriptive statistics for the underpricing prevalent in our sample of IPOs.
“Underpricing” is defined as the definitive offer price in the IPO compared to the first-day closing price of the
stock. The statistical figures included are the number of observations, the min, 25th percentile, mean, median, 75th
percentile, max, kurtosis, and skewness for our dependent variable underpricing.
                               25th                        75th
Variable N min   percentile mean median  percentile max kurtosis skewness

Young firms 130 -82.41 % -8.29 % 6.72 % 1.38 % 16.57 % 175.56 % 7.110 1.850

Old firms 130 -68.75 % -8.52 % 5.69 % 2.54 % 18.44 % 98.87 % 2.597 0.659

Appendix 8: Descriptive Statistics - BHAR
Appendix 8 illustrates various descriptive statistics for the BHAR prevalent in our sample of IPOs. “BHAR” is
defined as the Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Return of the stock less the return of the benchmark during the
corresponding timeframe. The statistical figures included are the number of observations, the min, 25th percentile,
mean, median, 75th percentile, max, kurtosis and skewness for our dependent variable Buy-and-Hold Abnormal
Returns.

BHAR 1-year
                               25th                        75th
Variable N min   percentile mean median  percentile max kurtosis skewness

Young firms 75 -111.17 % -47.85 % 1.53 % -5.91 % 23.65 % 208.40 % 1.185 1.116

Old firms 82 -89.25 % -29.20 % 17.16 % 3.64 % 42.05 % 350.97 % 7.762 2.446

BHAR 2-year
                               25th                        75th
Variable N min   percentile mean median  percentile max kurtosis skewness

Young firms 62 -122.89 % -57.43 % 20.41 % 2.15 % 52.49 % 713.64 % 14.286 3.276

Old firms 73 -110.04 % -34.62 % 32.42 % 12.01 % 47.45 % 563.45 % 8.241 2.479
37

BHAR 3-year
                               25th                        75th
Variable N min   percentile mean median  percentile max kurtosis skewness

Young firms 53 -170.72 % -68.55 % 25.71 % -18.09 % 35.87 % 917.09 % 11.439 3.144

Old firms 64 -124.52 % -39.70 % 50.29 % 20.12 % 101.32 % 752.66 % 8.544 2.501

Appendix 9: Standard Deviation - Underpricing
Appendix 9 illustrates the standard deviation of young and old firms, respectively, for our dependent variable
underpricing. “Underpricing” is defined as the definitive offer price in the IPO compared to the first-day closing
price of the stock.

Underpricing
 Variable Standard deviation

 Young firms 0.350

 Old firms 0.246

Appendix 10: Standard Deviation - BHAR
Appendix 10 illustrates the standard deviation of young and old firms, respectively, for our dependent variable
BHAR. “BHAR” is defined as the Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Return of the stock less the return of the benchmark
during the corresponding timeframe.

BHAR 1-year
 Variable Standard deviation

 Young firms 0.724

 Old firms 0.809

BHAR 2-year
 Variable Standard deviation

 Young firms 1.290

 Old firms 1.118

BHAR 3-year
 Variable Standard deviation

 Young firms 1.841

 Old firms 1.495
38

Appendix 11: Figure of the Correlation Between Firm Age and Underpricing

Appendix 11 plots our entire sample of IPOs on the Swedish stock market in relation to each firm’s age and the
corresponding under-/overpricing, illustrating the correlation.

Appendix 12: Test for Normality - Underpricing
Appendix 12 illustrates the findings from two separate tests for normality. Kolmogorov-Smirnov and Shapiro-Wilk
are two tests to determine if your sample is normally distributed. As the sig. values for young and old firms in both
tests are below the significance level 0.05, it implies that our sample significantly deviates from a normal distribution.
Thus, the assumptions underlying a one-sample t-test are not fulfilled, and such a test can not be performed.

 Kolmogorov-Smirnov Sig

 Young firms <0.001

 Old firms 0.010

 Shaprio-Wilk Sig

 Young firms <0.001

 Old firms <0.001
39

Appendix 13: Test for Normality - BHAR
Appendix 13 illustrates the findings from two separate tests for normality on the dependent variable BHAR for the
one-, two-, and three-year time period. Kolmogorov-Smirnov and Shapiro-Wilk are two tests to determine if your
sample is normally distributed. As the sig. values for young and old firms in both tests for all different time periods
are below the significance level 0.05, it implies that our sample significantly deviates from a normal distribution.
Thus, the assumptions underlying a one-sample t-test are not fulfilled, and such a test can not be performed.

BHAR 1-year
 Kolmogorov-Smirnov Sig

 Young firms <0.001

 Old firms <0.001

 Shaprio-Wilk Sig

 Young firms <0.001

 Old firms <0.001

BHAR 2-year
 Kolmogorov-Smirnov Sig

 Young firms <0.001

 Old firms <0.001

 Shaprio-Wilk Sig

 Young firms <0.001

 Old firms <0.001

BHAR 3-year
 Kolmogorov-Smirnov Sig

 Young firms <0.001

 Old firms <0.001

 Shaprio-Wilk Sig

 Young firms <0.001

 Old firms <0.001
40

Appendix 14: Homoscedasticity
41

Appendix 14 illustrates the level of heteroscedasticity prevalent within our sample of IPOs for our dependent
variables underpricing and BHAR for the one-, two-, and three-year time period. Homoscedasticity
(heteroscedasticity) refers to whether the residuals are (not) equally distributed.