CAN YOU TURN THE TRADE-OFF
INTO A WIN-WIN SITUATION?

A STUDY ON IMPLICATIONS OF INCORPORATING ESG’S INFORMATIVE
VALUE INTO PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT

CECILIA LINDSTRÖM

CLARA WIDÉN

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2022
Can you turn the Trade-off into a Win-Win situation?

Abstract

   Using data on Nasdaq Nordic stocks between 2016-2020, the thesis empirically analyzes
   how information about Environmental, Social, and Governance efforts derive implications
   for portfolio management. Our results reveal that ESG has no predictive value for  firm
   fundamentals, except the social pillar proxied as local community impact assessment.
   Furthermore, the study can not conclude that market participants value information about a
   firm’s sustainable efforts. Moreover, the factor model analysis reports that our proxies for
   ESG and Governance efforts have individual explanatory value for stock returns which can
   be integrated into predictions to attain a more realistic estimate. Finally, the thesis discusses
   if ESG’s informative value can be exploited in portfolio construction. Through the
   construction of an ESG efficient frontier, we visualize the implications of ESG inclusion
   and discuss if the trade-off between a performing and sustainable portfolio can be
   diminished. We relate the results to research in the area of Sustainable Responsible
   Investment and conclude that our findings partly contradict those of previous empirical
   analysis. The discussion hence covers what contributing insights our study conveys.

Keywords
ESG, Sustainable Responsible Investing, Portfolio  Management, Nasdaq Nordic

Authors

   Cecilia Lindström  (24835)
   Clara Widén  (24758)

Tutors
Marieke  Bos,  Deputy Director, Swedish House of Finance Researcher, Swedish House of
Finance

Examiner
Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Acknowledgements

We would like  to  direct  our  sincere gratitude  towards Marieke Bos for valuable guidance and
support, Rickard  Sandberg for  insightful advice, and MSCI  ESG  Research LLC for  providing
ESG-scoring  data.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in  Business Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Cecilia Lindström and Clara Widén, 2022

                                     1
1. Introduction
A firm’s ability to incorporate Environmental, Social, and Governance efforts has received
substantial attention over the past decade, and sustainable prosperity is now a relevant factor
for corporate success. Simultaneously, there is an ongoing trend among investors to integrate
ESG in investment evaluation and sustainable investments have grown by 15% between 2018
and 2020 (Global Sustainable Investment  Alliance, 2021). The monumental shift toward
sustainable portfolio management and the spiraling strive amongst investors to consider ESG
factors in financial analysis has motivated this thesis to disclose how ESG investing interplays
with portfolio performance. Previous literature suggests that sustainable investments come at
the cost of stock return (Hong and Kacperczyk 2009, Taylor, Stambaugh and Pastor 2019).
Despite the proposed trade-off between stock performance and sustainability, investors find
little guidance in  approaching it. This  thesis  explores  the possibility  of  incorporating
sustainability into portfolio construction to investigate if the alleged trade-off remains when an
investor utilizes information about ESG’s informative value.

Hence, our  two research questions can be formulated as follows;

i. Do ESG characteristics have an explanatory value of future firm fundamentals?

ii. Can ESG awareness diminish the trade-off between portfolio performance and sustainability
inclusion?

Our thesis will partly replicate and extend the empirical framework presented in Responsible
investing: The ESG-efficient frontier (Pedersen, Fitzgibbons, and Pomorski, 2021). To study
how ESG can be integrated into portfolio management, we analyze elements of stock
performance on Nasdaq Nordic over the period 2016-2020. We proxy each pillar in ESG as a
metric that aims to represent investor estimation  of sustainability. Firstly, an analysis of the
relation between ESG-proxy and future firm profitability is conducted to investigate whether
sustainability predicts firm fundamentals. Secondly, taking the Efficient Market Hypothesis
(Fama, 1970) into account, we further investigate if the ESG-proxies are incorporated in stock
price or if their potential predictive value can be exploited in portfolio management. Thirdly,
we explore if there are abnormal excess returns associated with each ESG-proxy to evaluate if
a sustainable approach in portfolio management outperforms traditional prediction models.
Lastly, the thesis studies if each ESG-proxy generates a factor return to conclude how
information about sustainability efforts can be used in the valuation process to achieve a more
realistic prediction.

Our thesis documents the following empirical findings. The results do not report statistical
predictive value for firm fundamentals of our chosen proxies, except for the S-proxy that
exhibits positive relation with Return on Net Operating Assets on a 10% significance level.
Furthermore, the study reveals that all ESG-proxies, except the Governance, lack significant
relation with stock valuation. Our G-proxy exhibits a negative relation with valuation on a 5 %
significance level, suggesting that information  about our estimated proxy is not incorporated
into stock price. The result further discloses a positive abnormal excess return for the ESG-
proxy, implying that a return premium can be attributed to stocks with a high ESG score to
derive a better prediction. Moreover, a negative abnormal excess return is identified for the G-
proxy, indicating that a return discount can be applied to good governance stocks to enhance
predictions. The proxies for the Environmental and Social pillar report no significant alpha and
hence have no predictive value of returns. In a visualization of how the above discussed results

                                     2
impact the incorporation of sustainability into portfolio management, we derive the ESG-
efficient frontier plotting Sharpe ratio against portfolio ESG. A perceived and realized frontier
is constructed for both the ESG aware and unaware investor, anticipating the implication of
utilizing ESG’s informative value. Lastly, observing the ESG efficient frontier, we discuss the
possibility of diminishing the trade-off.

Our thesis contributes  to the literature on numerous matters. Since Pedersen et al.’s (2021)
framework of ESG-efficient frontier was recently published, a replication alone, to anchor their
results, contributes to the research area of Sustainable Responsible Investing. Using the
framework on companies listed on Nasdaq Nordics, the thesis will anticipate if the mitigated
trade-off studied by Pedersen et al. (2021) is achievable in other market settings than the US
stock market.

A visualization of the cost and benefit of SRI is valuable for an investor with existing
motivation for sustainable investments since it enables a more well-founded decision based on
preferred portfolio ESG score relative to risk-adjusted return. Furthermore, the study is
valuable for an investor that currently ignores sustainable investment due to the general
perception that the trade-off between performance and ESG is definitive and cannot be
impacted. Previous research studies Sustainable Responsible Investments by analyzing the past
and lacks guidance on how an investor can approach the incorporation of ESG in investment
decisions to impact future outcomes. Raising the awareness of how ESG-factors’ informative
value of firm fundamentals, derived from the past, can be exploited  in portfolio construction to
potentially diminish the trade-off, the thesis strives to increase financial incentives to invest
sustainably.

Pedersen, et al. (2021) uses ESG-proxies to estimate how the average investor determines a
firm’s level of sustainability. Each proxy quantifies sustainability efforts by identifying one
metric and is not comprehensive in describing a company’s total level of ESG. Therefore, it is
relevant to study additional ESG-proxies to make the conclusions more exhaustive. Since  our
thesis analyzes different ESG-proxies using the same framework, we will provide a valuable
extension.

The rest of our paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the most relevant findings in
previous empirical studies, inducing our hypothesis stated in section 3. Section 4-5 describes
our data and methodology applied. Section 6-7 reports on our empirical results and discusses
how they relate to previous literature. Section 8 provides concluding remarks and suggestions
for future research.

1.2 Definitions

1.2.1 ESG awareness:
ESG awareness is defined as the knowledge about how Environmental, Social and Governance
efforts can create financial opportunities, both each factor respectively and combined (Pedersen
et al., 2021). Previous studies sort investors based on the level of motivation to invest
sustainably. The ESG motivated investors are suggested to evaluate investment decisions based
on a preferred sustainability level, while unmotivated investors assess risk and return, ignoring
ESG. This  thesis introduces the distinction between an ESG aware investor and an ESG
unaware   investor,   recognizing   that   investors   exploit   information   about   sustainability
differently when predicting risk and return.

                                     3
ESG aware investor (A-investor)
An ESG aware investor incorporates ESG’s explanatory value of firm fundamentals on stock
performance in portfolio management decisions.
ESG unaware investor (U-investor)
The unaware investor does not regard ESG-characteristics as decisive for firm fundamentals or
returns. Hence, the U-investor will neglect information on a firm’s sustainable efforts and
solely rely on traditional procedures in portfolio management.

2. Literature review
We incorporate the following two areas of research as a baseline for our contribution; Studies
that consider how ESG affects firm value and those covering how ESG affects portfolio
performance.

Previous research acknowledges that sustainability efforts correlate with firm fundamentals. In
a study on how Corporate Social Responsibility affects shareholder value, Ferrell et al. find a
positive relation between CSR and firm value (Ferrell, Liang, et al. 2016). Likewise, Friede,
Busch and Bassen observe comparable results when they perform an aggregated analysis on
evidence from 25 previous empirical studies. They conclude that 90% of the studies find a
nonnegative correlation and the majority a positive relationship between ESG and Corporate
Financial Performance (Friede, Busch and Bassen, 2015). This consensus is of interest to our
thesis since it signals that sustainable commitments can be valuable information when
predicting a firm’s financial performance.

In order to answer the  research questions, it is crucial to analyze the impact of ESG factors on
stock returns. In the article The price of sin: The effect of social norms on markets (Hong and
Kacperczyk, 2009) provide evidence that Sin stocks (companies involved in producing alcohol,
tobacco, and gaming) experience higher returns than otherwise comparable stocks. They argue
the existence of a sustainability norm among investors impacting their behavior and investment
evaluation. As a result, the market demand is biased towards  stocks with a high ESG profile.
Hence, the return of stocks that contradict the norms, such as sin-stocks, increase in comparison
(Hong  and  Kacperczyk  2009).  Compliantly,  Taylor  et  al.  conclude  that  green  assets
demonstrate lower expected returns due to the high demand for these stocks. (Taylor,
Stambaugh, et al., 2019)

Hence, previous research agrees that ESG-factors may decrease stock performance due to the
biased market demand toward sustainable stocks. They conclude that potential return is
neglected  if investments are made with an ESG constraint. This consensus suggests the
existence of a trade-off between a sustainable and performing portfolio but overlook the
possibility of reducing it. The thoroughness of this trade-off will be unfolded in our thesis to
explore if it can be mitigated.

Kempf and Osthoff provide broadening insights since they conclude that using ESG-ratings in
valuation is beneficial for the accuracy of predictions. They empirically show that a portfolio
going long stocks with a high socially responsible rating and short those with low experience
a statistically significant abnormal return of 8.7% per year when traditional factor models are
applied (Kempf and Osthoff 2007). This conclusion suggests that if an investor uses ESG-
rating  as an additional factor in portfolio construction, the perceived return outperforms

                                     4
traditional market predictions and potentially initiates a more accurate perception of future
returns.

What previous research in the area of Sustainable Responsible Investments overseas is how
insights about ESG’s predictability of firm fundamentals can be exploited in portfolio
construction. Existing literature either studies how sustainable effort impacts firm value or
stock performance but ignores the interplay between the two conclusions. The study by Kempf
and Osthoff proposes that stock return prediction could be more precise if ESG factors are
incorporated in investment evaluations (Kempf, Osthoff 2007). Their findings provoke an
interest in further investigating how portfolio performance is impacted by adding ESG factors
to traditional valuation models.

In the article that this thesis aims to partly replicate, Responsible investing: The ESG-efficient
frontier, Pedersen et al. (2021) present a framework that quantifies the performance cost and
benefit of including ESG-criteria in portfolio decisions. Similar to previous research, they
analyze how ESG affects firm fundamentals and stock performance. However, unlike earlier
literature, they further study how investors  can exploit ESG’s explanatory value in portfolio
construction. Hence, they partly approach the abnormal excess return proposed by Kempf and
Osthoff (Kempf, Osthoff 2007) and study the implications of absorbing it in valuation.

3. Hypotheses
i. We expect that ESG characteristics predict future firm fundamentals

Friede, Busch, et al. (2015) and Ferrell, Liang, et al. (2016) suggest a positive correlation
between firm value and sustainable efforts, proposing that ESG characteristics provide valuable
information when predicting future firm performance. Pedersen et al. (2021) report mixed
results for the ESG-proxies when testing their predictability of future returns. However, their
results indicate a significant positive correlation between ESG and firm fundamentals for most
of their examined proxies. Hence, combining the results from previous studies, we expect ESG
characteristics to predict firm fundamentals.

Given that the first hypothesis holds, the prospect for sustainable stocks would intuitively
increase. However, according to the Efficient Market Hypothesis (Fama, 1970), all pertinent
and available information is immediately incorporated into the stock price. Consequently, for
the first hypothesis to be valuable for our overall analysis, it is crucial to examine whether ESG
characteristics are priced in the market, which the following hypothesis will approach.

ii.  We expect that ESG characteristics are priced in the market

Galema, Plantinga and Scholtens (2008) report evidence that stocks with high ESG-score
experience a lower book-to-market ratio. This suggests that sustainable stocks are more
overpriced than stocks with a low ESG-score. Moreover, Pedersen et al. (2021) report that all
ESG factors were priced in the market, except the proxy for Governance efforts. Hence, we
predict that ESG characteristics are incorporated into the stock price.

iii. We expect that ESG characteristics do predict returns

Kempf and Osthoff (2007) report that a portfolio constructed on ESG factors experiences a
statistically significant abnormal excess return. Moreover, Pedersen et al. (2021) found a

                                     5
significant positive abnormal excess return on a portfolio constructed based on Governance
efforts and a negative abnormal excess return for a portfolio constructed based on social efforts.
The findings in previous literature hence suggest that if an investor uses ESG in portfolio
construction, the return will deviate from the market predictions. Therefore, we predict that
ESG characteristics do predict returns.

4. Data

4.1 Panel Data  Set
Our sample consists of firms listed on the Nasdaq Nordics between 2016-2020. The
inspirational paper, Responsible Investing: The ESG Efficient Frontier (2021), analyzes the
S&P 500 index with the incentive to exclude effects from small-cap  stocks. Therefore, merely
Large Cap Stocks have been considered throughout this paper. There are two dimensions in
our data set since we repeatedly observe stock characteristics of our sample. The observations
are proxies for ESG and the remaining regression variables for the sample period between 2016
and 2020. Hence, we utilize a panel data set with cross-sectional units observed over time
(Wooldridge 2010).

In an ideal data environment, we would adopt a more extended panel to leverage our analysis
on  more observations. Since our thesis examines the interaction between ESG and portfolio
performance, the relevance of our results and applicability of the conclusions would require
ESG focus amongst investors to be constant over the extended period. However, the topics of
ESG and SRI have recently gained a foothold in financial markets (Global Sustainable
Investment Alliance, 2021). Hence, observing a more extended panel could falter our
conclusions, given the setting for our analysis.

Due to the listing and delisting of firms, we did not obtain a balanced panel for the sample
period (Wooldridge 2010). Hence, the listing and delisting induce an inherent explanation for
why the panel is unbalanced, increasing the risk of correlation with  idiosyncratic errors. This
would imply unobserved aspects that affect the independent variable and potentially lead to
biased regression coefficients (Wooldridge 2012). In the optimal data environment, we would
analyze a balanced panel with a consistent sample from Nasdaq Nordics Large Cap throughout
the whole sample period.

4.2 ESG Proxies
In the optimal data environment, one common agency publishes transparent ESG ratings for
all firms according to regulated guidelines. However, there are numerous ESG rating providers
publishing divergent scores for the same firms (Livsey, 2022). Due to the ambiguity among
ESG ratings, merely considering published scores to estimate investor perception of firm
sustainability could induce inconsistent conclusions (Berg, Kölbel and Rigobon 2019). Hence,
compliant with the methodology applied by Pedersen, Fitzgibbons, et al. (2021), we use one
proxy for each ESG pillar and a weighted rating of all three pillars in the analysis. Since there
are several ways to quantify ESG efforts, the following section describes the underlying
rationale of our chosen proxies.

                                     6
4.2.1 ESG-Proxy
To proxy how an investor assesses overall ESG, we use ratings provided by MSCI. MSCI
publishes scores for a relatively large share of companies listed  on Nasdaq Nordic and is one
of the prominent and prolonged ESG-scoring providers (Livsey, 2022). Moreover, the MSCI
scores are the same as those used by Pedersen et al. (2021) since the thesis does not aim to
examine the ambiguity among ESG scoring providers.

4.2.2 E-Proxy
When assigning the Environmental pillar a quantitative metric, a comprehensive measure
disclosing if the company adjusts its business to sustainability goals is desired. OECD presents
that CO2 and GHG are commonly used as core metrics of  the environmental pillar in ESG
(Boffo, Marshall and Patalano, 2020). We hence proxy Environmental efforts as the natural
logarithm of Greenhouse Gasses (scope 1 and 2) over Sales, while Pedersen et al (2021) uses
Carbon Intensity over Sales. Following the methodology by Pedersen et al. (2021), the ratio is
negated in order to assign greener companies a higher score. The GHG emissions are measured
in kilotons, and sales are the reported end-year sales, including net income from investments,
in millions of  euros. The data was collected from Nordic Compass, a database provided by the
Swedish House of Finance. The choice to use the natural logarithm on the E ratio derives from
a performed skewness test. As shown in Table 13 in the appendix, the result exhibits  positive
skewness which is adjusted for using the natural logarithm to obtain a normal distribution of
the data (Wooldridge, 2012).

4.2.3 S-Proxy
A central aspect of the Social pillar in ESG is how a company engages and interacts with the
community surrounding its operations (S&P Global, 2020).   Hence, our chosen proxy for
Social efforts enclose if a company assesses its impact on local communities.  The proxy is
intrinsically binary, assigning the stock a value of 1 if it assesses its social impact on local
communities and a value of 0 otherwise. The data is obtained from Nordic Compass.

4.2.4  G-Proxy
The Governance pillar aims to represent how well the company governs itself and complies
with legislation and requirements from external stakeholders (Henisz and Koller, 2019). The
Global Reporting Initiative provides standards for how a firm should disclose its sustainable
responsibility. Hence, whether the company is compliant with the GRI standards is an indicator
of a responsible company and accountability from the management (Global Reporting, 2022).
Therefore our chosen proxy for Governance efforts is GRI compliance. The data is obtained
from Nordic Compass, and discloses if the company reports in accordance with GRI guidelines
level three or higher. GRI compliance is assigned a value of 1 and deviation from the standards
a value of 0, making the proxy binary.

                                     7
4.3 Regression Variables

4.3.1 Regression  on Future Firm Fundamentals

4.3.1.1 Dependent Variables
Following the methodology by Pedersen et al. (2021), Gross Profit over Assets and Return on
Net Operating Assets are used as the dependent variables when examining future firm
fundamentals. Gross Profit over Assets aims to determine how effectively a company utilizes
its assets to generate gross profits. Hence, GPOA is calculated as Gross Profit over total assets
(Novy Marx, 2013). The purpose of adopting Return on Net Operating Assets as a financial
metric is to capture the firm’s operating profitability, excluding the impact of enforced capital
structure. By excluding the effect of leverage, one attains a pure metric of profitability based
on operational efficiency. Return on Net Operating Assets is  calculated as Operating Income
                              1
over Net Operating Assets  (Nissim and Penman, 2001). The financial statement data is
obtained from Capital IQ.

                                                           "#$%% '#$()!!
                                      𝐺𝑃𝑂𝐴!  =
                                                         *$!+,  -%%.!%!"#

                                                      /0.#+!)12 314$5.!
                                  𝑅𝑁𝑂𝐴!  =
                                                   6.! /0.#+!)12 -%%.!%!"#

The dependent variables are calculated as above. In the regressions, the metric for subsequent
years are used as dependent variables. Hence the adopted dependent variables are  𝐺𝑃𝑂𝐴!78  and
𝑅𝑁𝑂𝐴!78.

Observable in Table 2 Panel A, the data for Return on Net Operating Assets include outliers in
relation to the prevalent dataset. Since Ordinary Least Squares regressions may be sensitive to
these data points (Wooldridge, 2012), we decided to remove extreme outliers for RNOA, as
visible in Table 2, Panel B. Hence, the data used for Return on Net Operating Assets throughout
our analysis are those with  removed outliers.

1
  Net Operating Assets is further calculated as Net Working Capital + Goodwill + Other Intangibles + Net Property, Plant & Equipment
(Stewart, 1990).

                                     8
4.3.1.2 Independent Variables
Following the methodology by Pedersen et al. (2021), the control variables used are Market
Beta, representing the expected change in the stock price relative to a change in the market
(Berk and DeMarzo, 2017), the natural logarithm of the company’s Market  Capitalization,
                                                                                    2
representing firm size, and the natural logarithm of book-to-price ratio . The book-to-price ratio
determines the market’s stock valuation, where a high ratio indicates that the stock is
undervalued (Berk and  DeMarzo, 2017). Additionally,  we implement a time dummy in the
regressions in order to control for time fixed effects (Gösser and Moshgbar, 2020). Hence, all
four regressions for each dependent variable are performed using constant control variables
while the ESG proxies are separately integrated as the independent variables targeted to
analyze.

Independent variables:
E = The negated greenhouse gas emission ratio
S = Social impact assessment on local communities
G = Reporting in accordance with GRI guidelines
ESG = The ESG score provided by MSCI
Beta = The market beta
Firm size  =  The natural logarithm of Market Capitalization
Book-to-Price  =  The natural logarithm book-to-price ratio
Year = A dummy variable for each year

2
  Book-to-price ratio is calculated as ((Total Assets-Total Liabilities)/Market Capitalization), (Berk and  DeMarzo, 2017).

                                     9
4.3.2 Regression on Valuation

4.3.2.1 Dependent Variable
Following the methodology by Pedersen et al. (2021), the natural logarithm of price-to-book
ratio is used as the dependent variable for examining if our ESG-proxies are priced in the
market. The price-to-book ratio is calculated as firm Market Capitalization divided by the Book
Value, where the Book Value is calculated as the Assets minus Liabilities (Berk and DeMarzo,
2017). The data for Market Capitalization, Assets, and Liabilities is obtained from Capital IQ.
The dependent variable is calculated as follows;

                                                  9+#:.! ;+0)!+,)<+!)$1!
                           𝐿𝑁(𝑃/𝐵)!  =  𝐿𝑁 -                  .
                                                     =$$: >+,?.!

4.3.2.2 Independent Variables
Following the methodology by Pedersen et al. (2021), the targeted independent variables are
our ESG proxies and the control variable is Market Beta. The additional control variables in
the above descriptive statistics (Table 5), Market Capitalization and book-to-price ratio have
been excluded as they intrinsically are integrated into the dependent regression variable.

Independent variables:
E = The negated greenhouse gas emission ratio
S = Social impact assessment on local communities
G = Reporting in accordance with GRI guidelines
ESG  = The ESG score provided by MSCI
Beta = The market beta

                                     10
4.3.3 Factor Return Regression

4.3.3.1 Dependent Variable
In line with Pedersen et al. (2021), these regressions aim to derive factor returns that can be
applied to the expected return formulas applied in the ESG efficient frontier (see Equation 1
and 2).  To incorporate the attributable explanatory value of book-to-market and ESG factor in
relation to the remaining expected return formula, the dependent variable should express how
well the stock performs in addition to equity risk premium. Hence, the dependent variable is
realized yearly return, excess to market risk premium;

                                        𝑟!78  =  𝑟#.+,)<.@  − 𝑀𝐾𝑇4444444!

4.3.3.2 Independent Variables
Following the methodology applied by Pedersen et al. (2021), z-scores for each factor are used
to estimate factor exposure. Z-scores are obtained using the following formula:

                                                  𝑋 − 𝑋4
                                          𝑧 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒A  =
                                                                                    𝜎

Since the regression aims to examine the factor return for each ESG-proxy and book-to-market
ratio; the following independent variables are used:

𝐵𝑀  𝑧  𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒  =  𝑧  𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒!""# %" &'(#)% ('%*"
𝐸  𝑧  𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒  =  𝑧  𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒+ ,("-.
𝑆  𝑧  𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒  =  𝑧  𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒/ ,("-.
𝐺  𝑧  𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒  =  𝑧  𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒0 ,("-.
𝐸𝑆𝐺  𝑧  𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒  =  𝑧  𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒+/0 ,("-.

4.3.4 Factor Model Regressions

4.3.4.1 Dependent Variable
Following the methodology applied by Pedersen et al. (2021), monthly stock returns are used
as the dependent variable when analyzing abnormal excess return. Stock returns are obtained
using the following formula;

                                                                        '$,!&#
                                           𝑟),!78  =      − 1
                                                                                     '$,!

where  𝑃),!  is the adjusted closing price for stock i at time t. Data on closing pricing have been
obtained from Capital IQ.

                                     11
4.3.4.2 Independent Variables
Following the methodology applied by Pedersen et al. (2021), the independent variables
controlled for are market excess return and  Fama French Factors (Fama and French, 1993). To
proxy the market index, adjusted closing price for OMX Nordic 40 index was collected from
Capital IQ. Market returns are calculated using the same formula as for stock returns. To proxy
Risk-free rate, Swedish 10 year Government Debt was collected from Capital IQ.

Fama and French (1993), established that there exists a small firm effect from which firms with
a small Market Capitalization outperform those with a high Market Capitalization and a  value
premium, from which firms with a high book-to-market outperform those with a low ratio. In
an extended Fama and French factor model (five-factor), they revealed the existence of a
robustness premium  deriving an excess return for firms with robust operating profitability and
an investment  premium  that generates excess return for firms that invest conservatively over
those that invest aggressively.  The Fama French Factors are collected from Kenneth R. French
Dartmouth College Database (2022).

Independent variables:
𝑟5  − 𝑟(  = Market excess return
SMB = Factor premium for small firms
HML= Factor premium for value stocks
RMW= Factor premium for robust firms
CMA = Factor premium for conservative investments

5. Methodology
The following section describes the methodology applied to answer our research questions.
Since portfolio management incorporates multiple mechanisms, sectional data analyses are
crucial to obtain a comprehensive conclusion. Hence, the study is performed on four essential
elements  of  portfolio  management  and  partly  replicates  the  methodology  applied  in
Responsible Investing: The ESG-efficient frontier (2021). The sectional data analyzes yield the
conclusion on how each ESG-proxy affects portfolio construction. To answer the second
research question, we will investigate what happens when an investor is aware of the potential
explanatory value each ESG-proxy has on stock prospects.

5.1 Ordinary Least Square Regressions

5.1.1 Regression on Future Firm Fundamentals
Following the methodology by Pedersen et al. (2021) we perform Pooled Ordinary Least
Squares (OLS) regressions, to examine if each ESG-proxy respectively predicts future firm
fundamentals.  Thus, four Pooled OLS regressions, separately integrating the proxies, are
performed on each profitability metric. The attributes of a panel dataset are considered through
the clustering of standard errors at firm level. Hence, we control for unobserved firm specific
characteristics that may occur when observing the same firm over several years (Wooldridge
2012). To further exclude the influence of time specific market conditions in the estimates,
time fixed effects are applied to the Pooled OLS regressions (Wooldridge 2010). The yearly

                                     12
fixed effects are implemented through the usage of time dummies (Wooldridge, 2012). The
Pooled Ordinary Least Square Regressions are formulated as following:

                𝐺𝑃𝑂𝐴!"#  =  𝛽$ + 𝛽#𝐸!  + 𝛽%𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎!  + 𝛽&𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒!  + 𝛽'𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝑡𝑜 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒!  + 𝛽(𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟!  + 𝜀
                𝐺𝑃𝑂𝐴!"#  =  𝛽$ + 𝛽#𝑆!  + 𝛽%𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎!  + 𝛽&𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒!  + 𝛽'𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝑡𝑜 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒!  + 𝛽(𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟!  + 𝜀
                𝐺𝑃𝑂𝐴!"#  =  𝛽$ + 𝛽#𝐺!  + 𝛽%𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎!  + 𝛽&𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒!  + 𝛽'𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝑡𝑜 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒!  + 𝛽(𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟!  + 𝜀
               𝐺𝑃𝑂𝐴!"#  =  𝛽$ + 𝛽#𝐸𝑆𝐺!  + 𝛽%𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎!  + 𝛽&𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒!  + 𝛽'𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝑡𝑜 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒!  + 𝛽(𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟!  + 𝜀

                𝑅𝑁𝑂𝐴!"#  =  𝛽$ + 𝛽#𝐸!  + 𝛽%𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎!  + 𝛽&𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒!  + 𝛽'𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝑡𝑜 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒!  + 𝛽(𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟!  + 𝜀
                𝑅𝑁𝑂𝐴!"#  =  𝛽$ + 𝛽#𝑆!  + 𝛽%𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎!  + 𝛽&𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒!  + 𝛽'𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝑡𝑜 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒!  + 𝛽(𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟!  + 𝜀
                𝑅𝑁𝑂𝐴!"#  =  𝛽$ + 𝛽#𝐺!  + 𝛽%𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎!  + 𝛽&𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒!  + 𝛽'𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝑡𝑜 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒!  + 𝛽(𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟!  + 𝜀
               𝑅𝑁𝑂𝐴!"#  =  𝛽$ + 𝛽#𝐸𝑆𝐺!  + 𝛽%𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎!  + 𝛽&𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒!  + 𝛽'𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝑡𝑜 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒!  + 𝛽(𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟!  + 𝜀

5.1.2 Regression on Valuation
To further examine if ESG characteristics are priced in the market, we perform Pooled OLS
regressions with the natural logarithm of the price-to-book ratio as the dependent variable,
compliant with Responsible investing: The ESG-efficient frontier (2021). Hence, these
regressions aim to investigate how the market values ESG characteristics and if investors are
willing to pay a higher price for these  stocks. Pooled OLS regressions are performed for each
ESG proxy, controlling for the Market Beta. As for the above regressions, standard errors are
clustered at the firm level. Hence, the four regressions are formulated as following;

                                     𝐿𝑁(𝑃/𝐵)  =  𝛽$ + 𝛽#𝐸 + 𝛽%𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎 + 𝜀
                                     𝐿𝑁(𝑃/𝐵)  =  𝛽$ + 𝛽#𝑆 + 𝛽%𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎 + 𝜀
                                     𝐿𝑁(𝑃/𝐵)  =  𝛽$ + 𝛽#𝐺 + 𝛽%𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎 + 𝜀
                                    𝐿𝑁(𝑃/𝐵)  =  𝛽$ + 𝛽#𝐸𝑆𝐺 + 𝛽%𝐵𝑒𝑡𝑎 + 𝜀

5.1.3 Factor return Regressions
To study if ESG-proxies can be quantified as indicators of returns, cross sectional Ordinary
Least Square Regressions are performed. As described in the data section, realized returns
excess to the market in the following year are used as the dependent variable. Compliant with
the methodology applied in Responsible investing: The ESG-efficient frontier (2021), book-
to-market z-score and z-score for the respective ESG-proxy are used as independent variables
to represent the factor exposure. The regression coefficient will hence be interpreted as factor
returns.

Compliant with Pedersen et al. (2021), this thesis assumes that an U-investor utilizes that
returns are solely driven by valuation, while an A-investor will additionally consider ESG as
explanatory for returns. Hence, to distinguish their diverse awareness on what available
information to exploit in predictions, separate regressions are performed. The five Cross-
sectional regressions are thus formulated as following;

                                𝑟!78(𝑈  𝑖𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟)  =  𝛽C  + 𝛽8𝐵𝑀  𝑧  𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒),!  + 𝜀
                        𝑟!78(𝐴  𝑖𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟)  =  𝛽C  + 𝛽8𝐵𝑀  𝑧  𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒),!  + 𝛽D𝐸  𝑧  𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒),!  + 𝜀
                        𝑟!78(𝐴  𝑖𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟)  =  𝛽C  + 𝛽8𝐵𝑀  𝑧  𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒),!  + 𝛽D𝑆  𝑧  𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒),!  + 𝜀
                        𝑟!78(𝐴  𝑖𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟)  =  𝛽C  + 𝛽8𝐵𝑀  𝑧  𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒),!  + 𝛽D𝐺  𝑧  𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒),!  + 𝜀
                      𝑟!78(𝐴  𝑖𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟)  =  𝛽C  + 𝛽8𝐵𝑀  𝑧  𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒),!  + 𝛽D𝐸𝑆𝐺  𝑧  𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒),!  + 𝜀

                                     13
5.1.4 Underlying assumptions of Ordinary Least Square Regression
The Ordinary Least Square regression assumes that no multicollinearity exists between the
independent variables meaning the regression variables are not correlated to one another.
Furthermore, the OLS makes an assumption about homoscedasticity implying that the variance
among error terms are equal or highly similar for the model. If the regression violates any of
the underlying assumptions of Ordinary Least Square Regression, the validity of the results
diminishes (Newbold and Carlson, 2012).

To test if the assumption about no multicollinearity holds, a Variance Inflation Factors-test
(VIF) is performed. As reported in Table 14-17 in the appendix, no multicollinearity among
our regression variables exists since no VIF-value is above 10 (Wooldridge 2012). To further
conclude if the dataset is homoscedastic, we perform a Breush-Pagan test. As presented in
Table 18-19 in the appendix, the test shows heteroscedasticity for part of the data.

5.1.5 Adjusting for heteroskedasticity
Performing the Breusch-Pagan test, heteroskedasticity is identified in the models which
indicates that the usage of Ordinary Least Square Regression may not provide the best linear
unbiased estimator (Newbold and Carlson, 2012). Hence, robust standard errors are applied on
the OLS regressions to account for heteroscedasticity. Since the Pooled OLS regressions on
Valuation are performed with clustered standard errors, the model intrinsically accounts for
heteroskedasticity and no further adjustment is required (Newbold and Carlson, 2012).

5.2 Factor Model Regression
To conclude if a sustainable approach in portfolio management induces abnormal excess
returns, time-series regressions are performed on three distinguished factor models; Capital
Asset Pricing Model, Fama French three-factor Model and Fama French five-factor Model.
Following the methodology in Responsible Investing: The ESG-efficient frontier (2021), the
abnormal excess return is interpreted as the alpha of each factor model regression.

Each year, our sample is sorted into five portfolios based on quintiles of their ESG-score and
E-proxy. For the Governance and Social proxy, only two portfolios are created since the scores
are binary. The portfolios are constructed at time t while monthly returns for the following year
are observed. Each year, the portfolios are rebalanced to account for development of the firms’
sustainability level. For each proxy, an additional portfolio is created that goes long stocks from
the highest portfolio and short the ones from the lowest yielding a Good-minus-Bad (GmB)
portfolio. The alpha our regression derives is that of the ESG factor mimicking GmB portfolio.

The first regression is derived from the Capital Asset Pricing Model (Berk and DeMarzo,
2017):
                                   𝑟),!  − 𝑟(,!  =  𝛼)  + 𝛽)  × J𝑟9,!  − 𝑟(,!K + 𝜀

Where  J𝑟9,!  − 𝑟(,!K  represents the monthly market excess return at time t.  𝑟),!  − 𝑟(,!  is the excess
return of portfolio i at time t and  𝜀  is the residual (error term).

As the purpose is to identify if there exists a factor premium associated with ESG, the derived
results  will increase in robustness if the influence of already established factor premiums are

                                     14
isolated. Hence, the second regression used is derived from the Fama and French three-factor
model (1993):

                    𝑟),!  − 𝑟(,!  =  𝛼)  + 𝛽)  × J𝑟9,!  − 𝑟(,!K + 𝛽)D  × 𝑆𝑀𝐵!  + 𝛽)E  × 𝐻𝑀𝐿!  + 𝜀

To further isolate impacting factors, the third regression is derived from the Fama and French
five-factor model (1993):

      𝑟),!  − 𝑟(  =  𝛼)  + 𝛽)  × J𝑟9,!  − 𝑟(,!K + 𝛽)D  × 𝑆𝑀𝐵!  + 𝛽)E  × 𝐻𝑀𝐿!  + 𝛽)F  × 𝑅𝑀𝑊!  + 𝛽)G  × 𝐶𝑀𝐴!  + 𝜀

5.3 ESG-efficient frontier
To visualize the outcome of the above described data analyses and conclude on the second
research question;  Can ESG awareness diminish the trade-off between portfolio performance
and sustainability inclusion?, the thesis will lastly derive the ESG-efficient frontier.

According to modern portfolio theory, investors are assumed to consider the expected return
and risk for their investment sphere before constructing a portfolio that satisfies their mean-
variance preferences (Berk and DeMarzo, 2017). We will, in line with Pedersen et. al (2021),
consider an extended mean-variance evaluation in which the investor constructs a portfolio
based on preferences in risk, return and sustainability.

Following the methodology in  Responsible investing:  The ESG-efficient frontier (2021), the
A-investor and  U-investor perceive the prospect of each stock differently due to a  diverse
knowledge and understanding of how Environmental, Social, and Governance factors impact
return. The U-investor is assumed to perceive annualized expected return as:

                                    H           4444444        444444
                                        𝐸! J𝑟),!78K  =  𝑀𝐾𝑇! + 𝑏𝑚),!𝐵𝑀!                                    Eq.  1

where,  4𝑀𝐾𝑇444444!  is the equity risk premium,  𝑏𝑚),!  is the cross-sectional z-score of the stock’s book-
to-market ratio and  4𝐵𝑀44444!  is the factor return of the book-to-market ratio, derived from the cross
sectional factor return regression in Table 10.

An A-investor is assumed perceive annualized expected as;

                                   -          4444444         444444      4444444
                                        𝐸! J𝑟),!78K  =  𝑀𝐾𝑇! +  𝑏𝑚),!𝐵𝑀! +  𝑠),!𝐸𝑆𝐺!                            Eq. 2

where,  𝑠),!is the stock’s cross-sectional z-score of the proxy for ESG and  4𝐸𝑆𝐺444444!  is the factor return
of the proxy for ESG, derived from the cross sectional factor return regression in Table 10.

Both investors are assumed to choose the portfolio that maximizes Sharpe ratio, calculated as
the portfolio expected excess return over portfolio standard deviation (Berk and DeMarzo,
2017). Since the two investors perceive expected return for the individual stock differently, the
U-investor and A-investor will choose two different portfolios, allowing for dissimilar Sharpe
ratios. To visualize  the trade-off between risk adjusted return and portfolio sustainability level,
an ESG-efficient frontier is plotted respectively for both investors with Sharpe ratio on the y-
axis and ESG level on the x-axis. The frontier reveal portfolios that maximize Sharpe ratio for
each level of portfolio ESG preference computed as;

                                     𝐸𝑆𝐺0$#!($,)$  =  𝛴 (𝑊)  × 𝐸𝑆𝐺))

                                     15
The perceived frontier is plotted based on each investor’s expectations on portfolio return. A
second ESG-efficient frontier is thereafter plotted with realized Sharpe ratios of the portfolios
from the perceived frontier for each investor. The realized Sharpe ratio for each portfolio is
computed on the basis of annual stock returns.

6. Empirical  Analysis

6.1 Do ESG Characteristics Predict Firm Fundamentals?
Table 6 and 7  shows the  results of the pooled regressions with yearly fixed effects for our
sample. The regressions aim to examine our first hypothesis on whether our ESG-proxies
predict future firm fundamentals, estimated by Gross Profit over Assets and Return on Net
Operating  Assets.

Table 6 reports the results from the regression using Return on Net Operating Assets as the
dependent variable and discloses low significance levels. The only control variable exhibiting

                                     16
significance at a 1% level is the natural logarithm of the  book-to-market ratio. Moreover, the
regression coefficients for our E, G, and ESG proxies are insignificant, suggesting that they
have no predictability of the following years’  RNOA. However, the positive coefficient for
our S-proxy on a 10% significance  level indicates that Social efforts proxied as the social
impact on local communities have an explanatory value. Hence, the first hypothesis is rejected
for all proxies except for our Social, emphasizing that the analyzed ESG-proxies are not
predictors of  future firm fundamentals.

Compliant with the previously discussed profitability metric, the regression coefficients
experience low significance when Gross Profit over Assets is applied as the dependent variable.
As observed in Table 6, the natural logarithm of the book-to-market exhibits negative
coefficients at a significance level of 1%. The insignificance of regression coefficients for the
ESG proxies anchor the rejection of our first hypothesis. We hence conclude that our examined
ESG characteristics have no predictability of future firm fundamentals.

Furthermore, the above regressions identify no predictability in our ESG-proxy. These results
align with what Pedersen et al. (2021) observe for RNOA. Hence, in consensus with Pedersen
et al. (2021), we conclude that information about MSCI ESG-score cannot be exploited in
portfolio management to identify prospects in firm operations if the investor uses RNOA to

                                     17
estimate profitability. However, contradictory to our results, Pedersen et al. (2021) found a
significant coefficient for MSCI ESG-proxy in the regression on GPOA. Based on their
findings, an ESG aware investor can use the ESG-proxy to predict firm profitability, measured
as GPOA. However, the same conclusion is not obtained for our sample, and we cannot suggest
the exploitation of MSCI ESG score in portfolio management.

Moreover, our S-proxy shows a positive relation to RNOA at a 10% significance level which
contradicts the negative relation found by Pedersen et al. (2021). However, their proxy for
Social is the sin stock indicator presented by Hong and Kacpercyk (2009). Pedersen et al.
(2021) assign companies engaging in sin industries a value of 0 and a value of 1 otherwise.
Hence, their results suggest that sin companies are predicted to demonstrate higher Return on
Net Operating Assets in the subsequent period than non-sin companies. In comparison, we find
that information about if companies assess their social impact on local communities has an
explanatory value of RNOA in the following year. Although our findings are different from
Pedersen et al. (2021), the analyzed S-proxy target dissimilar aspects of the S pillar in ESG.
The proxy employed by Pedersen et al. (2021) focuses on the industry in which the firm is
operating, while our examined proxy aims to describe how the firm engages with the society
enclosing its operations. Hence, the contradicting results suggest that distinguished elements
within the S pillar affect a firm’s operating profitability differently.

Compliant with Pedersen et al. (2021), we found no significant predictability in our E-  or S-
proxy of future Gross Profit over Assets. As previously discussed, we use different
proxies for Environmental and Social efforts than those utilized in Responsible  investing: The
ESG-efficient frontier (2021). Our agreement in results suggests that the absence of relation
between future GPOA and the pillar remains, even when Environmental and Social efforts are
estimated differently. As part of our contribution, we therefore enhance Pedersen et al.’s (2021)
conclusion and extend it with more exhaustive implications about Pillar predictability.

Furthermore, no significance for our E-  and G-proxy are observed, when employing RNOA as
the dependent variable. Contradictory, Pedersen et al. (2021) found positive coefficients for
their E-  and G-proxy at a 1% significance level. Pedersen et al. (2021) hence conclude that
their adopted proxies for Environmental and Governance predict Return on Net Operating
Assets. We observe  no predictability, which in contrast to Pedersen et al. (2021) implies that
an ESG-aware investor cannot utilize information about our E-  and G-proxy to increase
performance in portfolio management. As a part of our contribution to the area of research, we
cannot anchor the conclusions derived in Responsible investing: The ESG-efficient frontier
(2021).

As discussed above, our results are considerably different from the findings in Responsible
investing: The ESG-efficient frontier (2021). The contradictory results are partly derived from
the usage of different proxies for each ESG pillar but can also be explained by the distinct
attributes of our sample. Pedersen et al. (2021) leverage data from a sample period spanning
January 1963 to March 2019 for their E-, S-, and G-proxies and from January 2007 to March
2019 for the MSCI ESG scores, while our sample period is limited to 2016-2020. Since the
ESG focus among investors has substantially increased (Global Sustainable Investment
Alliance, 2021) in recent years, it is reasonable to assume differences in prerequisites for
sustainability in the financial market. Additionally, their time-fixed effects are executed on a
monthly basis in contrast to our yearly fixed effects. The reason behind our different
methodologies is the limitation in availability of monthly data for our proxies.

                                     18
6.2 Are ESG Characteristics Valued by the Market?

The Pooled OLS regression with the natural logarithm of price-to-book ratio as dependent
variable aims to determine whether the  ESG characteristics are priced in the market. A
significant, positive relationship between the proxies for ESG pillars and the price-to-book ratio
hence indicates the market’s willingness to pay a higher price for sustainable characteristics.
Consequently, a negative regression coefficient infers that the implied proxy is not priced in
the market and could be exploited by ESG-aware investors if it is a predictor of future firm
fundamentals. Furthermore, Table 8 exhibits that the governance proxy has a significant
negative coefficient. Interpreting these results, companies that are not GRI compliant exhibit a
higher price-to-book ratio than those that are. Hence, the market does not value our estimate
for governance efforts, and we can reject the second hypothesis for the G-proxy. However, for
the remaining ESG proxies, we find no significant explanatory value of the valuation ratio,
implying that we cannot conclude that investors value these ESG characteristics. Hence we
have to reject our second hypothesis  for all examined proxies.

Our result of a significant, negative coefficient for the G proxy is compliant with the results
proposed by Pedersen et al. (2021) for their employed governance proxy. Pedersen et al. (2021)
adopted low accruals as a proxy for Governance, with the motivation that accurately governed
firms possess conservative accounting principles (Sloan, 19966, Kim et al., 2012). The G-proxy
analyzed in our study covers GRI compliance and is, therefore, another way of quantifying
well-governed firms. Nevertheless, both proxies depict the G pillar in ESG  but in a distinct
manner. Hence, our compliant results support the consensus that good governance is a firm
characteristic that is not priced in the market. The conclusion indicates that aware investors

                                     19
could gain higher returns on stocks with high G-proxy, under the prerequisite that the
governance characteristic is a predictor of future firm fundamentals.

As previously discussed, Pedersen et al. (2021) suggest that their G-proxy is a predictor  of
future firm fundamentals. Combining the observed predictability with the result that their G-
proxy is not priced in the market, they conclude that investors can utilize information about the
concerned proxy in investment decisions. In contrast, we found no predictability of future firm
fundamentals, implying that we cannot conclude how the negative coefficient for the G-proxy
in Table 8 can be used in portfolio construction. Hence, our results cannot fully establish the
conclusion derived by Pedersen et  al. (2021) that information about G-proxy is valuable to
accomplish a well-performing portfolio.

6.3 Do ESG Predict Returns?

To assess if the usage of our ESG-proxies can enhance return predictions, the abnormal excess
returns of the Good-minus-Bad portfolios are observed. An abnormal excess return observation
indicates that the factor mimicking portfolio outperforms benchmark predictions. Hence, a
statistically significant alpha implies that the factor model applied does not perfectly predict
returns, which signals that the corresponding ESG-proxy has explanatory value in return
predictions. As reported in Table 9, the portfolios constructed based on our Environmental and
Social proxy do not experience a significant abnormal excess return. Thus we cannot  conclude
if they can be used in valuation to predict returns. These results are somewhat contradictory to
the ones found by Pedersen et al. (2021). They found a negative alpha for the three-factor model
in the value-weighted portfolio for their S-proxy, suggesting that their adopted S-proxy should
be incorporated as a return discount in prediction. Furthermore, they find a positive alpha for
the portfolio based on their E-proxy when applying the CAPM factor model at a 5%
significance level. However, the significance decreases when applying the extended factor
models. Fama French has established evidential factors with the predictive value of returns
(Fama and French, 1993), that should be considered for a more robust conclusion. Since
Pedersen et al.’s (2021) does not observe significant abnormal excess return when applying the

                                     20
Fama french factor models, their observed CAPM alpha could potentially derive from Fama
french factors and not from the applied E-proxy. Therefore, our conclusion that information
about environmental efforts does not predict future returns is in line with Pedersen et al. (2021)
when isolating previously established explanatory factors.

The factor mimicking portfolio for MSCI ESG-score report on a positive significant alpha
when regressed as a Capital Asset Pricing Model for both the equal-weighted and value-
weighted portfolio. The positive and significant abnormal excess return remains when further
isolating the impact of established alphas in the Fama French Factor models (1993). The results
communicate that sustainability proxied as MSCI ESG score can be used as an informative
factor in portfolio construction and has an explanatory value of returns. Hence, adding a return
premium to the conventional factor models for stocks with a high MSCI ESG score could
potentially absorb the abnormal excess return and allow a more realistic prediction. Our finding
of a positive abnormal excess return for the MSCI ESG proxy contradicts what Pedersen et al.
(2021) establish in their study. They find  no significant alpha when applying either factor
model to the excess return. Hence they conclude that information about a stock’s MSCI ESG-
score cannot be used in return predictions to derive more accurate estimates. Since we utilize
the same ESG-proxy as  in Responsible investing: The ESG-efficient frontier (2021), the
contradictory conclusions illuminate that their findings do not apply to our sample. Hence, we
contribute with insights that emphasize how distinct market settings provide dissimilar
prerequisites for Sustainable Responsible Investing. As previously discussed, we examine a
sample period following the monumental shift in ESG relevance on financial markets, while
Pedersen et al. (2021) applies a more extended period. Hence, the increased interest in
Sustainable Responsible Investing might affect the setting for ESG stocks and generate an
enhanced explanatory value for future returns.

The factor mimicking portfolio for sustainability proxied as GRI compliance report significant
results for the  value-weighted portfolio. As observed in Table 9,  alpha is consistently negative
for all three-factor models indicating that the excess return of a portfolio constructed based on
Governance proxy underperforms predictions made by the Capital Asset Pricing  Model and
Fama French factor model. Hence, the results reveal that an investor can include a return
discount attributed to stocks with high governance levels to obtain a more precise estimate. Our
results contradict the positive alpha for the G-proxy presented in Pedersen et al. (2021). Hence,
there is an ambiguity in whether information spawned from a firm’s governance efforts
comprises a return premium or discount for predictions. Since our study concludes on a
dissimilar G-proxy than in Responsible investing: The ESG-efficient frontier (2021), it
contributes with insights that all parts of the Governance pillar cannot be assumed to predict
returns in similar manners. Summarily, reviewing the result, we do not reject our third
hypothesis for our ESG and Governance proxy but for the Environmental and Social proxy.
Hence, we conclude that ESG proxied as GRI compliance and MSCI ESG score do predict
returns.

6.4 Quantification of ESG’s Predictive Value
The cross-sectional Ordinary Least Squares regressions performed with realized return excess
to the market as a dependent variable aims to further unfold the predictability of ESG-proxies.
Factor returns quantifies the explanatory value on stock returns attributed to the exposure of
book-to-market and ESG-level.  Hence, the regression reveals how much of a stock’s realized
return can be explained by its level of sustainability in relation to valuation.

                                     21
22
The regressions in Table 10 exhibit low significance level for the independent variables which
indicates that the quantification of our ESG-proxies’ predictive value cannot be obtained for
all observations. The exposure of our ESG-proxy reports a positive and significant factor return
in 2016 which suggests that a return premium can be attributed to high MSCI ESG-rating. The
regressions disclose a negative, significant factor return for our G-proxy in 2016 and for our S-
proxy in 2020. These results imply that a factor discount was derived for firms with a high
Governance score and Social score for the implied years. In Responsible Investing: The ESG-
efficient frontier (2021), the observed factor returns are not reported. Therefore, we cannot
derive a comparable discussion for contributing insights.

7. Discussion
Since our thesis aims to reveal the interplay between how ESG affects firm profitability and
stock valuation, we have studied the two areas separately but will henceforth disclose the
possibility to integrate them. Hence, the following section will firstly discuss the two areas in
relation to existing literature and thereafter visualize the implications from incorporating ESG’s
informative value into portfolio management.

                                     23
7.1 How do our Findings Relate to Previous Literature?
We rejected our first hypothesis about ESG characteristics’ predictability of firm fundamentals
for all proxies except the S-proxy. The absence of explanatory value for the profitability metrics
are contradictory to the findings by Ferrell, Liang et al. (2016), stating that a positive correlation
between CSR and firm value exists. Moreover, Friede, Busch, et al. (2015) presented that the
majority of empirical studies find a positive relationship between Corporate Financial
Performance and sustainable efforts. Our contradicting results are intrinsically contributing to
the  literature  since  they  indicate  that  ESG  characteristics  are  not  predictors  of  firm
fundamentals within our sample period. Since Ferrell, Liang et al. (2016) and Friede, Busch,
et al. (2015) performed their studies before the monumental shift in relevance of ESG on
financial markets, their sample experiences different conditions than ours. To accurately
examine how ESG affects the interplay between firm fundamentals  and portfolio construction,
it is crucial that the concluding implications for portfolio management are derived from
prevailing   market   conditions.   While   challenging   previous   research,   our   thesis   hence
contributes to the research since it observes the current environment for sustainable investing.

To enable the incorporation of ESG into portfolio management, it is furthermore essential to
consider what time frame of Corporate Financial Performance that provides the most efficient
information. There is a substantial distinction between our thesis and the empirical papers
examining firm's ESG commitment with regards to the time frame of applied profitability
metrics. Ferrell, Liang, et al. (2016) and Friede, Busch et al. (2015) have a long-term
perspective on firm profitability in their studies since they focus on firm value and Corporate
Financial Performance, which are metrics that intrinsically emphasize future value. However,
in line with Pedersen et al. (2021), our study aims to determine if ESG characteristics could be
employed by an ESG-aware investor whose primary goal is to achieve the highest possible
risk-adjusted return while still considering ESG. Since our thesis integrates the conclusions on
how ESG relates to CFP with the ones on how ESG affects stock prospects, it is more relevant
to apply a shorter time frame on the analyzed metric. It is reasonable to assume that the average
investor will rebalance its portfolio on a regular basis and therefore benefits more from insights
derived from a shorter perspective. Previous research oversees how the interplay between ESG
and Corporate Financial Performance can be exploited in portfolio management since they use
a longer time frame on firm characteristics. Through the utilization of a shorter time frame, we
more precisely examine the financial incentives to invest sustainably.

Further on, we rejected the second hypothesis stating that we expect ESG characteristics to be
priced in the market. Hong, Kacperczyk (2009) and Taylor, Stambaugh et al. (2019), suggests
that the increased focus on sustainability among investors has induced higher demand for
companies with high ESG levels. Gelema et al. (2008) further reveals that the increased demand
has derived premium prices. Hence, rejecting our second hypothesis contradicts previous
literature. Moreover, our insignificant coefficients  for the E-, S-, and ESG-proxy suggest that
we cannot conclude on the relation between ESG and valuation. Thus the results by Hong,
Kacperczyk (2009), Taylor, Stambaugh et al. (2019), and Gelema et al. (2008) do not hold for
our sample. Hence, we contribute  to the literature with the insight that a common relation
between how the market values a stock and the stock’s ESG is not applicable to all market
settings.

As discussed above, our study concludes that information about ESG has little informative
value  of firm fundamentals in our sample. Therefore we can not suggest that portfolio
construction can be enhanced by the utilization of firm fundamentals predictions. However, the

                                     24
integration of ESG into portfolio management can still be attained through information about
how ESG predicts stock return. As previously disclosed, our study on factor models concludes
that ESG proxied as MSCI ESG-score have predictive value of stock returns, compliant with
Kempf and Osthoff (2007). In contrast to Kempf and Osthoff (2007), our study utilizes that
ESG can be divided into three pillars and hence considers a more extensive estimate of
sustainable efforts. However, as discussed in section 6.3, our results exhibit discrepancy in the
proxies’ predictive value, which emphasizes the importance of considering each ESG pillar
individually. Kempf and Osthoff’s (2007) identification of an explanatory value attributed to
ESG has provoked the interest to investigate how one can utilize information about ESG in
portfolio construction.  Hence, our finding that each ESG pillar has different predictive value
provides contributing insights that need to be considered in investment decisions which is
further discussed in section 7.2

7.2 Incorporation of ESG into Portfolio Management
As previously revealed and discussed, ESG has an informative value that can be used as a
predictor for future returns to attain a more precise estimate. Hence the conclusion indicates
that information about sustainability can be exploited in portfolio construction.  Through the
factor return regression (Table 10), the predictive value is quantified which enables the
integration of ESG information into valuation. The following section will visualize and discuss
the implication of utilizing ESG’s informative value, as estimated by factor returns, in portfolio
construction. Using factors observed in 2019 to forecast returns and construct portfolios for
2020 a distinction between the ESG aware and unaware investor’s ability to predict return is
derived. We construct the frontiers for our examined ESG-  and E-proxy (Table 11 and 12),
disregarding the proxies for S- and G since they are binary, resulting in an investment screening
where investors either consider or do not consider these stocks in investment decisions. The
same analysis has been performed for 2021 but since the two frontiers reveal the same results,
the frontiers for 2021 has been included in Table 20 and 21 in the appendix.

Noteworthy is that the ESG efficient frontier does not intend to propose general conclusions
applicable for the population, but rather illuminate the interplay between our previously
established results. Hence, no statistical analysis is performed and the conclusions discussed
can only be assumed to apply for the implied year. Furthermore,  the factor returns used in
return predictions are not statistically significant as discussed in section 6.4 and do therefore
not accurately absorb ESG’s informative value. However, since the purpose of the frontiers is
to illustrate the implication of using ESG characteristics, the derived results from table 10 will
still be used for visualization purposes.

                                     25
7.2.1 ESG-Efficient Frontier

Table 11, Panel A illustrates the perceived frontier for both the ESG aware and unaware
investor. Since the two investors do not utilize the same information in return predictions, they
will interpret stock prospects differently. The perceived frontier reveals distinct investment
decisions made by the A-investor and U-investor to maximize Sharpe ratio at each level of
ESG  constraint. The ESG-aware investor incorporates the return premium signaled by MSCI
ESG-score derived from Table 9, when predicting future returns. Hence, the A-investor will
perceive that Sharpe ratio is maximized in a portfolio with weight bias towards high ESG
stocks, which is revealed in the frontier. Using the portfolios constructed to maximize
perceived Sharpe ratio at each level of ESG, a realized frontier can be plotted. Table 11, Panel
B visualizes the realized Sharpe ratios of each portfolio for both the ESG aware and unaware

                                     26
investor. Comparing the realized frontiers for the two investors, three main conclusions can be
derived.

Firstly, the shape of both frontiers reveal that the Sharpe Ratio increases in line with the
inclusion of ESG. However  this implication is only true up to a certain level of portfolio
sustainability. Reviewing the descriptive statistic of MSCI ESG-score for our sample (Table
3), the average ESG score is 5.54. The realized frontier for both investors indicate that the
Sharpe ratio experienced a diminishing effect when the portfolios are constrained to a higher
ESG score than the sample average. Hence, the result suggests the existence of a trade-off
between a performing and sustainable portfolio, compliant with evidence discussed in previous
research (Hong and Kacperczyk 2009, Taylor, Stambaugh, et al. 2019).

Secondly, the realized frontiers disclose that the portfolios constructed to maximize perceived
Sharpe ratio enables the ESG aware investor to obtain higher risk-adjusted return for each level
of ESG constraint. This finding agrees with the abnormal excess return observed for the MSCI
ESG factor mimicking portfolio in Table 9. Since the ESG aware investor incorporates a return
premium for stocks with high ESG score, the  predictions aim to absorb the abnormal excess
return and allow a more realistic perception of future prospects. The awareness of a return
premium derived for high ESG score and the exploitation of this informative value in portfolio
construction, enables  the A-investor to obtain a higher Sharpe ratio.

Thirdly, the realized frontier reports that an ESG aware investor faces a lower trade-off between
increasing the portfolio ESG level and maintaining a high Sharpe ratio. The A-investor
maximizes realized Sharpe ratio at portfolio ESG level higher than the U-investor. Increasing
the level of ESG-constraint, the A-investor maintains a high Sharpe ratio while the U-investor’s
diminishes. Hence, an increased ESG portfolio level induces a larger reduction in Sharpe ratio
for the U-investor. This implies that an ESG aware investor can reduce the tradeoff between
sustainability and portfolio performance, in terms of Sharpe ratio, by exploiting the value itself
in investing responsibly.

                                     27
7.2.2 Environmental-Efficient  Frontier

Table 12, Panel A illustrates the perceived frontier of maximized Sharpe ratio at each level of
portfolio environmental score. The perceived frontiers for the ESG-aware and ESG-unaware
investors are almost aligned which suggests that incorporating an additional factor return for
the E-proxy does not yield further implications than if the book-to-market ratio were used alone
for return predictions. Reviewing the realized frontiers in Table 12, Panel B, they are close to
identical for the ESG aware and unaware investors. The alignment of the frontiers implies that
the realized Sharpe ratios are homogenous for any given Environmental constraint. The shape
of both realized frontiers reveal a trade-off between adding Environmental level to the portfolio
and maintaining a Sharpe ratio, similar to what is discussed in previous literature (Hong and
Kacperczyk 2009, Taylor, Stambaugh, et al. 2019). Furthemore, since the frontiers are
synchronized, the trade-off implied for the A-investor and U-investor is the same.

                                     28
The observed result further illuminates that information about our Environmental proxy cannot
be used to obtain a different portfolio outcome. This implication coherently agrees with the
observations derived from Table 9 for our factor model regression. A  factor mimicking
portfolio based on environmental proxy does not report on significant abnormal excess return.
Hence our E-proxy has no predictive value of stock returns which is a potential explanation of
the frontiers’ similarities. Comparing the insights derived from the ESG-  and E-efficient
frontier, one can conclude that the tradeoff between a performing and sustainable portfolio can
be reduced when information about MSCI ESG-score is exploited, but not through the
utilization of our E-proxy. The diverse conclusions further emphasize the importance of
considering each pillar of ESG individually in portfolio management to obtain optimized
outcomes.

7.3 Limitations
There are considerable limitations in our models and data sample, impeding us from achieving
robust results. Ideally, we would like to analyze all and the same companies listed on Nasdaq
Nordic Large Cap over the sample period. In that case, we would obtain a balanced panel
reducing the risk of idiosyncratic errors correlated with companies falling out of the sample.
An alternative approach to using an unbalanced panel would be to exclude companies lacking
data over the sample period. However, we decided to include firms with missing data for some
years in order not to reduce the sample size too much since too few observations can result in
further concerns. (Wooldridge 2012)

Moreover, several conceivable explanations for why our ESG-proxies exhibit low explanatory
value exist. We will further present some reasons causing limitations to our results. Since the
demand for ESG in investments has substantially increased in recent years (Global Sustainable
Investment Alliance, 2021), our short panel may even be too long. The revised ESG focus
among investors can affect the awareness and demand for ESG characteristics within the
sample period, conceivably causing biases in our results. Furthermore, examining proxies as
quantitative metrics for ESG causes subjectivity in the analysis. Although we aimed to analyze
comprehensive and distinguishable characteristics, ESG-aware investors will evaluate diverse
aspects of a firm's sustainability level. Accordingly, it is not feasible to encounter ESG-proxies
as valuable to all ESG aware investors. Hence, the diverse knowledge and importance of our
chosen proxies among ESG aware investors is a limitation to our results.

Furthermore, as visible in Table 6 and 7, not all incorporated control variables are significant,
implying they are not value added for the validity of the model. In addition, these tables show
                      D
a relatively low  𝑅 , meaning that the analyzed ESG-proxy in combination with the chosen
control variables are not extensive for describing the variation of our dependent variables
(Wooldridge 2012). In that sense, replicating Pedersen et al. (2021) through integrating the
same control variables is a limitation to our results since there are better fitted models for our
examined sample. Moreover, some of our enforced tests for multicollinearity disclose that
heteroskedasticity exists among the error terms in our fitted models, see Table 18 and 19 in the
appendix. We decided to add robust standard errors for the Factor Return model to account for
the heteroskedasticity in the regression. However, applying Whites robust standard errors only
affects the t statistics and does not change the regression coefficients (Wooldridge 2012).
Thereby, not performing a better fitted regression to account for the heteroskedasticity in our
models is also a limitation to our results.

                                     29
8. Concluding Remarks

8.1 Conclusion
The monumental shift in financial markets to consider ESG as a decisive factor in evaluation
has increased the importance of further studying Sustainable Responsible Investing. There is
an ongoing discussion on how to mitigate global emerging risks that urges investors to include
a sustainability criteria in investment decisions (OECD, 2021). However, the interplay between
ESG and portfolio management has previously not been studied from a constructive viewpoint
but rather with the motive to establish a correlation. Despite agreeing results in empirical
research that investing with an ESG constraint hurts returns, investors find little guidance on
how to efficiently incorporate sustainability into portfolio management. Hence, the motivation
to invest sustainably  is challenged by diminished financial incentives. The increased relevance
of ESG has thus provoked this thesis to study if the alleged trade-off between a performing and
sustainable portfolio can be diminished. Our study partly replicates Pedersen et al. (2021) and
extends it with contributing insights.

In this study we have unfolded the possibility to successfully incorporate information about
sustainability into portfolio construction by analyzing three main elements. Firstly we have
examined if information about ESG correlates with future firm profitability to answer the
research  question;  Do  ESG  characteristics  have  an  explanatory  value  of  future  firm
fundamentals?  Our study reports low significance in the relation between analyzed ESG
proxies and profitability metrics, except for the Social proxy. Therefore we cannot conclude
that ESG characteristics have an explanatory value of firm fundamentals. Hence, our results do
not anchor the correlation between sustainable efforts and firm value proposed in previous
literature (Ferrell, Liang, et al. 2016, Friede, Busch, et al. 2015).

Since an exhibited predictive value of firm fundamentals does not affect stock return unless the
market is unaware of the potential correlation (Fama, 1970) , we furthermore investigated if
the ESG-proxies are valued by the market. For the majority of our examined proxies, we did
not find any relation with the applied valuation ratio. Hence we can not conclude upon whether
the market incorporates information about our ESG-proxies  in the stock price. Moreover, for
the G-proxy we found a statistically significant negative relation suggesting the examined ESG
characteristic predicts lower valuation. Our results are relatively surprising compared to other
findings in the field of study. Previous literature suggests that ESG is correlated with firm
fundamentals and argues a biased demand towards sustainable stocks (Hong and Kacperczyk
2009, Taylor, Stambaugh, et al. 2019). Hence they conclude that the market imposes a higher
valuation for ESG stocks. Our contradictory results are intrinsically contributing to the
literature since they emphasize that studies on Sustainable Responsible Investing needs to be
reconsidered for each individual market setting. Noteworthy, our study has intrinsic limitations
since we replicate statistical models from a paper examining a different data set, suggesting
there might be better fitting models and control variables applicable to analyze our data.

Lastly, the integration of sustainability into portfolio management requires knowledge of how
ESG can be used in predictions. Hence, we performed factor models regression to identify
potential abnormal excess returns. Our study reports that neither our E-proxy or S-proxy have
explanatory value of future returns, while the G-proxy has a negative and ESG-proxy a positive
predictive value. Hence we conclude that the integration of sustainability into portfolio

                                     30
management can be attained through the usage of a return premium attributed to stocks with a
high MSCI ESG score, or by incorporating a return discount assigned to GRI compliant stocks.

To broaden the perspective of investor behavior, we introduce ESG-awareness that represents
knowledge of how Environmental, Social and Governance efforts can create financial
opportunities. Acknowledging that investors will exploit all information they perceive to be
relevant, an aware investor is assumed to absorb ESG’s informative value of returns into
predictions. Hence, utilizing the value itself in investing sustainably, the aware investor will
estimate future return differently. To answer the second research question; Can ESG awareness
diminish the trade-off between portfolio performance and sustainability inclusion?, we
visualize the distinct portfolio choices of an  aware and unaware investor through the
construction  of  a  ESG-efficient  frontier  plotting  Sharpe  ratio  against  portfolio  ESG.
Maximizing ex ante Sharpe ratio at each level of ESG constraint, the perceived frontiers are
obtained for both investors. The realized frontiers are thereafter constructed based on the
investment decisions visualizing differences in realized Sharpe ratio at each level of ESG
inclusion for the two investor types.

Our frontier constructed for sustainability proxied as MSCI ESG-score,  visualize that both
investors indeed face a trade-off between ESG inclusion and maintenance of a high Sharpe
ratio as discussed in previous literature ((Hong and Kacperczyk 2009, Taylor, Stambaugh and
Pastor 2019). However a comparison of the two frontiers illuminates that the trade-off is
smaller for the ESG aware investor. Hence, we conclude that through the incorporation of
ESG’s   informative   value   into   portfolio   construction,   the   trade-off   between   portfolio
performance and sustainability inclusion can be reduced. Contradictory, the frontiers for our
E-proxy disclose that the existing trade-off cannot be reduced through ESG awareness. Instead
we conclude that the incorporation of our E-proxy’s predictive value of returns, does not yield
further implications than if the valuation ratio were used alone for return predictions. The
contradictory results for our ESG-  and E-frontier further emphasizes the importance of
considering each ESG pillar individually in portfolio management.

To conclude, this study finds no explanatory value in ESG of firm fundamentals for our sample,
which suggest that an investor cannot utilize information about sustainable efforts to estimate
future firm profitability. However, our results suggest that MSCI ESG-rating has predictive
value of returns that can be incorporated into portfolio construction to attain a better prediction.
Hence, through the exploitation of knowledge about Environmental, Social and Governance
efforts affecting stock prospects, an ESG-aware investor can diminish the tradeoff between
portfolio MSCI ESG score and Sharpe ratio.

8.2 Future Research
As disclosed in our study, the chosen proxies for E, S and G do not report coherent results for
each regression. Compliant with Pedersen et. al (2021) we hence conclude that each pillar of
ESG has distinct implications for portfolio management and should be treated individually. We
visualize that an ESG-aware investor can diminish the trade-off between a sustainable and
performing portfolio, utilizing information about  MSCI ESG score but not using our proxy for
Environmental Pillar. Consequently there is an interest to further explore how each ESG Pillar
affects financial opportunities differently.

The ESG proxies are chosen to capture investor estimates of how a firm performs in each
respective pillar. However, as previously discussed, neither our proxies nor the one utilized in

                                     31
Responsible Investing; ESG-efficient frontier (2021), are exhaustive metrics of the pillars.
Since there are investors that may consider additional aspects of sustainability that have not yet
been studied it is of interest to further investigate the incorporation of ESG in portfolio
management using alternative proxies. Part  of our analysis report results that contradicts those
by Pedersen et. al (2021) for the same pillar, when the dissimilar proxies are applied, which
further emphasized the interest in examining new proxies for ESG.

Lastly, in comparison to previous studies, we apply a current sample period following the
monumental shift in Sustainable Responsible Investing. Hence, our partly contradictory results
to existing literature suggests that the market environment for ESG investing has changed. We
thus recommend that research on the interplay between ESG and portfolio management should
be revised continuously.

                                     32
References

(2022). Retrieved from Capital IQ:
https://www.capitaliq.com/CIQDotNet/Screening/ScreenBuilderViper.aspx?UniqueScreenId
=1955322190&screentypeid=1&clear=all

(2022). Retrieved from Nordic Compass, Swedish House of Finance:
https://data.houseoffinance.se

Berg, Florian, and Kölbel, Julia,  and Rigobon Roberto, 2019, Aggregate confusion: The
divergence of ESG ratings, MIT Sloan School working paper

Berk Jonathan and Peter DeMarzo, 2017, Corporate Finance (4th Edition), Pearson Education,
p. 62, 375, 407-408, 41, 419

Boffo Riccardo, Marshall  Catriona and Patalano Robert, 2020, ESG Investing:
Environmental Pillar Scoring and Reporting, OECD Paris

Fama Eugene F., 1970, Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work ,
The Journal of Finance 25, 383-  417

Fama Eugene F. and  French Kenneth R., 1993, Common Risk Factors in the Returns on
Stocks and Bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56

French Kenneth R., 2022, Data Library, Dartmouth College  -  Tuck School of Business

Friede, Gunnar, and Busch Timo, and Bassen, Alexander, 2015, ESG and financial
performance: aggregated evidence from more than 2000 empirical studies, Journal of
Sustainable Finance & Investment 5, 210-233

Galema, Plantinga and Scholtens, 2008, The stocks at stake: Return and risk in socially
responsible investment, Journal of Banking & Finance 32, 2646-2654

Global Reporting, A Short Introduction to the GRI standards, 2022, Amsterdam Netherlands

Global Sustainable Investment Alliance, 2021, Global Sustainable Investment Review 2020:
http://www.gsi-alliance.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/GSIR-20201.pdf

Gösser, Niklas, and Moshgbar, Nima, 2020, Smoothing time fixed effects, Düsseldorf
Institute for Competition Economics

Henisz, Witold, and Koller, Tim, 2019, Five ways that ESG creates value, Nov 14, McKinsey
Quarterly
https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/strategy-and-corporate-finance/our-
insights/five-ways-that-esg-creates-value

Hong Harrison, and Marcin Kacpercyk, 2009, The price of sin: The effects of social norms on
markets, Journal of financial economics 93, 15-36.

                                     33
Kempf, Alexander and Osthoff Peer, 2007, The Effect of Socially Responsible Investing on
Portfolio Performance, The journal of the European Financial Management Association 13,
908-922.

Livsey Alan, 2022, Boom in ESG ratings leaves trail of confusion, Financial Times,  Mar 19

Newbold, Paul and William, Carlson, 2012, Statistics for Business and Economics (8th
Edition), Pearson Education, p. 582-591

Nissim, Doron, and Penman Stephen H., 2001, Ratio Analysis and Equity Valuation: From
Research to Practice, Review of Accounting Studies 6, 109–154

Novy-Marx, Robert, 2013, The other side of value: The gross profitability premium, Journal
of financial  economics 108, 1-28

OECD, 2021, ESG Investing and Climate Transition: Market Practices, Issues and Policy
Considerations, OECD Paris

Pedersen, Lasse H., Fitzgibbons, Shaun, and Pomorski, Lukasz, 2021, Responsible investing:
The ESG-efficient frontier, Journal of financial economics 142, 572-597.

S&P Global, 2020, What is the “S” in ESG?, Feb 2020
https://www.spglobal.com/en/research-insights/articles/what-is-the-s-in-esg

                                                     *9
Stewart, G. Bennett, 1990, The quest for value: the  𝐸𝑉𝐴   management guide,  HarperCollins,
Publishers Inc, United States of America,. p 100-108.

Taylor, Lucian A., Stambaugh, Robert F., and Pastor, Lubos, 2019, Sustainable Investing in
Equilibrium, National Bureau of Economic Research

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., 2010, Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, The
MIT Press, London, p. 577-578

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., 2012, Introductory Econometrics A Modern Approach (5th edition),
Cengage Learning, South-Western, p. 96, 98, 150-152, 159, 326, 491-492, 737

Reproduced by permission of MSCI ESG Research LLC
© 2022 MSCI ESG Research LLC All rights reserved.

The ESG data contained herein is the property of MSCI ESG Research LLC (ESG). ESG, its
affiliates and information providers make no warranties with respect to any such data. The
ESG data contained herein is used under license and may not be further used, distributed or
disseminated without any express written consent of ESG.

                                     34
Appendix

                                     35
36
37
38