DANCING IN THE DARK

A STUDY OVER SPAC PERFORMANCE

JONATHAN ELOFSSON

OLIVER LÖNNBERG

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2022
Dancing in the dark: A study over SPAC performance

Abstract:

   This paper aims to examine what factors that determine default-free SPAC period
   returns and explore why the popularity of SPACs has drastically increased in recent
   years. This is done using a dataset of 345 SPACs listed on the New York Stock
   Exchange and the NASDAQ. We proceed to calculate the returns using a tailored
   SPAC period model and compare them with the yield of 2-year US Treasury Notes.
   We further develop a regression model in order to explain what factors that influence
   SPAC period returns, such as underwriter ranking and derivative security structure.
   We find that default-free SPAC period returns on average outperform 2-year US
   Treasury Yields under the studied period with strong statistically support, however we
   yield limited insights when examining what components that explain SPAC period
   returns.

Keywords:

   Special Purpose Acquisition Companies, SPACs, SPAC period returns, Treasury
   Yield, Default-free investments, Underwriter ranking, SPAC wave, United States

Authors:

   Jonathan Elofsson (24793)
   Oliver Lönnberg (24731)

Tutors:

   Ran Guo, Visiting Teacher, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d'Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Jonathan Elofsson and Oliver Lönnberg

Acknowledgements:

   We would like to thank Visiting Teacher Ran Guo for his highly valuable guidance
   and support throughout the writing process of this thesis.

                                   1
                            1. Introduction

The process of initial public offerings (IPOs) plays a central role in companies' ability to
receive financing from a wider array of investors. When the company is transformed from
a private company to a public company, its shares reach both new institutional investors
and retail investors. In this process, the company provides itself with capital for potential
future growth plans or general working capital. The special purpose acquisition
company's (SPAC) IPO process differs from a traditional IPO in the sense that the
offering constitutes a blank check company, that at a future date after the public offering
acquire a private company and, in the process, take that company public. For SPAC IPOs
this inherit characteristic results in two central periods, Gahng, Ritter and Zhang (2021)
call them the “SPAC period” and the “De-SPAC period” which are illustrated in figure 1
below:

                   Figure 1. Timeline and lifecycle of SPAC IPOs

Figure 1 illustrates the two essential periods to fully understand SPACs. The SPAC period is the period
before a merger is pursued. The De-SPAC period begins when the merger is completed, and the company
starts to trade under a new ticker.

The SPAC period begins when the company is listed on the stock exchange and ends
when the company either liquidates or completes a merger. The De-SPAC period begins
when the merger is completed, and the company begins to trade under a new ticker.
Another notable characteristic is that the SPAC is created by a sponsor who provides
capital in the pre-IPO stage. Then, before the SPAC goes public it usually seeks
underwriters and institutional investors. The SPAC IPO is also characterized by listing
units instead of just common shares at the time of IPO, which later (usually between 45-
90 days after the time of IPO) is split up. Units are composed of a common share and
usually some kind of derivative securities. Most often a fraction of a warrant is included,
and in some rarer cases also a right. The money that is raised through the IPO process is
then placed in a trust account in which it earns interest until the money is used for a merger
or returned to the investors in case of liquidation.

                                   2
       SPACs usually have between 18 and 24 months to complete a merger with a
private company (Gahng et.al, 2021). If a merger is not pursued within the time horizon
the SPAC must liquidate. If liquidation occurs, the SPAC must redistribute the proceeds
from the IPO to the investors with accrued interest. Further, if an investor does not want
to pursue with the business combination it always has the right to redeem its share and in
turn receive their part of the cash in the trust account. This amounts to the price of one
unit at the IPO plus the interest it has accrued during the SPAC period. Due to the risk of
investors redeeming their shares and exhausting the trust account, sponsors often invite
PIPE (Private Investment in Public Equity) investments to offset redemptions from other
investors and secure funds for the business combination. PIPE investors also act as a
certification effect, signaling to investors not to redeem their shares in the first place.

       As a result of the possibility to redeem your common shares in exchange for the
cash that you are entitled to from the trust account, an investment in a SPAC during its
SPAC period can be viewed as investing in a default-free convertible bond with some
derivative securities generally included (Gahng et.al, 2021). Worth noting is that this
return is gross of any fees associated with, for example, underwriters since these fees are
not borne by the investors but rather the sponsors. However, investing in the SPAC cannot
be seen as completely risk-free since the investor is both exposed to an illiquidity risk due
to the common shares not being possible to redeem at any given moment, and a risk of a
fire-sale at the time of redemption. However, due to the money-back guarantee it can still
be regarded as a default-free investment.

       One important change in the framework of SPAC IPOs occurred in 2010 when
the voting right and the redemption right were unbundled and became two separate
decisions (Gahng et.al, 2021). Prior to this change, if one voted in favor of a specific
business combination then they could not choose to redeem their shares and vice versa.
This meant that an investor who wanted to utilize the default-free characteristics of
investing in a SPAC was required to vote against a business combination. Further it
implies that the derivative securities included in the SPAC unit - such as warrants and
rights - become worthless if the SPAC is forced into liquidation, this type of investor now
has an incentive to vote in favor of a business combination even if they regard it as being
a “bad merger”, since at least some value in the derivative securities will remain and they
will thus yield a higher return.

       During recent years, markets located in the United States have seen a rapid
increase in the number of SPAC IPOs executed each year, see Figure 2 (Statista, 2022).

                                   3
        Figure 2. Development of the number of SPAC IPOs in the United States, 2009-
                                 2015

 700
                                                                                      613
 600

 500

 400

 300
                                                                                248

 200

 100                                                                      59
                                                          34 46
               7 16 9 10 12 20 13
        1
   0
       2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Figure 2 illustrates the total number of SPAC IPOs per year between 2009 and 2021 in the United States.

However, we do not identify any immediate trend in the average size of SPACs, see
Figure 3.

       Figure 3. The average size of SPAC IPOs in the United States, 2009-2015

 400

 350                                                                            336

                                                            296
 300
                                                      269                              264

 250                                                             234 231

                                               195
 200

                                 145 146
 150

 100
              72 69
                            54
  50    36

   0
       2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Figure 3 illustrates the average size of SPAC IPOs per year in the United States. The values are in millions
of US Dollars.

                                   4
Looking at the development of SPACs, one immediately notices the sharp increase in
SPAC IPOs, from 1 SPAC IPO in 2009 to 613 in 2021. One should however note -
although this increase remains substantial - that the market has seen a very high number
of all types of IPOs in recent years, especially in 2020 and 2021. Nonetheless, the data
still supports a drastic increase in the share of SPAC IPOs in relation to the total number
of IPOs. (See figure 4)

         Figure 4. The total number of IPOs and the share of SPAC IPOs in relation to
               the total number of IPOs in the United States, 2009-2015

 1000                                                                        951   100%

  800                                                                          80%

  600                                                                          60%

                                                                           431
  400                                                                          40%
                                       268
                                220                          214
                                                       176       195
  200         168                        162                                     20%
                    123 132
                                                   100
         69

    0                                                                       0%
        2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Figure 4 illustrates the total number of IPOs per year between 2009 and 2021 in the United States. The line
in the diagram illustrates the development of the share of SPAC IPOs in relation to the total number of
IPOs. We see that SPAC IPOs have become a larger portion of total IPO market in recent years.

Gahng et.al (2021) note that in the time-period 2017-2019, nine SPACs were liquidated.
Further, 44 out of 64 - i.e., 69% - completed business combinations had a redemption
percentage of over 50%. The mergers were possible to pursue due to PIPE investments
offsetting some or all of the money that was redeemed. According to them, this changed
drastically in 2020 where only two SPACs were liquidated and only 25 out of 62 – i.e.,
40% - had a redemption percentage of over 50%. Zooming in on the fourth quarter of the
same year, 0 SPACs were liquidated and only 10 out of 37 – i.e., 27% - had a redemption
percentage of over 50%. This underpin their argument that the boom in SPAC popularity
is due to a change in investor sentiment and that recent high-profile deals have led to an
inflow of retail investors looking to chase past returns. They also believe that investors
becoming increasingly positive towards potential mergers led to less cash being redeemed
and that sponsors could complete more mergers. The substantial pool of cash delivered,
and the probability of a successful deal consequently led to SPACs being a more attractive
opportunity for operating companies.

                                   5
       However, we believe that there might be other reasons to why SPACs became so
popular during these years other than those proposed by Gahng et al. (2021). That investor
sentiment and generally more positive attitudes toward the potential business
combinations are not the only possible explanations as to why SPAC popularity has
grown in recent years.

        During this time-period interest rates dropped to record low levels, see Figure 3
for the development of the yield of 2-year US Treasury Notes between 2018 and 2021.

                Figure 5. 2-year US Treasury Note yield, 2018-2021

 3.50%

 3.00%

 2.50%

 2.00%

 1.50%

 1.00%

 0.50%

 0.00%
    2018-01-01 2019-01-01 2020-01-01 2021-01-01
Figure 5 illustrates the development of the 2-year US Treasury Note yield from January 2018 to January
2022.

Due to the characteristics of the SPAC period investment explained in section 1 and it
being a default-free investment, this sparked the idea of comparing the current SPAC
period returns with the alternative of investing in default-free US Treasury Notes. Further,
we also wanted to study which factors that could explain differences between SPAC
period returns prior to the announcement of a business combination, such as quality of
underwriters, size of IPO, etc.

        We are not the first ones to acknowledge a possible discrepancy between default-
free interest and SPAC period returns. Whenever a common stock (or unit) trades below
IPO price, one could always invest in it and then redeem it at a later point for an ensured
positive return. This opportunity has been exploited by various hedge funds and other
investors who have been given the epithet “SPAC mafia”, implying that they are taking
part of this free-money game (Reuters, 2021). According to Gahng et al. (2021), the top
20 members of this so-called SPAC mafia had over 56,552 million US Dollars in assets
under management invested in SPACs at the end of September 2021. They further
conclude that (although noting that it may be a simplification) that the default-free
convertible bond (i.e., the investment in the SPAC common share) is approximately worth

                                   6
the IPO price, with the derivative securities being a “free-lunch”. This further spurred our
interest in examining the returns during the SPAC period prior to the announcement of a
business combination and try to understand its specific nature rather than studying the
De-SPAC period which bears more similarity to “regular” IPOs.

       Based on these findings and the questions that arose among them, our contribution
would then be the following:

What could explain the rise in popularity of SPACs in recent years and what determines
SPAC period returns prior to the announcement of a business combination?

                           2. Literature review

Since SPACs have gathered significant popularity in recent years and prior to that being
a quite un-researched topic, the current literature regarding the subject is sparse. The
number of papers published in top finance journals is limited and the academic knowledge
is thus consequently low. Therefore, it was difficult to find relevant papers published in
financial journals that focuses on SPAC IPOs.

       One related paper is Gahng, Ritter and Zhang (2021) titled “SPACs” which is an
un-published working paper. They go through and measure the returns of SPACs in the
SPAC period and the De-SPAC period. Their sample size is 905 SPACs for the period
between January 2010 and September 2021 and their method of measuring returns factor
in both the return of common shares as well as stated fractions of warrants and rights in
the specific units. Their method of measuring SPAC unit return bears similarities with the
method that we use in our paper and acted as inspiration. The mentioned paper is - as
stated earlier - one of the first in this newly found area of study and their research
approach is broad, covering a wide area of topics regarding SPACs while omitting depth
on specific parts.

       Our extension to their paper would be to try and explain the differences between
returns in the SPAC period, this by using a regression model with the aim of exploring
which factors that influence SPAC period returns. This is something that is not included
in their paper and which we believe could yield interesting insights that are valuable for
practitioners. Further, we also aim to seek answers to the question of why SPAC
popularity has surged in recent years. Gahng et al. (2021) gives a shallow answer to this
question which is not underpinned by any statistical analyzes, and as mentioned in section
1 we believe that there are other undiscovered answers to this question. We aim to
engender some of those answers in this paper by comparing investments in SPACs to
other investments that exhibit similar characteristics. This is done through return
calculations and rigorous statistical analyzes in conjunction with observed investor
behavior. We also apply our and Gahng et al. (2021) combined findings to our hypothesis
about future SPAC period returns and associated investor attractiveness where fresh
SPAC data from 2022 is used to support our view.

       Therefore, our core contribution to the literature would be through citing variables
that explain differences in SPAC period returns and analyze their influence. Our paper
thus both contributes to the literature through more specific in-depth analyzes and

                                   7
clarifying if specific findings and relations are statistically significant. Further, we also
investigate alternative answers to present questions, most notably why SPACs became so
increasingly popular in recent years. It is our belief that these contributions are relevant
for practitioners and could facilitate future research.

                     3. Data and Methodology

3.1 Identifying SPACs and collecting SPAC data

The SPAC data was collected from SPAC Track (2022) and contains 345 SPACs that
went public between 2019-05-14 and 2021-03-30 that has not yet executed a business
combination or been liquidated. Further we have limited us to SPACs listed on either the
New York Stock Exchange or the NASDAQ in the United States. To determine which
stock exchange each SPAC is traded on, Yahoo Finance was used. Since our goal is to
calculate the annualized returns of the SPACs between going public and today it is
appropriate to examine those SPACs that have been trading for more than one year before
our examination date which is 2022-04-01. This implies that our data set includes all
SPACs that are currently listed on the mentioned markets where at least one year has
lapsed since their IPO date. We are aware that making this exclusion might lead to
survivorship bias i.e., bias as a result of excluding some observations that were difficult
to observe. If we had included SPACs that have been trading for less than one year, their
annualized returns would have been arbitrarily enhanced compared to other SPACs that
have been trading for longer. Therefore, we conclude that including only SPACs that have
been trading for at least one year will lead to the smallest bias in our study and the fairest
result. An optional way would have been to include all SPACs that have either done a
delisting or a business combination. This process had several issues as well, mainly that
it was difficult to access historical data on warrant and right structure and the historical
price of these, as well as prices of common shares before either delisting or performing a
business combination. As a result, we had to choose our current methodology which we
determine to be suitable for the purpose of analyzing SPAC period returns and to answer
our research question.

       The US market has been the dominant market regarding SPACs with the majority
of the total SPACs in the world being listed either on the New York Stock Exchange or
on the NASDAQ. For example, in 2020 there were 256 SPAC IPOs in the United States
and only 3 in all of the European markets combined (Statista, 2022). Examining SPACs
only from the US gives us a more consistent data set while only excluding a handful of
IPOs from other countries and markets. Further, we later also compare the performance
of SPACs with US Treasury Notes, hence making it additionally appropriate to examine
SPACs that are listed on markets based in the United States.

       The data obtained from SPAC Track include the names of the SPACs as well as
their ticker. Further, it also contains information regarding IPO date, IPO Size in US
Dollars, the current Trust Value in US Dollars, the current price of one common share,
the warrant structure as well as its corresponding warrant price and the right structure.
The data was then supplemented with the right price which was collected from Yahoo
Finance. We also drew samples to check whether it was correct by comparing the data
from SPAC Track to various other sources such as mentioned Yahoo Finance and CRSP.

                                   8
Further, we also examined SEC Filings and S-1 documents to check whether warrant
structure, IPO Size, unit structure, etc. were in fact correct.

       Our data set was then complemented with information regarding the underwriters
of each SPAC as well as how many units each bank contributed with. The information
regarding which underwriters acted as bookrunners was included in our data set from
SPAC Track, but unfortunately it lacked information about the number of units each
underwriter contributed with. This data was instead found on SPAC Research which
provided this information to our thesis. Moreover, it acted as a suitable way to cross-
check whether the data regarding which underwriters were responsible for each SPAC
where consistent between the two.

3.2 Underwriter Ranking

Underwriter ranking data was collected from the updated appendix “IPO Underwriter
Reputation Rankings (1980 – 2020)” of the paper “Why Has IPO Underpricing Changed
Over Time?” (Loughran and Ritter, 2004). This ranking is mainly based on how many
shares an investment bank underwrites when looking at IPO prospectus. More
specifically, in mentioned prospectus lead underwriters are mentioned first, then co-
managing underwriters and lastly other syndicate members. The non-managing
underwriting section of each prospectus contains different brackets of underwriters,
where a higher bracket indicates that the bank is underwriting more shares than a bank in
a lower bracket. The number of times a bank appears in a higher bracket determines its
ranking on a scale between 1.001-9.001. If a bank does not appear in the examined
prospectus the score is instead determined by an industry expert. If the industry expert
would not possess any material knowledge about the bank its score is instead based on
the offer prices of the IPOs that it has underwritten. The underwriters in our study were
then simply assigned the latest available score.

       11 of the 47 banks in our data set did not have any assigned score based on the
earlier mentioned ranking. These banks only appeared as bookrunners 16 times out of 553
total (recall, an IPO can have multiple joint bookrunners), i.e., the banks only acted as
bookrunner a total of 1-3 times each. Due to these banks having appeared unfrequently
in IPO prospectus (a natural implication of them being excluded in the ranking), as well
as them being involved in a minimal number of deals in our data set, we assigned them
the lowest possible score of 1.001.

        However, this is not applicable in all cases. There are also banks in our study that
have emerged in recent years that are regarded as “prominent banks” by the general world
of finance but lack any assigned score in the ranking. One example of this is PJT Partners
which made its appearance in 2015 when it was spun-off from Blackstone, which it was
                                                                           th
originally a part of. In 2021, PJT Partners was ranked as the 18  bank with highest deal
value in Europe. (Mergermarket, 2022). Thus, giving them the lowest score possible
might not reflect their true reputation or skillfulness.

                                   9
       However, since league table rankings such as that one just mentioned are not
based on thorough academic research, their volatility from year to year and us wanting to
keep stringency throughout the study, we believe it is most appropriate to be consistent
by giving them the lowest possible score instead of labeling them with a half-qualified
guess.

       We also need to mention the fact that some of the banks in our study suffer from
older rankings that have not been updated in multiple years. Most of the score rankings
in our study derives from the time-period of 2018-2020, however there are some banks
in our thesis which score has not been updated since 2010-2011. This can of course be
misleading since banks reputation may change over time and the rankings that they have
been assigned in this study are out of date. However, we still believe that it is a better
approximation of their current status instead of trying to estimate a new score or giving
them the lowest possible score of 1.001.

       In the cases when a SPAC has had multiple joint bookrunners, we have weighted
the total underwriter score of the SPAC according to how many units each bank has been
responsible for in relation to the total number of units issued in the IPO. i.e.:

                            𝑛
                                𝑈1                                        𝑈𝑛
            ∑ (        × 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒1) + ⋯ + (        × 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑛)
                 (𝑈1 + ⋯ + 𝑈𝑛)                 (𝑈1 + ⋯ + 𝑈𝑛)
                  𝑖=1

Where:

Un = The number of units an underwriter is responsible for

Scoren = The underwriter’s assigned score

Hence, the more units an underwriter is responsible for relative to the total number of
units offered in the IPO, the more weight its score bears.

        A list of all underwriters included in our study with their assigned score as well
as the number of IPOs they act as underwriters on can be found in Exhibit A in Appendix.

3.3 Treasury rates

Data over historical US Treasury yields were collected from NASDAQ. The data consists
of daily updated yields for Treasury Bills, Treasury Notes and Treasury Bonds over the
time-period between 1991-01-02 to 2022-02-04. However, only a small amount of this
data was used when conducting this thesis. More specifically, the data that was used
includes the yield of 2-year US Treasury Notes over the time-period between 2018-01-01
to 2021-12-31.

                                  10
3.4 Methodology

3.4.1 Calculating SPAC period returns

Our annualized SPAC period returns, RSPAC, has been calculated in the following way:

                                                       𝑃𝑠                      𝑇
                                     = (1 + 𝑅𝑆𝑃𝐴𝐶 )                                     (1)
                                                                         𝑃𝑖

Where:

     𝑃𝑠 = 𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑚𝑜𝑛𝑡, 𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑡) + 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑊𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑡 × 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑊𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑡
                                                                                                        (2)
                + 𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑅𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑠 × 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑅𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑡

                                       𝑃𝑖 = 𝐼𝑃𝑂 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑎 𝑈𝑛𝑖𝑡

And:

              Table 1. Definition of variables used in equation (1) and (2)

 Variable Definition
                                                                                                                                                           st
 t The current date (our examination date, April 1 , 2022)
 T The number of months between t and the SPAC IPO date
 Commont The price of one common share at time t
                            The money a holder of one common share is entitled to in
  Trustt
                                    the trust account
 Price Structure of Warrant The fraction of warrant that a specific SPAC unit includes
 Price of Warrantt The price of one warrant at time t
 Number of Rights The number of rights that a specific SPAC unit includes
 Price of rightt The price of one right at time t
Table 1 defines variables used in equation (1) and (2).

Since the SPACs in our study has not yet proposed a business combination or announced
liquidation, the holder of a common share cannot redeem this for the trust value and
collect the return at time t. Further, this implies that the trust account has more time to
gather interest and is subject to changes in rates and other parameters affecting
investments, however our annualization mitigates this bias somewhat. Additionally, you
can always collect the return of the common, warrant and right immediately by selling
them, or just realize the derivatives and then collect the value of the trust that you are
entitled to later.

       Furthermore, when a SPAC announces its proposed business combination this
may cause the share price to “spike” upwards or diminish heavily. In the case of a fierce
increase in the share price an investor can choose to collect this return, and in the case of
a decrease the investor is protected by the option to redeem his share. According to Gahng
et al. (2021) this spike is in some cases accountable for a large part of the total return
during the SPAC period. Since our method disregards this effect, one could interpret our
                                  11
calculations as the baseline return of the SPAC prior to an announced business
combination or liquidation. What we mean with baseline return is, for example, that an
investor always can sell their warrants and rights at time t and invest the cash at the risk-
free rate, and then collect their trust value or sell their common at the point of business
combination or liquidation – alternatively they can also sell their common at the
prevailing price at time t.

       Additionally, the price of the warrants and rights are based on their price at our
                                                                          st
examination date, which is set at April 1 , 2022, a date that is an arbitrarily number of
days away from either a business combination or liquidation. Hence, we do not take into
consideration how long the SPAC has been traded for. This might for example result in
the SPACs that have been struggling to find a satisfactory target having their securities
decrease in value. This due to, for example less confidence in the SPAC merger resulting
in an accreditive trade leading to more people selling their warrants which may decrease
their value. Further, at the time of business combination the price of warrants can also
drop if many investors disagree with the decision to merge with a specific company and
thus decide to sell their warrants, consequently pushing down prices. However, as
mentioned above, it is in this case always possible to trade their warrants or rights to
immediately realize returns. Further, there is no way to accurately estimate how long time
it will take for a certain SPAC to De-SPAC. We decided it would not be appropriate to
predict the time left before a business combination or liquidation by using, for example,
the average trading period of SPACs since this varies. This further implies that we cannot
draw any conclusions about when an investor that wants to redeem their common shares
can do so.

       Lastly, one of the key reasons to why we choose to build our model and calculate
the returns accordingly is that the majority of SPAC IPOs executed during the time-period
that we are interested in - i.e., when SPACs rose so substantially in popularity - has yet
to perform a business combination or liquidation. We call on other practitioners to
examine this when the data allows for it, more on this can be read in section 5.2.

       To conclude, for the purpose of our research question and hypothesis, we believe
that this is an appropriate measure for SPAC period returns and that it is also adequately
comparable with Treasury Notes.

3.4.2 Statistical method and approach

The data in our study consists of 345 SPACs. Since these SPACs are limited to companies
that have been in the SPAC period for more than a year, we are aware that potential
survivorship bias is present, but as we argued above, we think that our current approach
is the one with the least biases present. On the other hand, since our study only focuses
on data from the middle of 2019 to the middle of 2021 it might suffer from time-period
bias, but since the study have a focus on the actual period itself, we argue that the time-
period bias is less important to consider in our study.

        The statistical method of our study is based on the correlation family to determine
the effect size of our chosen parameters. As mentioned in the literature, the r family
measures the specific association between two or more variables. In our analysis we have

                                  12
done a multiple linear regression with five variables to try and explain the SPAC period
returns. To measure the strength of our regression analysis, we have included the
                                                2
coefficient of multiple determination (R ).

        The part of the study that is based on the d family, we did a standardized t-test to
explore the idea that there is a difference in the mean return of 2-year US Treasury Notes
and SPAC period returns.

       To validate our regression model and different tests performed we have executed
robustness testing for both statistical approaches used in this thesis. For the regression
model we ran tests to see whether our model fits the assumptions of the ordinary least
square's regression model. This includes testing for multicollinearity, autocorrelation, and
heteroscedasticity. For our t-test we test the assumption of normality and complement the
test with the non-parametric Mann-Whitney U-test, which does not assume an underlying
normal distribution.

3.4.3 Regression model

To examine what determines the return of SPACs during the SPAC period we use the
following regression model:

 𝑅𝑆𝑃𝐴𝐶 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡_𝑃𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2 × 𝑅𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡_𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑑𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽3 × 𝑊𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑡_𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑡
                 + 𝛽4 × 𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟_𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽5 × 𝐼𝑃𝑂_𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖

RSPAC is the annualized return of the SPAC during its SPAC period prior to announcing
a business combination or liquidation described in section 3.4.1

We start of our analysis by defining a simple dummy variable (Market_Place) to
distinguish between if the SPAC is currently trading on the NASDAQ or on the NYSE.

Further, we have identified some variables that we believe would have an impact on
SPAC period returns:

Right included (Right_Included) is a dummy variable that determines if the SPAC unit
offered at the time of IPO includes a right.

Warrant structure (Warrant_Structure) describes how large the fraction of the warrant
included in a unit is. For example, if you receive one half of a warrant when buying the
unit, the warrant structure is ½. Some SPAC units have no warrant included and if this is
the case the fraction is equal to zero.

Underwriter score (Underwriter_Score) is the score of the underlying bookrunner, or in
the cases where there are more than one responsible bookrunner this represents the
weighted average score described in section 3.2

Size of IPO (IPO_Size) is the size of the SPAC IPO measured in million US Dollars,
defined by the number of units offered at IPO times its price. Since IPO price in all our

                                  13
cases amounts to 10.00 US Dollars, the Size of the IPO is equal to the number of units
times 10.00 US Dollars.

Epsilon (𝜀𝑖) represents the error term in the regression.

3.4.4 Testing the difference in return between SPACs and 2-year US Treasury Notes

The hypothesis that we want to examine is whether the annualized SPAC period returns
outperform the corresponding yield of 2-year US Treasury Notes.

        The reason that we specifically choose the 2-year US Treasury Note is both that
the asset is considered default-free, in agreement with the SPAC period returns (that, as
previously mentioned, are not completely risk-free). Additionally, as mentioned in
section 1, a SPAC usually has a time frame of 18-24 months during which it must perform
a business combination before being liquidated. Our belief is that a 24-month time-period
adequately corresponds to the frame period of a SPAC and that it is suitable to use for our
examination.

       We have structured our data so that every SPAC IPO date has been matched with
the corresponding annual yield of the 2-year US Treasury Note at that specific date to
examine and compare the appropriate returns.

        Firstly, we perform a t-test to test whether there is a difference in mean return
between the two groups consisting of 2-year US Treasury Notes and the annualized
returns of the SPACs. To perform a valid t-test it is required to assume that the two
populations follow a normal distribution. In accordance with the central limit theorem,
assuming that our sample of 345 observations follow an approximate normal distribution
is not illogical. However, since the return is capped at a minimum of 0% this distorts the
normal distribution mechanics somewhat, and when plotting a histogram of the SPAC
returns, we observe the following:

                                  14
              Figure 6. Histogram over calculated SPAC period returns

Figure 6 illustrates the distribution of annualized SPAC period returns in our data sample. Here we
illustrate the point above that not a single SPAC during the SPAC period earned a negative return.
Therefore, the distribution is skewed toward positive returns. Annualized return is calculated according to
equation 1 above.

Further, checking the data for skewness and kurtosis results in the following statistics:

       Table 2. Skewness and kurtosis of calculated SPAC period return sample

                Skewness Kurtosis
       Statistics Std. Error Statistics Std. Error
       7.350 0.131 71.940 0.262
Table 2 shows the results when checking for skewness and kurtosis in our sample of calculated SPAC
period returns. n = 345.

This points towards the case that there is a potential risk present that the data over SPAC
returns may not follow a normal distribution in a sufficiently satisfactory way. This poses
a risk that performing a t-test assuming a normal distribution might cause incorrect results
and faulty conclusions. To mitigate this risk and to further strengthen our analysis we
chose to extend the examination by performing a non-parametric Mann-Whitney U test,
which does not require an assumption about the underlying probability distribution. When
performing this test, the data has been structured in the same way as described above and
the argument for using 2-year US Treasury Notes as a comparable security applies for
this test as well.

                                  15
        Additionally, to further avoid deceptive results we perform an additional t-test
where the SPAC returns have been edited by removing 5% top highest returns and their
corresponding 2-year US Treasury Note yields, this due to the data set containing some
SPACs return outliers with abnormally high returns. Removing the top 5% more than
halves the standard deviation and adequately removes the outliers in our data set. It is our
opinion that this can yield us more robust results and lead to better analyzes and
conclusions. The cut-off at the 95% percentile results in removing the 17 highest SPAC
returns which will be excluded in our secondary t-test.

               4. Empirical Results and Analysis

4.1 Descriptive Statistics

                    Table 3. Descriptive statistics of SPAC sample

 Descriptive Statistics
 Variable Obs Mean Std.Dev Min Max
 RSPAC 345 1.43% 1.97% 0.00% 24.05%
 Weighted Underwriter Score 345 7.481 1.7500 1.001 9.001
 Warrant Structure 345 0.368 0.207 0 1
 Elapsed Time (Days) 345 447.569 79.77 366.014 1051.403
 IPO Size ($M) 345 319.506 192.24 40.60 1380.00
 Common Price ($) 345 9.885 0.22 9.74 11.87
 Redemption value ($) 345 10.007 0.027 10.000 10.232
 Warrant Price ($) 327 0.411 0.34 0.07 3.44
 Right Price ($) 10 0.213 0.08 0.12 0.36
Table 3 presents the descriptive statistics of our SPAC sample. It includes the number of observations,
mean values, standard deviation, minimum and maximum values for relevant variables in our study.

Table 3 summarizes the descriptive statistics and overall data that has been collected
regarding the SPACs in our study. As previously mentioned, our data set consist of 345
observations and the average SPAC IPO size is $320m. The average return of the SPACs
during their SPAC period prior to a business combination or liquidation is equal to 1.43%.
Due to the money-back guarantee and default-free nature of investing in a SPAC during
this period the minimal return observed is 0%. This is further reflected in the minimal
redemption value amounting to 10.00 US Dollars with the average redemption value
being equal to 10.007 US Dollars. The average elapsed time since IPO is 448 days with
the minimal amount being 366 days, this is due to us only wanting to examine SPACs
that have been public for at least one year. Further, there were 327 observations that
contained warrants and 10 observations that contained rights.

        In addition, the average common share is trading at a price level of 9.88 US
Dollars, a price that is lower than the IPO price of 10.00 US Dollars. This – as mentioned
earlier – implies that an investor can choose to buy one share of common stock and then
at a later date redeem it for a certain positive return. However, buying just the common
share does not entitle the investor to any derivative securities since the unit, at that point,
has been split up and the securities are now trading under separate tickets. Further, we

                                  16
observe that on the scale between 1.001 and 9.001 the average SPAC has a weighted
underwriter score of 7.481.

4.2 Regression analysis

To assess our hypothesis regarding explanatory variables for SPAC period returns, we
present our empirical findings in table 4 below.

                      Table 4. Model summary and goodness-of-fit

                                                 Std. Error of
                      R R Square     the estimate df F p-value
 Model summary 0.307 0.094 1.886
 Regression 5 7.048 < 0.001***
Table 4 presents the overall results of our model. The R square of 0.094 indicate that our current explanatory
variable explains 9.4% of the total variance in the dependent variable. * Indicates p-values below 10%, **
indicates p-values below 5% and *** indicates p-values below 1%.

                                                              2
Table 4 illustrates a summary of our regression model. R  amounts to 0.094 and our p-
                                      2
value is lower than 0.001. An R  value of 0.094 implies that our model explains
approximately 9% of the total variance of SPAC period returns. The significance value
also indicates that the variables we have chosen for trying to explain differences
contribute to the regression in a certain way. Next, we look at the individual variables in
the regression and their contribution to the overall regression model.

            Table 5. Individual explanatory variables and their significance

                                                         Coefficients
 Explanatory variable Unstandardized B     Std. Error t p-value
 Weighted underwriter score -0.118 0.077 -1.521 0.129
 Size of IPO 0.001 0.001 1.854 0.065*
 Dummy: Market place -0.186 0.225 -0.828 0.408
 Dummy: Right included 1.406 0.673 2.091 0.037**
 Warrant structure 1.584 0.641 2.473 0.014**
Table 5 presents our explanatory variables and their unstandardized b-values i.e., how they affect the
dependent variable. Further the table show each variables significance level. * Indicates p-values below
10%, ** indicates p-values below 5% and *** indicates p-values below 1%.

Table 5 illustrates the effect of our independent variables on our measurement for SPAC
performance, i.e., RSPAC which is our dependent variable.

       The first predictor is our weighted underwriter score of the underlying
bookrunners which results in a p-value of 0.129. However, most interestingly, it finds that
this correlation is in fact negative, the opposite of what one at first would expect. This
means that SPACs assigned with a higher quality underwriter does not increase SPAC
period returns, rather a higher quality underwriter results in lower returns. But since our
p-value is rather large we cannot draw any statistically significant conclusions regarding
underwriter score’s impact on SPAC period returns.

                                  17
       Further, one must also note the question about causality in this case. Gahng et al.
(2021) notice that there is correlation between low quality SPACs and how many
derivative securities that they tend to include in their SPAC units. This is also something
that we notice in our data set, where SPACs with lower underwriter score generally
include both a higher fraction of warrants as well as being the only SPAC units that have
rights included, see Table 6.

  Table 6. Average share of warrants in a SPAC Unit and the number of SPACs with
                   rights included segmented after underwriter score

 Underwriter Score ≥ 6.001 < 6.001
 Avg. Warrant in unit 0.312 0.558
 Number of SPACs with rights included 0 10
Table 6 shows the average fraction of warrants in units segmented after underwriter score. SPACs with
underwriters who scored ≥ 6.001 included on average 0.312 warrants per unit. SPACs with underwriters
who scored < 6.001 included on average 0.558 warrants per unit. The table also illustrates that only SPACs
with an underwriter score in the lower bracket contain rights.

The regression model shows that the dummy variable that determines if the SPAC
contains a right and the fraction of a warrant that a SPAC includes is positively correlated
with the return. This result is of no surprise since the IPO price in our data set is constant
at 10.00 US Dollars and both warrants and right bear an intrinsic value. Hence, the more
securities that is included in the SPAC unit, the more value you get for the $10.00 that
you spend at the time of IPO. This could thus be an explanation for why underwriter score
is negatively correlated with SPAC period returns. One could also speculate that to attract
investors if you are a rather unknown sponsor who uses low-reputation underwriters, you
need to offer higher fractions of warrants and other securities. This is also contingent with
the conclusion made by Gahng et al. (2021), saying that sponsors have started to realize
the underpricing of SPACs by offering lower fractions of derivative securities, thus
leading to lower overall returns for investors.

       Further, Gahng et al. (2021) finds a strong correlation between SPAC period
returns post business combination and underwriter ranking, as well as De-SPAC period
returns and underwriter ranking. This might imply that a higher underwriter ranking has
an impact on how successful the eventual business combination of the SPAC will be, but
that it has no positive impact on the return prior to announcing a business combination.
         ‘
       Additionally, we also notice that the initial size of the IPO does not have any
significant effect on SPAC period returns. A larger IPO size implies that a larger amount
of cash will be placed in the trust account. A larger amount of invested capital usually
facilitates the opportunity to receive higher interest rates and other beneficial conditions,
and one could believe that this would result in an overall higher return. However, since
the redemption value only accounts for a minimal share of the total return where its value
instead rather derives from it enabling a money-back guarantee for its investors, this is
not a surprising result. Another notable feature is that if the SPAC is traded on the Nasdaq
or the New York Stock Exchange has minimal explanatory value for how large the SPAC
period returns are.

                                  18
4.3 T-test for mean differences in return between SPACs and 2-year US Treasury
Notes

Table 7 illustrates the average SPAC period return compared to the average 2-year US
Treasury Note yield. According to the observations for the time-period we can see that
there is a clear difference in the mean annualized return between the two groups in both
tests. This is an interesting finding considering the default-free characteristic of SPAC
period returns mentioned above. However, one need to keep in mind that not all of the
return is possible to realize at time t, more specifically it is not possible to realize if one
would need to redeem their shares, hence in multiple cases the majority of the return is
still locked and will continue to be until a business combination or liquidation is proposed.

       In the table below we have divided our data into two groups. The first section
consists of the full sample. We can see that there is a clear difference between the mean
of both groups, the SPAC mean return during the SPAC period is 1.43% while the
corresponding number for the 2-year US Treasury Note is 0.16%. In our adjusted sample
we choose to exclude the top 5% SPACs with the highest returns. As mentioned above
we saw in our data that a few SPACs had abnormally large returns during the SPAC
period (see for example figure 6 above for distribution of SPAC period returns),
considering the default-free nature. Therefore, we choose to exclude the top 5% and retest
our hypothesis. Here, we find that the mean return is still substantially higher for the
SPACs compared to the matching 2-year US Treasury Note yield, 1.12% and 0.14%
respectively on an annual basis.

            Table 7. SPAC period return versus 2-year US Treasury Notes

                               Full sample Adjusted sample

                         Mean Std. Deviation Mean Std. Deviation
 SPAC return 1.428% 1.967% 1.118% 0.729%
 Treasury Notes 0.156% 0.178% 0.142% 0.083%
Table 7 presents the mean and standard deviation of the annualized SPAC period returns and of the 2-year
US Treasury Notes. We have divided it up to illustrate the difference between the full sample and adjusted
sample. In the adjusted sample we removed the top 5% of the highest returning SPACs and their assigned
2-year US Treasury Note yields.

Table 8 presents the result of the test of differences in mean values. Here we can conclude
that there is a statistically significant difference in the mean value between SPAC period
returns and the 2-year US Treasury Note yields.

                                  19
                Table 8. Summary of independent samples t-test results

                                                          Mean      Std. Error
                         t One-sided p Two-sided p    Difference    Difference
 Full sample 11.96 < 0.001*** < 0.001*** 1.272% 0.106%
 Adjusted sample 24.09 < 0.001*** < 0.001*** 0.976% 0.041%
Table 8 presents the results of our t-test. Both the full sample and the adjusted sample gave a statistically
significant difference in mean between SPAC period returns and the 2-year treasury note at 99.9% statistical
confidence. * Indicates p-values below 10%, ** indicates p-values below 5% and *** indicates p-values
below 1%.

4.4 Mann-Whitney U test for mean differences in return between SPACs and 2-
year US Treasury Notes

As mentioned above, we supplement our regular t-test with a non-parametric test to make
our results more rigorous and statistically reliable. As a result, performing the Mann-
Whitney U test with the unedited data gives us the following statistics:

                  Table 9. Summary of Mann-Whitney U test results

                    N Mean Rank Sum of Ranks Z-value p-value
 SPAC Return 345 497.94 171,791
 2-year Yield 345 193.06 66,604
                                                                  -20.14 < 0.001***
Table 9 presents the Mann-Whitney U-test. The Z-value is -20.14, which according to appendix in
Newbold, Carlson and Thorne (2019) generates a p-value lower than 0.001. * Indicates p-values below
10%, ** indicates p-values below 5% and *** indicates p-values below 1%.

The mean rank for the 2-year US Treasury Note yield amounts to 193.06 while the
corresponding statistic for the SPAC returns amounts to 497.94. Further, the total rank
sum for the 2-year US Treasury Note yield amounts to 66,604 while the total rank sum
for the SPAC returns amounts to 171,791. Moreover, the test results in a p-value of less
than 1%. We can thus – according to the Mann-Whitney U test – conclude that the pool
of SPAC period returns is higher than their corresponding 2-year US Treasury Note yield
with statistical significance.

4.5 Analysis of differences in return between SPACs and 2-year US Treasury Notes

All three tests performed; the two t-tests with the full sample and the adjusted sample as
well as the non-parametric test conclude with p-values lower than 1% that the mean of
SPAC period returns is higher than the corresponding 2-year US Treasury Note Yields.

       We argue above that the fact that not a single SPAC showed a negative return
during the SPAC period illustrates its default-free characteristic. Considering that we
prove that SPAC period returns on average outperform comparable 2-year US Treasury
Notes, there might be an opportunity related to risk-adjusted returns, which might be of
great interest to industry practitioners. As we mentioned earlier in section 1.1, there are
hedge funds who have already implemented similar strategies given the attractive risk-
adjusted returns, the so called the “SPAC-mafia”.

                                  20
        Our tests statistically prove that the SPACs in our study - i.e., all currently listed
SPACs on the NYSE and the NASDAQ that have been traded for longer than one year –
has on average outperformed the corresponding 2-year US Treasury Yield. Although this
is not an exhaustive explanation for why the SPAC popularity rose so sharply in 2020 and
2021, we are confident in concluding that the default-free nature of investing in SPAC
during the SPAC period and its associated performance is a key contribution factor to
why the number of SPACs has increased rapidly in recent years.

       As noted earlier, derivative securities constitute the majority of SPAC period
return. Hence, this discrepancy between different default-free investments is started to
get noticed by sponsors. As a result, they have started to comprehend the “free-lunch”-
concept when including derivative securities in their SPACs and have responded with
including fewer amounts in their units, meaning that the market is starting to become
more efficient. Table 10 illustrates the development of the average warrant fractions in a
unit from 2019-2021.

                Table 10. Average warrant fraction in unit per year

 Year 2019 2020 2021
 Avg. Warrant in unit 0.67 0.45 0.33
Table 10 shows the average fraction of warrants included in our collected SPAC data per year. n2019 = 3,
n2020 = 98, n2021 = 244

This in conjunction with increasing yields in 2-year US Treasury Notes in the beginning
of 2022 should - according to our hypothesis – imply that SPAC popularity will decrease,
both due to lower expected returns because of fewer derivative securities being included
in the SPAC units as well as a higher opportunity cost caused by increased US Treasury
yields. By April, 58 SPAC IPOs had taken place in the US so far under 2022. This implies
a total run rate of 174 for 2022, a number significantly lower than the 613 SPACs that
went public in 2021.

       It is important to notice that this is only an estimation, and it will be affected by
multiple other economic and non-economic factors such as macro events, development
of the overall world situation and similar, and only time will tell if the trend of decreasing
number of SPACs will continue.

4.6 Robustness testing

To evaluate the validity of our regression model we perform different robustness tests.
These tests are mostly related to the assumptions of the OLS regression model as well as
assumptions related to the t-test. As a result, we test for multicollinearity, autocorrelation,
omitted variable bias and heteroskedasticity to make sure our regression model follows
the assumptions and yields appropriate conclusions.

                                  21
4.6.1 Multicollinearity

To estimate the strength of our model we turn to multicollinearity, which is important
since our research centers around how the independent variables affect the dependent
variable i.e., the return of SPACs. Therefore, if there is multicollinearity between our
independent variables their coefficients can’t be interpreted meaningfully. To test this,
we create a new regression equation for each independent variable and then test the
tolerance and the variance inflation factor (VIF). For equations and formulas see Exhibit
B in appendix.

       The result of the tests is presented in table 11 below. There we can see that for all
independent variables the VIF values are below 10, which according to Hair, Anderson,
Tatham and Black (1995) is the maximum acceptable level. Higher levels than that
indicates that multicollinearity and correlation between independent variables is a present
issue. Other books and research papers find that this level might be lower, and the cutoff
point can be 5 (Menard, 2001) or below. Since all our independent variables have VIF
values < 5 there is no issue with the variance inflation factor. Tolerance levels exhibit the
characteristics that higher T values indicate lower degrees of multicollinearity. The cut-
off point for tolerance is 0.4 (Allison, 1999), others argue that this number might be lower.
Our findings conclude that the tolerance levels are all above 0.4, indicating absence of
multicollinearity in the model.

                         Table 11. Test results for multicollinearity

 Explanatory variables Tolerance (T) Variance inflation factor (VIF)
 Weighted underwriter score 0.564* 1.774**
 Dummy: Market place 0.889* 1.125**
 Dummy: Right included 0.739* 1.354**
 Size of IPO 0.763* 1.310**
 Warrant structure 0.586* 1.706**
Table 11 shows all our independent variables tested for tolerance and variance Inflation factor. * Indicates
T > 0.4 and ** indicates VIF < 10.

4.6.2 Autocorrelation

Ordinary least squares (OLS) regression assumes that there is independence between the
random errors in our model. Therefore, we need to test if there is correlation between the
error terms from one observation to another adjoining observation. Since we use time-
series data, the error term in the data series represents the effect of all factors in the model,
excluding the independent variables effect on the dependent variable. As a result, the
characteristics of these factors might be similar over several time periods and correlation
between the error terms might be present between observations closer together in time.

                                  22
        For our study, it is therefore important to test for autocorrelated errors in our time-
series data. To test for this, we use the Durbin-Watson test:

                                                       𝑛                 2
                                          ∑𝑡 =2(𝑒𝑡 − 𝑒𝑡−1)
                                   𝑑 =       𝑛    2
                                                  ∑𝑡 =1 𝑒𝑡

Which approximately can be written as:

                                     𝑑 = 2(1 − 𝑟) (3)

        Our result for this test is that d approaches a value of 1.904. It is important to
mention that if d is approximately 2 and r is approximately 0 (derived from equation 3)
we can conclude that the errors are not autocorrelated (Newbold, 2019). This conclusion
is illustrated in Figure 7 below.

                      Figure 7. Illustration over autocorrelation decisions

Figure 7 presents the results of the Durbin-Watson test. Since our value is close to 2 there is no evidence
of autocorrelation. According to Newbold (2019) cutoff points for the Durbin-Watson test statistic is dL =
1.57 and dU = 1.78 with 𝛼 = 0.01, n = 100 and k = 5. N=100 was used since that was the maximum value
of the table.

4.6.3 Omitted variable bias

In our regression we have focused on five explanatory variables. Since our regression
model only explains around 9.5% of total variance according to table 3 above, it is
important to examine whether our model exhibits any omitted variable bias i.e., leaving
out relevant variables in the model which leads to bias in the form of greater explanatory
strength of the variables that were included. Since there is no general test in examining
omitted variable bias, we will have a discussion regarding this possibility. At first, our
model included four explanatory variables:

            𝑅𝑆𝑃𝐴𝐶 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡_𝑃𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2 × 𝑅𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡_𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑑𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡
                            + 𝛽3 × 𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟_𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽4 × 𝐼𝑃𝑂_𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖

                                  23
       When we ran this regression, underwriter score had a p-value of < 0.005. This
indicated to us then that the variable had statistically significant explanatory value for
SPAC period returns. When we included a fifth explanatory variable, warrant structure,
in our regression model our results became different. According to table 5 above,
underwriter score then only became significant at the 12% level. As a result, it is no longer
statistically certain that underwriter score has any significant explanatory value for SPAC
period returns. We can also note that our previous model exhibited omitted variable bias
i.e., that underwriter score looked to explain more than it did when we included one
omitted variable that had great explanatory strength.

4.6.4 Heteroscedasticity

To check whether our model is coherent with the assumption of homoscedasticity we
perform the Breusch-Pagan Test. We do this to further evaluate the robustness of our
regression model and be more confident regarding possible heteroscedasticity. Since our
regression model is based on the least square's method, if our sample does not exhibit the
same variance in the error terms, this method might not be the best option for our
regression. Therefore, performing the tests below is essential in validating our model.

       As mentioned above the Breusch-Pagan test examines the assumption of
homoscedasticity with the aim of evaluating whether heteroscedasticity is present in our
regression model. The test about heteroscedasticity could also tell us about whether our
model is built good enough or if we should continue to examine the relationship between
the dependent and independent variables. Therefore, the test is also important for the
overall model and its validity.

        Running the test results in the following outputs:

                       Table 12. Summary of Breusch-Pagan test results

    Sum of squares Breusch-Pagan value df p-value
        3.085 1.5425 1 > 0.1
Table 12 illustrates the outputs for the Breusch-Pagan test for homoscedasticity. The Breusch-Pagan
value is received by dividing the sum of squares by 2. The BP-value of 1.5425 is then compared against
table 7a in Newbold (2019) since it follows a chi-square distribution with 𝜐 (degrees of freedom) of 1. In
table 7a 𝛼 = 0.1 and 𝜐 = 1 gives a chi-square value of 2.706. Our BP-value of 1.54 is closer to 𝛼 = 0.25
and 𝜐 = 1 which have a cutoff at 1.32.

       The sum of squares in the regression model is 3.085. To interpret this number
meaningfully we convert it to the Breusch-Pagan value according to the method above.
The Breusch-Pagan value is then interpreted further by studying the chi-square
distribution for cutoff points with one degree of freedom. According to the table above
our value of 1.54 is significant for heteroscedasticity at a p-value higher than 0.1.
Therefore, we can conclude that it is likely that our model does not suffer from
heteroscedasticity, but rather follow the assumptions of the OLS regression model of
homoscedasticity.

                                  24
                            5. Conclusion

5.1 Conclusion

The purpose of this study has been to analyze the unique nature of SPACs and why the
popularity of SPACs has risen in recent years. More specifically we have examined the
default-free returns of SPACs during the SPAC period and which factors that influence
it. Our sample consisted of 345 SPACs listed on either NYSE or NASDAQ that went
public between 2019-05-14 and 2021-03-30. We also made use of an existing underwriter
ranking that was applied to the bookrunners of the collected SPACs.

       We then proceeded to calculate the annualized returns of the SPACs using our
tailored model inspired by the model used by Gahng et al. (2021). We developed a
regression model that aims to determine what factors that explain the return of SPACs,
looking at marketplace, right and warrant structure, underwriter score and IPO Size.
Further, we also compared the SPACs annualized return with 2-year US Treasury Note
yields to see if there is any discrepancy present between the two. To avoid drawing
misleading conclusions we performed multiple tests. Two parametric tests, one using all
samples and one where the top 5% highest returning SPACs were removed. Moreover,
we used a non-parametric Mann-Whitney U test to further strengthen the analysis. We
also tested our regression model for robustness to make our results more reliable.

       We found that the two parametric tests as well as the non-parametric test conclude
with statistical significance that default-free SPAC period returns on average outperform
2-year US Treasury Note Yields under the studied period. We argue that this evidence
with support by observed investor behavior by for example the so-called SPAC mafia
indicates that attractive default-free returns partially explain the rise in SPAC popularity
in recent years. We then drew implication about how trends in changed SPAC structure
with on average lower amounts of derivative securities in conjunction with higher US
Treasury Note yields will affect SPAC popularity, speculating that these two factors will
lead to a decrease in the number of SPACs in the nearest future. Data available by April
2022 underpin this hypothesis, although only time will tell if this continues.

       Our constructed regression model then yielded limited insights in which factors
that influence and explain default-free SPAC period return. We observe that underwriter
score has a negative correlation with SPAC, although with no statistical significance, as
well as noting that this may be due to a lower underwriter score being correlated with the
inclusion of more derivative securities. A higher inclusion of derivative securities is found
to be positively correlated with SPAC period returns with statistical significance, this
conclusion is coherent with Gahng et al. (2021) naming the derivative securities included
in SPAC units as “free-lunch”. Further, our model concludes with statistical significance
that the size of IPO is found to be almost completely uncorrelated with SPAC period
returns, however no significant conclusions could be drawn regarding how marketplace
affect returns.

                                  25
5.2 Further research

As mentioned earlier the SPAC universe is still unexplored with a sparse portfolio of
quality academic research, thus it is obvious that there is ample room for further research
to supplement the area. We below aim to touch upon some possible extensions.

        First off, our thesis takes its stance in exploring the SPAC period returns prior to
the announcement of a business combination as we argue for in section 3.4.1. After the
majority of the SPACs during this examined perioded have either performed a business
combination or been liquidated it would be interesting to both look at the SPAC period
return after the business combination has been announced, and the corresponding De-
SPAC period returns. This would also include looking at the proposed parameters to
attempt explaining the returns, such as quality of underwriter and size of IPO. We believe
this would yield interesting insights and further supplement the research field, and we
encourage practitioners to proceed with these questions when they become possible to
pursue.

       Furthermore, one parameter that is left out of our analysis is the sponsor behind
the SPAC. Thus, the effect that the sponsor has on SPAC performance is unknown in our
study. The reason we left this out in our analysis is that we did not find an adequate way
of swiftly analyzing them. However, we are certain that there are ways of doing this
through for example looking at the history of sponsors, if they have sponsored SPACs
before, if they consist of private investors or corporations, if they have any connections
to celebrities, etc. to either rank them or give them different labels. We thus willingly
invite more skilled and time affluent researchers to include sponsors in their analyzes to
further strengthen the research field and produce additional interesting insights. Another
possible parameter to look at is for example sector belonging if the SPAC has a distinct
investment niche.

        Earlier in this thesis we noted the fact that, although investing in a SPAC during
its SPAC periods with its money-back guarantee is to be considered default-free, it is not
completely risk-free. You are still exposed to for example illiquidity risk and fire-sale
risk. In our return model with associated tests to compare with the 2-year US Treasury
Note yield we do not take this risk into account and hence it is excluded from our analysis.
We thus believe that there is a need for a more developed and sophisticated model, which
in some way incorporates the risk-premium associated with investing in SPACs during
the SPAC period.

       To conclude, our regression model only explains a limited part of the SPAC period
return and the reminding explanatory value is puzzling. We thus welcome all additional
research that tries to explain SPAC return both during the SPAC period and the De-SPAC
period through extended analyzes, perhaps using our proposition as a starting point.

                                  26
                            References

Allison, Paul, 1999, Multiple Regression: A Primer (Pine Forge Press, California)

Foley, John, 2021, Goldman gets associate membership of SPAC mafia, Reuters,
https://www.reuters.com/breakingviews/goldman-gets-associate-membership-spac-
mafia-2021-11-01/

Gahng, Minmo, and Ritter, Jay R., and Zhang, Donghang, 2021, SPACs, working pa-
per, University of Florida.

Hair, Joseph, and Anderson, Rolph, and Babin, Barry, and Black, William, 2018,
Multivariate Data Analysis (Cangage Learning EMEA, Andover)

Menard, Scott, 2001, Applied Logistic Regression Analysis (SAGE Publications,
California)

Mergermarket, 2022, Global & Regional League Tables 2021,
http://www.mergermarket.com/pdf/MergermarketFinancialLeagueTableReport.Q42021.
pdf

Newbold, Paul, and Carlson, William, and Thorne, Betty, 2019, Statistics for Business
and Economics, Global edition (Pearson Education, Harlow).

Statista Research Department, 2022, Number of IPOs in the United States from 1999 to
2021, https://www.statista.com/statistics/270290/number-of-ipos-in-the-us-since-1999/

Statista Research Department, 2022, Number of special purpose acquisition company
(SPAC) IPOs in the United States from 2003 to April 2022,
https://www.statista.com/statistics/1178249/spac-ipo-usa/

Statista Research Department, 2022, Proceeds of special purpose acquisition company
(SPAC) IPOs in the United States from 2003 to April 2022,
https://www.statista.com/statistics/1178273/size-spac-ipo-usa/

                                  27
                         Appendix

Exhibit A. List of all underwriters appearing in our study, their assigned score, and the
                      number of IPOs they act as book runner in

             Underwriter Score Number of IPOs
              Citigroup 9.001 77
              Credit Suisse 8.501 53
              Goldman Sachs 9.001 35
              Cantor Fitzgerald & Co 6.001 32
              Morgan Stanley 9.001 30
              Bank of America 8.501 30
              Jefferies 8.001 30
              Deutsche Bank 8.501 28
              Barclays 8.001 26
              J.P. Morgan 9.001 25
              UBS Investment Bank 8.501 24
              Early Bird Capital 5.001 20
             BTIG 6.501 14
              RBC Capital Markets 8.001 10
              Stifel Nicolaus 7.001 9
             Cowen 7.001 9
              Cantor Fitzgerald 6.001 9
              Wells Fargo Securities 8.001 8
              Chardan 4.001 7
               I-Bankers Securities 2.001 6
             Maxim 3.001 6
              Mizuho Securities 7.501 6
             BMO Capital Markets 7.001 5
              B. Riley FBR 5.001 5
              Evercore ISI 7.001 5
              Raymond James 7.501 4
              Oppenheimer & Co. 7.501 4
              Moelis & Company 6.001 4
              Ladenburg Thalmann 6.001 3
              EF Hutton 1.001 3
              Piper Sandler 7.501 3
             Nomura 1.001 2
              Imperial Capital 4.001 2
              Guggenheim Securities 7.001 2
              Allen & Company LLC 8.001 2
              CODE Advisors 1.001 2
              PJT Partners 1.001 2
              William Blair 7.001 2

                                  28
              ThinkEquity 1.001 1
              H.C. Wainwright & Co. 1.001 1
               Intrepid Partners 1.001 1
               JMP Securities 1.001 1
              Kempen & Co 1.001 1
               Siebert Williams Shank 1.001 1
              SMBC Nikko 1.001 1
              Canaccord Genuity 6.001 1
               TD Securities 7.001 1
Total 47 553

Exhibit B: Multicollinearity Equations

                                                                𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡_𝑃𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑖𝑡
               = 𝛽0 + 𝛽2 × 𝑅𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡_𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑑𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽3 × 𝑊𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑡_𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑡
                + 𝛽4 × 𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟_𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽5 × 𝐼𝑃𝑂_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖

                                                       𝑅𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡_𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑑𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡
               = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡_𝑃𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽3 × 𝑊𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑡_𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑡
                + 𝛽4 × 𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟_𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽5 × 𝐼𝑃𝑂_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖

        𝑊𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑡_𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡_𝑃𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2 × 𝑅𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡_𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑑𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡 +
                         𝛽4 × 𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟_𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽5 × 𝐼𝑃𝑂_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖𝑡+ 𝜀𝑖

                                                            𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟_𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑡
               = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡_𝑃𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2 × 𝑅𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡_𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑑𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡
                + 𝛽3 × 𝑊𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑡_𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽5 × 𝐼𝑃𝑂_𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖

               𝐼𝑃𝑂_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡_𝑃𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2 × 𝑅𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡_𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑑𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡
                + 𝛽3 × 𝑊𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑡_𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽4 × 𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟_𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖

                                                    2
                                   𝛵 = 1 − 𝑅

                                      1
                                    𝑉𝐼𝐹 =    2
                                       1 − 𝑅

                                  29