Stockholm School of Economics
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Department of Accounting
Bachelor  Thesis
Spring 2022

 Are women really more risk averse?

      A study on gender differences in corporate financial policy decisions

                  Anton Dahl (24612)       Lina Dahlin (24614)

Abstract:

   Despite the recent progression of gender diversity in managerial positions, men still
   outnumber women at the top. The stereotype of women as being less prone to risk is
   sometimes referred to as an explanation of why women do not break the glass ceiling. Our
   study contributes to the existing literature on gender differences in risk propensity. It does
   so by exploring if women’s alleged risk aversion is present among female CEOs in one of
   the world’s most gender-equal countries, Sweden. We conduct an OLS regression examining
   the potential effect of gender differences on financial ratios of 752 unique companies
   between 2015 and 2019. We find no support for women being more risk averse in corporate
   financial policy decisions than men. Hence, we suggest that the  general preconception of the
   female stereotype could be questioned.

Keywords: Gender differences, CEO gender, Risk-taking, Leverage, Cash ratio

Tutor: Irina Gazizova, Assistant Professor, Department of Accounting
Table of Contents

1. Introduction                                                                3
   1.1 Purpose                                                                4
   1.2 Our study                                                               4
   1.3 Contribution                                                             5

2. Literature and Hypothesis development                                        6
   2.1 Risk behavior                                                            6
       2.1.1 Female versus male risk behavior                                       6
       2.1.2 Risk behavior in corporate settings                                       8
   2.2 The role of the CEO                                                      10
   2.3 Hypothesis                                                             11

3. Methodology                                                             14
   3.1 Data collection                                                           14
   3.2 Sample selection                                                         15
   3.3 Regression model                                                         15
       3.3.1 Risk proxies                                                        16
          3.3.1.2 Leverage                                                      17
          3.3.1.1 Cash ratio                                                      17
       3.3.2 Independent variable                                                 19
       3.3.3 Control variables                                                    19
   3.4 Endogeneity                                                           20
   3.5 Potential other problems                                                   21

4. Results                                                                     22
   4.1 Main regression                                                         22
   4.2 Robustness checks                                                       26
   4.3 Additional tests                                                           27
       4.3.1 Board diversity                                                      27
       4.3.2 Performance-based compensation                                       28

5. Discussion                                                                 30
   5.2 Endogeneity                                                           32
   5.3 Research method                                                        33

6. Conclusion                                                                36
   6.1 Future research                                                            37

References                                                                 39

Appendix                                                               42

                                                                           2
1. Introduction

Over the last decades, the percentage of women in senior executive positions in large publicly
listed companies in the European Union has increased and almost doubled between the years
2012 to 2019 (Eurostat, 2022). However, women are still outnumbered by  men at the top, as
females only made up 18% of all executive positions in 2019. Sweden is often referred to as
one of the most gender-equal countries globally and is frequently listed at the top of gender
equality rankings (World Economic Forum, 2021; UN Development Programme, 2020).
However, even in such a forward-leaning country, the gap between men and women remains
pervasive, especially at the very top. In 2019, the percentage of female managers in Sweden
was 43.1% (Eurostat, 2022), while the share of female board members and senior executives
amounted to 37.5 and 23.7%, respectively (Eurostat, 2022). Both of the latter have increased
compared to when the data started to be observed. As the percentage of women in senior
management positions grows, a stream of literature regarding gender differences in corporate
decision-making emerges. This study will continue upon the existing findings but with the
relationship between CEO gender and corporate financial policy decisions, specifically their
riskiness, as  its focal point.

Risk aversion is researched in a large set of literature. For example, by examining the choice of
asset allocation in saving plans, Sundén and Surette (1998) find that women, on average, invest
more heavily in low-risk options than high-risk ones. Jianakoplos and Bernasek (1998)
strengthen the results of Sundén and Surette when they find a larger share of women to prefer
no risk at all compared to the share of men, when allocating household assets. Additionally,
they find that women’s risk aversion does not drop to the same extent as for men when wealth
increases. Thus, when looking at household financial decisions, women are more risk averse.
Both Schubert et al. (1999) and Johnson and Powell (1994) question whether any conclusion
regarding gender differences can be drawn if one does not account for the setting. Schubert et
al. only find differences to be present when the situation is abstract, not contextual. Johnson
and Powell discover a significant gender difference in risk aversion in  a non-managerial
population. However, the authors find no such distinction to be present in a managerial
population, and thus, conclude that stereotypes based on faulty premises may limit women from
reaching managerial positions.

                                                                           3
Faccio et al. (2016) study the relationship between CEO gender and corporate risk-taking in
European companies. The paper finds female CEOs to be associated with less risk as their
companies exhibit lower leverage, less volatile earnings, and a higher chance of survival. Even
when  controlling for potential endogeneity concerns, including self-selection and familiarity
bias, their initial findings of women being more risk averse are still robust. However, Adams
and Funk (2012) discover opposite results when examining risk attitudes  among directors on
boards of Swedish companies. Women in senior management positions are, according to their
findings, even more prone to risk than their male counterparts. On the contrary, they find this
relationship to be reversed when comparing gender differences in the general population.

1.1 Purpose

The purpose of this study is to examine whether the CEO gender impacts the riskiness in
corporate financial policy decision-making in Swedish companies. This is of interest as women
are increasingly taking  place at the top of the business industry in Sweden as well as in Europe
as a whole. Thereto, Sweden is at the forefront of gender equality, and as described in the
previous section, there are conflicting views on gender risk aversion between European and
Swedish senior managers, making this a highly interesting topic to develop. We aim to extend
the existing literature regarding gender differences in risk propensity and how it affects
corporate risk-taking. Consequently, we wish to deepen the modern debate on gender inequality
by addressing the following question:  “Are Swedish female CEOs really more risk averse in
corporate financial policy decisions?”

1.2 Our study

By conducting an OLS regression on firm-year observation of publicly listed Swedish
companies, we study the relationship between CEO gender and company risk. Our study only
includes publicly listed companies partly as they must apply the same standard to their
reporting. Additionally, the CEOs of publicly listed companies face similar pressure as their
decisions are openly reviewed by a large share of outside stakeholders. For smaller privately
owned companies, the magnitude of CEOs’ decisions is smaller as they generally have fewer
stakeholders. Hence, the conditions in which CEOs of publicly listed companies operate in
differ from the ones that CEOs of privately owned companies face. As we have seen an increase
in female representation in senior management positions during recent years, we limit our study
to only include observations of the year  2015 to 2019. This mitigates the risk of incorporating
obsolete premises in our results.

                                                                           4
In previous research by Faccio et al. (2016), they measure company risk with three different
proxies; leverage, volatility on return on assets, and the likelihood of survival. As we limit our
study to review whether there is a gender difference in corporate financial policy decisions, we
exclude proxies that are to a larger extent influenced by market conditions and not directly
related to the financial decisions of  the executive team. Therefore, we determine the risk level
by examining financial balance sheet ratios, specifically leverage and cash ratio, as suggested
by Robinson et al.  (2020).  By including leverage, we are able to compare our results with the
findings by Faccio et al. We expect a negative relationship between female CEOs and leverage,
while our prediction for their relationship with cash ratio is the opposite.

1.3 Contribution

We contribute to the current literature in two ways. Firstly, we expand the findings by Faccio
et al. (2016) regarding gender differences in corporate settings as we apply a more time-relevant
period. Additionally, as we focus solely on a more gender-equal geographical area, we gain
knowledge of whether the contextual society impacts executives' decision-making process or
not. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to conduct a study on CEO and corporate
risk-taking in Swedish public companies. Hence, the study will broaden and deepen the existing
understanding on  gender differences in corporate risk-taking.

Secondly, we also develop the findings by Adams and Funk (2012) on the differences in risk
attitudes between women and men amongst the general population as well as in senior
management positions in Sweden. While their study finds an opposing result to what is
otherwise concluded in a large set of literature, their conclusion stems from self-assessment
studies and is not based on actual behavior. As our study instead applies a research method
including risk proxies unaffected by the perceptions of individuals, we hope to extend Adams
and Funk’s contribution to the knowledge of gender differences in Swedish companies.

                                                                           5
2. Literature and Hypothesis development

Several previous research fields are of interest when we explore whether female CEOs are more
or less risk averse than their male counterparts. In the following section, we review previous
literature covering observations of discrepancies in male versus female risk behavior in general
contexts as well as in corporate settings. In addition to these, we review literature examining
the importance and influence of the CEO role and gender. Finally, we develop the hypothesis
to be tested in this paper.

2.1 Risk behavior

2.1.1 Female versus male risk behavior

The topic of behavioral gender differences concerning risk propensity has been studied
extensively in prior literature. A large part of the literature focuses on differences in private
investments; see Sundén  and Surrette (1998) and Jianakoplos and Bernasek (1998) below.
Others, such as Schubert et al. (1999) and Johnson and Powell (1994), argue the importance of
studying risk propensity in contextual situations and not drawing conclusions about gender
differences amongst managers based on findings from the general population.

Sundén and Surette (1998) examine the presence of gender differences in the allocation of assets
in retirement savings plans. They collect investment decisions from about 4000 households  in
1992 and 1995 and categorize them as i) mainly invested in stocks, ii) mostly in bonds, and iii)
investments split between the two. Sundén and Surette find that a combination of gender and
marital status are drivers of investment decisions. They show that single women and married
men are less likely than single men to invest primarily in stocks, a result with statistical
significance. The paper also finds married women more likely to invest primarily in bonds than
single women. They find factors such as  age and education to have no effect on asset allocation
decisions. The paper demonstrates the complexity of risk aversion, the importance of gender in
matters where risk is present, and indicates that women are more risk averse than men. In
addition to the  findings by Sundén and Surette, Jianakoplos and Bernasek (1998) examine
potential gender differences in asset allocation by studying household holdings of risky assets.
Survey results show that 60% of all women preferred no risk compared to only 40% of all men
preferring the same level of risk, the lowest risk preference of four potential answers in the
survey. Additionally, they find relative risk aversion to decrease less for single women than for
single men when wealth increases, indicating that women are more risk averse relative to men.

                                                                           6
They also find that single women hold smaller amounts of risky assets than married women and
single men. Further, they find evidence of reductions in risky assets due to an increase in the
number of children in the household for single women, which they could not observe for single
men or married women. Both articles document differences in risk propensity between men and
women. However, neither Sundén and Surette (1998) nor Jianakoplos and Bernasek (1998)
comment on why  they find these differences or what implications their findings may have,
leaving the mechanism observed but relatively unexplored. Nevertheless, Sundén and Surette
argue that these differences may lead to large differences in financial wealth when they reach
retirement age.

Schubert et al. (1999) consider it necessary to investigate if the gender stereotypes of risk
preferences often referred to are actually present in economic behavior and therefore examine
gender-specific risk propensity in decisions  relevant to labor and financial markets. They study
this by testing for gender differences in both contextual and abstract frames, with both gain-
and loss domains. For contextual frames, the authors choose an investment (gain) and insurance
(loss) domain,  and in the abstract treatment, they perform gain-  and loss-gambling. In the gain-
gambling frame, women were more risk averse compared to men and in contradiction to many
other studies, women displayed significantly more risk-seeking behavior when facing the loss-
gambling frame. These results add to the previously mentioned research by Sundén and Surette
(1998) and Jianakoplos and Bernasek (1998). Schubert et al. find the financial decisions settings
to be the dependent factor for the comparative risk propensity of men and women. Hence, they
add tension to the literature when they show that risk propensity varies in different settings,
thereby highlighting a possible risk propensity among women previously neglected.

Johnson and Powell (1994) also question the previously found gender stereotypes often
considered to cause the underrepresentation of women in managerial positions. By comparing
the non-managerial population (without formal management education) and a managerial group
(with formal management education), they find differences in risk propensity between men and
women in the non-managerial group while not in the managerial group. The participants of the
non-managerial study were completely unaware of the observation and their participation as
the data  was collected from real betting offices. The managerial study was conducted by
allowing commerce undergraduates to recommend undertaking or not undertaking a project
with a low positive NPV, i.e., a perilous project. These results suggest that the stereotypes
considered to hinder women from managerial positions are based on faulty premises if they

                                                                           7
stem from the behaviors of the whole population and not just from those interested in
managerial positions.

2.1.2 Risk behavior in corporate settings

Prior literature on gender differences in risk preferences in general settings has been extended
and researched extensively in corporate settings. Faccio et al. (2016) acknowledge the potential
problem of companies acting on the existing stereotype of women as more risk averse when
they appoint a female CEO as it might be a mean to decrease risk in their company. Hence,
these companies potentially pressure the female CEO into certain types of decisions which
could affect the implications of many studies of gender differences in corporate settings.
Nevertheless, the authors document that European companies led by female CEOs have lower
leverage, less volatile earnings, and a higher chance of survival compared to companies led by
men. To strengthen the study's implications, they study transitions from male to female CEO,
and the authors find these to reduce company risk. Even though Faccio et al. face the
endogeneity problems mentioned above, they correct their studies for self-selection and
familiarity. They find companies led by female CEOs to be associated with lower levels of risk
and that less risky decisions follow the appointment of a female CEO. These results indicate
that females CEOs are more risk averse than male CEOs

Overconfidence is highly related to risk propensity and there is a general understanding that
women are less overconfident than men. Huang and Kisgen’s (2013) article builds on this
general understanding of women being less overconfident than men and examines its the
implications in corporate settings. Huang and Kisgen find that female executives undertake
fewer acquisitions and issue debt less often compared to male executives. They also show
female executives to have approximately 2% higher announcement rates than their male
counterparts. The same association is shown regarding debt issue announcement returns. Huang
and Kisgen’s results imply that male executives are relatively more overconfident than women
in similar executive positions. Additionally, Tosun et al. (2022) find female directors to lower
the tendency of overconfident CEOs to hold sub-optimal levels of cash. They also show that
female directors improve decision-making in companies as a result of effective monitoring.
However, they find that female directors themselves are not prone to  be especially optimistic
or cautious, nor does having more female directors affect excess cash holdings unless an
overconfident CEO is present. Another article by Levi et al. (2014) explores confidence-related
actions when examining the effects of gender on acquisitions. They present evidence of an

                                                                           8
association between the number of female directors and fewer bids as well as reduced bid
premiums. They find each additional female director to be associated with 7.6% fewer bids and
every female bidder director  to reduce the bid premium by 15.4%. This result supports Huang
and Kisgen’s (2013) findings, indicating that men are more overconfident than women and,
hence, show that women are more risk averse than men.

Schopohl et al. (2021) further develop on the impact of board diversity on company risk.
According to their findings, female CFOs in UK firms significantly reduce their firm leverage
and do so more effectively if their boards are diverse and externally appointed. They also find
that overly powerful CEOs  reduce female CFOs' impact on leverage. Li and Zeng (2019) add
to the studies of CFOs by emphasizing the importance of CFO gender when assessing stock
price crash risk in a large sample of US public firms. They find female CFOs to have lower
future stock price crash risk, counteract hoarding of bad news and affect stock return
distribution. When separating CEOs from the sample and examining their impact on future
stock price crash risk separately, they find no significant results.

The gender differences in boardrooms are examined further by Adams and Funk (2012). They
acknowledge  the  often  documented  general  differences  between  men  and  women  but
investigate the presence of these differences in Swedish boardrooms. Their findings show
gender differences in the boardroom, but these differences are reversed compared to those
observed in the population. Adams and Funk find that female directors emphasize benevolence,
universalism, and stimulation while caring less for power, security, conformity, and tradition.
They even find female directors to be slightly more risk prone than their male counterparts.
Adams and Funk develop their paper by discussing potential explanations for why Swedish
female directors show these reversed values. They argue that if breaking the glass ceiling is an
aspiration, being competitive might be a necessity. Another potential explanation argued for is
that women acting too feminine will not be promoted and therefore behave as men typically do.
The article also clarifies that the reversed  findings could also be a consequence of women
adjusting their behavior in male-dominated environments. Adams and Funk also note that
generally, the only position in Swedish boards that is not externally appointed is the CEO.
Lyness and Judeisch (1999) argue that women have to overcome gender stereotypes by an
extreme job performance to be externally appointed. Adams and Funk’s results imply that the
otherwise  often  documented  corporate  gender  differences  might  not  apply  to  Swedish
boardrooms. However, they do not provide a dependable prediction of the characteristics of the

                                                                           9
CEO as they argue that this position probably faces different expectations than the other
directors. In addition, the article only studies the directors' perceptions of their own attitudes
but does not examine if these alleged risk preferences are affecting corporate decision-making.

2.2 The role of the CEO

The impact of behavioral gender differences is likely to vary depending on the influence of the
person whose behavior is studied. Previous literature provides differentiated opinions regarding
the most influential position of companies and whether individuals have the ability to influence
corporate decisions, specifically regarding the influence on risk propensities.

Bertrand and Schoar (2003) study how an individual can influence corporate decision-making
by examining 600 publicly traded US firms and over 500 individual managers that could be
observed in a minimum of two separate companies. They find that all financing, investment,
and other organizational strategy variables systematically depend on the individual in charge.
Graham et al. (2013) compare the personality traits of CEOs and CFOs with corporate finance
decisions such as debt maturity, acquisition activity, and leverage policy. The study shows that
managerial attributes and attitudes can be related to the firm's corporate actions. The areas
focused on were based on findings in 2012 by Graham et al. (2015), showing that CEOs felt
that they have the most considerable influence on mergers and acquisitions and the firm's capital
structure. One of the findings by Graham et al. (2013) is that optimistic CEOs use more short-
term debt compared to CEOs who are less optimistic. They also find male CEOs more likely to
have higher debt ratios than female CEOs, notably higher short-term ratios. In addition, they
find that firms with previous or future growth rates are more likely to be run by risk-tolerant
CEOs. The authors acknowledge that they cannot show the direction of the causality as the
results could be seen as a reflection of managers’ self-selection into companies reflecting their
personality traits. They find a significant relationship between company actions and CEO
characteristics.

Schopohl et al. (2021) examine if female CFOs  and CEOs in the UK affect corporate leverage.
They find that female CFO reduces companies' leverage significantly while finding no such
reduction when studying female CEOs exclusively. When looking at both CEOs and CFOs, the
significant decrease in leverage remains. They also show that the power of the CEO matters for
the influence of the CFO, as the reduction of leverage was more efficient when the CEO was
less powerful. Even though their findings favor the importance of the CFO gender on corporate

                                                                           10
leverage, the authors acknowledge that CFOs have an especially large impact in the UK and are
usually in charge of leverage. Hence, the study’s indication of executive role might be of less
value to the rest of the world. Chava and Purnanandam (2010) add to the  studies of individuals'
influence on corporate risk-taking and contradict the findings by Schopohl et al.  (2021).  They
compare risk-decreasing incentives for both CEOs and CFOs and find only those of the CEOs
to be associated with lower leverage and higher cash balances. Instead, they find risk-decreasing
incentives for the CFOs to be associated with higher earnings-smoothing through accounting
accruals and safer debt-maturity choices. The authors argue that these results show that the risk
preferences of the CEOs are significant determinants of broader decisions in the companies,
such as capital structure. Meanwhile, the preferences of CFOs impact more specific and detailed
financial decisions.

Individuals are shown to have the ability to impact corporate decisions (Graham et al., 2013;
Bertrand and Schoar, 2003). Still, the previous literature about whose influence is the largest
on corporate risk measures is ambiguous as results acknowledge both the CEO and the CFO as
the most influential role (Schopohl et al., 2021; Chava and Purnanandam, 2010). However,  the
reasoning about the importance of the CEO is developed by Graham and Harvey (2001). They
state that the relation between the CEO and CFO is assumed to be an agency relation, where
the CFO answers to the CEO. The same association is implied by Mian (2001), who argues that
the CFO can be replaced if the firm's financial performance is weak and that the risk of this
increases if it is a public  company as they are under more pressure. These studies imply that the
CFOs might be acting more according to their CEOs' incentives than their own.

2.3 Hypothesis

Schubert et al. (1999) clearly question the implications of the differences in risk preferences
found by both Sundén and Surette (1998) and Jianakoplos and Bernasek (1998) when they find
that the tendency of women to be relatively more risk averse than men disappears in contextual
situations. Johnson and Powell (1994) also question these findings  when they argue that such
studies create false stereotypes, hindering women from higher executive positions when they
consider  the  whole  population  and  not  only  the  managerial  population.  These  early
discrepancies in both findings and implications of whether women are more risk averse than
men or not and in which situations these differences are present, make this an interesting topic
to examine further.

                                                                           11
Since then, numerous studies on gender differences in corporate settings have been conducted.
Research  finds female CEOs to be less overconfident and hence, more risk averse than their
male counterparts by making fewer acquisitions, placing fewer bids with lower bid premiums
and issuing less debt (Levi et al., 2014; Huang and Kisgen, 2013). The presence of  female
directors in boards lowers the tendency of overconfident male CEOs to reduce cash holdings
below optimal levels (Tosun et al., 2022). The female risk aversion is shown in the UK, where
female CFOs lower the company leverage and do so even more efficiently if they are externally
appointed (Schopohl et al., 2021). Other research finds female CEOs to reduce leverage and
volatile earnings while also increasing the companies’ chance of survival (Faccio et al., 2016).
The mentioned literature indicates that female executives are more risk averse than their male
counterparts.

These behavioral differences have lately been studied in Sweden as well, focusing on behavioral
differences among female and male directors (Adams and Funk, 2012). It is of particular interest
as Sweden is ranked as one of the world’s most equal countries (UN Development Programme,
2020). In addition, the paper is directly related to our research topic as well as the geographical
area of interest for our study. Their findings are notable as they show that the behavior of
females at the top of the business industry deviates from the observed behaviors in the general
population. However, if women are to be externally appointed, they have to perform
extraordinarily well (Lyness and Judiesch, 1999), which according to the authors, is a potential
reason for their deviating findings. As the CEOs in Sweden are usually internally appointed
(Adams and Funk, 2012), and thus, do not face the same pressure as externally appointed
directors, we believe that the CEOs may deviate from the findings regarding board members by
Adams and Funk. Thus, there is interest in studying CEOs separately.

It is shown that specific individuals in charge affect financial decisions (Bertrand and Schoar,
2003) and the personality traits of the CEOs and CFOs are shown to influence corporate actions,
such as leverage (Graham et al., 2013). Whether the relevant actor to observe is the CEO or the
CFO of the company differs across the literature. In the UK, female CFOs are shown to be
associated with lower leverage (Schopohl et al., 2021). Meanwhile, no such significant
relationship can be found for female CEOs, which would argue in favor of the influence of the
CFO. However, the authors emphasize that the role of the CFO in the UK is bigger and in
charge of leverage which reduces the importance of their implications.

                                                                           12
Implementing risk-decreasing incentives for both CEOs and CFOs results in differentiated
effects for the companies (Chava and Purnanandam, 2010). The incentives of the CEO lead to
a decrease in leverage and an increase in cash holdings, while the CFO incentives only affect
more detailed financial aspects. Additionally, the CEO and CFO relationship has been studied
before and is assumed to be of an agency nature (Graham and Harvey, 2001). Additionally, the
CFO is considered to be easily replaced by the CEO (Mian, 2001). Overall, this indicates that
even if the CFO would be in charge of, or would have the most significant influence on
company  leverage and cash holdings, the CFO must still follow the preferences of the CEO to
avoid the risk of being replaced. Consequently, we will examine the following hypothesis:

H: Female CEOs in Swedish publicly listed companies are more risk averse in corporate
financial policy decisions than their male counterparts.

                                                                           13
3. Methodology

This section explains how we examine the research question and test the hypothesis. We start
by presenting how the data is collected and how the sample is selected. We then present our
study’s design and our choice of risk proxies. Lastly, we present our robustness check to
mitigate endogeneity concerns.

3.1 Data collection

We collect the majority of the data from Retriever Business, a database that Retriever maintains.
The database contains up to 20 years of information about all Swedish companies, both private
and public ones. We gather information about the current CEO, including gender, name and
appointment date, and the gender of the previous CEO. Later in this section, we extend the
discussion regarding CEO information. From  Retriever Business,  we further obtain accounting
data regarding capital structure, financial performance, and company characteristics. We collect
data for five consecutive years, starting in 2015. We classify our sample into industries by
gathering the Global Industry Classification System (GICS) code from Compustat Global. S&P
Global Market Intelligence maintains Compustat Global, which contains financial and industry
data that is used worldwide.

To identify the gender of the CEO, we primarily use the gender indicator provided by Retriever
Business. As a shortcoming,  Retriever Business  only stores information about the current CEO
and its predecessor and, hence, the gender of some observations are unidentifiable through the
data source. By filtering on the appointment date, we identify for which companies we can not
assign the gender of the CEO through the pulled dataset. To retain as large a sample as possible,
we manually identify the remaining companies by collecting names from annual reports and
press releases. We then identify the gender by using Internet-based sources for names, for
instance NordicNames.de, similar to the used approach in Faccio et al.  (2016).  In the event of
a change of the CEO, we  apply the following approach; if the change took place in the first half
of the year, we assign the gender of the new CEO. However, if the change happened in the
second half of the year, we use the gender of the resigning CEO. By applying this approach, the
chosen risk proxies reflect the gender of the individual who has possessed the role as CEO for
the majority of the observed year.

                                                                           14
3.2 Sample selection

Our sample consists of all Swedish publicly listed companies registered before 2015-01-01
which enables us to obtain a panel data set through the selected years of 2015-2019. The chosen
period is considered relevant in reflecting our contemporary society but avoids the potential
effects of the pandemic starting in 2020. The initial sample consists of 773  companies that we
reduce as we apply the two following mandatory criteria.

Firstly, data on gender has to be available as the hypothesis focuses on gender effects.
Therefore, we apply the previously described process in which we primarily gather the data
from  Retriever Business. We complement the data by analyzing annual reports and press
releases when the initial approach was insufficient. If the gender is unidentifiable for one or
several years, we drop all observations for that company. This eliminates  16 companies from
our sample, resulting in a remaining total of 757 companies. Thereafter, we review data for all
the residuary dependent and independent variables. If the data reporting for an observed
company is consistently inadequate throughout 2015-2019, we drop the observation of the
company for all years. This decreases the sample by five companies.

Our final sample consists of 752 unique firms with a total of 3,760 firm-year observations. As
not all companies report data for all years, the number of observations with complete
information for all variables amounts to 3,729 firm-year observations.

3.3 Regression model

We apply a pooled Ordinary Least Square (OLS) regression model to test how the gender of
the CEO is associated with the risk level of the individual firm. The OLS model is extensively
used in papers published in reputable journals, including papers that examine the relationship
between individuals’ characteristics and corporate outcomes (Li and Zeng 2019; Faccio et al.,
2016; Levi et al., 2014). We use a panel data set to incorporate the benefits of cross-sectional
and time-series observations. The final main regression to be used is as follows:

    𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘!,#  =  𝛽%  +  𝛽&  ∗  𝐹𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑒  𝐶𝐸𝑂!,#  +  𝛽'  ∗  𝑙𝑛(𝐸𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑜𝑦𝑒𝑒𝑠)!,#  +  𝛽(  ∗  𝑙𝑛(𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠)!,#  +
                   𝛽)  ∗  𝑙𝑛(𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑦  𝑎𝑔𝑒)!,#  +  𝛽*  ∗  𝑅𝑂𝐴!,#  +  𝜀!,#

                                                                           15
The dependent variable Risk to be tested is one of the two chosen financial ratios, Leverage and
Cash ratio,  for the individual firm  i  at time  t. These measurements are subject to managerial
choices, influenced by the particular CEO (Graham et al., 2013; Chava and Purnanandam, 2010;
Bertrand and Schoar, 2003). Our independent variable of interest is the dummy variable Female
CEOi,t that equals one if the CEO is a female and zero otherwise. When we deploy the test using
Leverage as the proxy, we expect to find a negative relationship between Leverage and Female
CEO, similar to Faccio et al. (2016). The intuition is as follows; if a woman is more risk averse,
as suggested by our hypothesis, we expect a lower level of leverage as it mitigates the risk of
financial distress. On the contrary, we expect to find a positive relationship between  Cash ratio
and Female CEO, implying that female CEOs have higher cash ratios to decrease the riskiness,
as suggested by Chava and Purnanandam (2010). Our main regression further includes firm-
level control variables to adjust for the potential effect of different firm characteristics such as
age, asset size, and total asset return. A detailed description of these is located in section 3.3.3.
To prevent potential skewness of our results driven by outliers, we winsorize all continuous
variables at the 1st and 99th percentile.

3.3.1 Risk proxies

As described, we deploy our test with two different financial ratios as measurements of risk.
Prior research differs in its use of risk measures; some explore financial ratios (Tosun et al.,
2022; Schopohl et al., 2021; Faccio et al., 2016; Chava and Purnanandam, 2010), while others
focus on market-based measures (Peltomäki et al., 2021; Li and Zeng, 2019). As we want to
examine the impact of individuals in charge, we consider it more relevant to measure financial
ratios as they reflect the direct consequences of corporate financial decisions, while market-
based measures are to a larger extent affected by market expectations and valuation.

According to financial literature  (Robinson et al., 2020), the importance of financial ratios and
their relations to risk is emphasized extensively by prior research. These find financial ratios to
be of high importance when assessing a firm's risk of financial distress. There are five categories
of financial ratios; activity, liquidity, solvency, profitability, and valuation. Liquidity ratios
indicate companies' ability to meet their short-term obligations, while solvency ratios measure
their ability to meet long-term obligations (Robinson  et al., 2020). We find it relevant to
examine liquidity ratios and solvency ratios, both derived from the balance sheet, as we wish
to measure company risk.

                                                                           16
3.3.1.2 Leverage

In the first regression, the dependent variable of risk is leverage which is a solvency measure
and hence, measures the firms’ ability to meet long-term obligations. There are several ways of
measuring leverage and we use the debt-to-equity ratio.  Consequently, we define leverage
accordingly:
                                                               𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝐷𝑒𝑏𝑡
                      𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒  =
                                             𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠  −  𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝐷𝑒𝑏𝑡

The reasons why it is relevant to examine and measure the level of debt in a company are
several, one is to capture the company risk which is dependent on the company's leverage
(Robinson et al., 2020). The risk of  equity return is also affected by financial leverage, and its
influence is likely to be more significant for struggling firms (Chan and Chen, 1991).

Leverage is considered to measure the riskiness of corporate financing choices (Faccio et al.
(2016). The  authors argue that if a company has high leverage, they are more exposed to
negative shocks to their underlying business and hence, endanger larger effects on their net
profitability and a higher risk of default. Ferreira and Vilela (2004) also mention the generally
accepted relation between leverage and the risk of bankruptcy due to the rigid amortization
plans debt usually has. According to Berk and DeMarzo (2017), the risk of equity increases
with higher leverage, regardless if there is an underlying risk of default for the firm. Traczynski
(2017) finds only two robust measures predicting default risk, one of which he finds to be
leverage. In addition, Cathcart et al. (2020) show a positive relation between leverage and
default probabilities. Ohlson (1980) also finds that leverage significantly impacts the likelihood
of bankruptcy. Additionally, leverage is commonly used in prior research to measure company
risk and as an indicator of individuals' risk propensity (Schopohl et al., 2021; Faccio et al., 2016;
Chava and Purnanandam, 2010).

3.3.1.1 Cash ratio

In the second regression, we define our dependable variable risk as cash ratio, which measures
liquidity.  We define cash ratio accordingly:

                                      𝐶𝑎𝑠ℎ  +  𝐶𝑎𝑠ℎ  𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠
                       𝐶𝑎𝑠ℎ 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜  =
                                                             𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡  𝐿𝑖𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑒𝑠

                                                                           17
Cash ratios and cash holdings are recurringly used as an indicator of company risk in research
(Tosun et al., 2022; Liu and Mauer, 2011; Chava and Purnanandam, 2010). According to Opler
et al. (1999), one of several managerial motives to have higher cash holding is for its risk averse
nature. Ferreira and Vilela (2004) acknowledge the benefits of greater cash holdings, including
the reduction of the likelihood of financial distress, the allowance of pursuance of investment
policy when financial constraints are met, and minimizing the cost of raising external funds,
alternatively liquidating assets. The trade-off theory states that the optimal level of cash is
decided by weighing these benefits to the cost of holding cash,  mainly opportunity costs
(Ferreira and Vilela, 2004). Cash holdings are considered to reduce the bankruptcy risk of
companies, according to Tosun et al. (2022). They also describe it as the result of a firm's past
activities in terms of investment and financing as well as its operation. According to Bates et
al. (2009) and Opler et al. (1999), cash holdings increase as a precautionary move when firms’
cash flows become riskier. Riddick and Whited (2009) find evidence of this tendency to
increase cash holdings when income uncertainty rises.

Both the determinants and implications of greater cash holdings have been widely examined in
prior literature. Opler et al. (1999) look into determinants of cash holdings and find that firms
with riskier activities, smaller firms, and firms with better growth opportunities hold higher
cash levels. If companies, however, have better access to capital markets, they hold lower levels
of cash. Ferreira and Vilela (2004) draw similar conclusions, also examining the determinants

                               1
of cash holdings but in EMU corporation. They find cash holdings to be negatively related to
leverage, size, and assets’ liquidity and positively associated with investment opportunities and
cash flows.  Ozkan and Ozkan (2004) find that determinants with negative associations of cash
holdings in UK firms are liquid assets, bank debt, and leverage. They find cash flows and
growth opportunities to be positively related to cash holdings.

Additionally, the relation between cash holdings and risk has been examined by implementing
risk-increasing or decreasing incentives. Findings by Liu and Mauer (2011) show that risk-
increasing compensation incentives for CEOs positively affect firms’ cash  holdings. The
increased risk caused by the risk-increasing incentives could lead to higher external funding
costs. In order to hedge for future funding needs, companies with higher risk may hold excess
cash, which, according to the authors, could explain the positive relationship between risk and

1
 Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union

                                                                           18
cash. Chava and Purnanandam (2010) show the opposite reaction when looking at risk-
decreasing incentives for CEOs which they find to be associated with higher cash holdings. The
two articles describe the multiple use of cash with the same purpose of reducing risk in
companies. If the risk incentives are enforced to reduce risk directly, Chava and Purnanandam
(2010) show that an increase in cash holdings is a method of reducing risk. Meanwhile, if higher
risk is incentivized, higher cash holdings are used to lower the risk by compensating for the
firm's higher financial risk, according to Liu and Mauer (2011). This finding follows Ferreira
and Vilelas's (2004) reasoning about the relationship between leverage and cash. If a company
has high levels of leverage, they are supposed to hold larger amounts of cash to compensate for
the higher risk of financial distress caused by the high leverage. Meanwhile, they also reason
that high levels of leverage can be seen as an indicator of a firm's ability to issue debt,
diminishing the need for companies to hold cash.

3.3.2 Independent variable

We use the dummy variable  Female CEO  as the key explanatory variable of interest when
conducting the test. The variable equals one if the  corresponding firm’s CEO is a woman and
zero if the CEO is a man. The usage of dummy variables in this manner is extensively used in
research on gender differences (Schopohl et al., 2021; Peltomäki et al., 2021; Faccio et al.,
2016; Adams and Funk, 2012).

3.3.3 Control variables

We include several control variables in our main regression to mitigate the influence of
confounding variables and, thus, enhance the validity of the effect of our key independent
variable. By including the below variables, we limit the effect of observable firm characteristics
on our result.

Our first variables try to capture the potential effect of size. According to Chan and Chen
(1991), differences in size cause companies to react differently to equal economic news.
Additionally, companies of different sizes exhibit different return characteristics, potentially
affecting cash holdings and leverage. Several previous papers in the financial literature also
control for size (Schopohl et al., 2021; Levi et al., 2014; Adams et al., 2005). Thus, we
incorporate ln(Assets) and ln(Employees) in our regression model as proxies for size. ln(Assets)
is the natural logarithm of a company’s total assets.  Total assets  is the sum of non-current and

                                                                           19
current assets, expressed in Swedish Krona (SEK).  ln(Employees)  is the natural logarithm of
the number of employees for each firm-year observation.

We include similar variables as Faccio et al. (2016) to control for firm characteristics.
ln(Company age)  is the natural logarithm of a company’s age, measured as the difference
between the observed year and year of registration. Age controls for potential differences caused
by firms being in different life cycle stages. Lastly, ROA is the return on total assets, defined as
the ratio of the sum of operating profit and interest income divided by total assets. ROA indicates
the quality of the management and how efficiently a company generates profit from its assets.

3.4 Endogeneity

A potential limitation of our study is related to endogeneity concerns, a well-known issue within
research (Li and Zeng, 2019; Faccio et al., 2016). For example, the appointment of a CEO could
be affected by individual board members’ biases of gender stereotypes. Thus, the appointment
of a female CEO happens when the board wants to lower the risk level. Similarly, another bias
could be that men are more likely to be appointed CEO in industries with a higher general risk
level. Hence, the result found might not be a cause of the risk aversion between the genders but
rather omitted variables, social structures, and selection bias. We address the issue in two steps
approach, similar to Levi et al. (2014). Firstly, we include sector and time fixed effects in our
main regression to adjust for cross-sectional differences. This approach helps us remove
potential biases in unobservable and/or time-invariant omitted variables. Secondly, we perform
a   propensity   score   matching   in   which   companies   are   matched   on   observable   firm
characteristics, and  thereafter, we compare the risk level of these matching companies.

According to Robinson et al. (2020), one should only interpret financial ratios in relation to
other information about the company. Therefore, it is essential to compare the ratios within  the
industry as there are applicable norms for specific industries. Due to our sample's limited
number of firm-year observations, we perform our main regression with fixed effect on a sector
level rather than an industry level. We follow the approach used  by Freel et al. (2012) when we
categorize our sample firms into industry sectors. We use three broad sectors;  Production,
Wholesale and Retail,  and  Knowledge Service. We recognize all companies’ Global Industry
Classification Standard (GICS) code and associate the code with one of the three mentioned
sectors. An overview of the sector selection, including GICS, number of companies, the share
of female CEOs, and example companies, is available in Appendix 3.

                                                                           20
To further mitigate endogeneity concerns, we introduce a propensity score matching procedure
(Rosenbaum and Rubin, 1983). With this procedure, we match companies that are virtually
identical except for the gender of the CEO. The score is based on our control variables
ln(Assets), ln(Employees), ln(Company age),  and  ROA. We follow Faccio et al. (2016) and set
the maximum difference of the propensity score to be no more than 0.1% in absolute value
between the control group, i.e., companies with a male CEO, and the treatment group, i.e.,
female led companies. This strategy increases the similarity between the matches and, thus,
improves the result of potential differences in risk-taking. A shortcoming with the procedure is
that we only match on observable characteristics, and hence, there might still be unobservable
differences we can not control for.

We also run a matched-sample regression including the indicator of treatment and the matching
covariates as proposed by Leung and Veenman (2018). This procedure is described as a
“doubly-robust” estimation and  eliminates any possible random difference in the covariates
between the control and treated observation. Thus, the bias-reducing properties of matching and
regressing are combined with this method.

3.5 Potential other problems

A potential problem using an  OLS regression is heteroscedasticity. Applying this model
assumes the error terms to have an unknown but constant variance, so-called homoscedasticity.
If this assumption is violated, the model deployed faces problems with heteroscedasticity. We
detect the  presence of heteroscedasticity when performing the Breusch-Pagan and Cook-
Weisberg test. To solve the issue, we include Robust Standard Errors which adjust the standard
errors to consider the heteroscedasticity.

An additional potential problem is multicollinearity. This occurs if two or more of the
independent variables correlate highly with each other and thus, cannot contribute with unique
information to the regression model. We find no issue with multicollinearity as we study the
Variance Inflation Factor.

                                                                           21
4. Results

4.1 Main regression
 Table 1: Descriptive statistics

                                                        Female         Male
Variable            Obs.   Mean  Std. Dev    Min    Max   Mean  Median   Mean Median
Female CEO        3 760    0.072    0.259      0      1
 Leverage            3 745    1.334    2.340   -4.94   15.83   1.073     0.71   1.354    0.82
 Cash ratio          3 745    2.910    5.409       0  39.174   2.878    1.267   2.913   1.220
 ln(Employees)       3 589    4.070    2.538      0  10.699   3.530    2.833   4.112   3.611
 ln(Assets)           3 729   12.380    2.637   7.441  18.650  12.068  11.783  12.405  12.040
 ln(Company age)     3 760    2.647    0.904   0.693   4.710   2.589    2.639   2.652   2.639
 ROA                3 745   -0.146    0.434  -2.257   0.534  -0.225   -0.023  -0.140   0.011
 Note: This table reports descriptive statistics for the sample. The table includes the number of
 observations (Obs.), mean (Mean), standard deviation (Std. dev.), minimum value (Min), and maximum
 value (Max). It also reports the mean and median sorted by the gender of the CEO.  A complete
 definition of variables is available in Appendix.

The descriptive statistics show a total of 3,760 firm-year observations of CEO gender, whereof
7.2% are female CEOs. The share of female CEOs varies depending on the sector and industry
belonging and increases during our time period for every sector (see Appendix 4). In 2015, 6.1%
of all CEOs were women, and in 2019, the share of female CEOs increased to 8.6%. We find
the highest number of female CEO observations in the  Healthcare industry  (92 observations of
860, 10.7%), which belongs to the  Knowledge service sector.  This sector has the highest total
share of female CEO observations (7.8%) and is the largest sector in terms of the number of
total companies. The  Wholesale and retail  sector reports a summarized share of 7.5% female
CEO observations, while the  Production  sector only has a share of 6.3% female CEOs during
the observed period. Other industries with higher shares of female CEOs are  Utilities,  Real
Estate and Consumer Staples. However, these industries have a lower number of publicly listed
companies than the  Healthcare industry.

Out of these 3,760 observations, 3,745 had reported both leverage and cash ratio. The mean
value of  Leverage  among all of the observations is 1.334, and the mean value for  Cash ratio  is
2.910. In Table 1, the initial number shows gender differences when comparing both of the

                                                                           22
dependent variables. The mean value of  Leverage  for female CEOs is 1.073, while male CEOs
report a higher  Leverage, a mean of 1.354, 26.2% higher than the female mean value.
Comparing Cash ratio, the mean ratio for male and female CEOs differs much less, with a mean
value of 2.913 and 2.878, respectively. Table 1 also shows that male CEOs tend to have higher
numbers of employees on average, with a natural logarithm value of 4.112 versus 3.530. On
average, male CEOs also control older companies compared to their female counterparts, a
difference of 0.063, counted in the natural logarithm of age. The descriptive statistics also report
that the mean and median of assets in male-led firms are larger than those led by a female CEO.
Table 1 further shows that the mean value of ROA in companies led by women is lower than in
companies led by male CEOs. The same relationship is shown for the median value as the
median   ROA   is   positive   for   male   CEOs   while   negative   for   female   CEOs.

 Table 2: Correlation matrix

                           (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)     (7)
 (1) Female CEO          1

 (2) Leverage         -0.031*         1
                      (0.057)
 (3) Cash ratio         -0.002 -0.182***          1
                      (0.918)    (0.000)
 (4) ln(Employees)  -0.059***  0.117*** -0.300***         1
                      (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
 (5) ln(Assets)       -0.033**  0.088*** -0.117***  0.809***         1
                      (0.043)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
 (6) ln(Company      -0.018     0.011 -0.113***  0.504***  0.515***         1
 age)                 (0.271)    (0.511)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
 (7) ROA          -0.051***  0.073***    -0.014  0.420***  0.480***  0.274***      1
                      (0.002)    (0.000)    (0.393)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
 Note: This table reports the Pearson correlation coefficient between our variables. A complete
 definition of variables available in Appendix. P-value in parenthesis. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

Table 2 shows the correlation between our variables. Notable is the negative correlation of  -
0.182 with a significance level of 1% between Leverage and Cash ratio, which is in accordance
with our predicted relationship between the two risk measures. In addition to this, the table
shows a negative correlation of  -0.031 with a significance level of 10% and a p-value of 0.057
between  Female CEO  and  Leverage,  and an insignificant small correlation between  Female
CEO  and  Cash ratio  of  -0.002 with a p-value of 0.918.

                                                                           23
Table 3: Main regression

                                    (1)                                    (2)
                              Leverage                            Cash ratio
                                       Sector &                            Sector &
                    No FE   Sector FE                    No FE   Sector FE
                                     Time FE                           Time FE
Female CEO          -0.214*     -0.218     -0.214           -0.486*    -0.516    -0.499
                       [0.125]    [0.156]    [0.155]           [0.275]    [0.387]    [0.388]
ln(Employees)       0.124***  0.117***  0.116***        -1.168*** -1.123*** -1.125***
                       [0.025]    [0.041]    [0.041]           [0.105]    [0.199]    [0.199]
ln(Assets)              0.000     0.004     0.006        0.639*** 0.712*** 0.717***
                       [0.031]    [0.060]    [0.060]           [0.086]    [0.167]    [0.168]
ln(Company age)    -0.177***  -0.168**  -0.162**            -0.124     -0.221     -0.203
                        [0.054]    [0.082]    [0.082]           [0.122]    [0.215]    [0.217]
ROA                 0.183     0.176     0.168        0.775*** 0.915*** 0.886***
                       [0.129]    [0.150]    [0.151]           [0.163]    [0.213]    [0.213]
Constant            1.355***   1.293**   1.379**            0.076    -1.684    -1.669
                        [0.325]    [0.639]    [0.641]           [0.706]    [1.527]    [1.528]
R-squared              0.018      0.019     0.021            0.138     0.167     0.168
Sector Fixed Effect        No       Yes      Yes             No      Yes      Yes
Time Fixed Effect        No       No      Yes             No       No      Yes
No. of observations      3 588      3 588      3 588            3 588      3 588      3 588
Note: This table reports the result from the regression.. In Regression (1), Leverage is the dependent
variable. In Regression (2), Cash ratio is the dependent variable. A complete definition of variables
available in Appendix. Within-firm clustered robust  standard errors in brackets. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05,
*** p<0.01

When testing our hypothesis with our main regression, we conduct two separate tests. In the
first test, the dependent variable is  Leverage,  and in the second test, the dependent variable is
Cash ratio. We use  ROA  and the natural logarithm of  Employees,  Assets,  and  Company  age  as
control variables for both regressions. We run both of our tests in three steps: first without any
fixed effect, then including sector fixed effect, and lastly, sector  and time fixed effect. We will
refer to these steps as different versions of the tests.

We present the result of our main regression in Table 3. When we do not adjust for any fixed
effect in our first test, we find a negative coefficient between  Leverage and the Female CEO  of
-0.214. This negative relationship indicates that female-led companies, on average, have lower
leverage and hence, a lower risk level, similar to the predictions in our hypothesis. The result is
significant at a 10% level, with a p-value of 0.087. When we re-run our test by including sector

                                                                           24
fixed effect, we see a negative coefficient of  -0.218 between  Leverage  and  Female CEO.
However, the significance disappears as the p-value rises to 0.162. In the version of test 1,
including both sector and time fixed effects, the coefficient is the same as without any control
for fixed effects, but with a higher p-value of 0.169, indicating no significant difference between
the genders. As described in section 3.4, the theory emphasizes the importance of adjusting for
industry fixed effects. Since the significance disappears when doing so, we find no support for
our hypothesis when using leverage as our proxy for risk.

Both  ln(Employees)  and  ln(Company  age) show highly significant results for all three versions
but with different relationships to  Leverage.  ln(Employees)  has a positive coefficient between
0.124 (without fixed effects) to 0.116 (including sector and time fixed effect). This suggests
that leverage increases as a company grows in terms  of the number of employees. On the other
hand, leverage decreases as  ln(Company age)  increases. Both  ln(Assets)  and  ROA  positively
correlate with  Leverage, but these results are insignificant. We further see that the value of  R-
squared increases as we include fixed effects, going from 0.018 to 0.019 and, lastly, 0.021. This
implies that fixed effects have an impact on our analysis.

Table 3 further shows the result of our second test, in which we use Cash ratio as the dependent
variable. Opposite to our predictions, we find a negative relationship of -0.486 between Female
CEO  and  Cash ratio, meaning that female CEOs have a lower cash ratio than their male
counterparts. In the version not controlled for fixed effect, we find a p-value of 0.077, hence a
significance level of 10%. However, similar to what we experienced in the test with leverage
as the dependent variable, the results are no longer significant as we control for fixed effects.
With sector fixed effect, the coefficient changes to  -0.516 with a p-value of 0.183, and as we
incorporate time fixed effect, the coefficient reduces to  -0.499 with a p-value of 0.199. To
conclude,  Cash ratio  does not support the hypothesis as we found a negative, rather than
positive, relationship between the cash ratio and gender. Additionally, we do not find significant
results for the negative relationship when adjusting for fixed effects.

ln(Employees), ln(Assets),  and  ROA  do all provide our model with significant results at a 1%
level for all versions of our second test. There is a negative relationship between  ln(Employees)
and  Cash ratio  with a coefficient of  -1.125 (including sector and time fixed effect). For
ln(Assets) and ROA, there is a positive relationship of 0.717 and 0.886, respectively. The second
test's  R-squared  is higher than the first test’s and spans from 0.138 to 0.168 in the different

                                                                           25
versions. The influence of including fixed effects is also stronger in the second  test compared
to the first one.

4.2 Robustness checks

Table 4: Propensity score matching
PANEL A: Test of difference in risk proxies
                          Matched                                Diff.
Variable                       obs.    Mean (Female CEOs  -  Male CEOs)  P-value of diff.
Leverage (female CEOs)         258    1.078                      -0.150          0.210
Leverage (male CEOs)                1.228
Cash ratio (female CEOs)       258    2.719                      0.140          0.419
Cash ratio (male CEOs)                2.579

PANEL B: Matched-sample regression with sector and time fixed effect
                                                    (1)                           (2)
Variable                                   Leverage                   Cash ratio
Female-led vs. Male-led companies                    -0.167                        -0.104
                                                      [0.201]                       [0.372]
ln(Employees)                                       0.089                    -0.812***
                                                      [0.060]                       [0.199]
ln(Assets)                                           -0.025                      0.371**
                                                      [0.070]                       [0.161]
ln(Company age)                                    -0.058                     -0.522**
                                                      [0.110]                       [0.243]
ROA                                        0.170                 1.038***
                                                      [0.360]                       [0.308]
Constant                                         1.245                       1.317
                                                      [0.808]                       [1.535]
R-squared                                        0.022                      0.200

Sector Fixed Effect                                 Yes                       Yes

Time Fixed Effect                                  Yes                       Yes

No. of observations                                  497                       497

Note: This table presents the result of a Propensity score matching. The propensity score is estimated
on firm characteristics included in our main regression analysis within a year-sector group. Panel A
includes the mean (Mean) of the two groups (female CEOs and male CEOs), the difference (Diff)
between the mean of the two groups and observations, and p-value of difference (P-value of difference).
Panel B presents the outcome of the main regression based on the propensity score matched sample. A
complete definition of variables is available in the Appendix.  Robust standard errors in brackets. *
p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.

                                                                           26
As previously discussed, we face concerns with endogeneity, and we thus carry out a propensity
score matching to check for robustness in our results. The propensity scores are based on firm
characteristics in year-sector observations and are limited to have a maximum difference of
0.1% in absolute value and to find a 1:1 match. In Panel A of Table 4, we present the gender
difference in our risk proxies of the matched observations. The difference in Leverage between
female and male CEOs is  -0.150 with a p-value of 0.210. This relationship is similar to what
we found in the main regression. For  Cash ratio,  we see the opposite relationship compared to
the main regression, meaning that the  Cash ratio  for our matched sample is higher when the
CEO is female. This  relationship is, however, insignificant as the p-value equals 0.419.

In Panel B, we present the result of repeating the main regression with the matched sample. We
run the regression of our two risk proxies with the matched-sample treatment indicator variable
created by the propensity score matching procedure. There is a negative relationship between
female-led companies and  Leverage  and  Cash ratio.  This is the same relationship as found in
our main regression but with coefficients of smaller magnitude. The coefficient of  Leverage  is
-0.167 (-0.214 in Main regression, Table 3), and the coefficient of  Cash ratio  is  -0.104 (-0.499
in Main regression, Table 3). Both of the findings are, however, not significant. To conclude,
the results of the robustness checks do not support our hypothesis.

4.3 Additional tests

4.3.1 Board diversity

A great share of previously mentioned literature examines the effects of having diverse boards.
Both Tosun et al. (2022) and Schopohl et al. (2021) find gender distribution in boards to be
related to company risk, while Adams and Funk (2012) argue that the behavioral characteristics
of female board members in Swedish publicly listed firms differ from the rest of the population.
As we find no significant differences in risk propensity when comparing Swedish female and
male CEOs, we find it interesting and of explanatory value to test if a higher share of female
board members impacts the riskiness of a company. Hence, explore if it could better explain
gender differences in corporate  settings than the gender of the CEO. Therefore, we extend our
research further by testing the impact of gender diversity on boards by adding the share of
female directors on boards as a control variable in our main regression.

                                                                           27
We replace  Female CEO  with the share of women on boards,  Board diversity,  as the primary
independent variable in our regression and control for sector fixed effects. Due to data limitation
on board diversity, we run an OLS regression solely on a cross-sectional data set of 2020. To
avoid collinearity results, we exclude CEO gender from this regression as these are often
included in the boards, and their gender would otherwise be accounted for twice. As shown in
Appendix 5, companies with a male CEO have a slightly lower average share  of female
directors, 23.8%, compared to 27.0%. However, we anticipate that the gender of the CEO could,
to some extent, explain this difference as it is often included on the boards. In Appendix 6, we
show that the  Board diversity  has a negative relationship of  -0.716 with  Leverage. However,
this is an insignificant result with a p-value of 0.201. When examining female directors' relation
to  Cash ratio, its coefficient is smaller than for female CEOs,  -0.266 but still insignificant with
a p-value of 0.791.

4.3.2 Performance-based compensation

We also test if the share of performance-based compensation is related to company risk. Prior
research has found different incentives to affect company risk measures (Schopohl et al., 2021;
Chava and Purnanandam, 2010).  As a higher performance-based share implies a larger
dependency on performance for the individual, there is a relationship between risk propensity
and performance-based salary. We, therefore, extend our study by examining if there is a
relationship between leverage or cash ratio and share of performance-based salary for board
and CEO and if women or men are more likely to have a higher share of performance-based
salary. The interpretive value of this test is somewhat limited as we have no access to
information about which targets determine performance. However, since the selection of
workplace and its associated salary composition is an individual’s choice, individuals can
determine the riskiness of their own income to some extent. Thus, we find it interesting to
examine the share of bonuses in companies run by female CEOs compared to companies run
by male CEOs. We also find it relevant to explore the relationship between the bonus
component itself and our risk proxies because of its connection to risk propensity.

Appendix 7 shows the average share of performance-based salary for board members and CEOs
in Swedish public companies run by female or male CEOs. It shows that female CEOs have a
lower average share of performance-based salary for board and CEO, a share of 4.2% compared
to the average of 5.7% in companies run by male CEOs. This indicates that female CEOs have
a lower share of performance-based salary, i.e., a less risky salary. This could imply that female

                                                                           28
CEOs either apply to companies with less risk-filled salary policies, are recruited to them, or
impose such salary policies after their entry. However, this result includes endogeneity concerns
and requires further examination.

We add the share of performance-based salary,  Bonus, as a control variable in our main
regression while keeping  Female CEO  as the independent variable. We also include time and
sector fixed effects. Appendix 8 shows no significant relationship between Bonus and Leverage
as we find its coefficient to be  -0.480 with a p-value of 0.254. However, we find a positive
effect on  Cash ratio  at a 5% significance level with a coefficient of 1.367. When adding  Bonus
as a control variable, we also find a significant relationship between  Female CEO  and  Cash
ratio. The result indicates a 1% significance level with a coefficient of  -0.922 and a p-value of
0.001.

                                                                           29
5. Discussion

We find that female CEOs are associated with lower leverage in all versions of our tests,
supporting our  hypothesis. However, in contradiction to our predictions, we find that female
CEOs are related to lower cash ratios. Before including sector and time fixed effects in our main
regression, we find the gender of the CEO to impact both leverage and cash ratio  at a 10%
significance level. As we run our test, controlling for sector and time fixed effect, we cannot
find statistically significant support for women being more risk averse than men. Thus, we
cannot find any strong support for our hypothesis.

When we  follow the standards of prior literature and include sector and time fixed effects, we
observe an increase in the explanatory value for both our regressions models. However, as we
do this, our initial significant findings disappear. When we control for fixed effect, the
coefficients remain similar to our initial findings but with higher p-values. Since the significant
CEO gender differences in risk preferences disappear, we interpret the sector to have an
important influence on companies' risk levels and,  to some extent, limit the impact of the CEO.
When comparing the risk propensities of CEOs without controlling for the different conditions,
we could argue for the presence of gender differences. However, the result could be a cause of
endogenous matching,  which will be discussed further below. Our lack of significant results
indicates no gender differences in risk propensity among male and female CEOs. This is
coherent with findings in prior literature (Schubert et al., 1999; Johnson and Powell, 1994).
These argue that when women are given contextual decisions or if women are in the managerial
population, they do not differ from men in the risk propensity. The CEO is undoubtedly a highly
managerial position in companies, and it is reasonable to consider their decisions as almost
exclusively contextual.

Faccio et al. (2016) also examine the relation between CEO gender and company risk and use
leverage as one of their risk indicators. Our studies differ sample-wise, as Faccio et al. examine
a larger sample and a broader geographical area. They include a sample of 132 590 private and
public European companies and observe these from 1999 to 2009. In contradiction to our
insignificant results, Faccio et al. find significant results of risk aversion among female CEOs.
They find a negative relationship between female CEOs and leverage at a 1% significance level.
Our findings on Swedish publicly listed firms differ from those by Faccio et al. In order words,
we find the risk propensity among CEOs in Swedish publicly  listed firms to deviate from those

                                                                           30
of the CEOs in the rest of Europe. There are numerous potential explanations for why we find
different results compared to Faccio et al. (2016). Even though we do not examine these, we
consider it relevant to discuss some  potential explanations for why our Swedish sample differs
in risk propensity. One potential explanation for why we find men and women to differ less
than what Faccio et al. find, is that we focus exclusively on one of the most gender-equal
countries in the world (UN Development Programme,  2020). In countries where genders are
more equal, stereotypes and social norms that create expectations on women to be less risk
prone, are likely not to be as present. Hence, it is believable that higher equality indexes  are
reflected in the behaviors of the CEOs in the examined country. Therefore, we consider it
reasonable that Swedish male and female CEOs differ less in risk propensity than in Europe,
i.e., an area with a lower equality ranking (UN Development Programme,  2020). In addition to
geographical differences, Faccio et al. examine their sample for 10 years, starting 16 years
before our first observations. As the share of female CEOs has increased during the last years,
the discrepancy between our observed periods might also contribute to our differentiated
findings. Following the previous discussion, a more prominent presence and likely a larger
acceptance of female CEOs could lower the pressure to act according to existing risk averse
stereotypes.

Unlike Faccio  et al. (2016), the paper by Adams and Funk (2012) is geographically closely
related to our research as they focus on Swedish companies when examining the characteristics
of female board members. They find Swedish female directors to hold opposite characteristics
compared to the rest of the female population. The shown characteristics of female directors
are typically associated with those of the male stereotype, including risk preference. However,
the findings by Adams and Funk are based solely on self-perception. It is, hence, difficult to
conclude if their results actually indicate a higher risk propensity in the female director
population or if female directors simply compare themselves to a lower general risk propensity
amongst women. Similarly, as they  potentially face different social expectations than male
directors, they could assess their risk propensity differently.

Nevertheless, Adams and Funk discuss whether Swedish CEOs face the same barriers as
directors. They argue that this might not be the  case as CEOs are usually not externally
appointed, unlike the directors. Therefore, according to Lyness and Judeisch (1999), they do
not need to show as extreme performance, and thus, we anticipate that the CEO might differ
from Adams and Funk’s board-level findings. As we find no significant differences in risk

                                                                           31
propensity between male and female CEOs, we show that the CEOs deviate from the gender
differences that Adams and Funk argue to be present. At the same time, we can not find female
CEOs to be more  risk averse, as argued by Faccio et al. (2016).

In the literature, there is a conflicting view of whether it is the CEO or the CFO who has the
most influence on broader corporate financial policy decisions (Schopohl, 2021; Graham et al.,
2013; Chava and Purnanandam, 2010). In addition, prior literature also examine the influence
of diverse boards on risk-taking (Schopohl et al., 2021; Levi et al., 2014; Adams and Funk,
2012). Thus, the combination of which executives or directors and risk proxies are examined
could impact the result and lead to different conclusions than in previous corporate financial
literature. As prior literature on relevant decision makers is contradictory, we add board
diversity to our initial, inconclusive research on the impact of CEO gender. Our results show
that board diversity cannot explain corporate risk-taking as we find no significant relationship
between the share of female directors and risk proxies during 2020. However, a possible
explanation for our insignificant results could still be that the CFOs influence our chosen risk
proxies the most, as found in the UK (Schopohl et al., 2021). In such a situation, examining
gender differences amongst CEOs or board members based on these risk proxies would not
provide results that reflect gender differences in corporate settings. Due to the limitation of this
study and our sample size, as well as the lack of available data for CFOs, we do not perform
additional tests on CFOs.

We confirm the anticipated relationship between the size  of the performance-based salary
component and corporate risk-taking when we find a significant positive relationship between
the bonus component and cash ratios. When we control for differences in the share of
performance-based pay, we find the gender of the CEO to be significantly related to cash ratio
on a 1% significance level. We imagine that this is either due to a difference in the sample
(2,780 observations instead of 3,588 because of unavailable compensation data), or that those
female CEOs whose behavior turned the prior results insignificant are those who also have
higher shares of performance-based salary. Hence, their deviating risk preferences are now
explained by the bonus component instead.

5.2 Endogeneity

As discussed in several papers (Li and Zeng, 2019; Faccio et al., 2016), endogeneity concern is
an issue when examining corporate risk-taking and individual characteristics. Unobservable

                                                                           32
firm characteristics might cause a potential difference between the two groups. Self-selection
bias could  cause individuals to apply for companies with a certain risk profile, and hence, the
actual gender does not cause the risk level we use as proxies of a CEO’s risk-taking. Social
norms and structures might also be incorporated into an individual’s beliefs,  causing her or him
to lean toward certain types of companies. The appointment of the CEO may not be a random
decision and is therefore subject to the biases of board members. If the board wants to be less
exposed to risk, they potentially appoint a female  CEO as they believe she will act more risk
averse. Hence, there is a predetermined journey in which the independent decision-making of
the CEO may be limited.

By solely studying the difference in corporate risk-taking and not attitudes, we might capture
the effect of unobservable differences rather than the gender of the CEO. We include sector
fixed effects to control for unobservable sector characteristics as an initial step. When doing so,
the significance of the results found in our first regression disappears, which indicates that
gender has no significant effect on the risk level. As we develop our study with a propensity
score matching to compare virtually identical companies, we still experience the same pattern
as in our main regression. However, the magnitude of the coefficients decreases and the p-
values increase, meaning that the insignificant results continue to be present. This result
contradicts Faccio et al. (2016), that find a significant difference in corporate risk-taking when
performing a  propensity score matched analysis. As previously described, our study differs
from theirs in terms of the study's design. This includes differences in geographical location
(Sweden vs. Europe), companies of interest (publicly listed vs. all), observed period (2015-
2019 vs. 1999-2009) and risk proxies (leverage and cash ratio vs. leverage, volatility of ROA
and likelihood of survival).

Despite attempts to mitigate the risk of endogenous matching between CEOs and companies,
we   emphasize   that   any   documented   relationship   could   be   caused   by   unobservable
characteristics and/or omitted variables. Since a random assignment of CEO is not possible, we
do not exclude endogeneity as a potential explanation for differences in corporate risk-taking.

5.3 Research method

To determine the studied companies' risk levels, we chose two accounting-based financial ratios
as risk proxies, as suggested by literature (Robinson et al., 2020). The reason for using
accounting-based measures is that they can be influenced by the CEO (Graham et al., 2015;

                                                                           33
Chava and Purnanandam, 2010), compared to market-based measures, such as volatility on
stock   return   that   are   more   sensitive   to   external   influence   and   market   conditions.
Notwithstanding, we are humble about the fact that the ratios could  be a consequence of
previous management decisions and/or the company's performance. In addition, financial ratios
that stem from the balance sheet are snapshots of the situation at the very end of the reporting
period.

Our first proxy,  Leverage, is a generally known determinant of risk level in corporate policy
decisions (Robinson et al., 2020; Berk and DeMarzo, 2017). We found the relationship between
leverage and female CEOs to be negative, similar to the correlation in Faccio et al. (2016),
which strengthens the validity of our results. As we study the regression on  Cash ratio, we find
the opposite relationship compared to our predictions. One possible explanation is that women
CEOs are not more risk averse, maybe even less so than male CEOs, and hence,  chose to
decrease the ratio. However, another potential reason for the outcome is that the cash ratio might
not be a sophisticated proxy for risk due to the ambiguous reasons to hold cash. According to
financial literature, cash is a risk-free asset that  reduces the average risk of a company's all
assets (Berk and DeMarzo, 2017). Risk aversion motivates an increase in cash holdings (Opler
et al., 1999), and cash holdings are negatively related to leverage (Ozkan and Ozkan, 2004). An
increase in cash holdings could also be a precautionary move to limit potential underlying risk
(Bates et al., 2009), either driven by operational or financial properties. E.g., if the financial
risk is high, i.e., leverage is high, cash holdings might simultaneously need to be  increased to
mitigate the risk of an unforeseen shock. Hence, one might expect a different relationship
between risk and cash ratio than proposed in section 3.3.

Another essential consideration when evaluating the research method is the reliability of the
data. Reliability refers to how the data used in the regression has been selected and gathered
and if the observed values are reliable and accurate. We used  Retriever Business  as our main
source for all variables except for Industry, for which we used Compustat Global. By not using
several different sources avoids a potential risk of mismatch or misinterpretation. Due to the
shortcoming regarding the reporting of the gender of the CEO as described in section 3.1, we
had to manually collect the information  through data scraping of annual reports and press
releases for some observed companies. This manual process enabled incorrect reporting of the
gender, which could affect the result. However, most of the observations were not required to
undergo the manual process. We did several random tests on the finalized sample, and we could

                                                                           34
not find any errors. We further see that the percentage of female CEOs in our sample increases
over time, similar to what is reported by Eurostat (2022).

Although we are using control variables as in similar studies, we acknowledge that there still
might be additional observable characteristics that could provide explanatory value to the
outcome. Another limitation of the study is the fact that we only control for observable firm
characteristics in our tests. Thus, a possible explanation for our result is that there are underlying
individual differences in the characteristics of the CEOs that influence the outcome. In addition,
we only study corporate risk-taking and not psychological or attitudinal differences in risk
propensity. Hence, other unobservable effects might determine the chosen risk level.

                                                                           35
6. Conclusion

Women have always been underrepresented in the corporate world, but lately, we have observed
an increasing  representation of women in senior management positions. One explanation often
referred to for why women fail to break the glass ceiling is their alleged risk aversion. This is a
topic frequently studied in prior literature where women are found to invest in less risky options
compared to men (Sundén and Surette, 1998; Jianakoplos and Bernasek, 1998) and European
companies with female CEOs are also shown to have less risk in their companies (Faccio et al.,
2016). There are, however, contradictory findings where women are shown to not be more risk
averse than men if the managerial population is studied or if we study women and men in
contextual situations (Schubert et al., 1999; Johnsson and Powell, 1994). Adding to this tension
are the findings of Swedish female directors who consider themselves to be more risk prone
than the general female population (Adams and Funk, 2012).

We, thus, add to the prior research on gender differences in corporate settings by examining if
female CEOs in Swedish publicly listed companies are more risk averse in corporate financial
policy decisions than their male counterparts. We reject our hypothesis as we find no significant
results when comparing the relationship between risk proxies and female CEOs. However, we
find female CEOs to be insignificantly negatively related to both leverage and cash ratio. Whilst
we predicted the relationship with leverage to be negative, the result for the cash ratio goes
against our predicted outcome. To confirm the robustness of our results, we did a propensity
score matched regression which confirmed the findings of insignificant results. We add
contradicting results to previous findings on corporate financial policy decisions since we can
not find support for women being more risk averse. Furthermore, as women in senior
management positions in Sweden are previously found to not consider themselves as more risk
averse, our results on corporate risk-taking extend this knowledge. To conclude, we contribute
to the existing literature by examining female CEOs' behavior in one of the world’s most
gender-equal countries. When doing so, we find no significant differences. Hence, we suggest
that the general preconception of the female stereotype could be questioned.

We acknowledge that our research has some shortcomings. Firstly, cash ratio is a slightly
ambiguous risk measure. Secondly, we only account for observable firm characteristics and
hence, risk interpreting our results without considering other unobservable differences among
male and female CEOs and their companies. Thirdly, our results would be of higher explanatory

                                                                           36
value with a large sample, and if it could include the gender of both CFOs and CEOs as we
currently leave the influence of the CFO unexplored. We acknowledge several shortcomings of
our study, and conclusions should be drawn cautiously as we provide no significant indication
of the effect of gender on corporate risk-taking. However, our study does provide inspiration
for future research since we contradict prior findings on the effect  of female CEOs in other less
equal geographical areas and partly question the conclusions previously drawn from self-
assessment studies in Sweden.

6.1 Future research

This study has examined whether female CEOs are more risk averse than men in financial
corporate policy decisions. The topic of gender differences and risk aversion has been
extensively studied in many different settings. However, to the best of our knowledge, this is
the first paper to conduct a study on CEO and corporate risk-taking in Swedish publicly listed
companies. Because of the study's limitations, we see several areas of interest for future
research.

Firstly, Adams and Funk (2012) find that Swedish female directors exhibit an even more risk
prone attitude than male  directors. Thus, women at the top of business differ from the general
population. This finding only examines directors’ own perceptions of their behavior and beliefs,
not their actual behavior, we firmly believe that it would be interesting to conduct a combined
study. Such a study would include conducting a survey on risk attitude, like Adams and Funk,
and collecting risk proxies, as we do in this study. By doing so, it would examine if executives’
perceived attitudes affect their actions and decision-making and if there are gender differences
in the explored relationship.

Secondly, a limiting factor in our study is the number of available observations. Consequently,
we were limited to look at sectors rather than industries to maintain a sufficient amount  of
observations in each group which decreases the explanatory value of the study to some extent.
The limited amount of observations also rules out the possibility of conducting a difference-in-
difference test, describing the effect on the risk level after  transitioning from a female CEO to
a male CEO, or vice versa. By broadening the scope, e.g., including all Nordic countries, more
detailed tests can be conducted as the number of observations increases.
Thirdly, the role of the CEO versus the CFO is discussed in prior literature. Future research
could include both the CFO and CEO and compare the difference in risk level, dependent on

                                                                           37
the gender composition of the two positions. As there are four potential combinations (female
CEO, female CFO; male CEO, male  CFO; female CEO-male CFO; male CEO-female CEO),
one would require a larger sample than what is available within the context of our study.
Corporate financial policy decisions in public companies are not one-sided decisions and the
power of the respective executive might differ between companies. Thus, it would be of interest
to investigate the gender effect of different executive compositions.

                                                                           38
References

Literature
ADAMS, R.B., ALMEIDA, H. and FERREIRA, D., 2005. Powerful CEOs and Their Impact
on Corporate Performance.  The Review of financial studies,  18(4), pp. 1403-1432.
ADAMS, R.B. and FUNK, P., 2012. Beyond the Glass Ceiling: Does Gender Matter?
Management science,  58(2), pp. 219-235.
BATES, T.W., KAHLE, K.M. and STULZ, R.M., 2009. Why Do U.S. Firms Hold So Much
More Cash than They Used To?  The Journal of finance (New York),  64(5), pp. 1985-2021.
BERK, J.B. and DEMARZO, P.M., 2017.  Corporate finance.  4 edn. Harlow: Pearson.
BERTRAND, M. and SCHOAR, A., 2003. Managing with Style: The Effect of Managers  on
Firm Policies.  The Quarterly Journal of Economics,  118(4), pp. 1169-1208.
CATHCART, L., DUFOUR, A., ROSSI, L. and VAROTTO, S., 2020. The differential impact
of leverage on the default risk of small and large firms.  Journal of corporate finance
(Amsterdam, Netherlands),  60, pp. 101541.
CHAN, K.C. and CHEN, N., 1991. Structural and Return Characteristics of Small and Large
Firms.  The Journal of finance (New York),  46(4), pp. 1467-1484.
CHAVA, S. and PURNANANDAM, A., 2010. CEOs versus CFOs: Incentives and corporate
policies.  Journal of Financial Economics,  97(2), pp. 263-278.
FACCIO, M., MARCHICA, M. and MURA, R., 2016. CEO gender, corporate risk-taking,
and the efficiency of capital allocation.  Journal of corporate finance (Amsterdam,
Netherlands),  39, pp.  193-209.
FERREIRA, M.A. and VILELA, A.S., 2004. Why Do Firms Hold Cash? Evidence from
EMU Countries.  European financial management: the journal of the European Financial
Management Association,  10(2), pp. 295-319.
FREEL, M., CARTER, S., TAGG, S. and MASON, C., 2012. The latent demand for bank
debt: characterizing "discouraged borrowers".  Small business economics,  38(4), pp. 399-418.
GRAHAM, J.R. and HARVEY, C.R., 2001. The theory and practice of corporate finance:
evidence from the field.  Journal of Financial Economics,  60(2), pp. 187-243.
GRAHAM, J.R., HARVEY, C.R. and PURI, M., 2015. Capital allocation and delegation of
decision-making authority within firms.  Journal of Financial Economics,  115(3), pp. 449-
470.
GRAHAM, J.R., HARVEY, C.R. and PURI, M., 2013. Managerial attitudes and corporate
actions.  Journal of Financial Economics,  109(1), pp. 103-121.
HUANG, J. and KISGEN, D.J., 2013. Gender and corporate finance: Are male executives
overconfident relative to female executives?  Journal of Financial Economics,  108(3), pp.
822-839.
JIANAKOPLOS, N.A. and BERNASEK, A., 1998. Are women more risk averse? Economic
inquiry,  36(4), pp. 620-630.

                                                                           39
JOHNSON, J.E.V. and POWELL, P.L., 1994. Decision Making, Risk and Gender: Are
Managers Different?  British Journal of Management,  5(2), pp. 123-138.
LEUNG, E. and VEENMAN, D., 2018. Non-GAAP Earnings Disclosure in Loss Firms.
Journal of accounting research,  56(4), pp. 1083-1137.
LEVI, M., LI, K. and ZHANG, F., 2014. Director gender and mergers and acquisitions.
Journal of corporate finance (Amsterdam, Netherlands),  28, pp. 185-200.
LI, Y. and ZENG, Y., 2019. The impact of top executive gender on asset prices: Evidence
from stock price crash risk.  Journal of corporate finance (Amsterdam, Netherlands),  58, pp.
528-550.
LIU, Y. and MAUER, D.C., 2011. Corporate cash holdings and CEO compensation
incentives.  Journal of Financial Economics,  102(1), pp. 183-198.
LYNESS, K.S. and JUDIESCH, M.K., 1999. Are Women More Likely to Be Hired or
Promoted into Management Positions?  Journal of vocational behavior,  54(1), pp. 158-173.
MIAN, S., 2001. On the choice and replacement of chief financial officers.  Journal of
Financial Economics,  60(1), pp. 143-175.
OHLSON, J.A., 1980. Financial Ratios and the Probabilistic Prediction of Bankruptcy.
Journal of accounting research,  18(1), pp. 109-131.
OPLER, T., PINKOWITZ, L., STULZ, R. and WILLIAMSON, R., 1999. The determinants
and implications of corporate cash holdings.  Journal of Financial Economics,  52(1), pp. 3-46.
OZKAN, A. and OZKAN, N., 2004. Corporate cash holdings: An empirical investigation of
UK companies.  Journal of banking & finance,  28(9), pp. 2103-2134.
PELTOMÄKI, J., SIHVONEN, J., SWIDLER, S. and VÄHÄMAA, S., 2021. Age, gender,
and risk taking: Evidence from the S&P 1500 executives and market-based measures of firm
risk.  Journal of business finance & accounting,  48(9-10), pp. 1988-2014.
RIDDICK, L.A. and WHITED, T.M.,  2009. The Corporate Propensity to Save.  The Journal
of finance (New York),  64(4), pp. 1729-1766.
ROBINSON, T.R., HENRY, E. and BROIHAHN, M.A., 2020a.  International financial
statement analysis.  4 edn. Hoboken, N.J: Wiley.
ROSENBAUM, P.R. and RUBIN, D.B., 1983. The central role of the propensity score in
observational studies for causal effects.  Biometrika,  70(1), pp. 41-55.
SCHOPOHL, L., URQUHART, A. and ZHANG, H., 2021. Female CFOs, leverage and the
moderating role of board diversity and CEO power.  Journal  of corporate finance
(Amsterdam, Netherlands),  71, pp. 101858.
SCHUBERT, R., BROWN, M., GYSLER, M. and BRACHINGER, H.W., 1999. Financial
Decision-Making: Are Women Really More Risk-Averse?  The American Economic Review,
89(2), pp. 381-385.
SUNDÉN, A.E. and SURETTE, B.J., 1998. Gender Differences in the Allocation of Assets in
Retirement Savings Plans.  The American Economic Review,  88(2), pp. 207-211.

                                                                           40
TOSUN, O.K., EL KALAK, I. and HUDSON, R., 2022. How female directors help firms to
attain optimal cash holdings.  International review of financial analysis,  80.
TRACZYNSKI, J., 2017. Firm Default Prediction: A Bayesian Model-Averaging Approach.
Journal of financial and quantitative analysis; J.Financ.Quant.Anal,  52(3), pp. 1211-1245.

Other  publications
EUROSTAT, April 2022. Employees by sex, age and occupation.
Available:  https://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?query=BOOKMARK_DS-05311
_QID_581018CC_UID_-
3F171EB0&layout=SEX,L,X,0;GEO,L,Y,0;TIME,C,Z,0;AGE,L,Z,1;ISCO08,L,Z,2;UNIT,L,
Z,3;INDICATORS,C,Z,4;&zSelection=DS-053116AGE,Y15-64;DS-053116UNIT,THS;DS-
053116INDICATORS,OBS_FLAG;DS-053116TIME,2018;DS-
053116ISCO08,OC1;&rankName1=UNIT_1_2_-1_2&rankName2=AGE_1_2_-
1_2&rankName3=ISCO08_1_2_-1_2&rankName4=INDICATORS_1_2_-
1_2&rankName5=TIME_1_0_0_0&rankName6=SEX_1_2_0_0&rankName7=GEO_1_2_0_
1&rStp=&cStp=&rDCh=&cDCh=&rDM=true&cDM=true&footnes=false&empty=false&wai
=false&time_mode=ROLLING&time_most_recent=true&lang=EN&cfo=%23%23%23%2C
%23%23%23.%23%23%23 [Retrieved May 12, 2022].
EUROSTAT, February 2022. Positions held by women in senior management positions.
Available:  https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/SDG_05_60/  [Retrieved May 12,
2022].
WORLD ECONOMIC FORUM, 2021. Global Gender Gap Report 2021.
Available: https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2021.pdf [Retrieved May 11,
2022].
UN DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME, 2020. Gender Inequality Index (GII).
Available:  https://hdr.undp.org/en/content/gender-inequality-index-gii [Retrieved April 30,
2022].

                                                                           41
Appendix

Appendix 1: Variable definition and source

Variable                                            Definition                Source
Female CEO           Dummy variable that equals 1 if the CEO is     Retriever Business
                                            female and 0 otherwise       (Annuals reports,
                                                                               press releases)
Leverage           Ratio of total debt divided by total assets minus      Retriever Business
                                                               total debt
Cash ratio          Ratio of total cash and cash equivalents divided      Retriever Business
                                               by total current liabilities
ln(Employees)        Natural logarithm of the number of employees      Retriever Business

ln(Assets)                   Natural logarithm of total assets (SEK)      Retriever Business

ln(Company           Natural logarithm of the difference between     Retriever Business
age)                            observed year and registration date
ROA             Ratio of the sum of operating profit and interest     Retriever Business
                                      income, divided by total assets
Industry          The Global  Industry Classification Standard code       Compustat Global

Sector                           Segmentation based on  Industry

Board diversity       Ratio of female board members divided by the      Retriever Business
                                  total number of board members
Bonus               Ratio of performance-based  compensation for      Retriever Business
                      CEO and board members divided by the total
                      compensation for CEO and board members
Note: This table reports the definition and source of all variables.

Appendix 2: Process of selecting sample
                                                              Effect     Accumulated size
Swedish limited public company, registered before 2015-
01-01                                                                     773
Gender unidentifiable                                        -16                 757
No values reported for all years 2015-2019                       -5                 752
Total                                                     -21                 752
Note: This table reports the sample selection process, including the  effect and accumulated size.

                                                                           42
Appendix 3: Sector selection and share of female CEO
Sector                 Industry   GICS  No. of companies                     Example
                        Energy     10              14      Lundin Energy, Tethys Oil
                      Materials     15              35        Boliden, Gränges, SSAB
Production           Industrials     20             159     NCC, Haldex, NIBE, SAAB
                        Utilities      55                4  Slitevind, Arise, Implementa Sol
                     Real Estate      60              57      Bonava, Castellum, Balder
Total                                          269
                   Consumer
                                   25              72       Duni, MIPS, Nelly Group
                   Discretionary
Wholesale
               Consumer Staples     30              23 Scandi  Standard, Swedish Match
and retail
               Communication
                                    50              47  Eniro, Storytel, Telia, Embracer
                          services
Total                                          142
                    Health Care     35             172          Elekta, Getinge, SOBI
Knowledge           Financials     40              36  Ratos, Resurs, Investor, Avanza
service
                     Information
                                    45             133     Fingerprint, Mycronic, Tobii
                     Technology
Total                                          341
Note: This table represents the selection of sectors based on industry. Industry is based on the Global
Industry Classification Standard (GICS)

                                                                           43
Appendix 4: Share of female CEO (%)
                                   No. of
Sector               Industry               2015   2016     2017     2018     2019   Total
                              companies
                     Energy         14    0.0%   0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%   0.0%
                   Materials         35    2.9%   2.9%    5.7%   11.4%   11.4%   6.9%
Production        Industrials        159    3.1%   3.1%    2.5%    3.1%    4.4%   3.3%
                    Utilities          4   25.0%  25.0%   25.0%   25.0%   25.0%  25.0%
                 Real Estate         57   12.3%  15.8%   14.0%   15.8%   15.8%  14.7%
Total                            269    5.2%   5.9%    5.6%    7.1%    7.8%   6.3%
                Consumer
                                   72    5.6%   6.9%    6.9%   11.1%    8.3%   7.8%
                 Discretionary
Wholesale
           Consumer Staples         23   13.0%  13.0%   13.0%   17.4%   21.7%  15.7%
and retail
             Communication
                                   47    2.1%   2.1%    2.1%    4.3%    4.3%   3.0%
                       services
Total                            142    5.6%   6.3%    6.3%    9.9%    9.2%   7.5%
                Health Care        172    9.3%   9.3%   11.0%   10.5%   13.4%  10.7%
Knowledge        Financials         36    8.3%   8.3%    5.6%    5.6%    2.8%   6.1%
service
                  Information
                                  133    3.8%   3.8%    4.5%    5.3%    5.3%   4.5%
                  Technology
Total                            341    7.0%  7.0%     7.9%    7.9%    9.1%   7.8%
GRAND TOTAL                  752    6.1%  6.5%     6.8%    8.0%    8.6%   7.2%

Note: This table reports the share of female CEOs within each sector and industry.

                                                                           44
Appendix 5: Descriptive  statistics for additional test including Board diversity

                                                   Female CEO     Male CEO

Variable          Obs.  Mean Std. dev.   Min    Max   Mean  Median   Mean Median
Board diversity      742  0.242     0.183       0    0.778   0.270    0.268    0.238   0.240
Leverage            739  1.299     2.877     -5.9    22.02   1.545     0.84    1.266    0.74
Cash ratio          739  2.861     4.570   0.023   29.962   2.578    1.172    2.900   1.299
ln(Employees)       726  4.359     2.414       0   10.563   3.975    3.257    4.412   4.060
ln(Assets)           737 12.918     2.537   8.207   19.009  12.590   11.973   12.964  12.655
ln(Company age)     752  2.903     0.719   1.792    4.745   2.877    2.708    2.907   2.773
ROA                739  -0.127     0.357  -1.738    0.438  -0.182    -0.05   -0.119   0.010
Note: This table reports descriptive statistics for the sample of additional test. The table includes the
number of observations (Obs.),  mean (Mean), standard deviation (Std. dev.), minimum value (Min),
and maximum value (Max). It also reports the mean and median sorted by the gender of the CEO. A
complete definition of variables is available in the Appendix.

 Appendix 6: Additional test with Board diversity as main independent variable
                                                   (1)                            (2)
                                            Leverage                    Cash ratio
 Board diversity                                   -0.716                           -0.266
                                                  [0.559]                         [1.004]
 ln(Employees)                               0.224***                     -0.940***
                                                  [0.074]                         [0.178]
 ln(Assets)                                       -0.035                       0.609***
                                                     [0.097]                          [0.154]
 ln(Company age)                               -0.283*                          -0.070
                                                  [0.167]                         [0.246]
ROA                                     0.099                      0.108
                                                  [0.441]                         [0.335]
 Constant                                      1.856*                         -1.386
                                                  [1.104]                         [1.490]
 R-squared                                    0.021                       0.189
 Sector Fixed Effect                             Yes                        Yes
 No. of observations                              716                         716
 Note: This table reports the result from the regression including sector fixed effect.  Board diversity
 is defined as the share of women in the board. In Regression (1), Leverage is the dependent variable.
 In Regression (2), Cash ratio is the dependent variable. A complete definition of variables is
 available in the Appendix.  Robust standard errors in brackets. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

                                                                           45
 Appendix 7: Descriptive statistics for additional test including Bonus
                                                       Female          Male
 Variable            Obs.   Mean Std. dev.    Min    Max  Mean Median    Mean Median
 Female CEO       3 760   0.072    0.259      0       1
 Leverage           3 745    1.334    2.340   -4.94   15.83   1.073    0.71    1.354    0.82
 Cash ratio          3 745    2.910    5.409      0  39.174  2.878   1.267    2.913   1.220
 Bonus             2 819   0.056    0.107      0   0.510  0.042       0    0.057       0
 ln(Employees)       3 589    4.070    2.538      0  10.699  3.530   2.833    4.112   3.611
 ln(Assets)          3 729  12.380    2.637   7.441  18.650 12.068  11.783   12.405  12.040
 ln(Company age)    3 760    2.647    0.904   0.693   4.710  2.589   2.639    2.652   2.639
 ROA               3 745   -0.146    0.434  -2.257   0.534  -0.225   -0.023    -0.140   0.011
 Note: This table reports descriptive statistics for the sample. The table includes the number of
 observations (Obs.), mean (Mean), standard deviation (Std. dev.), minimum value (Min), and maximum
 value (Max). It also reports the mean and median sorted by the gender of the CEO. A complete definition
 of variables is available in the Appendix.

Appendix 8: Additional test with Bonus included in main regression
                                                 (1)                               (2)
                                          Leverage                       Cash ratio
Female CEO                                -0.168                           -0.922***
                                                 [0.135]                                [0.265]
Bonus                                     -0.480                            1.367**
                                              [0.421]                              [0.636]
ln(Employees)                            0.094***                           -1.041***
                                              [0.026]                              [0.109]
ln(Assets)                                   0.062                           0.548***
                                              [0.039]                              [0.094]
ln(Company age)                              -0.073                               -0.161
                                              [0.056]                            [0.134]
ROA                                  0.001                       1.207***
                                              [0.138]                             [0.217]
Constant                                   0.441                          2.074***
                                              [0.407]                             [0.799]
R-squared                                 0.028                            0.173
Sector Fixed Effect                           Yes                             Yes
Time Fixed Effect                            Yes                             Yes
No. of observations                           2 780                             2 780
Note: This table reports the result from the additional regression including sector fixed effect. In
Regression (1), Leverage is the dependent variable. In Regression (2), Cash ratio is the dependent
variable. Within-firm clustered robust standard errors in brackets. A complete definition of variables
is available in the Appendix.  * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01

                                                                           46