PROFITING FROM
UNCERTAINTY

A STUDY ON THE INFORMATIVENESS OF INSIDER TRADES
DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

SANDRA NORDLÖW
EINAR OTTESEN KALMAN

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics
Profiting from uncertainty: A study on the informativeness of insider trades during the
COVID-19 pandemic.

Abstract

Using publicly available data on insider trades made in constituent companies of the S&P 500, this
paper examines the return of- and market reactions to insider trades made during the first six months
of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our results show that insider trading activity peaked in the early months
of the pandemic, that insiders did possess predictive ability concerning future stock development and
that they hence were able to beat the market during our sample period. We conclude that there was no
identifiable correlation between insider trading activity and insider returns earned in specific
industries. Moreover, the sample data shows that the market priced large stocks more efficiently than
small stocks during the COVID-19 outbreak. We find that insider traders were successful in predicting
long-term stock price increases and decreases during the COVID-19 pandemic, and that insider trades
hence were informative as signals to buy or sell a stock. We also conclude that the stock market largely
ignored the signals given by insiders or just did not price it efficiently, which suggests that the market
did not trust insider trades as signals during the pandemic although they should have. We do not reach
significant results for our difference-in-difference regression which caps our capability of comparing
insider trading during the pandemic to insider trading in non-pandemic times.

Keywords

COVID-19, Insider Trading, NPR, SEC, Market Reactions.

Authors

Sandra Nordlöw (24736)
Einar Ottesen Kalman (24301)

Tutor

Ran Guo, Visiting Teacher, Department of Finance

Examiner

Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Acknowledgements

We would like to extend our gratitude to our tutor Ran Guo for his invaluable, continuous feedback
and help along the way. We would further want to thank Theodor Günther for well-needed assistance
in the data crunching process.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Sandra Nordlöw & Einar Ottesen Kalman, 2022
1. Introduction

1.1 Background
Towards the end of 2019, the contagious and deadly SARS-CoV-2 virus began spreading from the city
of Wuhan in China, and had by the beginning of March 2020 reached 114 countries worldwide
(WHO, 2020). The virus later became more known as COVID-19 and has as of 2022 reaped more
than 6,100,000 lives worldwide (Statista, 2022). As a consequence of the rapidly spreading virus, many
countries imposed restrictions throughout the spring of 2020, ranging from light recommendations to
month-long lockdowns in order to limit the spread of the virus. As borders closed, international trade
was severely impaired and the general uncertainty was high, stock markets started plunging. In what
afterwards was named the Coronavirus Crash of 2020, the US stock markets experienced the three
worst market drops in points in US history (Forbes, 2021). Generally, economic unpredictability of
this kind leads to stock market volatility at some point (Ahmad and Ramzan, 2016). Negative news
cause the stock market to drop and the drop is further accelerated by an overreaction causing panic
selling by both investors and automatically triggered algorithms. The behavioral nature of the
reactions raises an interesting question: Would a better-informed investor be able to make a financially
more sound decision in times of great uncertainty? Can outside traders benefit by following the trades
made by an insider?
        A security trade is labeled to be an “insider trade” if the trader is someone with great insight
into the company such as a C-level executive, a shareholder of 10% or more, a board member,
director, manager or similar. There are extensive law chapters that have been passed in order to
control insider trading, which in practice means that insiders have to report all the trades they make to
the Securities and Exchange Commission (the SEC) in the U.S. These filings become public
information as soon as they have been sent by the insider, which enables everyone to screen them.
Insider trades have a certain signaling value, showing the market how the insiders value their firms. As
a consequence they are actively followed by both business magazines and individuals. The base
assumption is that insiders have greater knowledge and insight than external investors, causing them
to be more informed and their purchase (sell) transactions to be an indication of future increases
(decreases) in the price of the security. Whether these signals are valuable or not depends on the
actual informativeness of the trades and is a repeatedly debated subject. This thesis aims to further
contribute to the discussion by addressing insiders’ informativeness during periods of crisis.
       Between the start of February and the end of March 2020, insiders of US-traded companies
sold shares for roughly $9.2 billion in their own companies (The Wall Street Journal, 2020). Previous
research has shown that insiders are better informed than the market and indeed earn abnormal
returns (Seyhun, 1986). However, that research did not dive deeper into the implications of insider
trading in times of crisis, when the market is more desperate for information than ever as it seeks
indications of how companies will perform in the new conditions forced upon them by the crisis.
Seyhun (1988, 1992, 1998) showed that insider traders seem to predict future market movements and
that they are contrarian investors. Fama and French (1988) argue that it is possible that insiders can
predict market movements simply because they are contrarian. Whether this was true or not under the
pandemic is something we try to address.
        The COVID-19 pandemic in general, and insider trading during the spring of 2020 in specific,
compose an interesting area of economic research as it is a current event whose effects still haven’t
been thoroughly documented by existing academia. Moreover, it would be interesting to investigate
how insiders acted under the most global crisis, whether they engaged more or less in trading and
whether there were any detectable reasons that either kept insiders away from trading on their
knowledge during the crisis or not.
1.2 Research Questions
The recency of the subject of this thesis and the potential use of understanding insider trading during
times of crisis for future use for both investors and researchers have prompted us to try to answer
questions that would help the above-mentioned actors in navigating the topic. This paper studies the
stock returns of the 494 largest public companies in the US during the first six months of 2020, the
period covering the Coronavirus Crash of 2020, in order to try to answer the the following research
questions:

i. How did the market react to insider trading during the advent of the COVID19 pandemic?

ii. Were insiders able to predict future stock development and earn abnormal profits on their trades made during the
pandemic?

iii. Were there any detectable patterns in insider trading during the pandemic?

1.3 Methodology
The thesis is to large extent an extension on Lakonishok and Lee’s (2001) paper “Are Insider Trades
Informative?”. The authors showed that insider trading often is financially beneficial to the insider,
but ignored by the market. We extend on Lakonishok & Lee’s findings by applying a similar
methodology in a new setting, namely during the first six months of the Covid-19 pandemic. The
purpose is to measure the signaling value of insider trades in times of great economic uncertainty as
well as to evaluate the informativeness of the trades. We first present summary statistics over insider
sales and purchases during the first six months of the pandemic, reported for small, medium and large
firms where the groups have been created on market cap basis. Like the above-mentioned authors, we
measure short-term market reactions to insider trades by considering the abnormal return of the
securities during the days surrounding each trade. Abnormal return is calculated by subtracting the
equally weighted S&P 500 return from the individual stock return of a five-day period. The S&P 500
is thus used as a proxy for overall market return.
       Following the methodology of Lakonishok & Lee, we also evaluate the performance of the
securities over longer time periods to determine the informativeness of the trades performed during
the spring of 2020, and their ability to predict stock returns. To determine whether aggregate insider
activity during the pandemic was able to predict stock development, we calculate a Net Purchase Ratio
(NPR) for all sample companies based on their insider activity during January to June 2020. The NPR
is calculated by dividing the net aggregate number of insider purchases by the total aggregate number
of insider transactions over the given six-month period. The net number of insider purchases is
calculated by subtracting the total amount of insider sales from the total number of insider purchases.
We further divide the securities into 10 portfolios, based on their NPR as of the formation date,
2020-07-30. The portfolios are created using the company's decile belongings, based on NPR. The
lowest decile constitutes portfolio 1 and the highest decile portfolio 10.
        Informed traders should make profitable transactions, implying that stocks with extensive
insider purchasing (selling) should show positive (negative) return looking forward, as the price of the
stocks increases (decreases), as predicted. The informativeness of the insider trading activity is thereby
evaluated by looking at the performance of the NPR portfolios following the formation date. In other
words, by evaluating if companies with extensive insider purchasing (selling), i.e. high (low) NPR,
during the start of the Codvid-19 pandemic, showed increasing (decreasing) stock prices following the
six month period. This is done by looking at both raw and abnormal returns for different time
intervals, from 6 months after the formation date and up until now, february 2020.
        We attempt to distinguish between returns produced by insider trading and returns based on
simple contrarian strategies by looking at post stock performance and synthesizing it in a table with
post-trade stock return.
        We further divide our data into three size groups depending on the securities market
capitalization, and calculate the average NPR for these three size groups. Despite Lakonishok & Lee
calculating NPR’s on insider transactions undertaken by managers, large shareholders and a
combination of both, we have refrained from doing so as our data sources did not allow us to include
that data in a way that did not incur extensive manual labor. What further motivated this exclusion
was the non-significant findings of Lakonishok & Lee for the individual groups mentioned. We group
our sample firms into three B/M (book-to-market) equity groups and three size groups based on
market capitalization. With the respective groups, we define the bottom three deciles as “Low B/M”
and “Small Firms”, the middle four deciles as “Medium B/M” and “Medium Firms”, and the top
three deciles as “High B/M” and “Large Firms”. We further calculate the average NPR of each group.
The goal is to be able to distinguish patterns between stocks with similar characteristics.
        Moreover, we divide our data on industry-basis to control for industry-related outlying results
that may have been abnormally impacted by the pandemic in any direction and hence weighting our
total results in a misleading direction. We also try to distinguish certain trends within different
industries. The industries used are the GICS sector classifications. Our results are reported in Table 6,
and we have created NPR portfolios within each industry and calculated the average NPR for each
industry.
        Lastly we run regressions on raw return, abnormal return and a difference-in-differences
regression. We run separate regressions for raw return and abnormal return as we want to control for
potential coefficient differences between what beats the market and what does not. We run separate
regressions on both raw returns and abnormal returns with and without dummies that control for
strong buy- and sell signals, which are given by an NPR>0.7 (strong buy signal) or <-0.7 (strong sell
signal), and another regression where we include dummies that control for industry fixed effects.
Companies with negative B/M are excluded in the regressions we make. Variables such as the
logarithm of market capitalization, the logarithm of book-to-market value, post 24 months return and
post 12 months return are included as control variables, controlling effects of different characteristics
as well as possible contrarian strategies.
       In our DiD analysis we compare our data from 2020 with comparable data from 2018. The
reason behind choosing 2018 and not 2019 is that since we compare return data on a one-year basis
after insider trades, data from 2019 would include returns that would have been impacted by the
pandemic which entered the scene in the winter 2019/2020, which would nullify our comparison. The
dummies included in our DiD analysis are one for NPR and one for year, as well as a DiD-dummy.

1.4 Results
Our results show that insiders were active in the beginning of the pandemic, seeing a peak in insider
trading in general and insider sales in specific in the early months of 2020. Moreover, our data shows
that stocks bought by insiders to a high degree deliver great return in the long-term, which suggests
that aggregate insider trading seems to have been predictive of future market movements, and could
be used as a tool to time the market, which is in-line with previous studies by Seyhun (1988, 1998) and
Lakonishok and Lee (2001). Additionally, we find that insiders who sold off stock also were predictive
of future negative stock development, which diverts from findings in previous literature, which has
concluded that insider sales are not predictive of stock price downturns. In our data, this is shown by
the low NPR portfolios, who thus have a relatively big proportion of insider sellers, generated
negative return post-insider trade. Our finding is indicated by the highest NPR portfolio earning
14,65% higher return than the lowest NPR portfolio in twenty months time, which is our longest
measured period. Moreover, we do find that large companies were priced more efficiently than
smaller companies during the COVID-19 pandemic, shown by lower abnormal return in larger
companies, hinting about insider information already being included in the pricing of the stock, which
is consistent with previous research (Lakonishok & Lee, 2001) made on stock pricing in non-crises. In
line with the findings of Lakonishok and Lee, we find that the biggest potential benefit in exploiting
insider trading activity lied in smaller companies during the COVID-19 pandemic. We find that
insiders in smaller companies are successful in predicting stock price increases, more so than insiders
in larger companies. In the regressions we run we get significant results when including dummies that
indicate strong buy or sell signals. The regressions suggest that a strong buy signal is associated with a
0.096 increase in return, while a strong sell signal is associated with a -0.115 decrease in return.
Moreover, we get that there is a negative correlation between NPR and return of -0.097. We do not
find any pattern related to industries and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic regarding NPR or
returns. We do not achieve significant results for the difference-in-differences regression that we run
between 2020 and 2018 beyond for one dummy, which hence limits the conclusions we can draw
from how insider trading during the pandemic differed from the trend line of insider trading. The
year-dummy suggests that there were higher returns in 2020 compared to in 2018 but beyond that we
cannot conclude anything of substance.

2. Theoretical framework and Literature review
As previously mentioned, the paper that has inspired the production of this thesis is “Are Insider
Trades Informative?” by Lakonishok and Lee (2001). In the article the authors investigate insider
trading over a 20-year period, from 1975 to 1995, with the goal of mapping how insider trading has
developed over time as well as to see if insiders earn abnormal returns and whether the insider trades
have any substantial effects on the market, in the form of market reactions following the insider trade.
       We have used the same methodology as the above-mentioned researchers, but our thesis
differs from their article in a few essential ways. One concerns the time period and the generality of
the conclusions. Lakonishok and Lee endeavor to analyze insider trading over a long period of time,
hence researching insider trading behavior and consequences under “normal conditions”, and are thus
able to draw generalizing conclusions about insiders ability to predict market movement and earn
abnormal returns, in general. We are interested in investigating insider trading under extreme
conditions, more specifically during the dawn of the COVID-19 pandemic that started in 2020. This
paper seeks to draw conclusions related to insider trading during the first hectic six months of 2020,
wherein the worst financial turmoil known as the Coronavirus Crash of 2020 went down, while our
predecessors sought conclusions on a general level without diving deep into any specific set of
conditions. With that being said, the potential contribution of our thesis to the existing literature on
this topic is revealing potential differences in insider trading behavior, profits and market reactions to
those insider trades under circumstances of extreme uncertainty. Learnings from this paper could thus
be used to understand the value of insider signals given by their trading in times when valuing stocks
is a close-to-impossible task, considering that great uncertainty about the future and the company’s
place in it often are accompanies crises like the one we experienced throughout the last two years.
Another aspect of what both Lakonishok and Lee as well as Seyhun brings up in their studies that we
check for as well, is contrarian strategies, meaning insiders tend to buy stocks when they have
performed badly. We must then check whether insiders simply use contrarian strategies or if they time
the market and buy undervalued stock due superior information possession.
        Moreover, we do reference different forms of the efficient market hypothesis in our thesis,
which is a concept first mentioned by Fama (1970). There are three forms of the effective market
hypothesis. The strong version claims that in an effective market there are no barriers to the flow of
information, all information is accounted for in the stock price and there exist no information
asymmetries. In such a market, no investor can make a more informed investment decision than his or
her peers. In other words, even insiders should not be able to make more informed decisions and
should therefore not be able to earn abnormal profits, i.e. beat the market. The semi-strong form
submits that no technical or fundamental analysis will help an investor gain advantage over the
market. The only way of doing so is using non-public information. The weak form of the effective
market hypothesis suggests that the stock price accounts for the data of past stock prices, rendering
technical analysis useless but fundamental analysis useful for an investor in determining whether a
stock is over- or undervalued. The methodology we use in this thesis, where we measure raw and
abnormal returns earned by insiders during the COVID-19 pandemic and compare them to returns
made in 2018 in a differences-in-difference analysis, does thus have implications for our perception of
an efficient market. Does a pandemic make the market more or less efficient? In other words, does
the uncertainty brought about by a pandemic or crisis impact which form of the efficient market
hypothesis that is relevant to take into consideration, and what implications does that in that case have
in terms of market reactions to insider trades? Does the potential information advantage held by
insiders increase in a pandemic when general uncertainty is widespread? After Fama, there have been
studies that show that we do not have a completely efficient market and that there are delays in the
incorporation of news into stock prices [Busse and Green (2002), Patell and Wolfson (1984), Jennings
and Starks (1985), Barclay and Litzenberger (1988)]. Comparing the studies of Lloyd Davied and
Canes (1978) and Busse and Green (2002), it becomes evident that markets have become more
efficient over the years: while the former found that stock prices adjusted for news in a matter of
minutes, the latter found that stock prices adjusted for news in a matter of seconds.
In this thesis, the efficient market hypothesis is of interest as we want to measure whether the market
considers insider signaling and prices it into the stock price during a time when uncertainty is
ubiquitous. If it would, we would expect stock prices of stocks that insiders have bought to be pushed
upwards in the short-term, and the reverse for insider sales. By checking for this, we can test the
market’s efficiency during a crisis, using the base assumption of the semi-strong form of the EMH
suggesting that insiders do know more than external investors.
        Marin (2013) found that insider purchases peak before a big increase in the stock price, and
that insider sales tend to be as most intensive right before a financial crash, such as the one the
markets experienced in the spring of 2020. This paper tests the findings by Marin in a new setting to
check if the conclusions of the paper holds also for a financial crash caused not by the default of
financial instruments or illiquidity in the market, but by a deadly pandemic that decimates the
worldwide labor force and hence has graver potential consequences for the economic activity in the
world long-term. Moreover, a pandemic comes suddenly and with no direct link to financial
fundamentals, which means that smart economists will not have the same prerequisites to predict a
crash induced by a pandemic compared to a financial bubble. We do however not use the
methodology used by Marin, but are able to put his findings under new light with the purpose of
drawing conclusions about the insider's predictive ability of their own stocks. Additionally, Marin
concluded that insiders tend to reach the peak of selling several months prior to the drop of the stock
price. The reason behind this is hypothesized in the article to be because of insiders being prohibited
to trade on non-public information, and in order to avoid SEC scrutiny they execute their trading
orders many months ahead of an announcement that will impact the stock price. We compare insider’s
behavior in this regard under new circumstances, namely the COVID-19 pandemic.
        There is already plenty of research published on the matter of insider trading that has
concluded that insiders do in fact earn abnormal returns [Seyhun (1986, 1998), Eckbo and Smith
(1998), Jeng, Metrick and Zeckhauser (1999)]. The aim of this study is to investigate whether this held
true during the COVID-19 pandemic, when forecasting and hence valuing stocks were harder than in
a long time.

3. Data
Our sample consists of data from 494 constituent firms taken of the S&P 500 index as of February
2022. We decided to use the S&P 500 constituents as our sample because of the following reasons:

    1. The S&P 500 includes companies from a wide array of industries, hence eliminating the risk
        of industry-specific noise in our data.
    2. The index provides us with a quantity of companies substantial enough to analyze and draw
        generalizing conclusions from.
    3. It covers the dominant companies in the US, accounting for over 75% of the total market
        capitalization of US companies across all exchanges.
Some data was retrieved from CRSP and Compustat via the WRDS database during the spring of
2022, when this study was conducted. This includes the data over closing day stock prices needed to
calculate returns, the data over current market capitalization of our sample firms as well as these
companies’ respective B/M ratios. When this study was written, the S&P 500 consisted of a total of
505 securities. The discrepancy between the 505 securities in the index and the 494 stocks we have
included in our data set has its explanation. The WRDS database lacked data on stock price for 11 of
the securities in the index for the period 2018-2022, which was crucial data for a stock to be included
in this study. One natural explanation for this is that some firms have more than one security, with
different voting rights, etc. Of the 494 stocks included 479 companies had any insider trading
happening under our sample period.
        Data over the insider transaction was obtained from WRDS and the section Insiders Data by
WRDS. It covers all non-derivative insider transactions performed and reported, in the sample
companies during the spring of 2020. The dataset is based on the reports sent in by the companies to
the Securities and Exchange Commission’s (the SEC), which contains all insider transactions that are
subject to disclosure according to Section 16(a) of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934. The data
used in this study is from Form 4-filings, which is a filing that must be sent to the SEC whenever
there is any change in beneficial ownership of a company made by an insider.
        Unlike Lakonishok & Lee (2001), we choose to not classify our data into different groups
depending on the type of insider, i.e. “Management”, “Large Shareholders” and “Others”. There are
two reasons behind this exclusion. The first one is that we faced issues with finding and synthesizing
data on type of insider with our other data. The other is that the vast majority of insider traders are in
the company management. Previous research has found that only a small fraction of the insider trades
are performed by large shareholders (Lakonishok & Lee, 2001). This means that the results we would
receive if we were to include that division in our thesis would either way be heavily weighted towards
the results of insiders pertaining to the management group. We then deduced that we could proceed
with our study without including the type of insider without losing important nuance or substance to
this thesis.
       One reminder that Lakonishok & Lee included in their paper and that may be of use to
mention here as well is that commercial banks, investment banks, insurance companies, investment
advisers, pension funds, brokers, employee benefit plans and mutual funds do not need to report their
trading of a certain stock even if they hold more than 10% of the shares in the company as long as
they acquired the shares without the intention to change or influence control over the company. Many
institutional investors do however report their transactions as a precaution to possible legal action
against them. This means that there may be some major trades that are not included in our sample
due to them being executed by any above-mentioned entity which would have exercised their right to
not report the trade to the SEC.
        In this study we look at two types of trading: “Sales” and “Purchases”, which refer to
open-market or private purchases and sales of stock. These are derived from the Form 4-filings from
the SEC, which are the forms that report insider sales and purchases. Sales of shares acquired by
exertion of options are categorized as “Sales”. Other transactions and types of securities are excluded
from this study. While Lakonishok & Lee presented a third trading type, “Option”, we have excluded
this category. The “Option” category referred to the acquisition of shares through exercising options,
warrants or convertible bonds. The reason we exclude this category from our study is that our
working hypothesis is that the market signal of an insider exercising an option to acquire a share will
be far more ubiquitous compared to the non-option acquisition of the stock by the insider. As US
federal law requires public companies to disclose the compensation of high-ranking officers, any
investor interested in options that may be exercised by a C-level employee of the company can be
found in the latest 10-K filed by the company on the EDGAR portal. With that being said, exercising
options should be included in the current pricing of the stock and hence it is excluded from our
thesis.
The data on sales and purchases is then used to calculate NPR for each company and group, whose
calculation is given by:

                                                              𝑁𝑒𝑡 𝐴𝑔𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑒 𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑟 𝑃𝑢𝑟𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑠
                 𝑁𝑃𝑅 = 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐴𝑔𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑒 𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑟 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠

Throughout the following article we categorize our sample firms into three size and three
book-to-market (B/M) equity groups. B/M is calculated by the following equation:

                                                                                        𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒
                           𝐵/𝑀 = 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑡𝑦

We also look at the abnormal return of different stocks and groups, calculated as:

                           𝐴𝑏𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 =
           𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 − 𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑦 𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 𝑜𝑓 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑝/𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒/𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒

4. Summary Statistics
Table 1 presents summary statistics for each category of sirm size and transaction type, for the
treatment period of January - June 2020. Presented are the average number of trades per firm during
the period and the average fraction of companies with at least one insider transaction of respective
type; purchase or sale. Statistics are also shown for the total sample and both transactions together.
Table 2 presents the monthly statistics over our sample firms’ insider trading activity over the period
January-June 2020. Both the number of trades made during the period as well as the fraction of firms
in our sample with at least one insider purchase or sale is given by Table 2.
        Our first (1) hypothesis was that insider trading would be more frequent in larger companies
compared to small companies, as a result of larger companies having greater headcount than smaller
ones and hence having more insiders that can trade. Moreover, as larger companies are more heavily
scrutinized we expect more trading activity in these companies. Additionally, (2) we expected insiders
to have sold more in the very start of the pandemic but have started to purchase more after the big
index drops that happened in the Corona Crash, due to panic selling and a better understanding than
the market of when their own stock is undervalued. Lastly, (3) we suspect a peak in the number of
insider trades around the Corona Crash of 2020, caused by panic selling and a domino effect of it, as
well as contrarian strategies are expected to kick in.
        The results showed in Table 1 that there was at least one insider trade in 91% of our sample
firms in 2020, and that a typical company during our sample period averages 26,51 insider trades
during our sample period of six months (14,24 purchases and 12,27 sales). In the article written by
Lakonishok & Lee (2001), their sample of companies and insider trades in those companies between
1975-1995 averaged 20 trades a year, with sales exceeding purchases by far. This means that we saw
more insider trades during six months than Lakonishok & Lee denoted per year. Hence, our results
show that insider trading has increased significantly since the 1990’s. It is reasonable to assume
however that this level of insider trading is abnormal and caused by the circumstances of the
pandemic, even if it would have increased incrementally over the years since Lakonishok and Lee
conducted their study.


Figure 1: Aggregated number of insider trades per day of the sample firms
The figure presents the total number of insider transactions performed each day during the period of January - June 2020,
for the 494 firms included in the sample. Transactions refers to non-derivative transactions, purchase and sell orders,
reported by Form 4 filings to the SEC. The figure only shows the dates up until the beginning of June, since no
transactions under the mentioned conditions were reported for the subsequent dates.

        Moreover, we find in the results in Table 1 that insider trading is more frequent in larger
companies (29,03 per six months) compared to smaller ones (25,66 per six months), which confirms
our (1) hypothesis. This could be explained by bigger firms having a larger headcount and hence have
more insiders that can trade their own company’s security. Another identifiable trend that can be
derived from the results displayed in Table 1 is that the fraction of insider sales and purchases is the
same across size groups, while purchases exceed sales when it comes to the amount of trades. The gap
between the number of insider purchases and sales becomes more narrow for larger firms compared
to smaller companies. Finding the reason behind why insiders sold or purchased stock during the
spring of 2020 is not the purpose of this thesis, instead our aim is to investigate how insiders acted
during the Coronacrash and how their trades were perceived by- and performed on the market.
        As seen and displayed in Table 2, the data confirms our third (3) hypothesis about an insider
trading peak in February/March of 2020, in connection to the Corona Crash. These results can also
be seen in Figure 1. Compared to the preceding and following months, there was an abnormally high
insider trade frequency in February (over double the number of trades in January) which is the month
when COVID-19 had started to spread across western countries, including the USA, and lockdowns
and other restrictions were imposed over several countries (Sencer, 2022). This is in line with the
findings of Marin (2013) who found that a peak in insider sales often precedes a financial crisis.
However, while Marin found that this peak often occurs several months before a financial crash, our
data points at increased insider activity just weeks before the crash. This could suggest that in times of
crisis, the time advantage held by insiders gets smaller and that insider sales could be seen as
informative of the development of the stock in the upcoming weeks, not months into the future.
Moreover, Table 2 also confirms our second (2) hypothesis, with February being the only month
where the number of insider sales exceeded the number of purchases. After February, insider
purchasing once again overtook insider selling.
        While there was insider trading of both sorts in only 29% of our sample firms in January,
there were insider trades of both types, purchases and sales, happening in over 60% of our sample
firms in February. In March, the insider activity dropped again, to further decline in April and then
increase again in May. Against that background, we can conclude that insider trading happened across
many more companies right before the crash compared to after the crash. The deviating numbers in
June can be explained by the trade-stop occurring in the summer months. In summary, all of our
hypotheses were confirmed by the sample data.
        The results accounted for in Table 2 are in line with what (Marin, 2013) found when
investigating insider trading taking place around financial crashes. The author found that insider sales
reach their peak in the time preceding a financial crash, and that insider purchases tend to reach their
peak right before a big increase in the stock’s price. In Marin’s findings however, they concluded that
insiders tend to reach the peak of selling several months prior to the drop of the stock price. The
reason behind this is hypothesized in the article to be because of insiders being prohibited to trade on
non-public information, and in order to avoid SEC scrutiny they execute their trading orders many
months ahead of an announcement that will impact the stock price.
        In our findings, insider trading and foremost insider selling reached its peak in February 2020,
only one month before the Coronacrash of 2020 began (Mazur et al., 2020). A plausible explanation
for the discrepancy in our findings compared to Marin’s (2013) findings could be explained by the
different nature of our research compared to Marin’s (2013). A pandemic like the one experienced in
2020 will have a ubiquitous impact across all aspects of human activity, rendering changes to the
economic landscape from one day to another. This gives rise to drastic revaluations of future earnings
of companies in a way that could not be predicted several months earlier by insiders. As per our
results, insiders in our sample firms were still selling off their assets prior to the actual crash, i.e. in
February, but due to the paradigm-shifting nature of a deadly pandemic, the time advantage that
insiders have had can have become much shorter compared to under other circumstances, such as the
ones under which Marin (2013) performed his studies.
        Another reason why the above theory may hold true is linked to the research on insider
trading made by Meulbroek (1991). Meulbroek found that the SEC generally investigates insider
purchases to a greater extent than it goes after and prosecutes insider selling that has been made on
non-public information. Meulbroek found that 87% of insider trading cases filed by the SEC between
1980 and 1989 concerned insider purchases. Marin (2013) reached similar findings on sample data
during the period 1995-2002. Considering that February was the only month where insider selling
exceeded insider purchases, and that the level of sales was >200% higher compared to all other
months in our sample period except one, our data may suggest that insiders may not worry and hence
not hesitate as much when selling off their own stock compared to when they are about to purchase
that same stock on non-public information. Since the COVID-19 pandemic created a lot of
uncertainty during the spring of 2020, it can also have been used as a cover for insiders to sell off their
stock, when the real decision base for the sale might be of other, non-public and thus illegal grounds.

5. Trading period return
Table 3 presents the abnormal return for the 5 days following an insider transaction in our sample and
aims to measure the market reaction following the announcement of the insider trade, as it is
reasonable to assume that the information about the trade reaches the market within these five days.
In accordance with the methodology used by Lakonishok and Lee (2001) we calculate daily abnormal
return for the stocks following an insider trade and sum these over the 5 days, which is what is
presented in Table 3. Abnormal return is calculated by subtracting the equally weighted sample return
from the individual stock return. Companies are divided into size categories on a market capitalization
basis. The segments are determined as described in the introduction with the bottom and top three
deciles being the “small firms” and “large firms” categories, while the middle four deciles constitute
the “medium firms” segment. Regarding the division of companies into B/M groups, the same

methodology has been followed, referring to the use of deciles, where the bottom three deciles
constitute the “Low B/M” segment and so on. The top row shows the results in terms of abnormal
trades made in firms with different book-to-market equity values.
        Our first (1) hypothesis is that if the market is semi-effective (meaning that all info except
insider, non-public information is priced into the security), and an insider purchase (sell) is a positive
(negative) signal to outsiders then the market would react to the purchase (sell) signal by following and
pushing the stock price upwards (downwards) causing positive (negative) short-term return. However,
we forecast the tendencies to be clearer for the purchase transaction than the sell transactions, as sales
is not an as clear signal due to the possibility of it being caused by differing incentives. A
contradictory hypothesis is presented as our second (2) one, which depends on the rejection of the
first one, and forecasts insider purchases (sales) to be surrounded by negative (positive) returns. The
hypothesis is based on an assumption of low market efficiency and the signals not being followed by
the market. In-line with the weak form of the efficient market hypothesis, the insiders would then buy
shares when they deem them undervalued by the market, with the belief that they will earn money on
a later increase in share price induced by factors currently ignored by the consensus. Insider purchases
(sells) should therefore be surrounded by days of negative (positive) return, when the stock is
performing poorly, as long as the market does not follow the insiders pushing the price upwards
(downwards).
       The results show that insider purchases were surrounded by negative abnormal returns on
average (-0,28% for the 5 days following the transaction) and sales by positive abnormal returns on
average (+0,20% for the 5 days following the transaction), causing us to reject the first (1) hypothesis.
The results are rather in-line with the second hypothesis, indicating that the market was ineffective
and the insiders trading based on the weak form of the EMH. The aggregated abnormal returns were
close to zero across all firm sizes and B/M groups. All groups of insider purchases were followed by
average negative abnormal returns for the insider except for in medium-sized firms with low
B/M-value. On the sales side, all sales generated average positive abnormal returns around the trading
date except for medium-sized firms with high B/M-value and large firms with medium and high
B/M-value.
       Concerning market efficiency, Busse & Green (2002) showed that news nowadays can be
incorporated in a stock’s price within a matter of seconds. This means that if insiders do have more
information than external investors, stock prices should surge after insider purchases and the contrary
for insider sales. Considering that we are looking at returns over a period of five days as presented in
Table 3, it is possible that other news beyond the insider trade had an impact on the stock in any
direction, hence creating noise that blurs our results.
Another implication of the results shown in table 3 are the implications of these insider trades as
signals to external investors. If the market trusted insiders actions as guidance for their own
investment decisions, we should expect the stock price to increase after a trade, with potential to beat
the index development during these days. What our data suggests is that the market did not perceive
insider trades as powerful signals during the COVID-19 pandemic, or at least did not react to the
information efficiently, which was somewhat expected considering the general uncertainty brought
about by the pandemic.
        The market reacts stronger to purchases compared to sales as there can be several reasons
behind an insider selling stock, but the main motivation to buy a stock must be to make money, which
is something that Lakonishok & Lee (2001) also point out. Our sample data further suggests that
there wasn’t any substantial difference in scrutiny of smaller firms compared to larger firms during the
pandemic. As seen in Table 3, firms of all sizes show abnormal returns close to zero around an insider
trade. Except for Low B/M, medium-sized firms, there were no purchasing insiders that beat the
market, while many sellers timed and beat the market, which is shown by these insiders yielding
abnormal returns above zero. This conclusion has its limitations however considering our sample
consists of the S&P 500, i.e. USA’s largest and most scrutinized companies. All in all, our sample
suggests that the market more or less ignored insider trades across all firm sizes during the Covid-19
pandemic, which is something that can be concluded considering that the miniscule abnormal return
is uniform across all firm sizes and firm characteristics. This is aligned with the results of Seyhun
(1986), Pascutti (1996) and Lakonishok & Lee (2001) on their research on insider trading under
“normal” conditions.

6. NPR decile portfolio performance
Table 4 presents the performance of different NPR portfolios. The portfolios were formed based on
the net purchase ratio of the sample companies, over the six month period. Portfolio 1, “Lowest”
consists of the firms in the lowest decile based on NPR while portfolio 10, “Highest”, consists of the
highest decile. The table presents 6 months, 12 months, 18 months and 20 months (“Until now”) post
holding period raw returns, starting from the NPR portfolio formation date. It also presents the 12
months post holding period abnormal return, calculated as the raw return minus the equally weighted
raw return of the sample, for the period. 6 months, 12 months and 24 months prior raw returns are
also reported, with the aim of controlling form contrarian strategies. Lastly, average NPR,
book-to-market value and market capitalization for each portfolio is presented, together with the
number of firms included in each group. Results are also shown for the sample firms with no insider
activity, “No”, and for the sample firms divided into “Positive” and “Negative” NPR.
        Our working hypothesis is that insiders should have better insight into the fair valuation of
their stock compared to the average external investor and hence better decision basis for when to sell
or buy the stock. As a result of the high uncertainty caused by the pandemic, connected high volatility
of the market and panic reactions of the average investor, insiders should have an increased
information advantage and the ability to make profitable decisions. Thus, low NPR-firms should
show lower raw returns and negative abnormal returns and firms with high NPR higher raw returns
and positive abnormal returns, since low NPR represents extensive insider selling and high NPR
extensive insider purchasing during the six months period.
        The results in Table 4 reveal that insiders in the highest NPR portfolio earned the highest post
period raw return for all holding periods; between 33% and 36%, pointing towards the hypothesis
being true. Likewise, the lowest NPR portfolio was among the lowest performing for all
post-formation periods. For the intermediate NPR portfolios, the results are not as clear. Considering
abnormal return, it is possible to see that the lowest portfolio did, as expected, have negative 12
month abnormal return. Indicating that insiders did well in selling the securities. For the highest NPR
portfolio, the 12 month abnormal return was positive and also the highest, indicating that these
insiders also made profitable decisions. However, as for raw returns, there is no clear linear correlation
between NPR and abnormal return for the other portfolios. The interpretation of these results is that
when insiders do buy (sell) substantially more than they sell (buy) in aggregate, it is a reliable signal of
future gains (downturns) on the stock. However, unless NPR is very high or low, the signal might not
be as reliable. Our first hypothesis is hence confirmed by our sample data, albeit with the notion that
it is most reliable as an indicator in extreme cases, NPR-wise.
        Another interesting finding in Table 4 is that the average market capitalization of the
high-NPR firms is the lowest in the sample, while the average market capitalization of the low-NPR
firms is the highest. Considering that the high-NPR firms had the largest abnormal return, this could
hint about the market being more efficient (Fama, 1970) for larger firms compared to smaller firms,
making it more difficult to earn an abnormal return in these securities. A possible reason for this
being that larger firms are more closely followed. It also tells us that insiders bought more (relative to
sales) in smaller companies than in larger ones, hinting about insiders having a greater information
advantage in smaller firms compared to in larger ones.

        Moreover, Figure 2 illustrates annual raw return both post- and prior to the formation date,
across all NPR portfolios. As seen in Figure 2, the highest NPR portfolio had both the worst track
record and the best post annual return, meaning the group of companies where insiders bought the
most in relation to insider sales were the firms that had the worst stock price decreases in the past was
and also the largest stock price increase after the formation date. Figure 2 showcases the correlation
between prior- and post-insider trade performance of our NPR portfolios. What becomes evident
when looking at the figures is that insiders are contrarian investors that prefer to purchase stock
whose prior stock performance has been bad. They are moreover successful in predicting the future
stock price development of these stocks, as shown by these NPR portfolios’ return. Whether this is a
predictive ability caused by greater understanding of firm fundamentals or is a result of a contrarian
strategy ican not be fully explained by these figures, and should therefore be kept in mind.

Figure 2: Prior and post annual raw return of net purchase ratio portfolios
We form 10 portfolios based on the number of insider transactions made in the respective companies during our sample
period. We only include those firms that have at least one insider transaction during the sample period. NPR is the number
of insider purchases minus the number of sales divided by the total number of insider transactions. “Prior” refers to the
average one-year holding period return before the decile formation date. “Post” refers to the average one-year return
starting from the decile formation date.

Against the above background, we can conclude that the data points towards insiders being able to
predict future market movements also under a financial crash (in our case, the Corona crash of 2020),
which is aligned with the findings of Seyhun (1998, 1992, 1988). Seyhun found that stocks that
declined more during a financial crisis were the same stocks where the most bought by insiders. He
also showed that the stocks that were bought the most during a crisis were the same stocks that
generated the largest positive return following the crisis. The same is found for our sample firms as
shown by Figure 2.
       Lakonishok, Shleifer & Vishny (1994) found an inverse correlation between B/M-value and
long-term past stock performance. This holds true also for our sample firms as seen in Table 4. The
reasons behind this can have many roots according to the authors. A firm with low risk and whose
future cash flows are discounted at a low rate would be low B/M, as well as a firm that are overvalued
or have a lot of intangible assets that are not reflected in the accounting book due to R&D being
expensed. In accordance with this finding, high NPR firms have higher B/M-values while low NPR
firms show lower B/M-values, which also holds true for our sample if comparing the highest NPR
decile with the lowest NPR decile.
        One possible explanation for the clear positive trend in returns for high NPR firms is that
purchasing insiders really do have an ability to predict future stock price development, and were able
to do so during the COVID-19 pandemic. The conclusion reached by Lakonishok & Lee (2001), that
insider buys were found as more informative by the market compared to sales, is something that
according to our sample data also holds true under the Corona Crash of 2020. However, comparing
our results to the ones found by Lakonishok & Lee, many of our sample firms experienced negative
returns prior to the insider trade while their sample firms all showed positive returns also prior to the
insider trades. It was however not unexpected that the -6m, -12m and -18m return were negative as
the end date for thesee return measurements was the 30th of June 2020, i.e. after the worst market
dips caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, meaning many stocks had seen big downturns by then. In
total, this shows that the signals sent to external investors by inside traders follow the same pattern
under crisis as they do under normal circumstances, but that they are reinforced by the crisis and that
the results become more extreme.

7. Performance of different size and B/M groups
Previous research has shown that abnormal returns are dependent on firm characteristics. Some
investing strategies are for example claimed to work better in smaller stocks compared to larger stocks
(Chopra, Lakonishok and Ritter (1992)). The findings are consistent with the hypothesis that the
efficient market hypothesis (Fama, 1970) works more efficiently for larger stocks compared to for
smaller stocks. The reason behind this is assumed to be that larger firms are under more scrutiny than
smaller firms (Lakonishok & Lee, 2001). In table 5 we aim to examine these relationships. In order to
investigate the relationship between stock return, firm characteristics (B/M-value) and firm size
(market capitalization), we calculate abnormal returns for firms in differe nt size groups, B/M groups
and NPR groups with the lowest three deciles of each denoted as “Small”, “Lowest B/M” and LNPR,
respectively. The middle four deciles of each type are denoted “Medium”, “Medium B/M” and
“MNPR”, respectively. The highest three deciles are denoted as “Large”, “Highest B/M” and
“HNPR”, respectively. Averages are shown for the return of each group. This time, the abnormal
return is calculated as the return of the stock minus the equally weighted return of the stocks in the
same B/M and size quintiles, in order to further investigate the relationship. The group of firms with
no insider trading activity, and thereby no NPR, are presented under in the “No” columns.
        In accordance with previous research, we hypothesize that it should be possible to determine
patterns across size and B/M groups, as the different characteristics have a possibility of correlating
differently with returns as well as insiders information advantage. High B/M-value means that the
market values a company’s equity cheaply compared to the book value of the equity. Our hypothesis is
that high B/M firms yield lower abnormal returns compared to low B/M firms.
        In table 5 abnormal returns are presented on a six-month basis, a 12-month basis, an
18-month basis and 20 month basis (from the formation date until now). For comparison, 12 month
post formation date raw return is also included. Looking at the total result of the statistics, we can
conclude that there is no clear correlation between B/M ratio and abnormal return in these periods in
our sample. In other words, our above-mentioned hypothesis is rejected, meaning the EMH does not
seem to work better for larger companies during times of crisis.
       Only in the mid-cap segment does the HNPR portfolio outperform the LNPR portfolio. For
large firms, the HNPR portfolio largely underperforms compared to the LNPR and MNPR
portfolios, which is consistent with Lakonishok & Lee’s findings. Lakonishok & Lee (2001) suggests
that the reason behind this is that larger companies put more efforts into discouraging illegal insider
trading by using strict and extensive compliance policies, which in turn should have the consequence
of disabling insiders from earning abnormal returns from trades made on non-public information.
        Extending these findings, Figure 3 graphically presents the one-year postformation period
returns across different size- and NPR groups. One trend that can be identified in Figure 3 is that
there was an inverse correlation between firm size and raw returns during our sample period. We also
find that for small and medium firms, firms with high NPR (HNPR, Buy) had higher post-formation
year returns than the ones with medium and low NPR. This indicates that the insiders made informed
and profitable decisions in these two size groups. The pattern does not hold for large firms, where the
HNPR firms generated the lowest return. A possible explanation can again be the fact that larger

Figure 3: Post annual raw return in % of different size and NPR groups.
We form 10 portfolios at the end of June each year based on the net purchase ratio (NPR) of each company. We calculate
NPR, the number of purchases minus the number of sales divided by the total number of insider transactions. “Insiders”
include managers, board members, shareholders of >10% and anyone else deemed to have access to non-public
information about the company. We use only firms with at least one insider transaction during our sample period when
forming the 10 portfolios. “Sell” represents the lowest three NPR deciles, “ Mix” represents the middle four NPR deciles,
and “Buy” represents the top three NPR deciles. Bars designated “Small”, “Medium” and “Large” comprise the bottom
three, the middle four and the top three deciles, respectively, These deciles are based on market capitalization. We plot
post-one-year holding period returns, which are equally weighted average returns of the firms in each group, for different
size and NPR groups.

firms are under higher scrutiny causing them to be more fairly priced and insiders to have less of an
information advantage.
       Contrary to the findings of Lakonishok & Lee (2001), we do find major differences between
the HNPR and LNPR portfolios across B/M groups. We detect the overall single biggest spread in
annual abnormal return (AR+12m) between HNPR and LNPR (20%) for large, low B/M stocks,
which is the segment of large growth stocks, such as Twitter, Meta and Microsoft. What is interesting
is that it is the HNPR that has a negative abnormal return of -16% while the LNPR portfolio
performed an abnormal return over the next twelve months of 4%. This suggests that insiders
definitely were not able to predict long-term stock price development. In line with the above given
argument, this finding suggests that insiders had no edge over other investors, which is supported by
the notion about the efficient market hypothesis [Fama (1970)], but could also be explained by the
price momentum [Jegadeesh and Titman (1993)] that suggests that stocks that perform well or poorly
continue to do so. For smaller, low B/M firms, insiders do seem to have an advantage over the market
as the HNPR portfolio was able to generate a 9% abnormal return over the post formation year
(AR+12m). This makes sense, considering the assumption that larger firms are under greater scrutiny
than smaller ones.
       We detect another finding contrary to a pattern found by Lakonishok & Lee (2001) among the
small cap, high B/M firms – so-called value stocks. These value stocks are usually considered “cheap”
and hence, insiders tend to buy these stocks (Lakonishok & Lee, 2001). They are considered cheap
since the valuation of these companies is below the value of the firms’ assets. While Lakonishok &
Lee found that insider sales in this firm category was followed by largely negative abnormal returns,
our sample shows that a sale of these stocks was followed by a positive abnormal return (7%). The
abnormal return is positive both on a six-month basis as well as in a longer time horizon. This does
not apply for larger firms, where the LNPR portfolios (i.e. where insiders have sold off) show
negative abnormal returns on all time frames. This indicates that insiders who were selling in small
sized stocks companies were unsuccessful in predicting an upcoming downturn in stock price for their
companies during the pandemic while insiders in large companies were more successful in doing so.
Lakonishok & Lee found as previously mentioned that the informativeness of insider sales decreased
the larger the company was. Our findings suggest that even for small firms, the informativeness seems
to be low.
        In summary, our data suggests that insiders in small companies were successful in predicting
price upswings but not downturns, while insiders in larger companies were not very successful in
predicting neither stock price decreases or increases.

8. Performance in different sectors
We sought to broaden the potential insights in this thesis regarding insider trading by adding an angle
of approach not used by Lakonishok & Lee in their 2001 paper “Are Insider Trades Informative?”.
The reason behind including this segment in the thesis is to complement chapter 7, which investigated
firm characteristics on a size- and B/M level. This following chapter will endeavor to detect abnormal
activity as per NPR scores, raw returns and abnormal returns in different sectors, all showcased in
Table 8. The sectors included are the 11 sectors of the GICS sector classification.
        Our main hypothesis is that industries with high average NPR will demonstrate higher average
abnormal return than industries with low average NPR. This would be in-line with earlier hypotheses
expecting high NPR firms to outperform low NPR firms, if insiders indeed have an information
advantage. Our second hypothesis is regarding fluctuations between sectors. We believe it possible for
the Health Care and Consumer Discretionary sectors to show higher insider trading activity, caused by
them being abnormally affected by the pandemic itself and the economic downturn, respectively.
        Table 6 reports the performance of different NPR portfolios across different sectors, given in
the left column. In the table, both overall return and abnormal return is presented alongside the
number of firms included in each portfolio. The average NPR was negative for the Information
Technology sector, Communication Services and Real Estate, meaning those experienced a lot of
insider sales, relative to other industries. The industries with the highest NPR were the Materials,
Energy and Financial sector. This means that insiders were purchasing a lot in companies with
business in the materials industry, energy and financials during our sample period. What is interesting
to point out is that the sector that one may think of as most concerned by an ongoing pandemic, the
health care sector, would be in one of the extremes when it comes to average NPR. Nonetheless, our
sample shows that the average NPR in the health care sector was 0,003 which is the second closest to
zero among our sample industries. The consumer discretionary sector did not show a specifically high
or low NPR either, although higher than the healthcare sector. This indicates that there was mixed
sentiments whether to sell or buy among the insiders in both these sectors, which for the health care
sector could be explained by the uncertainty revolving around an eventual vaccine and how the
healthcare sector would be impacted by the pandemic in general. Of course, there may also be outliers
in our data that could weigh the industry average to a certain direction, such as a vaccine-finder
candidate like Pfizer or an outperformer within consumer discretionaries.
       Looking at how the different sectors have performed compared to index, we evaluate
abnormal returns per industry for different holding periods, which is calculated by subtracting the
equally weighted average of our sample firms from the return of each stock, before averaging for the
different sectors. Looking at the abnormal return from the formation data and up until now,
Table 6: NPR portfolio performances in different sectors, %
table 6 shows that the sectors with the highest abnormal return are the Financial sector, the Energy
sector and the Consumer Discretionary sector. The biggest losses in terms of abnormal return until
now have been drawn in the Communication Services sector, the Consumer Staples sector and in the
Utilities sector. However, considering raw return instead of abnormal return, denoted by R6 for
six-month return and R12 for twelve-month return, Table 8 shows that raw return has been positive
for all sectors across all NPR levels with an exception for High NPR-firms in the Utilities sector and
High NPR-firms in the Consumer Staples sector. There is in other words no apparent correlation
between NPR and returns across industries.
Apart from this, all sectors have been generating positive returns both on a six-month and
twelve-month basis. Highest six-month return was given in the Consumer Discretionary industry
while the highest twelve-month return was given in the Energy sector, basically confirming the results
given by abnormal return. The Utilities sector generated the lowest returns both on a six-month basis
and a twelve-month basis.
       We can further conclude from Table 8 that superior performance by high NPR firms is not
uniform across industries. It was correct in the Communications Services, Financials, Industrials and
to some degree Materials industry. Hence, those are the industries where insider trades were indeed
informative to external investors. As the constituents of the Communication Services, Financials and
Industrials industries are all far apart in terms of firm characteristics (B/M) we cannot conclude to
detect a clear pattern between B/M industries and return. Nor can we conclude that insider trading
worked as an informative signal to external investors during the COVID-19 pandemic.

9. Regression Analysis
Previous to this chapter we have presented raw- and abnormal returns for firm groups depending on
B/M ratio, size, industry and net purchase ratio. In accordance with the methodology used by
Lakonishok & Lee (2001), we run a regression on the variables previously looked into. The purpose is
to investigate whether insiders were able to predict cross-sectional returns with their trades during the
COVID-19 pandemic, which may be indicative for future crises. As shown in Table 4 and Figure 2,
insiders tend to buy stocks that have performed poorly in the past. As Debondt & Thaler (1985)
showed that stocks that have been long-term losers in the past usually outperform past winners, we
want to make an adjustment for differences in long-term returns. Contrarian strategies, as mentioned
in previous chapters, target this phenomenon, and is something that insiders usually reside to, as
shown by Lakonishok & Lee (2001) and Seyhun (1988, 1998). As we found in Table 6, there are big
differences in returns over the period preceding the trade. Hence, when determining insiders ability to
predict cross-sectional returns, we need to control for both intermediate- and long-term past
performance as well as for B/M-value and size. In order to undertake this task, we use a multilinear
regression approach in order to test insiders’ ability to predict cross-sectional returns while assessing
statistical significance.
        We run a cross-sectional OLS regression (regression 1) where the dependent variable (Raw
Returni) is the raw return of the stock i over the next twelve months, and include robust standard
errors in order to obtain unbiased standard errors on our coefficients. The explanatory variables
include measures on insider trading activity and control variables. The main variable, NPRi, measures
insider trading activity, and takes on the minimum value of minus one (-1) when insiders are only
selling, and a maximum value of one (1) when insiders are only buying. The control variables used are
LBMRi [ln(B/M)], LSIZEi [ln(market capitalization)] and two independent variables that capture past
returns. Intermediate-term past holding return is measured by PR12, holding return in the past 12
months, while long-term past performance is measured by PR24i, return over the past 24 months.
Previous research, including Lakonishok & Lee (2001), suggests that insider’s ability to predict returns
is greater in larger companies compared to smaller companies which is why we include a control
variable for the size. In addition, differences across B/M values have shown to be of interest,
explaining the LBMR control variable. Past performance control variables are included to control for
contrarian strategies. We also run a regression using the same independent variables but put Abnormal
Return as an independent variable instead, (regression 4), in order to detect whether there are any
fundamental indicators in insider trading, company characteristics and past return for a stock’s ability
to beat index. In all regressions we measure returns in percentages.
        We run regressions, on raw- and abnormal return (regression 2 and 5, respectively), including
dummy variables for strong buy- or sell-signals, similar to what is done in Lakonishok and Lee’s
regressions. While their buy-dummy took on the value of one (1) when NPR≥0.95, the net dollar
volume traded is in the top 25% and there are at least three different insiders trading, our buy-dummy
takes on the value of one (1) when NPR≥0.7. We lower the cut-off value for NPR and ignore the two
other signals included by Lakonishok and Lee because of a couple of reasons. We do have a smaller
sample compared to Lakonishok and Lee, which speaks for lowering the cut-off point. We also lack
data on dollar volume traded as well as on individual trader identification, but the results would be
interesting nonetheless as an NPR of 0.7 or -0.7 should still be considered strong signals in either
direction. The goal of including these dummy variables is to capture the correlation between insider
purchases or sales and stock return.
        Lastly, we run regressions, on raw and abnormal returns (regression 3 and 6, respectively),
with one dummy variable for all sectors except one. The goal of these regressions is to fix the results
in regression 1) and 3) for industry, sector, effects. These are systematic differences between the
sectors that could affect the regressions and their explanatory value.

The regressions runned on 12 months raw returns

Regression 1:
       Raw Returni = α1  + β1 LBMRi + β2 LSIZEi + β3 PR12i + β4 PR24i + β5NPRi

Regression 2, with dummy variables for strong buy- or sell-signals:
      Raw Returni = α1  + β1 LBMRi + β2 LSIZEi + β3 PR12i + β4 PR24i + β5NPRi +
                                    β6 DPLi + β7DSLi

Regression 3, industry fixed effects:
      Raw Returni = α1  + β1 LBMRi + β2 LSIZEi + β3 PR12i + β4 PR24i + β5NPRi +
                                       β6DSECTORi

The regressions runned on 12 months abnormal returns

Regression 4:
    Abnormal Returni = α1  + β1 LBMRi + β2 LSIZEi + β3 PR12i + β4 PR24i + β5NPRi

Regression 5, with dummy variables for strong buy- or sell-signals:
   Abnormal Returni = α1  + β1 LBMRi + β2 LSIZEi + β3 PR12i + β4 PR24i + β5NPRi +
                                    β6 DPLi + β7DSLi

Regression 6, industry fixed effects:
      Raw Returni = α1  + β1 LBMRi + β2 LSIZEi + β3 PR12i + β4 PR24i + β5NPRi +
                                       β6DSECTORi

The numbers reported in table 7 are the coefficients from our regressions, all adjusted to get robust
standard errors. The numbers on top represent the different regressions made. Column 2 and 5
include the dummies for strong buy or sell signals, while column 3 and 6 include dummy variables for
different industries to control for industry fixed effects. The first three columns present coefficient
estimators for regressions with raw return as the dependent variable, while columns 4 to 6 report the
coefficient estimators for regressions with abnormal return as the dependent variable. For the same
regressions performed on raw and abnormal returns (1 and 4, 2 and 5, 3 and 6) some of the
coefficients show close to identical values for some variables, which is reasonable and expected as we
subtract the sample average from the individual firm returns when calculating abnormal returns.
        For the main regression, (regression 1 and 4, respectively), we get significant results for
company size and past return (both 12 months and 24 months). While Lakonishok and Lee (2001)
got one of their most significant coefficients in book-to-market, we do not get a significant result for
this variable. The fact that we do get significant results for long-term past return is contrary to the
findings of the mentioned researchers. Both past return-coefficients are negative for our main
regression, which means that there is an inverse correlation between past return and future return in
our sample. In other words, bad past return is correlated to better future return than good past return
is. This indicates a possibility to earn from contrarian strategies. Moreover, the size coefficient is
negative, confirming what we previously have claimed in this thesis, that returns were larger for
smaller firms compared to for larger firms. One of the most important things to point out is that we
only achieve significant results for NPR when we include the dummies for strong buy and sell signals.
This makes sense since by adding the dummies the data group becomes more narrow for analyzing
NPR’s correlation with return. When comparing the first and second regressions, we see that the
introduction of dummies does not impact the size estimates nor the past return estimates, which is
reasonable as insider trading does not impact the size of the company or what has happened in the
past.
        Looking at the second and fifth regression, where we include dummies for insider signals and
which yielded significant results for our NPR variable, our NPR/B5-coefficient is -0.097, which
implies that after controlling for other variables, the difference in returns between pure buyers (NPR
= 1) and pure sellers (NPR = -1) is 19,4% per year in the first post formation year. The results from
this regression shows how important insider activity is even during crises, and that they may be useful
as signals for external traders of what is to expect next in terms of returns in times when general
uncertainty is ruling on the markets. As seen in Table 7, a strong buying signal (B6) is associated with
a significant excess return of almost 10% per year in times of crisis, while a strong sell-signal is
associated with an upcoming downturn of -11,5% of the stock per year. The same applies for
abnormal returns. What is interesting is that this goes against previous research, which suggests that
selling by insiders does not predict future stock downturns. This has been motivated by insiders
selling off stock in order to rebalance and diversify their portfolios in times when executive
compensation increasingly gets tied to stock (Lakonishok and Lee, 2001). Our finding suggests that
during the COVID-19 pandemic, insiders were able to predict future stock movements and that both
insider buying and selling had useful signaling value. This is a finding that may prove useful in future
research of insider trading in connection to other crises.
        When we fix for sector effects, we get the results of regression 3) and 6). We can see that these
are not very different from the results of regression 1) and 4), indicating that possible systematic
effects within sectors did not affect our initial result significantly. For NPR, the coefficient remains
the same for both the raw return and abnormal return regression. For LBMR and LSIZE as well as
PR12 and PR24, there are small differences. The only variable significantly affected by the industry
effects seems to be the long-term prior return, PR24, which is significant at a 5% level when not
fixing for industry effects, but not significant anymore when doing so. This suggests that when taking
into account the differences between sectors, the long-term prior return does not significantly affect
the prediction of past returns, as suggested by regression 1) and 4).
        In conclusion we can conclude that insiders successfully predicted future stock price
movements during the pandemic whether it was going up or down. Moreover, using a contrarian
strategy was generally a good strategy during the pandemic as past losers were the biggest future
winners, and lastly we found that returns during the pandemic were greater for smaller firms

10. Difference-in-difference Analysis
We further include a differences-in-difference test in our thesis as a robustness test. This is a statistical
method through which we are able to study the differential effect on a treatment group versus a
control group (Angrist & Pischke, 2009). In our study, we compare the return of insiders and their
predictive ability during the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 to the return and predictive ability of
insiders in 2018, before the pandemic. The 2018 returns are our control group while the 2020 returns
during the pandemic constitute our treatment group. The reason we use 2018 and not 2019 as our
control group is that when calculating returns after insider trades in 2019, we would have entered
2020 and hence would the results in our control group include returns during the COVID-19
pandemic, and thus not serve as a control group. Using 2018 as the control group lets us stay as close
to 2020 as possible, without any effects of the pandemic. In that way, we keep surrounding
circumstances as similar as possible. With that being said, 2018 was also an eventful year, with the
Cambridge Analytica scandal, midterm elections that reshuffled the power in the congress while the
back-then president Trump was investigated for the alleged involvement of Russia in his 2016
presidential campaign (Forbes, 2018). However, we concluded that there was no major event that
would offset 2018 as a suitable year to use in our DiD analysis on insider trades and holding period
returns.
        Lakonishok & Lee (2001) did not include a differences-in-difference test in their study since
they were not conducting research on a topic or in an environment that deviates from the normal
state. Instead they studied insider trading over a long period of time. The scope of this study is in that
regard quite different from Lakonishok & Lee’s, as our goal is to investigate whether insider trading
during the start COVID-19 pandemic differed from insider trading otherwise. This can be achieved
by a differences-in-differences analysis where we will be able to compare the results in this study to
trends before the dawn of the pandemic. The differences-in-difference method includes making a
parallel trends assumption, which in this case means that our base assumption is that the year 2018
provides an appropriate counterfactual trend that insider trading in 2020 would have followed if it
were not for the COVID-19 pandemic. In other words, our assumption is that without COVID-19,
returns and predictive ability for insiders in 2020 would have followed the same trend as they did in
2018. Nonetheless, we do expect the trading behavior and results to differ.
        To perform the regression, we create one dummy variable for the year concerned, which takes
on the value of one (1) if the trade is made in 2020, and conversely it takes on the value of zero (0) if
the trade is made in 2018. We further create another dummy variable for NPR, which takes on the
value of one (1) if the NPR score is positive (>0) and takes on the value of zero (0) otherwise. Lastly,
we create one differences-in-differences variable which is the product of the two above-mentioned
dummy variables, concerning the year and NPR-ratio.

DYEARi = 0 if 2018, 1 if 2020
DNPRi = 0 if NPR ≤ 0, 1 if NPR > 0
DIDi = DYEARi * DNPRi

                      R = β0  + β1 DYEARi + β2 DNPRi + β3DiD

The result of the Difference-in-Differences regression is reported in Table 8. Results are significant
for the year dummy, DYEARi, suggesting that there was indeed a significant difference between the
returns in 2020 and 2018. The results indicate that there was a close to 16% spread in raw
twelve-month returns of the firms included in the sample in 2020 compared to in 2018. Insiders in
our sample did, as the rest of the market, perform better on trades done during the 2020 crisis
compared to the ones they did in 2018. However, the NPR dummy, DNPRi, is insignificant
suggesting that these performances were not significantly caused by insiders making informed
decisions. Even if considered, DNPRi showed a low value of 0.009, indicating that insiders on average
were not remarkably good at predicting future stock return. If a variable would be positive, it would
mean that it is correlated to stock return >0, and if negative it would be correlated to a negative stock
price development. This result is probably blurred partly by the fact that our NPR dummy is set to 1
when NPR>0, which can be very ambiguous considering it may entail that investors have bought just
a little more than they have sold. An NPR of 0.1 and an NPR of 0.95, which was used by Lakonishok
& Lee as their cut-off value when determining what NPR value should be deemed a strong buy signal,
are vastly different and may hence deteriorate the value of the results given by our regression. In
chapter 11 we will further address our insignificant results, investigate the reason behind them, what
to make of them and how future research may complement this thesis.
        The DIDi estimator, combining the effects of the DNPRi and DYEARi dummies, is also
insignificant. The coefficient is also negative, indicating that if significant it would suggest that NPR
was less indicative of future year returns in 2020 than 2018. These findings conclude that based on
our sample, insiders did perhaps earn higher returns following the pandemic but these were not
caused by them being informed but rather by the development of the market as a whole. If the
returns earned would have been results of the inder’s informativeness, NPR and past return should
correlate positively on a significant level, suggesting that firms with extensive insider purchasing
indeed performed better over the subsequent year. This does not seem to be true for our sample.
However, since the results are not significant, we cannot fully reject the possibility.

11. Discussion

11.1 Limitations
As shown in the past two chapters covering regressions and difference-in-differences analysis we did
not reach any significant results on our DiD-regression beyond the year dummy, but we did manage
to get some significant results on our other regressions. The following paragraphs will discuss those
insignificant results and aim at derivating the potential roots to the lack of statistical power.
        First off, it is suitable to summarize the differences in our research and the research
conducted by Lakonishok and Lee (2001), whose methodology we to great extent have used. As
mentioned in the introduction, Lakonishok and Lee looked into detecting patterns in insider trading
over a period of twenty years, from 1975-1995. Moreover, they included insider trading conducted in
all companies on the NYSE, AMEX and Nasdaq during this period. On the other end, we looked
into insider trading during the spring of 2020, in companies that are included in the S&P 500 index.
Needless to say, the scope and aim of our study caused us to conduct research on a far smaller sample
than Lakonishok and Lee. This has big implications for the statistical power of the study as well as the
margin of error, where the former is low and the latter greater with a small data sample. In retrospect,
we could have conducted a priori determination of a sample size requirement that would have given
us a high probability of getting more significant results.
       When concerning the strong buy- or sell-dummies we used, the above-mentioned problem
worked in combination with us applying less restrictions on the dummies. While Lakonishok and Lee
had three requirements for the dummy to be activated, we only had one requirement that was
substantially softer than theirs. While they required an NPR>0.95 to classify a strong buy-signal, we
only required an NPR>0.7, which of course could have caused noise in our results. There is of course
a possibility that there really is a difference between the populations as well as there could be
correlational relationships between industries and returns, but that it exists on a much lower level or
magnitude than we anticipated.

11.2 Future research
For any future research that may be conducted on insider trading during the COVID-19 pandemic or
another period of crisis, or that considers using the framework developed by Lakonishok & Lee
(2001), we would extend the following recommendations in order to get satisfactory and significant
results:

    1. Make sure to use a substantial dataset, preferably aggregate data from all companies listed at
        one or more stock exchanges instead of the constituents of one stock index, as we have
        learned that it sets clear boundaries for the reach of your research.
    2. If replicating the methodology by Lakonishok & Lee, ensure the dataset includes data on all
        parameters needed to execute all tests that they do, as this improves compatibility.

Moreover, it is up to future researchers to complement the existing research on insider trading and
this paper on insider trading during the COVID-19 pandemic. The implications of insider trading
overall and especially during crises may have further implications for the efficient market hypothesis,
as crises can push insiders to execute on eventual non-public information. For future research, it
would be interesting to look into and conduct further research that may help explain some of the
findings made in this thesis, such as that insider sales were predictive of future stock price decreases,
which is contrary to what previous literature had found. Future research could help explain whether
this occurrence was unique for the pandemic we experienced or that would hold true for other crises
as well.

11.3 Summary and concluding remarks
With this paper we set out to investigate how insider traders acted during the beginning of the
COVID-19 pandemic, when markets were at their shakiest and the future as most uncertain. In order
to do so we used tools and mental models developed by previous researchers. Against the background
presented in the past chapters we can conclude that insider trading did indeed intensify at the start of
the pandemic, that the market did react to signals in the form of insider trading, shown by the
short-term stock price changes. Moreover, we have shown that insiders usually bought the stock when
the stock had performed badly, and sold their stock when the stock return was good. This last finding
diverts from previous research and suggests that insider trades could have greater signaling value for
external investors in times of crisis compared to under normal circumstances. Our findings also
conclude that insiders in large companies have better predictive ability compared to insiders in smaller
companies. Among our results we also find a significant difference in pricing of small companies and
pricing of larger companies. This indicates that the biggest opportunity for externals looking to
exploit insider signaling during times of crisis lies in smaller companies, as the market perceives insider
signals with much less enthusiasm in these companies, even though these companies offered large
returns. Another finding in this thesis was that there was a consistent trend of insiders using
contrarian trading strategies also during the pandemic, which is a strategy that they also use in
non-crisis times as shown by previous literature. Future research will however have to investigate
whether this holds true for insider trading in other types of crises that bring uncertainty to stock
markets or if this trend was unique for the COVID-19 pandemic crisis.
        Albeit trying to detect any eventual insider trading across industries we did not see any clear
pattern related to NPR or B/M and return across industries. In line with the conclusions reached by
Lakonishok and Lee, we found that the majority of the insider trading happens in large stocks, where
insider activity has limited value compared to insider trading in smaller stocks.
        Perhaps the most important takeaway from this thesis is that insider trading followed certain
patterns during the pandemic, which is something that may come to use for external investors in
future crisis scenarios when trying to understand how to interpret insider trades for information when
uncertainty is ubiquitous. Against the background presented in this thesis, we can conclude that some
investors indeed were successful at predicting future stock price developments during the pandemic,
with the highest NPR portfolios outperforming the lowest ones and the strong buy and strong sell
dummies showing significantly positive and negative correlation with 12-month post return,
respectively. Aggregate insider trading seems to have some predictive value, especially in the extreme
cases, enabling external to profit off copying these trading patterns, whether it be selling off their
stock or purchasing stock. This despite the fact our data suggests that in the short term, the markets
to great extent ignored these signals given by insiders.
References

Angrist, J. D., and Pischke, J. S., 2009, “Mostly harmless econometrics: An Empiricist’s Companion”,
book, Princeton University Press

Ahmad, N., Ramzan, M., 2016, “Stock Market Volatility and Macroeconomic Factor Volatility”,
International Journal of Research in Business Studies and Management,3, 37-44

Barber, B. M., and Lyon, J. D., 1997, “Detecting long-run abnormal returns: The empirical power and
specification of test-statistics”, Journal of FinancialEconomics, 43, 341-372.

Busse, J. A., and Green, T. C., 2002, “Market efficiency in real time”, Journal of Financial Economics,65,
415-437

Chopra, N. C., Lakonishok, J., and Ritter, J. R., 1992, “Measuring abnormal performance: Do stocks
overreact?”, Journal of Financial Economics, 31, 235-268

Debondt, W. F. M., and Thaler, R., 1985, “Does the stock market overreact?”, Journal of Finance, 40,
793-805

Eckbo, B. E., and Smith, D. C., 1998, “The conditional performance of insider trades”, Journal of
Finance, 53, 467-498

Fama, E.F., and French, K.R., 1993, “Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds”,
Journal of Financial Economics, 33, 3-56.

Fama, E.F., 1970, “Efficient capital markets: a review of theory and empirical work”, Journal of Finance,
25, 383-417.

Fama, E.F., and MacBeth, J.D., 1973, “Risk, Return and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests”, Journal of
Political Economy, 81, 607-636.

Healy, Helen, 2018, The Biggest Events of 2018, Financial Times, December 20

Frazier, Liz, 2021, The coronavirus crash of 2020 and the lessons it taught us, Forbes Magazine,
February 11

Ikenberry, D., Lakonishok, J., and Vermaelen, T., 1995, “Market underreaction to open market share
repurchases”, Journal of Financial Economics, 39, 181-208

Jagadeesh, N., and Titman, S., 1993, “Returns to buying winners and selling losers: Implications for
stock market efficiency”, Journal of Finance, 48, 65-91

Jeng, L. A., Metrick, A., and Zeckhauser, R., 1999, “The profits to insider trading: A
performance-evaluation perspective”, working paper, University of Pennsylvania

Lakonishok, J. and Lee, I. 2002, “Are insider trades informative?”, The Review of Financial Studies, v.14,
No.1, 79-111
Lakonishok, J., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R. W., 1994, “Contrarian investment, extrapolation and risk”,
Journal of Finance, 49, 1541-1578.

Loughran, T., 1997, “Book-to-Market across firm size, exchange and seasonality: Is there an effect?”,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative analysis, 32, 249-268.

Marin, J. M., and Olivier, J.P., 2008, “The dog that did not bark: Insider trading and crashes”, Journal of
Finance, 63, 2429-2476.

Mazur et al., 2020, “COVID-19 and the March 2020 stock market crash. Evidence from S&P1500”,
National Library of Medicine

Meulbroek, L. K., 1991, “An empirical analysis of illegal insider trading”, Journal of Finance, 47,
1661-1699

Pascutti, M.J., 1996, “Inside trading, market regimes and information”, working paper, Harvard
University.

Seyhun, N., 1986, “Insiders’ profits, costs of trading, and market efficiency”, Journal of Financial
Economics, 16, 189-212.

Seyhun, N., 1990, “Overreaction or Fundamentals: Some lessons from insiders’ response to the
market crash of 1987”, Journal of Finance, 45, 1363-1388.

Seyhun, N., 1992, “Why does aggregate insider trading predict future stock returns?”, Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 107, 1303-1331.

Statista, May 9th 2021, Number of coronavirus (COVID-19) cases worldwide as of May 9, 2022, by
country. Retrieved from Statista:
https://www.statista.com/statistics/1043366/novel-coronavirus-2019ncov-cases-worldwide-by-count
ry/

Pulliam, Susan; Coulter, Jones; Fuller, Andrea, 2020, Amazon’s Bezos, Other corporate executives sold
shares just in time, The Wall Street Journal, March 24.

WHO, March 11th 2020, WHO Director-General’s opening remarks at the media briefing on
COVID-19 - 11 March 2020. Retrieved from WHO:
https://www.who.int/director-general/speeches/detail/who-director-general-s-opening-remarks-at-th
e-media-briefing-on-covid-19---11-march-2020
