DO THEY KNOW?

A STUDY OF THE IMPACT OF PDMR TRANSACTIONS ON
STOCK MARKET RETURNS DURING THE UNCERTAIN
MARKET CONDITIONS OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

EDVARD BRUU

ALEXANDER SILWER

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2022
Do They Know?: A Study of the Impact of PDMR Transactions on Stock Market
Returns During the Uncertain Market Conditions of the Covid-19 Pandemic

Abstract
    This paper examines how equities listed on Nasdaq Stockholm reacted to
    transaction announcements by persons discharging managerial responsibilities
   (“PDMRs”) during unprecedented market uncertainty. We find that PDMRs
    transaction announcements generated abnormal returns for purchases but not for
    sales. We then investigate what factors that are explanatory and run analyses
    across various company sizes. We identify that PDMR transaction announcements
    carry informational value, and that the magnitude of the informational value was
    elevated during the Covid-19 pandemic. This paper validates prior studies and
    opens for further research on regulatory initiatives to level the playing field
     between regular investors and corporate insiders.
Keywords

    Covid-19, Insider Trading, Nasdaq Stockholm, Uncertainty, PDMR
Authors

   Edvard Bruu (24811)
    Alexander Silwer (24696)
Tutors

    Marieke Bos, Deputy Director, Swedish House of Finance
Examiner

    Adrien d´Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance, Stockholm School
   of Economics
Acknowledgements
   We direct our gratitude toward Marieke Bos for excellent guidance, kind support,
    and helpful comments. We would also like to thank Gustaf Soldan for support and
    guidance with the statistical analysis. All errors are those of the authors.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Edvard Bruu and Alexander Silwer, 2022
   ON THE 20TH OF FEBRUARY 2020, OMXSPI – an index of all shares that
trade on the Stockholm Stock Exchange reached an all-time high (Nasdaq,
2022a). Twenty-five calendar days later, on the 16th of March, the index had lost
more than 35 percent of its value. The rapid fall was a consequence of the
increased spread of the novel coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2. By the 18th of March,
lockdown measures to halt the escalation were widespread and more than 250
million people in Europe were under strict lockdowns (The Guardian, 2020). The
number of PDMR transactions in companies listed on Nasdaq Stockholm
increased with 291% year-over-year in the month of March, between 2019 and
2020 (SFSA, 2022). More generally, the frequency of trades trended upwards
throughout the entire period of 2017-2021 (Graph 1). In this study, we
investigate how prices of equities listed on Nasdaq Stockholm react to insider
transactions and how the reactions change during uncertain market
environments.
   In 2020, there was extreme uncertainty in financial markets globally (Baker
et al, 2016). The Covid-19 pandemic was an event with unprecedented
uncertainty both in terms of magnitude and duration. At its peak, it was an
existential crisis, far worse than what the world encountered during the financial
crisis of 2008-09 (McKinsey, 2020). In April 2020, IMF projected full-year US
GDP to contract -5.9%, revised to -8.0% in May, actual outcome was -3.5% (IMF,
2020).
   At the same time, trading activity among insiders in Swedish companies was
at highly elevated levels. Legal insider transactions occur when a person
discharging managerial responsibilities (“PDMR”) purchases or sells financial
instruments where he or she does not know about any upcoming material market
announcement (e.g., earnings, M&A, other material events). Not to be confused
with illegal insider transactions, which occur when PDMRs use their knowledge
to profit from known upcoming market announcements. In practice, the PDMR
transaction is generally legal when it follows the ruling guidelines and there is
no guaranteed (or highly certain) profit to be derived in the short run.
   Market reactions to PDMR transaction announcements are important to
study as they can be used as a proxy to put a number on the value of the
informational advantage held by PDMRs. Markets tend to react more positively
to PDMR purchases than to PDMR sales (Lakonishok and Lee, 2001). Large
market reactions following a PDMR transaction announcement indicate a
greater informational value of said transaction. A PDMR that believes that the
stock price of his or her company has a strong outlook can be expected to purchase
more shares and vice versa. There is an informational value of PDMR
transactions as PDMRs have greater visibility on upcoming company
performance compared to other market actors, which is also why PDMR
transactions are regulated.
    If an uncertain market environment can be shown to elevate the advantage
of PDMRs, then it may be of interest for regulators to further restrict PDMR
trading during these conditions, which is why this study is of interest.
   Graph 1 shows an initial spike of trades during the rapid decline of the
market in Q1 2020, as well as a general elevation of trading volumes throughout
2020 and 2021. The cyclical pattern of transactions should be seen in the light of
the trading restrictions that are posed on PDMRs before the release of earnings

                                     1
results; known as the “silent period” (Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority,
2022).

                                         Graph I. Freq uency of POM R Transac ti ons

            50

              10

                                 2018                                202 0                                 2022
                                                               DOi e

          The graph above illustrates the trading frequency among PDMRs at Nasdaq Stockholm in the period 2017-2021 (black line), calculated as a 30-day rolling average of PDMR transaction
         volumes. In addition, a trend line for this frequency data across the period is also included in the graph (blue line). The vertical grey line indicates the split of our control and treatment
         periods.

           (SFSA, 2022)
    In Sweden, the PDMR rules are set forth by the Swedish Financial
Supervisory Authority (“SFSA”). Any transaction that falls under the rules must
be reported within three business days. Information about transactions is
generally made available to the public immediately upon reporting. The SFSA
has been tracking all reported PDMR transactions since 1995. PDMRs report
their transactions directly to the SFSA and any person subject designated as a
PDMR and has an annual trading volume of at least EUR 5,000 is required to
report all of their transactions. PDMRs are heavily restricted in terms of timing
for their purchases and sales (SFSA, 2022).
   The market reactions to PDMR transactions in normal market conditions has
been thoroughly studied in prior research. By combining the research question
asked by Lakonishok and Lee (2001) and the methodology used by Loh and Stulz
(2018) in their study of market reactions to analyst revisions in uncertain market
conditions, our study covers a field that has seen limited research. We have not
found, foreign or domestic, any papers that study how the market reacted to
PDMR transactions during an event with equivalent uncertainty as the Covid-
19 pandemic. Hence, we hope that the study will be seen as an appreciated
addition to current literature.
   In this study, we investigate how stocks listed on Nasdaq Stockholm reacted
to PDMR transaction announcements during a period with higher market
uncertainty (approximately 2020 to 2021) as opposed to a period with lower
market uncertainty (2017 to 2019). To achieve this, we formulate the following
two research questions:
  I) Was there a higher informational value of PDMR trading during the
         Covid-19 period as compared to normal market conditions?
  II) What parameters affect how much the informational value deviated
         during the Covid-19 period as compared to normal market conditions?
This study is a natural build-on to previous studies closely related to this topic.
Lakonishok and Lee (2001) found that insider trades have an informative
value, and we wish to build on this by investigating how this effect change

                                     2
depending on market sentiment. A lot of research has been made around
investor sentiment in terms of uncertainty, but little has been made on how
PDMR transactions affect markets across good and bad sentiments. Covid-19
is for natural reasons a relatively new research topic, and we find this study to
complement existing research well.
   To structure the report, we will base our analysis on Loh and Stulz (2018).
They studied market reactions to research analyst revisions during good and bad
times. They found that analyst ratings play a more important role during times
of high uncertainty. The fundamentals of their study are highly transferable to
our study given that they also look at the informational value of condensed
information released collectively to the market, while also making a distinction
between normal market conditions and times of uncertainty.
    In our study, we have been using two sets of data. The first data set is from
the SFSA and consists of all reported PDMR transactions from the beginning of
2017 to the end of 2021. Every PDMR transaction report includes descriptions of
the particular transaction concerning its nature and included stakeholders. The
second data set is from Refinitiv and consists of opening and closing stock prices
covering one period before and after each PDMR transaction in the first data set,
as described in the Data Section. The study only includes Nasdaq Stockholm
(Large Cap, Mid Cap, Small Cap, and First North).
    We have opted to replicate the methodology of Loh and Stulz (2018). For every
PDMR transaction report, a quantitative analysis has been made to assess
whether the related stock has seen abnormal stock returns following the
publication of the PDMR transaction. Abnormal returns have been defined in
relation to industry price indices. We have then compared the results across the
Covid-19 period (treatment period) and the period of normal market conditions
(control period). Like Loh and Stulz (2018) we conducted a Welch’s t-test to
compare the populations, followed by a time-series regression.
   The results show higher abnormal stock returns following PDMR purchase
transaction reports in the treatment period than in the control period. Across all
markets, the difference between the periods equals 0.39% (p-level<0.01) for
purchases. We have not seen a meaningful difference in price impact from sales.
Overall, the largest impact was seen in the industry group “Banks.” Additionally,
through the time-series regression, we were able to isolate the effect of the
uncertainty factor to a greater extent. Full results will be elaborated on in a later
section.
                Theory and Hypotheses
A. Background
   To explain how, and why the market reacts to insider trades, this section
provides the theoretical framework through which the matter can be understood.
The section is divided into four parts. Our first section covers previous research
on investor behaviors in times of uncertainty (i.e., if the information can be
expected to be incorporated the same way during times of high uncertainty). In
this section, we also include our main reference, Loh and Stulz (2018). The second
section covers how markets can be expected to react to announcements of PDMR
transactions (i.e., how, and when the information value is incorporated in prices).
In the third section, we review the informativeness of insider trading. In the

                                     3
fourth section, the contribution of this report will be discussed, and how it
complements previous research. Finally, in the last section we discuss our
hypotheses for the results of our research.
B. Times of Uncertainty
    The Covid-19 pandemic was an unprecedented event during which the level
of uncertainty in global markets reached a record high (Baker et al. 2016). In the
third issue of the 73rd volume of The Journal of The American Finance
Association, Loh and Stulz published their study “Is Sell-Side Research More
Valuable in Bad Times?”. Their study was set up to find out if analyst revisions
had a more influential impact on stock prices during times of uncertainty. To
define times of uncertainty, they used the definition set forth by Baker et al.
(2016). In addition to utilizing the Economic Policy Uncertainty Index, they also
added additional periods of defined crises. These were September – November
1987 (1987 Crisis), August – December 1998 (LTCM), and July 2007 – March
2009 (GFC). They laid out three hypotheses for why analysts may have less of an
impact during times of uncertainty and three hypotheses for why analysts may
have more impact during times of uncertainty. We will elaborate on these
hypotheses to the extent that they can be related to our study.
   The most prominent argument for why analysts would have less impact
during times of uncertainty is the inattention hypothesis. In a study from 2009,
Hirshleifer, Lim and Teoh showed that when a lot going on in the markets
(measured as intensity of news flow), investors are inclined to not be heavily
affected by news events. This could analogously be applied to our study. There
are evident similarities between reporting of PDMR transactions and reporting
of updated analyst revisions. This follows logically as both cases are based on
someone who can be presumed to possess a high level of knowledge taking an
action that can be perceived as being more (i.e., an upwards revision or a
purchase) or less (i.e., a downwards revision or a sale) positive. The logical
argument holds up better for purchases than for sales. In his book “One Up On
Wall Street”, Peter Lynch states that insiders sell stocks for many reasons, but
there is only one reason that they purchase stocks – to make money. If the
hypothesis of Loh and Stulz (2018) holds and if their reasoning can be
analogously applied, then we could expect to see little to no additional impact
from when PDMR transactions are made during times of uncertainty as
compared to times without uncertainty.
   In favor of why analysts (and analogously PDMRs) would have more impact
during times of uncertainty are two main concepts. Firstly, Schmalz and Zhuk
(2019) showed that some firms see greater stock price reactions to
announcements during bad times. This effect is attributed to the overreaction
hypothesis. Secondly, Kacperczyk et al. (2017) proved that information on future
payoffs that are of reasonable accuracy has a higher informational value when
there is a lot of uncertainty. Following the logic from prior concepts, then this
would indicate that PDMR transactions would have a greater stock price impact
during times of uncertainty.
    In an interesting study by Hirshleifer and Shumway (2003), it was found that
sunny days are strongly correlated with abnormal returns. There was no effect
from other weather conditions. They suggest that sunlight affected the mindsets

                                     4
of people which resulted in more positive sentiment. Loewenstein (1996) found
that being “out of control” in terms of fulfilling the visceral factors of oneself had
direct effects on impulsivity and self-control. Both these studies confirm that
investor sentiment is easily affected by externalities.
   Chiu, Chung, Ho and Wu (2018) found that a strong negative sentiment
resulted in net-selling in the market, putting pressure on prices. If we can say
that the uncertainty of the pandemic gave people a sense of being “out of control”,
then we should see increased sales pressure in the market. Combined with the
findings of Christie and Huangs (1995) that investors are more prone to follow
others during times of crisis, we find a literature indication that PDMR
transactions may have a greater impact during times of crisis.
C. Real-time Event Impact on Capital Markets
    Starting with Fama (1970), security prices in an efficient market reflect all
available information. Efficiency can be in the weak form (prices reflect all public
historical information), in semi-strong form (prices reflect all public historical
and current information), or in strong form (prices reflect all public and private
historical and current information). Equity markets are generally operating
under semi-strong efficiency. Under the efficient market assumption, we should
therefore expect PDMR transactions to have an immediate effect on stock prices
since PDMR transactions, as identified by Lakonishok and Lee (2001), can be
used to predict stock price performance.
   Busse and Green (2002) found that a stock being mentioned in a positive
manner would see abnormal returns immediately (within seconds). They found
that active traders play an important role in ensuring that prices respond quickly
to information. Belgacem, Creti, Guesmi and Lahiani (2015), found that
macroeconomic announcements had an immediate effect on the US stock market
which in turn had an immediate effect on the oil market. Mehndiratta and Gupta
(2010) showed that the stock market had an immediate reaction to dividend
announcements. These studies show that markets re-price stocks following
material announcements and can hence not explain what Lakonishok and Lee
(2001) saw as markets missing out on valuable information. While this study will
not review the long-term effects of PDMR transactions, it will review its short-
term effect.
D. Informativeness of PDMR Transactions
   PDMR purchasing activities tend to be an indicator of upcoming abnormal
stock returns (Alldredge and Cicero, 2015). Lakonishok and Lee (2001) examined
all PDMR activity for all companies on the NYSE and Nasdaq during a twenty-
year period. As they expected that it could take some time for reporting
information to reach markets, they decided to look at returns during a 5-day
window. They could conclude that PDMRs achieved abnormal returns on their
purchases in some cases whereas they did not in other cases. Most of the short-
term returns occurred following the trading date rather than following the
publication of their trades. The greatest effect was seen when a manager or
executive purchased stocks in a small company, yielding almost a 0.75%
abnormal return over the upcoming 5-day period. Another quarter percentage of
abnormal returns was added in the 5 days following the publication of the PDMR
transaction. A manager or executive buying in large companies had little effect.

                                     5
By combining the effect of the 5-day period following the trade and the 5 days
following the announcement, they showed that the market responded with
around one percentage abnormal returns for small companies and close to no
abnormal returns for large companies. Their results were in line with previous
studies (Seyhun, 1986) however for Eckbo and Smith (1998) PDMRs did not earn
immediate abnormal returns in their study of transactions at the Oslo Stock
Exchange.
    When Lakonishok and Lee (2001) reviewed long-term stock performance
following PDMR transactions, they found that transactions were useful for
predicting long-term returns. They found that a company with extensive insider
purchases performed 7.8% better than companies with extensive insider sales
during the first year. The spread shrunk to 2.3% in the second year. In the article,
they also concluded that it was unlikely that the difference in performance could
be attributed to different risk profiles of each respective equity. Their main
conclusion was that insiders are great at picking up shares at a lower price and
seem to know when to sell. Most interestingly, they also found that the market
does not react immediately to incorporate the full predictive value of insider
transactions, hinting that valuable information is ignored by the market.
   Biggerstaff, Cicero and Wintoki (2020) found that PDMRs trade both when
they have a short-term informational advantage and when they have a long-term
advantage. They provide an example with two firms: one that is about to miss on
earnings in the near future and one that has an ongoing process with a supplier
that is developing poorly but will not be revealed to the market for many months.
At the first firm, the insider has only a short amount of time to trade before it
will be too late. In the latter case, the insider has a long duration to trade before
the market will punish the stock price. To account for this, the authors are
considering two types of trades: isolated and sequenced. They conclude that both
have strong informational value. They also concluded that the informational
advantage could be derived from being more aware and informed of external
activities relating to the business performance (e.g., early spotting of trends such
as upcoming supply chain issues). In other words, abnormal returns by PDMRs
do not necessarily stem from direct information their own companies but could
also stem from being more aware of public information about related parties.

                                                Table 1. Mapping of Select Literature

           Author Year Focus area Market Reactions PDMR U ncertainty Market

    Main    Loh and Stulz 2018 Market reactions to analyst revisions ✓ - ✓ US
    references Lakonishok and Lee 2001 Informativeness of insider trading                        US
                                                                  ✓ ✓ -

           Biggerstaff, Cicero and Wintoki 2020 Informativeness of insider trading ✓ ✓ - US

           Schmalz and Zhuk 2019 Market reactions to corporate annoncements… ✓ - ✓ US

           Chiu, Chung, Ho and Wu 2018 Equity prices during weak sentiments ✓ - ✓ US

            Baker et al. 2016 Uncertainty - - ✓ Global

            Belgacem, Creti, Guesmi and Lahiani 2015 Market reactions to real time events ✓ - - US

           Kacperczyk 2015 Value of information during uncertainty ✓ - ✓ US
     Selected
    other     Mehndiratta and Gupta 2010 Market reactions to corporate events ✓ - - US
     references
           Hirshleifer, Lim and Teoh 2009 Market reactions during high noise ✓ ✓ - US

            Busse and Green 2002 Market reactions to real time events ✓ - - US

           Eckbo and Smith 1998 PDMR trading ✓ ✓ - NO

           Christie and Huang 1995 Uncertainty ✓ - ✓ US

           Seyhun 1986 PDMR trading ✓ ✓ - US

            Fama 1970 Efficient market hypothesis ✓ - - US

       The table above shows a summary of a select number of literary references used in this paper and what combinations of content they cover. As seen there is no current paper that researches the
       intersection of the market reaction to PDMR transactions in times of uncertainty.

                                     6
E. Contribution
   Our work is the first report that reviews how uncertain times affect market
reactions to PDMR transactions. Lakonishok and Lee (2001) asked whether
PDMR transactions are informative, which they did indeed find them to be. We
ask whether PDMR transactions carry additional informative value during times
of uncertainty. To further build on their study, we will add additional control
variables beyond PDMR ranking and company size. In difference to Lakonishok
and Lee (2001), we will study Nasdaq Stockholm as opposed to the New York
Stock Exchange, Nasdaq, and American Stock Exchange. We estimate that the
dynamics of Loh and Stulz (2018) will be similar to our study subject and hence
construct our methodology to resemble their work. We use Loh and Stulz (2018)
as they also reviewed a period with a distinct uncertain market environment
with more stable periods.
F. Hypotheses
   To address our two research questions, we present three main hypotheses
that we will test with the data set.
    Hypothesis 1:
   There will be an increased market reaction to PDMR transactions for the
    Covid-19 period.
   In Loh and Stulz (2018), bad times contributed significantly to increased
market reactions to analyst revisions. We expect the same to hold for our study.
This is also in line with with Schmalz and Zhuk (2019) and Kacperczyk et al.
(2017).
    Hypothesis 2:
   The intensity of the increased market reactions will vary across sectors. We
    expect to see greater market reactions among stocks in the industries:
     ‘Automobiles and Parts’, ‘Energy’ and ‘Travel and Leisure’
   The probability of default report from S&P (Standard & Poor’s, 2022) can be
used as a proxy to predict which sectors that have had the worst sentiment and
therefore should see the largest reaction. Based on their report, we expect the
market reactions to be most exaggerated for Travel and Leisure (~19% peak
default risk), Automobiles (~14% peak default risk) and Energy (~13% peak
default risk) (Standard & Poor’s, 2022). Furthermore, sectors with greater
uncertainty are probably more likely to have investors that are in a sense of being
“out of control” (Loewenstein, 1996). The sentiment should be worse in sectors
that are harder hit by the pandemic (Chiu et al, 2018). Worse sentiments would
imply that PDMR transactions should therefore have more pronounced increased
market reactions.
   Hirshleifer, Lim and Teoh (2009) found that a high intensity of investor
updates caused each incremental update to have a relatively smaller impact. We
expect corporations in sectors with a greater Covid-19 exposure to serve their
investors with fewer updates (i.e., suspended guidance, hesitancy to comment on
outlooks). Hence, we expect a larger informational advantage for insiders in
these sectors and therefore a higher intensity of market reaction to PDMR
transaction announcements. This would apply to the sector ‘Travel and Leisure’.

                                     7
    Hypothesis 3:
    Reactions to stocks listed on markets with looser regulation requirements
    will be larger. This implies that we expect reactions on Nasdaq First North
    to be greater than on the Main List of Nasdaq Stockholm.
    Biggerstaff, Cicero and Wintoki (2020) conclude that PDMRs trade when they
have an informational advantage. The value of the informational value should,
following a PDMR transaction, be incorporated into the stock price assuming
semi-strong market efficiency (Fama, 1970). We think that the value of PDMRs
informational advantages increases during bad times and as such any trade
should cause more of an increased market reaction. More importantly, we think
that the relative informal advantage is greater in small companies listed on
markets with looser reporting requirements. The two main drivers for this are
less comprehensive investor communication and less analyst coverage (Nasdaq,
2021a). Additionally, this is also in line with the findings of Alldredge and Cicero
(2015).
                       Data
A. Background
    To investigate our research question, we leverage two sets of data. Data from
the SFSA on PDMR transactions over the period stretching from January 2017
to December 2021 and market data for the same period. The market data is
required to assess market reactions to PDMR transactions. In this section, the
data approach utilized for this paper will be further detailed.
B. Ideal Data Set
   In an ideal world, our research question would be studied by looking at
companies with identical characteristics, evenly spread between different
sectors, where some companies are randomly assigned market conditions that
are classified as uncertain, hence synthetically creating an exogenous change in
uncertainty. These companies would then have similar PDMR transaction
behavior, unaffected by personal biases or company differences, with consistent
publication patterns of these transactions. This would enable us to make a cross-
sectional analysis over time to observe these two groups of companies, and to
study the potential difference in the endogenous change to their abnormal stock
returns. The impact of the market uncertainty would hence be isolated and
conclusions regarding its effect on the informational value that the market
assigns to such conditions would be highly precise. However, in practice, it would
be impossible to gather such data and conduct the research in this way. Hence,
we have had to adhere to the data that we have been able to gather in practice,
the process of which is described below. Nonetheless, the reader should be aware
that this entails inherent limitations to the conclusions that can be drawn from
our results. These limitations include, but are not limited to, time trends, omitted
variable bias, and problems with sector comparability. The impact of which will
be discussed in detail in the Limitations Section.
C. PDMR Transaction Data
   Most jurisdictions have restrictions on personal trading for people with
insider information. In Sweden, these restrictions are regulated by the SFSA.

                                     8
Information is collected based on EU Regulation No 596/2014 (MAR) Article 17.
Article 19(10) of MAR defines who are covered under the regulation.
    “(a) a member of the administrative, management, or supervisory body of that
entity; or (b) a senior executive who is not a member of the bodies referred to in
point (a), who has regular access to inside information relating directly or
indirectly to that entity and power to take managerial decisions affecting the
future developments and business prospects of that entity.”
    In addition, Article 3(1)(26) of MAR lists that any of the following also are
covered provided that they have a connection with a person covered under Article
19(10) of MAR.
    “(a) a spouse, or a partner considered to be equivalent to a spouse in
accordance with national law, (b) a dependent child, in accordance with national
law, (c) a relative who has shared the same household for at least one year on
the date of the transaction concerned; or (d) a legal person, trust or partnership,
the managerial responsibilities of which are discharged by a person discharging
managerial responsibilities or by a person referred to in point (a), (b) or (c), or
which is directly or indirectly controlled by such a person, or which is set up for
the benefit of such a person, or the economic interests of which are substantially
equivalent to those of such a person.”
   Covered persons must report transactions within three business days. It is
mandatory to report the following information: link to PDMR (i.e., self or
associated), position, name, issuer, type of instrument, ISIN code, type of
transaction, link to option program, price per unit, volume, and transaction date.
Following reporting, the SFSA immediately publishes the information without
prior review (Official Journal of the European Union, 2014). Given that this
system is based on self-reporting there are inherent problems with omitted or
incorrect data for some transactions. Lakonishok and Lee (2001) based their data
analysis on data exported from the Ownership Reporting System (ORS) from the
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). This is the American
equivalent to the Swedish system that the SFSA administrates, and has the
same inherent self-reporting problem, hence being consistent with the
methodology of this reference.
   When extracting the PDMR transaction data from the Swedish Financial
Supervisory Authority, certain data points were excluded due to incomplete data
and lack of relevance to our research. Datapoints were filtered out in the
following steps, with the number of transactions before and after the filter was
applied specified in the parentheses:
      I. Removal of non-share transactions, e.g., trades in options, warrants,
          and bonds, and non-trading transactions, e.g., loans and dividends
        (77,383 → 65,413).
     II. Removal of transactions that have later been corrected or changed,
          where the updated version of the reporting has been included in the data
         set (65,413 → 59,116).
    III. Removal of transfer transactions, where the PDMR has purchased and
         then sold the same number of shares on the same day to move these
        between accounts (59,116 → 58,394).

                                     9
    IV. Removal of transactions related to shares that are not listed on Nasdaq
        Stockholm (58,394 → 37,674).
     V. Removal of transactions with incomplete information due to mistakes or
         inconsistencies in the reporting (37,674 → 31,240).
    The decision to filter the data based on conditions 2 to 5 is aligned with the
methodology of Lakonishok and Lee (2001). In their research, no data filtering
was done based on financial instruments (step 1). Though that had to do with
the fact that the data set exported from the U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission only contained stock transactions from the start, hence there was
no need for these researchers to filter the data based on these conditions, which
was necessary for us to do to achieve the equivalent data set.
D. Price Data
   For every PDMR transaction, price data was collected from Refinitiv. The
collection of pricing data was limited to opening and closing prices of the trading
day that the publication of the PDMR transaction was made. In the case where
a PDMR transaction was published outside of market opening hours, the
methodology described in sub-section H was used to isolate the impact of the
PDMR transaction on the abnormal market returns as much as possible.
    The decision to use opening and closing prices of the trading day instead of
intraday trading data stems from three factors. First, given that we wanted to
look at PDMR transaction data across all Nasdaq Stock Exchange Lists, it would
be challenging to set an appropriate time interval, given that the differing
liquidity between the stock exchange lists would mean that the time it would
take for the market prices to properly reflect the informational value of the
PDMR transaction would differ between stock exchange lists. As we wanted to
have a consistent methodology in our research, it would therefore be difficult to
set an appropriate time interval without it being arbitrary and potentially
missing the informational value contributed to the transaction. Second, given
that we wanted to isolate the idiosyncratic changes in the stock value, which
were not related to changes in general market or sector sentiment, we wanted to
look at abnormal stock returns by adjusting with sector index development (will
be described in sub-section H). However, intraday data for sector indices
compiled by Nasdaq is not available, meaning that it would not be possible for
us to isolate the abnormal stock return if looking at intraday data. Finally, the
usage of opening and closing prices to analyze the abnormal stock returns in the
market following an event with potential informational value is an approach that
has been universally used among the references that we have looked at. This
goes for both Lakonishok and Lee (2001) and Loh and Stulz (2018). Hence, to
mimic this methodology as close as possible and avoid unintended consequences
by deviating, opening, and closing prices were used as the price data in our
research.
   The PDMR reporting data set from the SFSA includes reports from all
companies listed on Swedish regulated markets. For our study, we have
narrowed down the scope to include companies listed on Nasdaq Stockholm. This
includes Nasdaq Main Market and First North. The Main Market of Nasdaq
Stockholm includes Large Cap, Mid Cap, and Small Cap. First North includes
First North Growth Market and First North Premier Growth Market. For our

                                     10
analysis, First North Growth Market and First North Premier Growth Market
have been merged as they are of similar characteristics. Markets other than
Nasdaq Stockholm have been excluded due to a general lack of transactional
liquidity and inferior data quality, making it more difficult to draw conclusions
through the inclusion of this data. The decision to exclude smaller stock exchange
lists in the data analysis is also consistent with the methodology of Lakonishok
and Lee (2001). In their case, they decided to limit their data set to PDMR
transactions related to companies on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE),
approximately the American equivalent of Nasdaq Stockholm.
    The sector indices used were based on the ICB-code (Industry Classification
Benchmark) of the stock. For the Stockholm stock market, Nasdaq has a sector
index for each of the industries categorized by the ICB codes. The index used
for each sector is specified in Appendix B.
E. Stock Exchange Lists
    To provide additional insight into the results and given our hypothesis that
the degree of regulation and requirements regarding information sharing and
transparency would have an impact on the informational value assigned to the
PDMR transaction by the market, the transaction data was split according to the
stock exchange list that the associated stock was listed on. This was also in line
with the analysis conducted by Lakonishok and Lee (2001) which also made the
equivalent split of the data to be able to draw more precise conclusions. Given
that we limited the relevant transactions to stocks traded on the Nasdaq
Stockholm stock exchange lists, there were four main stock exchange lists to split
the transactions between Large Cap, Mid Cap, Small Cap, and First North, while
also continuously looking at the aggregated level for all transactions,
independent of stock exchange list.
   The Nasdaq stock exchange lists differ in their requirements on company
compliance, level of scrutiny on transparency, company size, and trading
liquidity, which is what impacts the list chosen by the company during an IPO
process (Nasdaq, 2019). It is also possible for companies to be transferred
between stock exchange lists, given that they live up to the requirements of the
new list. In those instances, we have classified the company according to the list
that they were listed on as of December 31, 2021. The reason for this is that
companies are expected to live up to the requirements of the new list several
months before transferring, hence meaning that they in practice adhere to the
requirements of the new list long before they are officially transferred (Nasdaq,
2021b). For the distinction between stock exchange lists it is therefore more
reasonable to classify the stock according to the list it transferred to, rather than
having it depend on the stock exchange list that the stock was listed on during
the publication date, as the level of informational transparency will have been
implemented in practice already. The number of unique companies and
transaction dates included in the data set is showcased below, split by stock
exchange list and transaction type.

                                     11
                   Table 2. Descriptive Statistics - Companies & Transaction Dates
                                                              Stock Exchange List
                             All Cap Large Cap Mid Cap Small Cap First North
    N o. of com panies
    Purchases 828 128 146 94 460
     Sales 579 112 112 69 286

    N o. of transaction dates
     Purchases 1,608 1,063 1,129 818 1,399
     Sales 1,318 637 622 317 900
     The table above shows the descriptive statistics for the number of unique companies traded and transaction dates in the data
    set. The data has been grouped by Stock Exchange Lists and split between transaction types.

F. Transaction Types
    Finally, the dependent variable has also been split according to the
transaction type, where a distinction has been made between PDMR purchase
and sales transactions. The reasoning behind splitting the data into two subsets
has to do with the inherent characteristics of the two different transaction types.
As specified in the Hypothesis Section, we believe that a purchase from a PDMR
of a security should generate a higher abnormal return of the share during times
of uncertainty, while a sales transaction should generate a lower abnormal
return, since this effect is expected to be negative. Hence, if these effects are
equally large in opposite direction, we would only expect to see deviations from
the control period that derives from differences in the relative weighting of the
transaction types. To avoid the neutralization of informational value in the data
set when mixing purchases and sales, we have instead opted to split the data
between the two different transaction types to isolate these effects, while also
allowing us to analyze the potential differences between the transaction types.
This approach is also in line with the methodology used by Lakonishok and Lee
(2001), where they also split the PDMR transactions between different
transaction types and never analyzed the data on an aggregated level.

                     Table 3a. Descriptive Statistics Dependent Variables - PDMR Purchases
   Variable N Mean Median Std. Dev. Min Max
   All 23, 069 0. 43% 0. 17% 4. 32% -97% 46%
      Control 12,089 0.25% 0.08% 4.27% -97% 38%
      Treatment 10,980 0.64% 0.28% 4.36% -49% 46%
   Large Cap 6, 645 0. 01% 0. 01% 1. 86% -18% 28%
      Control 3,943 -0.06% -0.04% 1.58% -14% 18%
      Treatment 2,702 0.10% 0.09% 2.20% -18% 28%
   Mid Cap 4, 213 0. 30% 0. 19% 3. 32% -33% 37%
      Control 2,339 0.16% 0.11% 2.81% -26% 14%
      Treatment 1,874 0.47% 0.30% 3.85% -33% 37%
   Sm all Cap 2, 210 0. 62% 0. 28% 4. 09% -18% 34%
      Control 1,231 0.57% 0.28% 3.88% -18% 34%
      Treatment 979 0.68% 0.25% 4.34% -17% 16%
   First N orth 10, 001 0. 73% 0. 35% 5. 67% -97% 46%
      Control 4,576 0.47% 0.25% 6.14% -97% 38%
      Treatment 5,425 0.95% 0.44% 5.23% -49% 46%

     The table above shows the descriptive statistics for the dependent variable for transactions on each stock exchange list and on an aggregated
     level for PDMR purchase transactions. The descriptive statistics are also split between the control and treatment period and shown on an
     aggregated level. Return is calculated as a change in price, expressed in percentage terms. The data is comprised of 23,069 purchase
     transactions across all stock exchange lists.

                                     12
                                Table 3b. Descriptive Statistics Dependent Variables - PDMR Sales
   Variable N Mean Median Std. Dev. Min Max
   All 8, 171 -0. 58% -0. 24% 4. 93% -96% 61%
      Control 4,139 -0.57% -0.21% 5.58% -96% 24%
      Treatment 4,032 -0.60% -0.27% 4.17% -49% 61%
   Large Cap 2, 204 0. 06% 0. 00% 1. 93% -11% 23%
      Control 1,080 0.20% 0.01% 1.91% -11% 12%
      Treatment 1,124 -0.06% -0.02% 1.94% -10% 23%
   Mid Cap 1, 797 -0. 77% -0. 45% 2. 97% -15% 15%
      Control 1,065 -1.10% -0.55% 2.87% -10% 14%
      Treatment 732 -0.28% -0.32% 3.04% -15% 15%
   Sm all Cap 714 -0. 41% -0. 07% 3. 27% -16% 11%
      Control 441 -0.48% -0.09% 3.18% -16% 6%
      Treatment 273 -0.29% -0.03% 3.42% -13% 11%
   First N orth 3, 456 -0. 94% -0. 54% 6. 92% -96% 61%
      Control 1,553 -0.75% -0.48% 8.44% -96% 24%
      Treatment 1,903 -1.09% -0.57% 5.37% -49% 61%

     The table above shows the descriptive statistics for the dependent variable for transactions on each stock exchange list and on an aggregated
     level for PDMR sales transactions. The descriptive statistics are also split between the control and treatment period and shown on an
     aggregated level. Return is calculated as a change in price, expressed in percentage terms. The data is comprised of 8,171 sales transactions
     across all stock exchange lists.

G. Sector
   With inspiration taken from Lakonishok and Lee (2001), we have also
included a sector analysis in our research. Partly this has to do with the fact that
it is reasonable for the market to attribute differing informational values to
differing industries, given their varying characteristics. For example, as
mentioned in our hypothesis regarding sectors, there is an inherent difference in
default risk between industries that makes certain sectors more exposed in times
of uncertainty.
    Partly, we could also expect sector differences to exist due to the nature of
the Covid-19 crisis, the effects of which have impacted industries to a varying
degree. (Deloitte, 2020; Suneson, 2020) Given that the uncertainty during the
treatment period is related to the unpredictability of the pandemic, it would be
interesting to see if, and in that case how, the abnormal market returns vary
between industries. Hence, we believe that a sector analysis will have a positive
contribution to our research.
H. Dependent Variable: Abnormal Stock Returns
   To measure potential changes in market reactions to PDMR transactions we
look at abnormal stock returns. Adhering to the same methodology as used in
Lakonishok and Lee (2001), opening and closing prices were used to calculate the
intraday returns for the stocks on the day of the publication of a PDMR
transaction related to that stock. To the furthest extent possible we wanted to
isolate the effect of the PDMR transaction on the intraday stock return to observe
the idiosyncratic effect, excluding potential general market and sector-specific
effects on that particular date. Hence, in line with Lakonishok and Lee (2001),
this was achieved by calculating the abnormal intraday stock return of the stock
on the day of the publication of the PDMR transaction. The abnormal stock
return was proxied by looking at the delta of the return of the stock itself and the
return of the sector index of the stock which provides a good approximation of
how the stock would have performed if there were no systematic sentiments
related to the general market or the specific sector of the stock during that
particular day. Given that the publication of PDMR transactions is not restricted
to be publicized only at the times when the stock market is open, there are

                                     13
frequent occasions of publications happening outside of market opening hours.
In such cases, the stock return is instead calculated by looking at the percentage
return between the closing price on the preceding trading day and the opening
price on the following trading day. This calculation methodology can be
summarized in the following equations, where the abnormal stock return, 𝑅, is
calculated as the percentage change throughout, or between, trading days where
𝑃 is the price for a given stock 𝑥 on a given trading day 𝑛. In addition, 𝑥̂  represents
the sector index for the given stock and 𝑜 and 𝑐 indicates whether it is the closing
or opening price of the stock on the trading day.

     Abnormal stock returns for PDMR transactions published during market
                              opening hours

                                                            𝒄       𝒐         𝒄       𝒐
                                              𝑷𝒙𝒏 − 𝑷𝒙𝒏    𝑷̂𝒙 𝒏 − 𝑷̂𝒙 𝒏
                             𝑹𝒙𝒏 =            −      𝒐                    (1)
                                                   𝑷𝒐        𝑷
                                                                           𝒙𝒏                    ̂𝒙 𝒏

     Abnormal stock returns for PDMR transactions published before market
                              opening hours

                                                        𝒐       𝒄             𝒐       𝒄
                                          𝑷𝒙𝒏 − 𝑷𝒙𝒏−𝟏    𝑷̂𝒙 𝒏 − 𝑷̂𝒙 𝒏−𝟏
                            𝑹𝒙𝒏 =      𝒄 −      𝒄                     (2)
                                                    𝑷𝒙𝒏−𝟏             𝑷̂𝒙 𝒏−𝟏

      Abnormal stock returns for PDMR transactions published after market
                              opening hours

                                                        𝒐       𝒄         𝒐       𝒄
                                          𝑷𝒙𝒏+𝟏 − 𝑷𝒙𝒏    𝑷̂𝒙 𝒏+𝟏 − 𝑷̂𝒙 𝒏
                            𝑹𝒙𝒏 =       𝒄 −       𝒄                    (3)
                                                              𝑷𝒙𝒏                   𝑷̂𝒙 𝒏

I. Treatment Variable: Covid-19 Period
   In line with Loh and Stulz (2018) the treatment variable that we are
studying, is a dummy variable indicating whether the transaction was published
during the treatment period or the control period. The treatment period, in this
case, is defined as 2020-02-01 until 2021-12-31. This treatment period has been
chosen with a similar methodology to Loh and Stulz (2018). They looked at
uncertainty during the financial crisis and utilized the Global Economic Policy
Uncertainty Index to approximate uncertainty levels to define their treatment
period. Given that our crisis was not primarily of financial character, where
uncertainty regarding global economic policy is highly relevant, but instead a
public health crisis, we looked at the societal restrictions imposed in Sweden as
an approximation of uncertainty in society. Societal restrictions can be seen as a
proxy for societal uncertainty in a public health crisis given that it indicates a
lack of control of the pandemic and its consequences. Despite not adhering to the
same index, the same underlying methodology as applied by Loh and Stulz (2018)

                                     14
has therefore been used, though with a slightly different practical
implementation. Societal restrictions related to the Covid-19 pandemic were
studied using the “Oxford Covid-19 Government Response Tracker” for Sweden
(Oxford University, 2022).

                                Graph  2.  Covid-19 Govemmem Response Tracker - Sweden (20 17-2021)

              80

                                    20 18                                2020                                2022
                                                                                         Da1e

          The graph above illustrates the levels of the Swedish Restriction Index in the period 2017-2021. The index uses the societal response of the United Kingdom as the basis which is why
       the index never reaches 100 for Sweden. This index takes 23 indicators into consideration that are recorded on a scale to reflect the magnitude of the societal reaction to the
       pandemic. The vertical grey line indicates the split of our control and treatment periods.

            (Oxford University, 2022)
    The vertical, dashed line in the graph indicates the first time the restriction
index was non-zero, which was on 2020-02-01. That was the basis for which the
start of the treatment period was chosen. As can be seen in Graph 2, societal
restrictions were still broadly implemented throughout 2020 and 2021, with
slight deviations, which is the reason 2020-02-01 to 2021-12-31 was chosen. The
end of the period was chosen based on data availability, as it was during this
time that we began conducting our research on the topic and hence put a hard
stop on data collection at this time to avoid sampling bias by having the option
to collect additional data to potentially skew the results. The control period on
the other hand was defined as 2017-01-01 to 2020-01-31. This period is not
symmetrical to the treatment period in the number of days but is instead close
to equivalent in the number of PDMR transactions, which is the basis on which
the control period was chosen. This was in line with the methodology used by
Loh and Stulz (2018) to select their control period. The reason for adhering to the
calendar years for the start of the control period and end of the treatment period
was to minimize the effect of any potential seasonal trends in the data set, which
was then also later controlled for in the regression analysis.
J. Control Variables
   In line with the methodology used by Loh and Stulz (2018), we perform a
time-series regression to study the effect of the Covid-19 pandemic on the
abnormal stock returns following the publication of PDMR transactions. The
remaining regression variables are included as control variables to isolate the
effect of the treatment variable, while also providing additional insights into the
potential correlation between underlying factors in PDMR transactions and their
market impact. Loh and Stulz (2018) researched how the impact of changes in
equity analyst estimates impacted abnormal stock returns in times of
uncertainty compared to normal conditions. In their regression analysis, they
included ten control variables in addition to the treatment period dummy
variable, with nine of these control variables being related to the equity analyst

                                     15
recommendation and one being related to the stock itself. Given that we are not
researching the exact same topic, even though there are many underlying
similarities between the research, we have used other control variables. In our
regression model seven control variables were used, and all of them are related
to the PDMR transactions, the equivalent of being related to the equity analyst
recommendations in our reference. However, it should be mentioned that three
of these variables, Trans.Size, Report.Period and Report.Day, is a mixture of
information for the PDMR transaction and the stock. Therefore, we consider the
model to include both control variables related to the transaction and the
underlying transacted stock and hence are aligned with the methodology used by
Loh and Stulz (2018).
  𝐕𝐚𝐫𝐢𝐚𝐛𝐥𝐞 Type Definition
  Covid Treatment Dummy variable indicating if the PDMR
                                              transaction occurred during the treatment period.
  Trans. Size Control The transaction size of the PDMR trade related to
                                       the total number of shares outstanding (non-
                                     diluted) of the company, expressed in parts per
                                             million (ppm).
  Insider. Role Control Dummy variable indicating if the insider is the
                                   CEO, CFO, or Chairman of the Board in the
                                        company.
  Incentive. Progr. Control Dummy variable indicating if the PDMR
                                    transaction was related to an incentive program in
                                          the company.
  Report. Period Control Dummy variable indicating whether the PDMR
                                     transaction occurred two weeks after the release of
                                                a financial report.
  Market. Open Control Dummy variable indicating whether the stock
                                    exchange was open for trading at the time the
                                           PDMR transaction was published.
  Report. Day Control Dummy variable indicating whether the PDMR
                                    transaction was published on the same date as the
                                                release of a financial report.
  Relative Control Dummy variable indicating whether the PDMR
                                    transaction was made by a related person to the
                                            insider instead of by the insider him-/herself.
    The first control variable, Trans.Size, is a numeric variable that specifies the
relative size of the transaction in relation to the entire company size. This
calculation was based on the number of shares to avoid valuation deviations
when calculating the ratio. Hence, the number of shares transacted in the PDMR
transaction was divided by the total number of shares outstanding on a non-
diluted basis. Given that most transactions are small in relation to the entire
company size, this variable was expressed in parts per million (ppm). The second
control variable, Insider.Role, is a dummy variable that indicates whether the
PDMR that the transaction is related to has a material insider role in the
company. A material role has in this case been defined as a CEO, CFO, or
Chairman of the Board. In the case that an executive has possessed more than

                                     16
one role in the company, e.g., being both the CEO and Board member, the more
senior, operational role has prevailed in the categorization, i.e., the CEO role in
the previous example. This categorization has been made in line with the
classification of a material insider role done by Lakonishok and Lee (2001) for
PDMRs. This variable is important to include as it is reasonable to assume that
the market attributes differing informational value to whether the transaction
is made by the CEO or a division manager in the company. The third control
variable, Incentive.Progr., is a dummy variable that indicates whether the
PDMR transaction was related to an incentive program in the company, i.e.,
whether the purchase was executed by choice by the executive with his or her
own money, or if the transaction was part of the compensation package for that
executive. This data was part of the data set from the SFSA and is self-reported
by the PDMR when registering the transaction. The fourth control variable,
Report.Period, indicates whether the transaction was made within 14 days after
the release of a financial report. The information on reporting dates was
extracted from Refinitiv. This variable is important to consider as this indicates
the period when the informational gap between the PDMRs and investors is the
lowest, given financial information has recently been released, which can be
assumed to impact the informational value attributed to the PDMR transaction.
The fifth control variable, Market.Open, is a dummy variable that indicates
whether the PDMR transaction was published at a time when the market was
open. Given that there are no restrictions on when a PDMR can self-report their
transactions, PDMR transactions can be published both before and after market
opening hours, as well as during the weekend and bank holidays, which this
variable includes in the model. This is important to include in the regression
model as a publication of a transaction outside of market opening hours, makes
it more difficult to attribute the potential abnormal market return to the PDMR
transaction. The sixth control variable, Report.Day, is a dummy variable that
indicates whether the PDMR transaction was made on the same date as a
financial report was published. This is important to isolate as the reaction of the
market on said date can be assumed to relate to the financial report rather than
the PDMR transaction, which is important to be able to isolate. The final control
variable, Relative, is a dummy variable that indicates whether the transaction
was executed by a person in close relation to the PDMR rather than the insider
him-/herself. According to the Swedish Market Abuse Regulation (“MAR”), a
person in close relation to a PDMR is defined as a spouse, or a partner equivalent
to a spouse, a dependent child, a relative sharing the same household, and
certain other exceptions (SFSA, 2022). This data is self-reported by the PDMR
and included in the data set from the SFSA. This is an important aspect to
consider in the regression model as the market may attribute different
informational values to the transaction depending on if it was executed by the
PDMR or a relative to the PDMR.
    The purpose of including the specified control variables was to control for the
relevant differences in these factors between the control and treatment period.
These differences can be seen in the detailed descriptive statistics (Appendix C).
Given these changes between the periods, there would be a risk that they would
distort the outcome if omitted from the regression model and in turn lower the
accuracy of our findings, which is why they were instead included as control

                                     17
variables.
    Below follows the descriptive statistics for the dummy and numeric variables,
split between PDMR purchase and sales transactions.

                         Table 4a. Descriptive Statistics Independent Variables - PDMR Purchases
                                                                                     Stock Exchange List
                                         All Large Cap Mid Cap Small Cap First North
   Variable N % N % N % N % N %
    Covid-19 23, 069   100%    6, 645    100%    4, 213    100%    2, 210    100%   10, 001   100%
      Yes 10,980    48%     2,702    41%     1,874    44%      979     44%     5,425    54%
      No 12,089    52%     3,943    59%     2,339    56%     1,231    56%     4,576    46%
    Sector 23, 069   100%    6, 645    100%    4, 213    100%    2, 210    100%   10, 001   100%
       Automobiles and Parts 209      1%       39      1%      124      3%       -        -       46      0%
       Banks 491      2%      270      4%      221      5%        -        -         -        -
      Basic Resources 698     3%      362     5%      80      2%      81      4%      175     2%
        Chemicals 326       1%         -         -          -         -          -         -        326       3%
      Construction and Materials 2,757    12%     1,463    22%     225      5%      321     15%     748      7%
      Consumer Products and Services 1,015     4%      122     2%      348     8%      143     6%      402     4%
      Energy 365     2%      24      0%      23      1%      9      0%      309     3%
      Financial Services 663     3%      117     2%      273     6%      7      0%      266     3%
       Food, Beverage and Tobacco 323      1%       2       0%      220      5%       -        -       101      1%
      Health Care 3,833    17%     345      5%      859     20%     510     23%     2,119    21%
        Household & Personal Products 34       0%         -         -          -         -         34       2%         -         -
      Industrial Goods and Services 4,291    19%     1,730    26%      788     19%      357     16%     1,416    14%
       Media 181      1%       -        -       80      2%       1       0%      100      1%
       Personal Care, Drug and Grocery Stores 164      1%       33      0%       40      1%       -        -       91      1%
       Real Estate 1,587     7%      767     12%      365      9%       -        -       455      5%
      Retail 889     4%      394     6%      140     3%      1      0%      354     4%
      Technology 3,510    15%     331      5%      223      5%      497     22%     2,459    25%
      Telecommunications 1,142     5%      621     9%      32      1%      102     5%      387     4%
      Travel and Leisure 545     2%      25      0%      172     4%      133     6%      215     2%
       Utilities 46       0%        -         -         -         -        14       1%       32       0%
    Insider Role 23, 069   100%    6, 645    100%    4, 213    100%    2, 210    100%   10, 001   100%
      Non-material 15,853    69%     5,251    79%     2,823    67%     1,334    60%     6,445    64%
      Material 7,216    31%     1,394    21%     1,390    33%      876     40%     3,556    36%
    Report Period 23, 069   100%    6, 645    100%    4, 213    100%    2, 210    100%   10, 001   100%
      No 17,423    76%     5,012    75%     2,932    70%     1,595    72%     7,884    79%
      Yes 5,646    24%     1,633    25%     1,281    30%      615     28%     2,117    21%
    Market Open 23, 069   100%    6, 645    100%    4, 213    100%    2, 210    100%   10, 001   100%
      Closed 6,570    28%     1,720    26%     1,184    28%      678     31%     2,988    30%
      Open 16,499    72%     4,925    74%     3,029    72%     1,532    69%     7,013    70%
    Report Day 23, 069   100%    6, 645    100%    4, 213    100%    2, 210    100%   10, 001   100%
      No 22,653    98%     6,534    98%     4,116    98%     2,154    97%     9,849    98%
      Yes 416     2%      111     2%      97      2%      56      3%      152     2%
    Relative 23, 069   100%    6, 645    100%    4, 213    100%    2, 210    100%   10, 001   100%
      No 16,832    73%     5,058    76%     3,301    78%     1,701    77%     6,772    68%
      Yes 6,237    27%     1,587    24%     912     22%     509     23%     3,229    32%

     The table above represents descriptive statistics across Stock Exchange Lists for the independent dummy variables covering PDMR purchase transactions,
      covering in total 23,069 purchase transactions. "-" indicates that there is no transaction for that particular combination of variables.

                    Table 5a. Descriptive Statistics Independent Variable: Trans.Size - PDMR Purchases

   Stock Exchange List N Mean Median Std. Dev. Min Max

    All 23, 069 10 ppm 0. 10 ppm 42 ppm ~ 0 ppm 7, 205 ppm

    Large Cap 6,645 8 ppm 0.01 ppm 55 ppm ~ 0 ppm 1,412 ppm

    Mid Cap 4,213 2 ppm 0.07 ppm 23 ppm ~ 0 ppm 1,118 ppm

    Small Cap 2,210 4 ppm 0.17 ppm 31 ppm ~ 0 ppm 797 ppm

    First North 10,001 17 ppm 0.22 ppm 63 ppm ~ 0 ppm 7,205 ppm

     The table above shows the descriptive statistics for the independent variable Trans.Size on each stock exchange list and on an aggregated level for PDMR
      purchase transactions. Transaction size is calculated as the transaction size, in shares, in relation to the company's total number of shares outstanding,
      expressed in parts per million (ppm = 0.0001%). The data is comprised of 23,069 purchase transactions across all stock exchange lists.

                                     18
                        Table 4b. Descriptive Statistics Independent Variables - PDMR Sales
                                                                                Stock Exchange List
                                      All Large Cap Mid Cap Small Cap First North
Variable N     % N % N % N % N %
Covid-19 8, 171   100% 2, 204   100% 1, 797   100% 714    100% 3, 456   100%
  Yes 4,032    49% 1,124    51% 732     41% 273     38% 1,903    55%
  No 4,139    51% 1,080    49% 1,065    59% 441     62% 1,553    45%
Sector 8, 171   100% 2, 204   100% 1, 797   100% 714    100% 3, 456   100%
  Automobiles and Parts 22      0% 1      0% 17      1% -       - 4      0%
  Banks 172      2% 155      7% 17      1% -       - -       -
  Basic Resources 238     3% 135     6% 4      0% 32     4% 67     2%
  Chemicals 105      1% -        - -        - -        - 105      3%
  Construction and Materials 349     4% 195     9% 110     6% 29     4% 15     0%
  Consumer Products and Services 635     8% 136     6% 119     7% 82     11% 298     9%
  Energy 297     4% 24     1% 7      0% 28     4% 238     7%
  Financial Services 223     3% 79     4% 81     5% 4      1% 59     2%
  Food, Beverage and Tobacco 126     2% 35      2% 54      3% -       - 37      1%
  Health Care 1,297    16% 153     7% 658     37% 51     7% 435     13%
  Industrial Goods and Services 1,898    23% 471     21% 331     18% 153     21% 943     27%
  Media 45      1% -       - 13      1% 3      0% 29      1%
  Personal Care, Drug and Grocery Stores 133     2% 8      0% 4      0% -       - 121     4%
  Real Estate 359     4% 208     9% 109     6% -       - 42      1%
  Retail 333     4% 139     6% 61     3% 1      0% 132     4%
  Technology 1,269    16% 94     4% 146     8% 260     36% 769     22%
  Telecommunications 468     6% 340     15% 4      0% 18     3% 106     3%
  Travel and Leisure 161     2% 31     1% 62     3% 49     7% 19     1%
  Utilities 41      1% -        - -        - 4       1% 37      1%
Insider Role 8, 171   100% 2, 204   100% 1, 797   100% 714    100% 3, 456   100%
  Non-material 5,965    73% 1,825    83% 1,159    64% 506     71% 2,475    72%
  Material 2,206    27% 379     17% 638     36% 208     29% 981     28%
Report Period 8, 171   100% 2, 204   100% 1, 797   100% 714    100% 3, 456   100%
  No 6,422    79% 1,784    81% 1,128    63% 596     83% 2,914    84%
  Yes 1,749    21% 420     19% 669     37% 118     17% 542     16%
Market Open 8, 171   100% 2, 204   100% 1, 797   100% 714    100% 3, 456   100%
  Closed 2,973    36% 672     30% 574     32% 344     48% 1,383    40%
  Open 5,198    64% 1,532    70% 1,223    68% 370     52% 2,073    60%
Report Day 8, 171   100% 2, 204   100% 1, 797   100% 714    100% 3, 456   100%
  No 8,118    99% 2,193    100% 1,779    99% 711    100% 3,435    99%
  Yes 53     1% 11     0% 18     1% 3      0% 21     1%
Relative 8, 171   100% 2, 204   100% 1, 797   100% 714    100% 3, 456   100%
  No 5,415    66% 1,767    80% 1,402    78% 471     66% 1,775    51%
  Yes 2,756    34% 437     20% 395     22% 243     34% 1,681    49%
The table above represents descriptive statistics across Stock Exchange Lists for the independent dummy variables covering PDMR purchase transactions,
covering in total 8,171 sales transactions. "-" indicates that there is no transaction for that particular combination of variables.

                   Table 5b. Descriptive Statistics Independent Variable: Trans.Size - PDMR Sales

Stock Exchange List N Mean Median Std. Dev. Min Max

All 8, 171 9 ppm 0. 16 ppm 62 ppm ~ 0 ppm 2, 415 ppm

Large Cap 2,204 15 ppm 0.03 ppm 110 ppm ~ 0 ppm 2,415 ppm

Mid Cap 1,797 4 ppm 0.12 ppm 23 ppm ~ 0 ppm 474 ppm

Small Cap 714 8 ppm 0.40 ppm 34 ppm ~ 0 ppm 450 ppm

First North 3,456 7 ppm 0.29 ppm 31 ppm ~ 0 ppm 592 ppm

The table above shows the descriptive statistics for the independent variable Trans.Size on each stock exchange list and on an aggregated level for PDMR sales
transactions. Transaction size is calculated as the transaction size, in shares, in relation to the company's total number of shares outstanding, expressed in
parts per million (ppm = 0.0001%). The data is comprised of 8,171 sales transactions across all stock exchange lists.

                                  19
                                                     Table 6. Correlation Matrix

    Variables (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) VIF Purchases VIF Sales

    (1) Covid-19 - Yes 1.000 1.0186 1.0446

    (2) Transaction Size of Company (%) 0.001 1.000 1.0007 1.0241

    (3) High-ranking Insider - Yes 0. 052* * * 0.011 1.000 1.0283 1.0347

    (4) Incentive Program Related - Yes -0. 061* * * 0. 015* -0. 092* * * 1.000 1.0502 1.0908

    (5) Transaction in Reporting Period - Yes 0.005 -0.006 0. 041* * * -0. 039* * * 1.000 1.0642 1.0597

    (6) Market Open on Publication - Yes -0. 024* * * 0.005 0.011 0. 080* * * -0.012 1.000 1.0073 1.0306

    (7) Publication on Reporting Date - Yes 0. 017* * -0.001 0. 018* * -0. 033* * * 0. 222* * * 0. 025* * * 1.000 1.0644 1.0267

    (8) Transaction by Relative - Yes 0. 061* * * 0.006 -0. 040* * * -0. 170* * * -0. 054* * * -0.011 -0. 038* * * 1.000 1.0362 1.0849

       The table showcases the results of The Pearson Product-Moment Correlation two-tailed tests of each combination of independent variables in the regression models. Given that the regression models are
       split between transaction types, the V IF-values for the Purchase and Sales regression models are presented separately. Bold values indicate statistical significance at α<0.1.
       *** p-value<0.01, **p-value<0.05, *p-value<0.1
    We perform a multicollinearity test on the independent variables of the
regression variables by calculating the Variance Inflation Factors (VIF). None of
the independent variables have a VIF value that supersedes the standard limit
of 10, meaning that we can conclude that multicollinearity between independent
variables is not a material problem for our regression model (Newbold, 2013).
The correlation matrix is performed on the entire data set regardless of
transaction type, while the VIF is calculated separately for PDMR purchases and
sales given that this is calculated on an individual regression model that differs
between the transaction types.
    In addition to this multicollinearity test, we also run an additional
multicollinearity test across a total of 50 variables to check for correlation
between fixed effect variables such as sector, stock exchange list, publication day,
publication month, and detailed insider roles. This multicollinearity test can be
found in Appendix D. This was done with the purpose to test for omitted variable
bias, given that they could reveal potential fixed effects that are not captured by
the linear regression model. Given that we found no relevant correlation between
these additional control variables and the treatment variable, and that the VIF
values were well within the standard limit, we can conclude that the risk for
omitted variable bias for these defined additional control variables is low.
K. Placebo Variable
    To conduct a robustness test of our empirical results, testing for potential
overarching time trends in the data that were not related to the exogenous
change in uncertainty, we also created a placebo variable to run a placebo test.
The rationale and method behind this decision are described in detail in the
methodology. To run the placebo test we had to create a placebo variable, to test
for potential time trends.

   𝐕𝐚𝐫𝐢𝐚𝐛𝐥𝐞 Definition
   Placebo Dummy variable indicating if the PDMR transaction
                               occurred during the placebo period (2018-09-08 to 2020-01-
                             31) or if it occurred in the non-placebo period (2017-01-01 –
                               2018-09-07) in the control data.
   This was done by splitting the control period data in half in terms of the
number of transactions, all while maintaining the chronological order of the data.
The control period data that stretched from 2017-01-01 to 2020-01-31, was
therefore split on the 8th of September 2018 (which was the date that generated
the most even distribution of transactions between the two halves of the data
set). All transactions that occurred before said date was given a 0 in the placebo
variable, while all transaction that occurred after this date was given a 1 in the

                                     20
placebo variable. This focus on splitting the data set on the number of
transactions instead of on the number of days was in line with the methodology
used by Loh and Stulz (2018).
    Below follows the descriptive statistics for the placebo variable used in the
placebo test, split between PDMR purchase and sales transactions.

                            Table 7a. Descriptive Statistics Placebo Variable - PDMR Purchases
                                                                                     Stock Exchange List
                                         All Large Cap Mid Cap Small Cap First North
   Variable N % N % N % N % N %
    Placebo 12, 089   100%    3, 943    100%    2, 339    100%    1, 231    100%    4, 576    100%
      Yes 6,042    50%     2,103    53%     1,219    52%     652     53%     2,068    45%
      No 6,047    50%     1,840    47%     1,120    48%     579     47%     2,508    55%
      The table above represents descriptive statistics across Stock Exchange Lists for the placebo variable in the control peroid covering PDMR purchase transactions,
      covering in total 12,089 purchase transactions. "-" indicates that there is no transaction for that particular combination of variables.

                              Table 7b. Descriptive Statistics Placebo Variable - PDMR Sales
                                                                                     Stock Exchange List
                                         All Large Cap Mid Cap Small Cap First North
   Variable N % N % N % N % N %
    Placebo 4, 139    100%    1, 080    100%    1, 065    100%     441    100%    1, 553    100%
      Yes 2,084    50%     632     59%     447     42%     269     61%     736     47%
      No 2,055    50%     448     41%     618     58%     172     39%     817     53%
      The table above represents descriptive statistics across Stock Exchange Lists for the placebo variable in the control peroid covering PDMR sales transactions,
      covering in total 4,139 purchase transactions. "-" indicates that there is no transaction for that particular combination of variables.

                    Methodology
A. General Methodology
   Though our study has been heavily influenced by the research conducted by
Lakonishok and Lee (2001), given its connection to the informational value of
PDMR transactions, our research question is formed in such a way that the
methodology used by these researchers would not be appropriate to use to derive
an accurate conclusion. That is since we are trying to examine the difference in
informational value between periods of different market sentiments, which
cannot be done by replicating the methodology used by Lakonishok and Lee
(2001). For this purpose, the methodology used by Loh and Stulz (2018) is instead
replicated, motivated by the strong underlying similarities in the research as
discussed in the introduction. Instead of looking at the abnormal stock returns
in conjunction with revised analyst recommendations between periods of
differing market sentiment, we will be looking at the abnormal stock returns in
conjunction with PDMR trades during the Covid-19 crisis compared with normal
market conditions. This type of analysis can either be studied directly through a
comparison of the dependent variable between the treatment and control period
or through a time-series regression. In line with Loh and Stulz (2018), both
methods will be used in this study to be able to determine whether there is a
significant difference between the abnormal returns in the control and treatment
period and to determine whether such a difference derives from the change in
uncertainty or if it is due to other changes in the independent variables.
   As stated in the Data Section, the ideal methodology would be to randomly
assign an uncertainty to homogenous firms equally spread in all sectors and then
study the two groups over time to see if there is an endogenous effect on abnormal
stock returns following the introduction of the exogenous change in uncertainty.
However, that is a hypothetical approach that is not feasible in reality. Instead,

                                     21
we have had to use observational data from a global public health crisis as a
proxy for market uncertainty and compare the abnormal stock returns following
PDMR transactions to the equivalent returns in the control period. This
approach differs from the ideal scenario as it suffers from possible time trends,
omitted variable bias, and problems with sector comparability that limits the
accuracy of the results that we derive. Our research methodology has been
constructed to reduce and test the extent of such limitations. However, attaining
a methodology that eradicates all possible limitations would not be achievable.
Hence, the limitations that prevail are discussed in detail to inform the reader
of their potential implications on the results.
B. Statistical T-tests
   In line with Loh and Stulz (2018), our direct study through comparison
between the control and treatment period is executed using Welch’s t-tests for
unequal variances. This statistical test is used to determine whether the equally
weighted means of the abnormal stock returns following the announcement of
PDMR transactions are significantly different between times of extreme
uncertainty (approx. Q1 2020 to Q4 2021) and normal market conditions (approx.
Q1 2017 to Q4 2019). The analysis is conducted by calculating the test statistic,
using equation 4, and then analyzing the level of significance by which the null
hypothesis can be rejected by observing the p-value associated with each t-test.
The formula through which one calculates the test statistic is given by Newbold
et al (2013) and compares the sample mean of the treatment period (𝑥̅ ) with the
sample mean of the control period (𝑦̅  ), with 𝑠 representing the sample variance
and 𝑛 the sample size:

                                                       𝒙̅   − 𝒚̅
                                   𝒕 =
                                                            𝟐    𝒔𝟐                                 (4)
                                                                                   𝒔𝒙        𝒚
                           √  +
                                                              𝒏𝒙    𝒏𝒚

    Initially, the analysis is meant to test if the average abnormal return
following the publication of a PDMR transaction differs in times of uncertainty.
This is done by dividing the data into two subsets, depending on if the transaction
type is classified as a purchase or a sales transaction. Since the characteristics
of the effect of the transaction types are expected to neutralize the results when
looking at the entire data set, we instead want to look at one-sided Welch’s t-
tests split between the different transaction types. As stated in the Hypotheses
Section ,we would expect that both types of PDMR transactions would generate
a more extreme abnormal share return following the announcement. This would
manifest itself as a more negative abnormal return for sales and a more positive
abnormal return for purchases. Given this view, the following null and
alternative hypotheses have been set up for the different transaction types. 𝑅̅
representing abnormal returns, with the superscript 𝑏 and 𝑠 representing the
buying and selling transaction type respectively, and the subscript 𝑐 and 𝑡
representing the control and treatment period respectively.

                                     22
                        Purchase PDMR transactions

                                                                       ̅   𝒃      ̅   𝒃
                                       𝑯𝟎: 𝑹 𝒕 − 𝑹 𝒄 ≤ 𝟎
                                                                               (5)
                                                                       ̅   𝒃      ̅   𝒃
                                       𝑯𝟏: 𝑹 𝒕 − 𝑹 𝒄 > 𝟎

                           Sales PDMR transactions

                                                                           ̅   𝒔       ̅   𝒔
                                        𝑯𝟎: 𝑹 𝒕 − 𝑹 𝒄 ≥ 𝟎
                                                   𝒔      𝒔                                  (6)
                                            𝑯𝟏: 𝑹̅   𝒕 − 𝑹̅   𝒄 < 𝟎

    Additionally, we perform t-tests on the average abnormal returns for the
different sectors represented in our data set. This is done with the intuition that
the degree of uncertainty should differ between industries, given the inherent
diversity of operational challenges and opportunities that the Covid-19 crisis
posed. As noted from the S&P report, there is a discrepancy between how e.g.,
the Travel and Leisure industry and the Health Care industry were impacted by
the pandemic, as well as their default risk, which should be reflected in how the
market reacts to PDMR transactions within these different industries (Standard
& Poor’s, 2022). Given that these effects are more ambiguous than on the
aggregate level, this analysis will be performed as a two-sided Welch’s t-tests,
given potentially varying directional effects among industries. The following null
and alternative hypotheses have been set up for the sector-level analysis with
this in mind:
                                           𝑯𝟎: 𝑹̅   𝒕 − 𝑹̅   𝒄 = 𝟎
                                                                               (7)
                                           𝑯𝟏: 𝑹̅   𝒕 − 𝑹̅   𝒄 ≠ 𝟎

C. Time-series Regression
   In line with the methodology used by Loh and Stulz (2018), we also perform
a time-series regression analysis to try to isolate the effect of the treatment
period by investigating the time-series determinants related to each dependent
variable, and their statistical significance. The independent variables that were
presented in the Data Section are used for the time-series regressions.
    Following the methodology of Loh and Stulz (2018), the regression is
conducted as an ordinary least squared (OLS) linear regression, to determine the
relationship between the dependent variable and the independent variables,
both on the individual stock exchange lists and at an aggregated level. In line
with the method logic introduced in the Data Section, the linear regressions are
split between purchase and sales transactions to avoid neutralizing the effect of
the PDMR trade announcement. The model behind the linear regression can be
expressed in the following way:
               𝑹 = 𝜷𝟎 + 𝜷𝟏𝑪𝒐𝒗𝒊𝒅 + 𝜷𝟐𝑻𝒓𝒂𝒏𝒔. 𝑺𝒊𝒛𝒆 + 𝜷𝟑𝑰𝒏𝒔𝒊𝒅𝒆𝒓. 𝑹𝒐𝒍𝒆 +
                        𝜷𝟒𝑰𝒏𝒄𝒆𝒏𝒕𝒊𝒗𝒆. 𝑷𝒓𝒐𝒈𝒓. + 𝜷𝟓𝑹𝒆𝒑𝒐𝒓𝒕. 𝑷𝒆𝒓𝒊𝒐𝒅 +         (8)
                  𝜷𝟔𝑴𝒂𝒓𝒌𝒆𝒕. 𝑶𝒑𝒆𝒏 + 𝜷𝟕𝑹𝒆𝒑𝒐𝒓𝒕. 𝑫𝒂𝒚 + 𝜷𝟖𝑹𝒆𝒍𝒂𝒕𝒊𝒗𝒆 + 𝜺

                                     23
D. Placebo Test
    In addition to the t-tests and time-series regression, we have also decided to
include a placebo test as a robustness test of our results. This contrasts with Loh
and Stulz (2018) that did not have such a test in their research. That has to do
with the fact that they included data with uncertain market conditions from
multiple, separate time periods and therefore were not as exposed to time trends.
However, given that we are looking at a period of long, continuous uncertainty
and contrasting this with a long, continuous control period that in its entirety
occurred before the treatment period, the outcome of our method runs the risk of
capturing general trends that develop in the markets over time. To test if our
results derive from the behavioral changes following an increase in market
uncertainty or are due to noise in the market data, we perform a robustness test
in the form of this placebo test.
    A placebo test is a statistical method used to diagnose problems with research
designs in observational studies, whereby a research method is applied to a data
set that should not yield any significant results for the placebo variable. This is
done to test whether the research method accurately identifies correlations in
the data or simply reacts to noise (Eggers et al, 2021). For our study, we use our
linear regression model, which was described in the previous section, and apply
it to our control period data. We then run the same regression model as
previously described, with the only difference that it is run solely on the control
period data and that the treatment variable is changed to the placebo period
variable (Placebo) instead of the uncertainty period variable (Covid). The model
used for the Placebo Test can therefore be described in the following way:
              𝑹 = 𝜷𝟎 + 𝜷𝟏𝑷𝒍𝒂𝒄𝒆𝒃𝒐 + 𝜷𝟐𝑻𝒓𝒂𝒏𝒔. 𝑺𝒊𝒛𝒆 + 𝜷𝟑𝑰𝒏𝒔𝒊𝒅𝒆𝒓. 𝑹𝒐𝒍𝒆 +
                        𝜷𝟒𝑰𝒏𝒄𝒆𝒏𝒕𝒊𝒗𝒆. 𝑷𝒓𝒐𝒈𝒓. + 𝜷𝟓𝑹𝒆𝒑𝒐𝒓𝒕. 𝑷𝒆𝒓𝒊𝒐𝒅 +         (9)
                  𝜷𝟔𝑴𝒂𝒓𝒌𝒆𝒕. 𝑶𝒑𝒆𝒏 + 𝜷𝟕𝑹𝒆𝒑𝒐𝒓𝒕. 𝑫𝒂𝒚 + 𝜷𝟖𝑹𝒆𝒍𝒂𝒕𝒊𝒗𝒆 + 𝜺

   In line with the rest of our methodology and the research done by Loh and
Stulz (2018), we run the placebo test separately for PDMR purchase and sales
transactions to determine whether the research method is inherently flawed due
to non-controlled time trends.
                    Empirical Results
A. Statistical T-tests
    Table 8 presents the results from the t-tests on changes in average abnormal
stock returns between the control period and the treatment period. This test
includes all available transactions in both the control and treatment period
without controlling for industry, though with a split between purchase and sales
PDMR transactions, in line with the reasoning presented in the methodology.
Looking at changes in the average abnormal stock return between the periods,
we can conclude that across all stock exchange lists the average abnormal stock
return for PDMR purchase transactions increased by 0.39% during the treatment
period. This outcome is in line with our hypothesis that the abnormal stock
return would increase during the treatment period. This result is statistically
significant at the 1% significance level and was consistent across all stock

                                     24
exchange lists. Stocks on First North saw the largest change in abnormal stock
returns, with an average increase of 0.48% in conjunction with PDMR purchases,
with the value being significant at 1%. Transactions on the Large Cap and Mid
Cap lists also experienced slightly smaller increases at the 1% significance level.
Returns related to PDMR transactions on Small Cap stocks were not shown to
be statistically significant.

                                     Table 8. Transaction Type T-Test Results
                                                                       Change in Return
    Stock Exchange List Purchases Sales
    All 0. 39%* * * (0.04)%
    Large Cap 0. 16%* * * (0. 26)%* * *
    Mid Cap 0. 30%* * * 0.82%
    Small Cap 0.11% 0.19%
    First North 0. 48%* * * (0. 34)%*

     The table reports the difference in average returns between the control and treatment period, split by transaction type and company size. A positive value
     indicates an increase in the average return in the treatment period compared to the control period, and vice versa. The returns are calculated as a
     percentage price change. The data covers the price reaction of 31,240 PDMR transactions, see descriptive statistics for the division of data between
     company sizes and transaction types. The one-sided Welch's t-tests have been conducted by comparing the PDMR transactions in the treatment period
     with the PDMR transactons in the control period, grouped by company sizes. Bold values indicate statistical significance at α<0.1.
     *** p-value<0.01, ** p-value<0.05, * p-value<0.1

    Looking at the equivalent results for PDMR sales transactions, no
statistically significant results were derived when looking at securities across all
lists, contrary to our hypothesis. Large Cap stocks saw the largest change in the
negative effect from PDMR sales when comparing the period, a result that was
significant at the 1% significance level, with First North having a larger negative
effect but at the 10% significance level. No other individual stock exchange list
had any significant changes in the abnormal stock returns between the two
periods, though worth highlighting that Mid and Small Cap had a positive
change in their abnormal returns, though lacking statistical significance.
    In Table 9a results of the t-tests split by sector for PDMR purchase
transactions are showcased. On the aggregate level, approximately half of the
sectors have some sort of significant results, with ‘Banks’, ‘Automobiles and
Parts’ and ‘Personal Care, Drug and Grocery Stores’ showing the highest
increases in abnormal share returns between the control and treatment period,
at 1%, 5% and 5% significance level respectively. For ‘Banks’ this change is
mainly prevalent across the two largest stock exchange lists where results are
1.10% at significance level 5% and 1.37% at significance level 5% for Large Cap
and Mid Cap respectively. These results are in line with our hypothesis that
there would be heterogeneity between different sectors in market reaction.
Furthermore, in line with our hypothesis ‘Automobiles and Parts’ saw a
significant increase in abnormal stock returns in the treatment period. However,
we did not see the same results for ‘Energy’ and ‘Travel and Leisure’, which we
expected. In addition, ‘Food, Beverage and Tobacco’, ‘Basic Resources’,
‘Consumer Products and Services’ and ‘Retail’ all showcase an increase in
abnormal stock returns of more than half a percent between the periods at a
significance level of 1%.
    Two sectors showcase surprising results in the form of statistically significant
opposite effects between different stock exchange lists. The first one of these
industries is ‘Technology’ which has an increase of 1.09% on average on Large
Cap and a decrease of -1.15% on Small-Cap between the periods, both being at
the 1% significance level. The other sector is ‘Health Care’ with a negative effect

                                     25
of the average abnormal stock return during the Covid-19 crisis of -0.74% on
Large Cap and an equivalent positive effect of 1.20% on Small Cap, both being
at the 1% significance level.
    One industry that stands out is ‘Travel and Leisure’ which showcases a clear
decline of the abnormal stock return during the Covid-19 crisis, contrary to our
hypothesis, at a 1% significance level at the aggregate level. Even though this
negative impact can be seen across most stock exchange lists, the effect seems to
mainly be derived from the companies within the sector that are listed on First
North, where the decline is both large in its effect and statistically significant at
the 1% level. For the remaining sectors the effects are both small and statistically
insignificant on the aggregate stock exchange list level, and hence point toward
a very limited sector-specific impact on the abnormal stock returns.

                                         Table 9a. Sector T-Test Results for PDMR Purchases

                                                                                                     Stock Exchange List

      Sector All Large Cap Mid Cap Small Cap First North
      Automobiles and Parts 1. 29%* * - 1. 03%* * - 3. 98%* *

      Banks 1. 90%* * * 1. 10%* * 1. 37%* * - -

      Basic Resources 0. 81%* * * 0. 72%* * * -0.46% -0.29% 0.87%

      Chemicals 0.31% - - - 0.31%

      Construction and Materials 0.08% -0. 22%* * * -0.39% -0. 92%* * * 1. 20%* * *

      Consumer Products and Services 0. 78%* * * 0.08% 0. 52%* * 0.13% 0.73%

      Energy 1. 24%* * -0.24% -1. 05%* * 3.48% 1. 38%* *

      Financial Services 0.03% -0.44% 0.24% - -0.17%

      Food, Beverage and Tobacco 0. 79%* * * - 0. 95%* * * - -0.34%

      Health Care 0.13% -0. 74%* * * -0.10% 1. 20%* * * -0.03%

      Industrial Goods and Services 0. 50%* * * 0.08% - -0.39% 1. 42%* * *

      Media 1.02% - -0.17% - 1.88%

      Personal Care, Drug and Grocery Stores 1. 33%* * 1.08% -0.73% - -

      Real Estate 0. 31%* * 0.01% 0. 41%* * - 1. 37%* * *

      Retail 0. 71%* * * 0.10% 0.59% - 0.51%

      Technology -0.06% 1. 09%* * * 1.03% -1. 15%* * * -0.06%

      Telecommunications 0.35% 0.06% -1.33% -0.52% 1.42%

      Travel and Leisure -0. 98%* * * -2.17% 0.22% -0.48% -2. 33%* * *

      Utilities 3.51% - - - 4. 41%*
          The table reports the difference in average returns between the control and treatment period, split by sector and company size. A positive value indicates an increase in the average return
         in the treatment period compared to the control period, and vice versa. The returns are calculated as a percentage price change. The data covers the price reaction of 31,240 PDMR
         transactions, see summary statistics for the division of data between sectors and company sizes. The two-sided Welch's t-tests have been conducted by comparing the PDMR purchase
         transactions in the treatment period with the PDMR purchase transactons in the control period, grouped by sector and company sizes. Bold values indicate statistical significance at
          α<0.1. "-" indicate that it was not possible to conduct a t-test due to insufficient quantities of data.

    In Table 9b results of the t-tests split by industries for PDMR sales
transactions are showcased. On the aggregate market level, there are slightly
fewer sectors with significant results. The largest decreases in average abnormal
stock returns between the periods can be seen among the ‘Financial Services’,
‘Industrial Goods and Services’ and ‘Technology’ industries that have an effect of
-1.01%, -0.73%, and -0.65% at 5%, 1%, and 5% significance level respectively. For
the two latter sectors, this effect can be seen across the stock exchange lists, but
significant results only exist on Large and Small Cap for ‘Financial Services’.
‘Food Beverage and Tobacco’, ‘Utilities’ and ‘Telecommunications’ also stand out
in these results given that they have an increase in the average abnormal stock
return related to PDMR sales transactions between the periods, which are both
significant at the 5% level. For the two former industries, this effect seems to be
derived from First North securities, with a large positive effect at 5%
significance, while the driver of the ‘Telecommunications’ is more ambiguous.
These results also showcase heterogeneity among different industries in market

                                     26
reaction, in line with our hypothesis.
   When comparing Tables 9a and 9b for significant results on the aggregate
stock exchange list level, it is evident that a large, statistically significant
positive effect on PDMR purchases during the Covid-19 crisis rarely has an
equivalent negative effect on PDMR sales. This is contrary to our hypothesis
given that we thought that the abnormal stock return would be dependent solely
on industry rather than transaction type, and hence implicitly thought that there
would be symmetry in the results, which was not the case. It is only ‘Industrial
Goods and Services’ that has significant symmetrical effects for both PDMR
purchases and sales, while other industries seem to have asymmetrical effects
between the different transaction types.

                                         Table 9b. Sector T-Test Results for PDMR Sales

                                                                                                  Stock Exchange List

    Sector All Large Cap Mid Cap Small Cap First North
    Automobiles and Parts - - - - -

    Banks 0.30% 0.05% 3.14% - -

    Basic Resources 0.09% -0. 49%* 0.60% -1.84% 1.40%

    Chemicals 0.81% - - - 0.81%

    Construction and Materials -0.11% 0. 46%* * -0.51% -0. 79%* -3.18%

    Consumer Products and Services -0.34% 0.06% 2. 26%* * * -2. 97%* -1.41%

    Energy -0.59% - 0.90% 0.66% -0.71%

    Financial Services -1. 01%* * -1. 67%* -0.14% -5. 10%* -1.95%

    Food, Beverage and Tobacco 0. 94%* * -0.11% -0.25% - 2. 76%* *

    Health Care -0.10% -0. 91%* * 1. 00%* * * -0.01% -1. 95%* * *

    Industrial Goods and Services -0. 73%* * * -0. 43%* * * -0.29% 2. 48%* * * -1. 31%* * *

    Media 1.57% - -1.73% - 3.88%

    Personal Care, Drug and Grocery Stores -0.51% - - - -0. 91%* *

    Real Estate 0.04% -0.07% 0.11% - 0.62%

    Retail 0.07% 0.49% -0.16% - -0.13%

    Technology -0. 65%* * 1. 73%* * -0. 75%* -0.44% -1. 09%* * *

    Telecommunications 2. 58%* * -1. 06%* * * - 1.46% -

    Travel and Leisure -0.08% 0.23% 0.43% -0.37% 1.43%

    Utilities 4. 61%* * - - - 4. 46%* *
      The table reports the difference in average returns between the control and treatment period, split by sector and company size. A positive value indicates an increase in the average return
      in the treatment period compared to the control period, and vice versa. The returns are calculated as a percentage price change. The data covers the price reaction of 31,240 PDMR
      transactions, see summary statistics for the division of data between sectors and company sizes. The two-sided Welch's t-tests have been conducted by comparing the PDMR sales
      transactions in the treatment period with the PDMR sales transactons in the control period, grouped by sector and company sizes. Bold values indicate statistical significance at α<0.1.
       "-" indicate that it was not possible to conduct a t-test due to insufficient quantities of data.
      *** p-value<0.01, ** p-value<0.05, * p-value<0.1

B. Time-series Regression
    Table 10a shows the outcome of the regression on abnormal stock returns for
the PDMR purchase transactions. When looking at the effect of the treatment
period, the results are very much in line with that of the t-tests, i.e., that there
is a statistically significant positive effect on the abnormal stock returns during
the Covid-19 crisis on the aggregate market level. Given that the linear
regression method also considers the effects of other independent variables, the
effect seen by the treatment variable can be considered more isolated than that
of the t-tests. Important to note however is that the regression method only
indicates a correlation between dependent and independent variables, not
causality. Looking across the stock exchange lists, the effect is prevalent
throughout, though only statistically significant for Large Cap, Mid Cap, and
First North at 5%, 5%, and 1% significance levels respectively. The effect is most
prominent for First North. These results are also broadly in line with those
presented from Welch’s t-test. This is in line with our hypothesis that smaller

                                     27
lists would have larger effects on PDMR transactions during uncertain times.
Another noteworthy aspect of these results is that almost all the independent
variables included in our regression model have a statistically significant
explanatory value on the aggregate level.
   The largest positive effects on abnormal stock returns can be derived from
whether the transaction is associated with a high-ranking PDMR (CEO, CFO, or
Chairman) and if the transaction was published 14 days after the release of a
financial report. Furthermore, multiple statistically significant negative effects
can also be found in the regression model on the aggregate market level, with
transactions related to incentive programs decreasing the abnormal stock
returns following the trade announcement. Furthermore, the publication of the
PDMR transaction on the same date as a financial report has the largest negative
effect on abnormal stock returns. However, this should be seen in the light that
increased market activity and changes to investor sentiment are to be expected
on such a day given the release of new financial information in the report. The
only independent variable that lacks any relevant statistical significance, both
on the individual stock exchange level and at the aggregate, is the size of PDMR
transactions in relation to the company size. Our regression indicates that there
is no correlation between the size of the PDMR transaction and the abnormal
stock returns.
    When looking at the individual stock exchange level the statistical
significance of the coefficient of the independent variables is generally not as
extensive. Being a high-ranking PDMR, publishing the transaction on the date
of a financial report or the 14 days following the release of a financial report seem
to have statistically significant effects across a majority of the stock exchange
lists. Worth noting here is that transactions related to stocks on the Small Cap
list seem to have deviating factors with statistically significant effects. However,
this might have to do with the lower sample size of Small Cap transactions
compared to the other stock exchange lists.

                                     28
                       Table 10a. Regression Results for PDMR Purchase Transactions
                                            Dependent Variable: Abnormal Stock Return

                                                                           Stock Exchange List

                                         All Large Cap Mid Cap Small Cap First North

    Covid-19 - Yes 0. 3%* * * 0. 1%* * 0. 3%* * 0.2% 0. 4%* * *

                                         (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.2%) (0.1%)

   Transaction Size of Company (%) 0.0% 0.0% -0.0% -0. 0%* 0.0%

                                         (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%)

    High-ranking Insider - Yes 0. 5%* * * 0. 3%* * * 0. 4%* * * 0. 4%* * 0. 5%* * *

                                         (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.2%) (0.1%)

    Incentive Program Related - Yes -0. 3%* * * -0.0% -0.1% -0. 9%* * -0.2%

                                         (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.2%) (0.4%) (0.3%)

    Transaction in Reporting Period - Yes 0. 3%* * * -0. 2%* * * 0. 6%* * * 0.2% 0. 6%* * *

                                         (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.2%) (0.1%)

    Market Open on Publication - Yes 0. 1%* -0. 1%* * -0.1% 0. 5%* * 0. 2%* *

                                         (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.2%) (0.1%)

    Publication on Reporting Date - Yes -1. 1%* * * -0. 6%* * * -1. 7%* * * -0.3% -1. 5%* * *

                                         (0.2%) (0.2%) (0.3%) (0.6%) (0.5%)

    Transaction by Relative - Yes 0. 2%* * * 0. 1%* * 0. 2%* 1. 7%* * * -0.1%

                                         (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.2%) (0.1%)

   Constant -0.0% 0.0% -0.1% -0.3% 0.1%

                                         (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.2%) (0.1%)

    Observations 23,069 6,645 4,213 2,210 10,001

     2 0.007 0.014 0.017 0.039 0.007
   R

            2 0.007 0.013 0.015 0.036 0.006
    Adjusted R
     The table presents the results of the regression for PDMR purchase transactions, grouped by stock exchange list, with abnormal stock returns
     following the PDMR transaction publication as as the dependent variable. Stock return is calculated as a price change in percent. The data
     covers PDMR transactions of 828 stocks over 1,608 trading days, compiling 23,069 observations in total split between four stock exchange
     lists. Standard errors are shown in paranthesis. Bold values indicate statistical significance at α<0.1
     *** p-value<0.01, **p-value<0.05, *p-value<0.1

    One should comment on the R2-value of the linear regression given that it is
very low across all regressions. That means that our linear regression model only
explains a fraction of the total variance in the dependent variable in our data.
This is in line with expectations for this type of model, given that it is constructed
by only eight variables, most of which are binary, dummy variables, and that it
tries to explain a highly complex event that abnormal stock returns represent,
especially in uncertain times. Given that almost all the coefficients of the
dependent variables showcase statistical significance, with most of them being
at the 1% significance level, indicates that the linear regression model has at
least a partial explanatory value in the abnormal stock returns.
    Finally, we perform a Breusch-Pagan heteroscedasticity test on all regression
models, to see if we can determine that the error terms are homoscedastic. Given
the high degree of significance in the test across stock exchange lists, we can
reject the null hypothesis that the residuals are homoscedastic. This poses a
limitation to our regression results, given that one of the implied assumptions of
a time-series linear regression is that the variance is constant across the data,
without any systematic patterns. Given that the outcome of our
heteroscedasticity test showcases that such patterns most likely exist in the

                                     29
data, the least-squares regression model is not the best-unbiased estimator
(Newbold, 2013). This is a limitation in the conclusions that can be drawn from
the regression results.

                               Table 11a. Heteroscedasticity Test - PDMR Purchases
                                                                         Stock Exchange List
                           All Cap Large Cap Mid Cap Small Cap First North

    Regression 83. 66* * * 118. 66* * * 96. 74* * * 94. 39* * * 37. 85* * *

     The table reports the results of the Breusch-Pagan heteroscedasticity test results for all regression models run on PDMR purchase data. Significant results
      indicate that we reject the null hypothesis of homoscedasticity. Bold values indicate statistical significance at α<0.1.
     *** p-value<0.01, **p-value<0.05, *p-value<0.1
    Table 10b showcases the results from the regression analysis made on the
PDMR sales transactions. In this case, the outcome is not as clear-cut. When
looking at the effects of the treatment period on the abnormal stock return
following the PDMR trade, we see no significant effect at all on an aggregated
level. Once again, these results are in line with those of the t-test outcome, where
we also did not see any significant impact of the transaction occurring during the
Covid-19 crisis and its subsequent market reaction. Looking across the stock
exchange lists, we find statistically significant effects that can be derived from
the treatment period for stocks on the Large and Mid Cap list. However, contrary
to our hypothesis, this effect seems to be positive for the Mid Cap list, i.e., that
is a higher abnormal market return than what can be seen in the control period.
This positive sentiment in the treatment period was also seen for some of the
stock exchange lists in Welch’s t-test, though those results were not statistically
significant for any stock exchange list.
   In line with the PDMR purchase transactions, almost all the independent
variables showed statistical significance in explaining the abnormal market
return at the aggregated level. The prevalence of a high-ranking insider selling
shares seems to have a substantial negative impact on the following abnormal
market return post-publication, with statistical significance at the 1% level.
Similarly, having a relative to the PDMR sell shares also has a substantial
negative impact at the same statistical significance level. When comparing the
effect of these independent variables with the equivalent ones for PDMR
purchases, we see that there is an asymmetry in the reaction. That is, when the
transaction is a purchase, being a high-ranking PDMR or a relative to the insider
increases the positive effect of the trade on the abnormal market return at the
aggregated level, while the same factors generate an increased negative affect
following a sales transaction. It is also worth noting that the negative effect
seems to be larger than that of the positive, suggesting a skew of the amplitude
of the effect towards PDMR sales. Transacting in conjunction with the release of
a financial report also seems to have a statistically significant negative impact
on the abnormal market returns at the 1% level. This negative impact is also
symmetrical to the positive effect showcased by the same independent variable
for the PDMR purchase trades, though with less of a clear skew towards the
negative effect. Once again, it is worth noting that a linear regression method is
better, though not perfect, at isolating the effects of individual independent
variables. However, it is only able to showcase correlation between the dependent
and independent variables and cannot prove any sort of causality.

                                     30
                         Table 10b. Regression Results for PDMR Sales Transactions
                                            Dependent Variable: Abnormal Stock Return

                                                                           Stock Exchange List

                                         All Large Cap Mid Cap Small Cap First North

    Covid-19 - Yes -0.0% -0. 2%* * * 0. 4%* * * 0.3% -0.1%

                                         (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.3%) (0.2%)

   Transaction Size of Company (%) 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% -0.0% 0.0%

                                         (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%) (0.0%)

    High-ranking Insider - Yes -0. 8%* * * -0. 3%* * * -1. 3%* * * 0. 5%* -0. 7%* * *

                                         (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.3%) (0.3%)

    Incentive Program Related - Yes 0. 4%* -0. 2%* * 0. 6%* * -1.0% 1.1%

                                         (0.2%) (0.1%) (0.3%) (1.0%) (0.7%)

    Transaction in Reporting Period - Yes -0. 5%* * * 0.0% -0. 9%* * * -0.4% -0.0%

                                         (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.3%) (0.3%)

    Market Open on Publication - Yes -0. 4%* * * 0. 2%* -0. 2%* 0.1% -0. 7%* * *

                                         (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.3%) (0.2%)

    Publication on Reporting Date - Yes -0.6% 0.6% -2. 4%* * * 0.4% -0.7%

                                         (0.7%) (0.6%) (0.7%) (1.9%) (1.5%)

    Transaction by Relative - Yes -0. 7%* * * 0.1% 0. 8%* * * -0.4% -1. 4%* * *

                                         (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.2%) (0.3%) (0.2%)

   Constant 0. 2%* 0.1% -0.1% -0. 5%* * 0.4%

                                         (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.2%) (0.2%) (0.3%)

    Observations 8,171 2,204 1,797 714 3,456

     2 0.014 0.012 0.131 0.014 0.016
   R

            2 0.013 0.009 0.127 0.002 0.014
    Adjusted R
     The table presents the results of the regression for PDMR sales transactions, grouped by stock exchange list, with abnormal stock returns
     following the PDMR transaction publication as as the dependent variable. Stock return is calculated as a price change in percent. The data
     covers PDMR transactions of 579 stocks over 1,318 trading days, compiling 8,171 observations in total split between four stock exchange lists.
     Standard errors are shown in paranthesis. Bold values indicate statistical significance at α<0.1
     *** p-value<0.01, **p-value<0.05, *p-value<0.1
   When looking at the individual stock exchange level, there seems to be a
higher degree of heterogeneity in the statistically significant independent
variables for the different stock exchange lists, as compared to the equivalent
clear overlap for PDMR purchases. For PDMR sales there is statistical
significance among the majority of stock exchange lists for the variables related
to high-ranking insiders and the market being open upon publication. However,
the correlation of these variables to the abnormal stock returns varies between
the stock exchange lists, which weakens the overall conclusion that can be drawn
from the results on the aggregated level.
    Once again it is worth noting the low R2-values that are prevalent for the
regression analysis. In this case, the R2-values are higher than that of the results
for PDMR purchases, though there are fewer statistically significant variables,
with only a minority of the factors showing any significant explanatory value at
the aggregated level. Hence, one should be careful in drawing any definitive
conclusions from the regression model, other than that directly related to these
significant independent variables.
    Finally, we perform a Breusch-Pagan test for heteroscedasticity for the
PDMR sales transactions as well. Like the PDMR purchases, the null hypothesis

                                     31
that homoscedasticity is prevalent among the residual terms can be rejected,
hence indicating that heteroscedasticity is a problem for these linear regression
models as well. However, it worth mentioning is that the level of significance is
generally lower for the PDMR sales, but that could also be the result of the
smaller sample size among sales transactions.

                                 Table 11b. Heteroscedasticity Test - PDMR Sales
                                                                         Stock Exchange List
                           All Cap Large Cap Mid Cap Small Cap First North

    Regression 48. 47* * * 48. 67* * * 101. 16* * * 14. 72* 36. 09* * *

     The table reports the results of the Breusch-Pagan heteroscedasticity test results for all regression models run on PDMR sales data. Significant results
      indicate that we reject the null hypothesis of homoscedasticity. Bold values indicate statistical significance at α<0.1.
     *** p-value<0.01, **p-value<0.05, *p-value<0.1

C. Placebo Test
   As stated in our Method Section, the purpose of the placebo test was to act as
a robustness test to check for any potential overarching time trends that distorts
our results. Given this purpose, an ideal outcome would be to have no significant
results for the placebo period variable, as this would indicate that the results
that we got from the linear regression were not related to a general time trend
but rather an exogenous change in the market uncertainty. Given that the
placebo period variable was not statistically significantly different from zero
when looking across all stock exchange lists, this strengthens the confidence in
the results that we got from our linear regression, as this would suggest that the
statistically significant results, we got from those tests were not related to a
general time trend. When looking at the individual stock exchange lists, we find
some statistically significant results for Large, Mid, and Small Cap. However,
for the two former lists, this result contrasts with the linear regression results,
as this result is negative instead of positive, hence still suggesting that there is
no general increase in abnormal market returns over time for these lists – rather
the opposite. For Small Cap, there seems to be quite a large positive time trend
for abnormal market returns following PDMR purchase transactions. However,
given that we did not derive any conclusions due to statistical insignificance in
our regression results for this stock exchange list, this does not impact our ability
to draw conclusions. One should also be careful to draw major conclusions from
the result from Small Cap given that the small sample size for this list makes its
results more prone to result from distortions due to noise in the data.

                 Table 12a. Placebo Test - Regression Results for PDMR Purchase Transactions
                                            Dependent Variable: Abnormal Stock Return

                                                                           Stock Exchange List

                                         All Large Cap Mid Cap Small Cap First North

    Placebo Period - Yes -0.1% -0. 1%* * -0. 3%* * 0. 7%* * * -0.3%

                                         (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.1%) (0.2%) (0.2%)

    Observations 12,089 3,943 2,339 1,231 4,576

     The table presents the results of the regression for PDMR purchase transactions, grouped by stock exchange list, with abnormal stock returns
     following the PDMR transaction publication as as the dependent variable. Stock return is calculated as a price change in percent. Only the
     placebo period variable is included in the table, but the same independent variables as were used in the normal regression model were used
     when running the regression. Standard errors are shown in paranthesis. Bold values indicate statistical significance at α<0.1
     *** p-value<0.01, **p-value<0.05, *p-value<0.1

                                     32
                   Table 12b. Placebo Test - Regression Results for PDMR Sales Transactions
                                            Dependent Variable: Abnormal Stock Return

                                                                           Stock Exchange List

                                         All Large Cap Mid Cap Small Cap First North

    Placebo Period - Yes -0. 6%* * * -0. 3%* * -0. 6%* * * 0.1% -0.2%

                                         (0.2%) (0.1%) (0.2%) (0.3%) (0.4%)

    Observations 4,139 1,080 1,065 441 1,553

     The table presents the results of the regression for PDMR purchase transactions, grouped by stock exchange list, with abnormal stock returns
     following the PDMR transaction publication as as the dependent variable. Stock return is calculated as a price change in percent. Only the
     placebo period variable is included in the table, but the same independent variables as were used in the normal regression model were used
     when running the regression. Standard errors are shown in paranthesis. Bold values indicate statistical significance at α<0.1
     *** p-value<0.01, **p-value<0.05, *p-value<0.1

   For PDMR sales transactions the placebo period variable is statistically
significant when looking across all stock exchange lists. This would suggest that
there might be an overarching time trend of an increased negative abnormal
stock return following the publication of a PDMR sales transaction. However,
one should remember that the purpose of the placebo test is to examine whether
there is a general time trend that distorts the results in the covid treatment
period. For this outcome to be distortive we would have to see the same negative
factor in the results for the covid treatment variable, as that would suggest that
the outcome would rather be the outcome of an overarching time trend rather
than the exogenous change in uncertainty in the distinct period. Since our results
from the linear regression model indicate that there is no significant change in
the abnormal market return for PDMR sales transactions during the covid
treatment period as compared to the control period, the outcome of the placebo
test does not impact the interpretation of our initial results. However, it does
suggest that one should be more careful when drawing definitive conclusions for
PDMR sales transactions, as there seem to be underlying time trends in the data
that do not exist for PDMR purchase transactions. Though it is worth bearing in
mind that the PDMR sales transaction data is more prone to noise given its
smaller sample size, which increases the risk of distorted results in the placebo
test. Regardless, this suggested time trend from the placebo test for PDMR sales
transactions should be considered a limitation in our research that negatively
impacts the conclusions that we can make.
                       Discussion
A. Results of Hypotheses
   As previously present, we have found significant results that the market
reactions to PDMR purchase transactions were more distinct during the
treatment period than during the control period, while no significant difference
was prevalent for sales transactions. In this section of our paper, we will discuss
the results and attempt to explain our outcomes in light of current literature.
First, we will revisit our in-going hypotheses:
    Hypothesis 1: There will be an increased market reaction to PDMR
    transactions for the Covid-19 period.
    In general, we found increased market reactions to PDMR transactions for
the Covid-19 period. Table 8 shows a positive 0.39% change in returns on
purchases across all stock exchange lists (significant the p-value<0.01 level). We

                                     33
did not see the same effect on sales.
   The result is in line with how Loh and Stulz (2018) found that market
reactions to analyst revisions differed between good and bad times. However, Loh
and Stulz (2018) found increased market reactions to both upwards revisions and
downwards revisions. We, therefore, expected the reaction to be increased both
for purchases and sales. One possible reason that could explain our outcome is
that the signaling value of purchases is higher than that of sales (“only one
reason to sell”) (Lynch, 2000s). That is a fact that makes it problematic to
compare analyst revisions with PDMR transactions (signaling asymmetry). An
additional explanation to this lack of symmetry in results between transaction
types could be that of the anchoring effect (Kahneman, 2011) . If investors have
adjusted their reference point downwards in uncertain times, they might see a
PDMR purchase as deviating additionally from their expectations than what
they would have in normal market conditions. This could explain why we see
additional market reactions for PDMR purchase transactions but not for sales.
We note that our outcome is in line with what Lakonishok and Lee (2001) found
during their study; they were also unable to show significant increased abnormal
stock returns to PDMR sales transactions. Like this paper, they did achieve it
for purchases. Previous research, mainly Lakonishok and Lee (2001) showed that
increased reactions to PDMR transactions are caused by the informational value
derived by the market from said transaction. Interpreting our results, we find
that the informational gap between investors and PDMRs likely was higher
during the treatment period than the control period. It is a plausible conclusion
that would be in line with previous research.
   Our result indicates an increase in abnormal stock returns following PDMR
purchase transaction announcements in uncertain times, while the same cannot
be said for sales, hence partly confirming our hypothesis. This would suggest that
investors attribute additional value to PDMR purchases in uncertain times, but
do not attribute equal informational value to PDMR sales.
    Hypothesis 2: The intensity of the increased market reactions will vary across
    sectors. We expect to see greater market reactions among stocks in the
    industries: ‘Automobiles and Parts’, ‘Energy’ and ‘Travel and Leisure’.
    We found the intensity of the increased market reactions to be varying across
sectors. For purchases, the largest significant effects were seen for ‘Banks’ (Table
9a). For sales, the largest significant effect was seen for ‘Telecommunications’.
At a first glance, the indication is that the significant effects are larger for
industries (e.g., banks and telecommunications) where the financing risk is high.
Following the outbreak of the pandemic, the credit markets were largely
uncertain and little information reached investors for the first part
(Kammarkollegiet, 2020). One plausible explanation for the increased market
reactions to financing heavy businesses could be that information was scarce,
and hence the relative additional value carried by PDMR transactions was
elevated. While there are many plausible explanations, another one worth
mentioning is that companies in both the ‘Banks’ and ‘Telecommunications’
sectors tend to bear a lot of debt, and the crisis made financing more challenging
(Kammerkollegiet, 2020). A part of the informational value of the PDMR
transactions could have been that these businesses were not planning large

                                     34
future write-offs which could explain part of the increased market reactions.
Should concerns regarding financing outlook be an area where information was
scarce, then we would expect increased reactions. This is also in line with the
findings by Kacperczyk et al (2017).
    In line with our hypothesis, ‘Automobiles and Parts’ was one of the industries
that saw the highest increase in abnormal stock returns during the pandemic, at
least for PDMR purchases. This is in line with our hypothesis and would suggest
that sector exposure to default probability has at least some explanatory value
in market reaction increases in times of uncertainty (Standard & Poor’s, 2022).
However, given that we did not see the same effect for companies in the ‘Energy’
and ‘Travel and Leisure’ sectors, said connection is likely not very prominent.
For ‘Travel and Leisure’ the outcome was even directly contradictory to what we
had expected, with a decrease in market reactions to PDMR purchase transaction
during the pandemic as compared to normal market conditions. Despite not
adhering to our expectations, this outcome could be explained by the study by
Hirshleifer, Lim and Teoh (2009). ‘Travel and Leisure’ was one of the most, if not
the most, impacted sectors of the pandemic, with international travels reduced
by more than 90% following the outbreak (Borko, 2020). Given the increased
media and analyst attention that such an event has on companies in the sector,
there might have been an increase in the intensity of news flow and a subsequent
reduction in the informational gap between investors and insiders. Hence, in line
with the results of Hirshleifer, Lim and Teoh (2009) the individual informational
value of an additional news event, such as the publication of a PDMR
transaction, might have been reduced to such an extent that it is considered to
have less value than during normal market conditions. This would explain this
outcome, despite not being in line with our expectations.
    The same reasoning would apply to the ‘Health Care’ sector that also saw no
significant increases in market reactions in the treatment period. The pandemic
may simply have drawn so much attention to the sector that the information
value of the PDMR transactions became redundant. An example of this could be
the Nasdaq Large Cap company Getinge. They are a manufacturer of medicinal
technology equipment. A substantial product line of theirs is that of respiratory
equipment. During the height of the pandemic, they released an elevated number
of press releases, and communication to the market about new production targets
and the means to get there (Teknikföretagen, 2020). Hence, the results are not
as unexpected as one could think at first.
    To conclude, our results indicate heterogeneity among the intensity of market
reactions following PDMR transactions between different sectors. There are
some indications that the default risk of companies within the sector impacts
how the abnormal stock returns develop in uncertain times. However, contrary
to our hypothesis, there instead seems to be a negative correlation between the
media and analyst exposure of a sector and the increase in market reactions
during uncertain times given the possible reduction of the informational gap
between investors and insiders.

                                     35
    Hypothesis 3: Reactions for stocks listed on markets with looser regulation
    requirements will be larger. This implies that we expect reactions on
    Nasdaq First North to be greater than on the Main List of Nasdaq
   Stockholm.
   We found a larger increase in market reactions on Nasdaq First North than
on the Main List of Nasdaq Stockholm. The results were in line with expectations
and confirms our hypothesis. We noted the largest reaction on First North, which
adhere to looser regulatory requirements (Nasdaq, 2019), and the smallest
reaction on Large Cap. We note that our findings are in line with the previous by
Alldredge and Cicero (2015).
    As equity markets operate under semi-strong efficiency (i.e., they include all
public information in the pricing), we expected this result. There is greater
visibility on Main List equities and the market has more information and the
additional incremental informational value of PDMR transactions is hence lower
than for First North. It is reasonable to conclude that this effect can derive from
the efficient market hypothesis (Fama, 1970).
   Another plausible explanation to our result is the relatively higher market
liquidity on the Main List as opposed to First North. Low volumes generally
result in higher volatility, which for this study would imply larger market
reactions to PDMR transactions announcements. In April 2022, the average
number of daily transactions per company on the Nasdaq Stockholm Main List
was ~2,300 trades whereas the same number for First North was ~340 trades
(Nasdaq, 2022b).

                                        Table 13. Results of Hypotheses
                                    Hypothesis 1 Hypothesis 2 Hypothesis 3

    Result Mostly Confirmed Mostly Rejected Confirmed

     The table above summarizes the outcome of the hypotheses that were introduced in the beginning of this paper. The hypothesis can either be Confirmed
     (validated in its entirety), Mostly Confirmed (most parts of it validated while others were rejected) or Mostly Rejected (most parts of it rejected while
     others were validated).

B. Surprises
   One of the most surprising outcomes of our study is that we generally found
a lack of symmetry between reactions to PDMR purchases and PDMR sales. We
expected industries that saw large positive reactions to purchases to also see
large negative reactions to sales and vice versa. While this holds for some
industries, e.g., industrials, we did not see it for the majority of the sectors. For
the food and beverages sector, we even saw significant increases of abnormal
stock returns upon PDMR transaction announcements, regardless of whether it
concerned a purchase or sale. The study by Lakonishok and Lee (2001) also found
similar results. Their explanation was that insiders tend to trade against
momentum and that the informational value of purchases was higher than for
sales. That means when PDMRs purchase on bad days, the market will react
positively, and, when PDMRs sell on good days, the informational value of said
sale will not alone contract the positive effect of the momentum.
C. Limitations
    As described in previous sections, our research methodology has been
designed to reduce and test for limitations in our results. Despite this, it is not

                                     36
possible to completely mitigate external disturbing factors that have a distorting
effect on our findings.
   To begin with, given that we are measuring the abnormal stock returns based
on opening and closing day prices, there is a lot of other events and information
that is also priced throughout the trading day that is hard to control for. Choosing
to define abnormal stock returns as the return throughout the entire trading day
is in line with our main reference and is the overall superior approach as
discussed in the Data Section. However, it does make it more difficult to isolate
the return directly linked to the publication of the PDMR transaction. For
example, in the case that the company makes a press release with positive
sentiment on that same day, the market can be expected to have a positive
reaction to said news that is unrelated to the publication of the PDMR
transaction, hence having distorting effects on our results. We have tried to limit
this effect as much as possible by adjusting our approach to how abnormal stock
returns are measured depending on publication time and by incorporating the
publication of financial results as a control factor in our regressions. This creates
the tightest possible interval that can be achieved with opening and closing
prices, and controls for one of the most information intense events that a
company can have, though the results will still suffer due to price effects from
unrelated informational events.
    As discussed in the results of the placebo test, there does not seem to be any
overarching time trends related to the development of abnormal stock returns
following PDMR transactions, i.e., that there is a trend that the market reaction
increases or decreases following the publication that is unrelated to the level of
uncertainty in the markets. This increases the confidence in our research
methodology as that means that we to a larger extent can isolate the effect of the
change in market uncertainty. However, the prevalence of a seemingly negative
time trend for PDMR sales transactions, i.e., that the market reacts acts in a
more negative fashion as time progresses, limits the accuracy of the conclusions
that can be drawn for the sales transactions. That is because the inconclusive
result for PDMR sales transactions in our study might be due to two opposing
effects, namely the negative time trend and a potentially positive effect from
market uncertainty, which neutralizes the total effect. We can only speculate
regarding whether that is the case or not, but such a possibility limits the extent
of conclusions one can draw for PDMR sales transactions.
   As discussed in the Data and Method Sections, in addition to our treatment
variable our regression model includes seven control variables to isolate the
effect of a change in market uncertainty. Furthermore, we have also tested for
correlation and multicollinearity for additional fixed-effects variables and found
no relevant, significant results. Despite this effort, one should not neglect the
possibility that the model suffers from omitted variable bias, whereby a factor
that correlates with the treatment variable but is not included in the regression
model, distorts the results. Examples of potential omitted variables include
PDMR trading behavior, where the Covid-19 pandemic might have changed the
frequency and size of their transactions in relation to their personal wealth, that
the market reacts to. Furthermore, there might have been increased media
attention related to the PDMR transactions during the pandemic that might
drive the market reaction, rather than it being the change of market uncertainty.

                                     37
We found it difficult to gather accurate data and develop a methodology for how
to control for trading behavior and media attention, which is the reason they
were not included in the first place. Though we do not have any evidence that
suggests that these would have an impact on the results, the reader should be
aware of our inability to control for them which creates a risk for omitted variable
bias.
    As was mentioned in the results, the R2-values of our regression model were
low. This implies that our regression model is not exhaustive and only captures
a few of the explaining factors that derive the dependent variable. However,
given the complexity of the variable that we are trying to explain, i.e., abnormal
stock returns, it is expected that our linear model will not be complete.
Regardless, most of the variables that we do include in the model are statistically
significant, suggesting that they provide value to the model, despite the limited
effect size. The prevalence of heteroscedasticity in our data set was presented in
the Results Section. This implies that a linear regression model is not the optimal
way that one should study this phenomenon. However, it does not mean that the
results of the regression model are invalid, but that there are better ways to
model it. The reader should be aware of this and the fact that it impacts the
ability to draw conclusions based on our findings.
   Finally, one should be aware of the inherent limitation for some sectors in
how we calculate our abnormal stock returns. As presented in the Data Section,
this is done by subtracting the appropriate sector index returns from the share
performance of the individual stock. Generally, this results in a measure of the
isolated performance of the individual stock, where macro- and sector
developments have been filtered out. However, for niche sectors, their value-
weighted sector index is to a large extent driven by a few large companies. This
means that such a sector index would disproportionally be impacted by the
individual stock performance of those large companies. This would in turn
decrease the calculated abnormal stock return compared with an optimal setting
since the performance of the individual share disproportionally impacts the
performance of the sector index that is subsequently subtracted to derive the
abnormal stock return. For example, the sector index for the media industry
(SX4030PI) consists of only four unique companies, whereby the abnormal stock
returns for stocks in this sector can be expected to be lower than what they would
have been in an ideal setting (Nasdaq, 2020). However, this only has an impact
on the amplitude of the effect, but not the direction of it, and is also limited to a
few niche sectors rather than being a problem with the entire data set.
Regardless, the reader should be aware of this limitation in our results.
                    Final Remarks
A. General
    The extraordinary uncertainty event that was the Covid-19 pandemic had an
evident impact on financial markets. In this climate, uncertainty reached high
levels, stock market volatility was elevated and PDMRs executed an increasing
number of transactions (SFSA, 2022). PDMR transactions have, in prior
research, been proved to bring informational value about the upcoming
performance of companies. Considering this, we set out to study market reactions
to PDMR transaction announcements before and during the pandemic and

                                     38
compare market reactions to insider transactions during these periods. There
have been no prior studies investigating PDMR transaction announcement
reactions during times of uncertainty; in addition, most adjacent studies have
been conducted in the United States (Table 1). In the light of this, we find this
study to be an important contributor to a better understanding of how authorities
should design PDMR regulations and how corporations can position themselves
around these announcements.
   Our study investigates whether there were increased market reactions
during times of uncertainty, proxied by the Covid-19 pandemic.
    On the aggregated level in our t-tests, we find that PDMR purchase
announcements during the treatment period gave 0.39% daily excess returns at
p-level<0.01. Looking at individual lists, we saw significant results for all lists
but Small Cap. For our significant results, we found positive increased market
reactions for all lists. The effect was larger on smaller lists than on larger lists.
This is in line with our expectation that insider has a larger informational
advantage at smaller companies and hence each transaction carries a higher
relative informational value. We did not find aggregated significant results for
PDMR sales announcements. However, we did find significant results for
individual lists.
   In our sector analysis, we found increased market reactions to differ by
industry. In general, we found larger reactions, both positive and negative, for
industries that carry a lot of financial risks. Interestingly, we did not find large
positive reactions in the ‘Travel and Leisure’ and ‘Health Care’ sectors –
indicating that all the media and analyst attention on the industries during the
pandemic has diminished the informational value of each PDMR transaction.
   The regression analysis for purchases shows that the market environment
can explain 0.3% (significant at p<0.01) of the daily excess returns following the
publication of a PDMR purchase transaction during the Covid-19 pandemic,
while no significant results were found for PDMR sales transactions. Note that
this is largely in line with the results from the t-test.
    Given the evident increase of the PDMR informational advantage during the
crisis (with many industries having more than a 1% increase in abnormal stock
returns during the Covid-19 pandemic), we think that there are good grounds for
the regulator to investigate what actions can be taken to level the playing field.
We find additional regulatory restrictions to be an appealing measure for this
case. While none of the alternatives is perfect, measures could include pre-
emptily reporting trades and restricting trades during extraordinary uncertainty
peaks; especially when the company has not yet informed the market of how an
uncertainty event is having an impact on them.
    The results of our study are largely in line with our key references;
Lakonishok and Lee (2001) and Loh and Stulz (2018). Like the first, we find a
larger effect for purchases than for sales and larger effects for smaller companies
(lists) than for larger ones. Similarly, to the latter, we found increased market
reactions during uncertain times. Our study can hence be used to validate the
findings of said studies. However, while our results validate their key points;
there are some incongruities. We saw no aggregate significant effect for sales,
yet Loh and Stulz (2018) did find large significant reactions for downwards
reactions. This highlights that the papers are not fully comparable as analyst

                                     39
revisions always carry informational value whereas PDMR transactions seem to
mostly carry informational value for purchases.
B. Future Research
   Since the outbreak of the pandemic, much research work has been drawn to
this uncertain event. Researchers have been attracted to unprecedented
conditions of the crisis and how it has both impacted corporations on the
individual level and the wider capital markets. This report is a much-needed
contribution to better understand PDMR transaction effects. For future research
on this topic, we have a few suggestions on areas where we see value in additional
studies. As mentioned in the Data Section, the ideal study would be to design a
research method with a synthetically exogenous change in uncertainty. While
this is not possible in practice, further research could include larger data sets
which would generate more significant results and hence serve as validation for
this study.
    In this paper, the treatment period is defined as the period with high degrees
of Covid-19 restrictions. There are other alternatives on how to define the
treatment period. One possible way would be to use market volatility as a proxy
for uncertainty (e.g., CBOE VIX, or similar). By using an index that is updated
with higher frequency, the uncertainty effect could plausibly be easier to isolate.
    In addition, future research could further break down a period of uncertainty.
By reviewing different parts of the uncertainty cycle, we expect that interesting
results could be found. One way to do it would be to define each uncertainty day
with a category. Categories could be based on which topics are dominating media
for that day. Example categories could be i.e., Economic Slowdown, Inflation,
Deflation and Unemployment.
    Finally, additional research could be constructed as a playbook for
corporations that are on how to build and retain the confidence of the market. By
studying more distinct components that can explain how markets react to
transactions depending on characteristics, studies can aid executives in
designing PDMR policies, but also help in optimizing share buyback programs.
Our results evidently point out that there are right and wrong strategies
available. Hence, responsible regulators, owners and executives with fiduciary
duties should be obliged to be aware and take into consideration the findings of
this study.

                                     40
                       References
Alldredge, Dallin M., and David C. Cicero. (2015). Attentive insider
   trading. Journal of Financial Economics 115.1 (2015): 84-101.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis. (2016). Measuring
   economic policy uncertainty. The quarterly journal of economics 131.4 (2016):
   1,593-1,636.
Belgacem, Aymen, Anna Creti, Khaled Guesmi, and Amine Lahiani. (2015).
   Volatility spillovers and macroeconomic announcements: evidence from crude
   oil markets. Applied Economics 47.28 (2015): 2,974-2,984.
Biggerstaff, Lee, David Cicero, and M. Babajide Wintoki. (2020). Insider trading
   patterns. Journal of Corporate Finance 64 (2020): 101654.
Borko, Seth, Wouter Geerts and Haixia Wang. (2020, September). The Travel
  Industry Turned Upside Down. McKinsey.com. Retrieved from:
   https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/travel-logistics-and-infrastructure/our-
   insights/the-travel-industry-turned-upside-down-insights-analysis-and-
   actions-for-travel-executives. Accessed 14 May 2022.
Busse, Jeffrey A., and T. Clifton Green. (2002). Market efficiency in real
   time. Journal of Financial Economics 65.3 (2002): 415-437.
Chiu, Junmao, Huimin Chung, Keng-Yu Ho and Chih-Chiang Wu. (2018).
   Investor sentiment and evaporating liquidity during the financial
   crisis. International Review of Economics & Finance 55 (2018): 21-36.
Christie, William G., and Roger D. Huang. (1995). Following the pied piper: Do
   individual returns herd around the market?. Financial Analysts Journal 51.4
   (1995): 31-37.
Deloitte. (2020). COVID-19 will permanently change e-commerce in Denmark.
  Retrieved from:
   https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/dk/Documents/strategy/e-
   commerce-covid-19-onepage.pdf. Accessed 10 Apr 2022.
Eckbo, B. Espen, and David C. Smith. (1998). The conditional performance of
   insider trades. The Journal of Finance 53.2 (1998): 467-498.
Eggers, Andrew C., Guadalupe Tuñón, and Allan Dafoe. (2021). Placebo Tests for
  Causal Inference. Unpublished working paper.
Fama, Eugene F. (1970). Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and
   empirical work. The journal of Finance 25.2 (1970): 383-417.
Hirshleifer, David, and Tyler Shumway. (2003). Good day sunshine: Stock
   returns and the weather. The journal of Finance 58.3 (2003): 1,009-1,032.

                                     41
Hirshleifer, David, Sonya Seongyeon Lim, and Siew Hong Teoh. (2009). Driven to
   distraction: Extraneous events and underreaction to earnings news. The
   Journal of Finance 64.5 (2009): 2,289-2,325.
IMF. (2020, October 31). World Economic Outlook October 2020. IMF. Retrieved
   from: https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/Issues/2020/09/30/world-
   economic-outlook-october-
  2020#Full%20Report%20and%20Executive%20Summary. Accessed 10 Apr
  2022.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Jaromir Nosal, and Savitar Sundaresan. (2017). Market
   power and informational efficiency. Unpublished working paper.
Kahneman, Daniel. (2011). Thinking, Fast and Slow. Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Kammarkollegiet. (2020). Kapitalförvaltningens kvartalsrapport Q1 2020.
  Kammarkollegiet.se. Retrieved from:
  https://www.kammarkollegiet.se/download/18.1bbf82e91715d868181363e3/158
   7386849084/Kvartalsrapport_2020-Q1%201.0b.pdf. Accessed 7 May 2022.
Lakonishok, Josef, and Inmoo Lee. (2001). Are insider trades informative?. The
   Review of Financial Studies 14.1 (2001): 79-111.
Loh, Roger K., and René M. Stulz. (2018). Is sell‐side research more valuable in
   bad times?."The journal of finance 73.3 (2018): 959-1013.
Loewenstein, George. (1996). Out of control: Visceral influences on
   behavior. Organizational behavior and human decision processes 65.3 (1996):
   272-292.
Lynch, Peter, and John Rothchild. (2000). One up on Wall Street: how to use
  what you already know to make money in the market. Simon and Schuster.
McKinsey. (2020, November 2). When nothing is normal: Managing in extreme
   uncertainty. McKinsey. Retrieved from: https://www.mckinsey.com/business-
   functions/risk-and-resilience/our-insights/when-nothing-is-normal-managing-
   in-extreme-uncertainty#. Accessed 10 Apr 2022.
Mehndiratta, Neetu, and Shuchi Gupta. (2010). Impact of dividend
   announcement on stock prices. International Journal of Information
   Technology and Knowledge Management 2.2 (2010): 405-410.
Nasdaq. (2019, 1 January). Regelverk för emittenter – Nasdaq Stockholm.
  Retrieved from:
  https://www.nasdaq.com/docs/Nasdaq%20Stockholms%20regelverk%20f%C3%
   B6r%20emittenter%20-%201%20januari%202019.pdf. Accessed 7 May 2022.
Nasdaq. (2020). SX4030PI, OMX Stockholm Media Pi. Nasdaq.com. Retrieved
  from:
  http://www.nasdaqomxnordic.com/indexes/index_info?languageId=3&Instrum
  ent=SE0004383669. Accessed 7 May 2022.

                                     42
Nasdaq. (2021a). Nasdaq European Markets. Nasdaq.com. Retrieved from:
  https://www.nasdaq.com/docs/2021/10/06/Nasdaq_First_North_%20GM_%20In
  troduction_2020_1.pdf. Accessed 7 May 2022.
Nasdaq. (2021b, October). From Nasdaq First North Growth Market to the
  Nasdaq Stockholm Main Market. Nasdaq.com. Retrieved from:
  https://www.nasdaq.com/docs/2021/10/14/Listing_Transfer_Guide_to_Nasdaq_
  Stockholm_2021.pdf. Accessed 7 May 2022.
Nasdaq. (2022a). Global Index Watch (GIW) Directory. Indexes.Nasdaqomx.Com.
   Retrieved from: https://indexes.nasdaqomx.com/Index/Directory. Accessed 10
   Apr 2022.
Nasdaq. (2022b). Statistics from Nasdaq Nordic Exchange April
   2022. Nasdaq.com. Retrieved from:
  https://view.news.eu.nasdaq.com/view?id=b5fb0dc27fadac3b2354b12dd50d5cb
  d6&lang=en. Accessed 15 May 2022.
Newbold, Paul, William Carlson and Betty Thorne. (2013). Statistics for
   Business and Economics: Eight Edition. United States: Pearson Education,
   Inc.
Official Journal of the European Union. (2014, 12 June). Market Abuse
   Regulation. Eur-lex.Europa.Eu. Retrieved from: https://eur-
   lex.europa.eu/legal-
  content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32014R0596&from=EN. Accessed 2 May
  2022.
Oxford University. (2022). Covid-19 Government Response Tracker.
   Bsg.ox.ac.uk. Retrieved from: https://www.bsg.ox.ac.uk/research/research-
   projects/covid-19-government-response-tracker. Accessed 1 May 2022.
Schmalz, Martin C., and Sergey Zhuk. (2019). Revealing downturns. The Review
   of Financial Studies 32.1 (2019): 338-373.
Seyhun, H. Nejat. (1986). Insiders' profits, costs of trading, and market
   efficiency. Journal of financial Economics 16.2 (1986): 189-212.
Standard & Poor’s. (2022, January). Industries Most And Least Impacted By
   COVID-19 From A Probability Of Default Perspective - January 2022
  Update. Spglobal.Com. Retrieved from:
   https://www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/news-insights/blog/industries-
   most-and-least-impacted-by-covid-19-from-a-probability-of-default-
   perspective-january-2022-update. Accessed 10 Apr 2022.
Suneson, Grant. (2020). Industries Hit Hardest By Coronavirus In The US
   Include Retail, Transportation, And Travel. WLST. Retrieved from:
   https://eu.usatoday.com/story/money/2020/03/20/us-industries-being-

                                     43
   devastated-by-the-coronavirus-travel-hotels-food/111431804/. Accessed 10 Apr
  2022.
Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority (SFSA). (2022). PDMR transactions.
  Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority. Retrieved from:
   https://www.fi.se/en/markets/investors/pdmr-transactions/. Accessed 10 Apr
  2022.
Teknikföretagen. (2020, 7 April). Så kan Geting möta vårdens behov.
   Tekniforetagen.se. Retrived from:
   https://t.teknikforetagen.se/samhallsutveckling/genom-samarbete-moter-
   getinge-vardens-behov/. Accessed 7 May 2022.
The Guardian. (2020, March 18). Italy Records Its Deadliest Day Of Coronavirus
   Outbreak With 475 Deaths. The Guardian. Retrieved from:
   https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/mar/18/coronavirus-lockdown-eu-
   belgium-germany-adopt-measures. Accessed 10 Apr 2022.

                                     44
   Appendix A: Random Sample from Data Set

          0.35%-1.30%-2.72%-0.43%-2.91%-1.91%-3.60%2.25%-1.39%0.20%-1.09%-0.68%4.14%-1.17%0.93%-7.89%-0.73%1.94%-1.47%-3.97%

     Abnormal Stock Return


      N  N  N  N  Y  Y  N  N  N  N  N  N  Y  N  N  N  N  N  N  N


      N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  Y  N  N  N  N  N  N


       Y  N  Y  N  N  N  Y  N  Y  N  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  N  N  Y


      N  Y  Y  N  N  Y  N  Y  N  N  N  N  N  Y  N  N  N  N  N  N


      N  N  N  N  N  N  Y  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N


      N  Y  Y  Y  Y  N  N  N  N  N  Y  N  N  N  Y  N  N  N  N  N

     Insider.Role Incentive.Progr. Report.Period Market.Open Report.Day Relative
Random Sample of Dataset




                                8 ppm         57 ppm0 ppm                           24 ppm
         119 ppm1,861 ppm404 ppm133 ppm4,531 ppm 897 ppm495 ppm       260 ppm3,190 ppm 2,045 ppm414 ppm556 ppm  556 ppm138 ppm174 ppm
     Trans.Size                                                       17,456 ppm
Appendix A.



      N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y
     Covid






     Stock Exchange ListLarge CapLarge CapFirst NorthLarge CapFirst NorthLarge CapMid CapFirst NorthFirst NorthLarge CapLarge CapMid CapSmall CapFirst NorthFirst NorthSmall CapLarge CapLarge CapLarge CapMid Cap




    Sector IndexSX5010PISX5010PISX5020PISX3010PISX4020PISX5510PISX101010PISX101010PISX4020PISX5010PISX3010PISX4050PISX5510PISX5510PISX3020PISX3020PISX20PISX5510PISX15PISX5010PI







    TickerOM: PEAB BOM: BRAVOM: SEYEOM: AZAOM: TANGIOM: SKF BOM: TOBIIOM: FRISQOM: MAGIOM: SKA BOM: SHB BOM: SKIS BOM: BEGROM: RENEWOM: MANGOM: QLIROOM: SOBIOM: LUGOM: TEL2 BOM: FAG


     Publ. Date2017-09-132017-11-252018-03-202018-05-172018-10-232018-10-262018-11-132018-11-182019-05-022019-05-142019-11-062020-01-092020-08-272020-11-272021-02-082021-02-182021-03-112021-04-132021-05-062021-05-20The above table shows a random sample of 20 PDMR transactions from the dataset. The data is not meant to be considered representative for the entire dataset, but rather to help the reader understand how the data has been structured when running statisti

                              45
         Appendix B: Sector Index Summary

                          Appendix B. Sector Index per Industry
Sector ICB-code Sector Index Index ISIN
Automobiles and Parts 4010 SX4010PI SE0004383495
Banks 3010 SX3010PI SE0004383792
Basic Resources 5510 SX5510PI SE0004383347
Chemicals 5520 SX5520PI SE0004383313
Construction and Materials 5010 SX5010PI SE0004383396
Consumer Products and Services 4020 SX4020PI SE0004383545
Energy 6010 SX60PI SE0004383263
Financial Services 3020 SX3020PI SE0004383875
Food, Beverage and Tobacco 4510 SX4510PI SE0004383511
Health Care 2010 SX20PI SE0004383594
Household & Personal Products 3030 SX30PI SE0004383784
Industrial Goods and Services 5020 SX5020PI SE0004383412
Media 4030 SX4030PI SE0004383669
Personal Care, Drug and Grocery Stores 4520 SX4520PI SE0000744070
Real Estate 3510 SX35PI SE0004383842
Retail 4040 SX4040PI SE0004383636
Technology 1010 SX101010PI SE0004383917
Telecommunications 1510 SX15PI SE0004383701
Travel and Leisure 4050 SX4050PI SE0004383685
Utilities 6510 SX65PI SE0004383743
The table reports the sector index used to calcualte abnormal stock returns for stocks in each
industry, with their respective ISIN-number. For some sectors no sub-sector index is available, in
that case the broader main sector index has been used instead.

                                  46
 Appendix C: Descriptive Statistics Split by Treatment
                       Period

               Appendix C1. Descriptive Statistics Independent Variables - Pre-Covid (Control Period)
                                                                                Stock Exchange List
                                      All Large Cap Mid Cap Small Cap First North
Variable N     %     N % N % N % N %
Transaction Type 16, 228   100%    5, 023    100%    3, 404    100%    1, 672    100%    6, 129    100%
  Purchases 12,089    74%     3,943    78%     2,339    69%     1,231    74%     4,576    75%
  Sales 4,139    26%     1,080    22%     1,065    31%      441     26%     1,553    25%
Sector 16, 228   100%    5, 023    100%    3, 404    100%    1, 672    100%    6, 129    100%
   Automobiles and Parts 67       0%        -         -        57       2%        -         -        10       0%
   Banks 328      2%      279      6%       49       1%        -        -         -        -
  Basic Resources 528     3%      327     7%      26      1%      79      5%      96      2%
   Chemicals 222       1%         -         -          -         -          -         -        222       4%
  Construction and Materials 1,740    11%     959     19%     172      5%      191     11%     418      7%
  Consumer Products and Services 944     6%      115     2%      257     8%      185     11%     387     6%
  Energy 324     2%      40      1%      4      0%      22      1%      258     4%
  Financial Services 471     3%      94      2%      222     7%      2      0%      153     2%
  Food, Beverage and Tobacco 198      1%       8       0%      123      4%       -        -       67      1%
  Health Care 3,057    19%     282      6%     1,047    31%     289     17%     1,439    23%
  Industrial Goods and Services 3,169    20%     1,403    28%     642     19%     282     17%     842     14%
  Media 128      1%       -        -       55      2%       1       0%       72      1%
  Personal Care, Drug and Grocery Stores 155      1%       24      0%       23      1%       -        -       108      2%
  Real Estate 817      5%      493     10%      252      7%       -        -        72      1%
  Retail 585      4%      303      6%      138      4%       -        -       144      2%
  Technology 2,178    13%      71      1%      184      5%      447     27%     1,476    24%
  Telecommunications 920     6%      598     12%      13      0%      41      2%      268     4%
  Travel and Leisure 357     2%      27      1%      140     4%      117     7%      73      1%
   Utilities 40       0%        -         -         -         -        16       1%       24       0%
Insider Role 16, 228   100%    5, 023    100%    3, 404    100%    1, 672    100%    6, 129    100%
  Non-material 11,709    72%     4,232    84%     2,232    66%     1,090    65%     4,155    68%
  Material 4,519    28%      791     16%     1,172    34%      582     35%     1,974    32%
Report Period 16, 228   100%    5, 023    100%    3, 404    100%    1, 672    100%    6, 129    100%
  No 12,423    77%     3,964    79%     2,260    66%     1,260    75%     4,939    81%
  Yes 3,805    23%     1,059    21%     1,144    34%      412     25%     1,190    19%
Market Open 16, 228   100%    5, 023    100%    3, 404    100%    1, 672    100%    6, 129    100%
  Closed 4,783    29%     1,285    26%      896     26%      598     36%     2,004    33%
  Open 11,445    71%     3,738    74%     2,508    74%     1,074    64%     4,125    67%
Report Day 16, 228   100%    5, 023    100%    3, 404    100%    1, 672    100%    6, 129    100%
  No 16,016    99%     4,958    99%     3,342    98%     1,637    98%     6,079    99%
  Yes 212     1%      65      1%      62      2%      35      2%      50      1%
Relative 16, 228   100%    5, 023    100%    3, 404    100%    1, 672    100%    6, 129    100%
  No 11,990    74%     4,061    81%     2,721    80%     1,232    74%     3,976    65%
  Yes 4,238    26%     962     19%     683     20%     440     26%     2,153    35%
The table above represents descriptive statistics across Stock Exchange Lists for the independent dummy variables covering all transaction in the control period
(Pre-Covid), covering in total 16,228 transactions. "-" indicates that there is no transaction for that particular combination of variables.

                    Appendix C2. Descriptive Statistics Independent Variable: Trans.Size - Pre-Covid (Control Period)
Stock Exchange List N Mean Median Std. Dev. Min Max
All 16,228 6 ppm 0.14 ppm 43 ppm ~ 0 ppm 7,205 ppm
Large Cap 5,023 6 ppm 0.01 ppm 39 ppm ~ 0 ppm 1,031 ppm
Mid Cap 3,404 3 ppm 0.09 ppm 26 ppm ~ 0 ppm 1,118 ppm
Small Cap 1,672 5 ppm 0.20 ppm 33 ppm ~ 0 ppm 797 ppm
First North 6,129 9 ppm 0.36 ppm 57 ppm ~ 0 ppm 7,205 ppm
The table above shows the descriptive statistics for the independent variable Trans.Size on each stock exchange list and on an aggregated level in the
control period (Pre-Covid). Transaction size is calculated as the transaction size, in shares, in relation to the company's total number of shares outstanding,
expressed in parts per million (ppm = 0.0001%). The data is comprised of 16,228 purchase transactions across all stock exchange lists.

                                  47
                Appendix C3. Descriptive Statistics Independent Variables - Covid (Treatment Period)
                                                                                Stock Exchange List
                                      All Large Cap Mid Cap Small Cap First North
Variable N % N % N % N % N %
Transaction Type 15, 012   100%    3, 826    100%    2, 606    100%    1, 252    100%    7, 328    100%
  Purchases 10,980    73%     2,702    71%     1,874    72%      979     78%     5,425    74%
  Sales 4,032    27%     1,124    29%      732     28%      273     22%     1,903    26%
Sector 15, 012   100%    3, 826    100%    2, 606    100%    1, 252    100%    7, 328    100%
  Automobiles and Parts 164      1%       40      1%       84      3%       -        -       40      1%
   Banks 335      2%      146      4%      189      7%        -        -         -        -
  Basic Resources 408     3%      170     4%      58      2%      34      3%      146     2%
   Chemicals 209       1%         -         -          -         -          -         -        209       3%
  Construction and Materials 1,366     9%      699     18%     163      6%      159     13%     345      5%
  Consumer Products and Services 706     5%      143     4%      210     8%      40      3%      313     4%
  Energy 338     2%      8      0%      26      1%      15      1%      289     4%
  Financial Services 415     3%      102     3%      132     5%      9      1%      172     2%
  Food, Beverage and Tobacco 251      2%       29      1%      151      6%       -        -       71      1%
  Health Care 2,073    14%     216      6%      470     18%     272     22%     1,115    15%
   Household & Personal Products 34       0%         -         -          -         -         34       3%         -         -
  Industrial Goods and Services 3,020    20%     798     21%     477     18%     228     18%     1,517    21%
  Media 98      1%       -        -       38      1%       3       0%       57      1%
  Personal Care, Drug and Grocery Stores 142      1%       17      0%       21      1%       -        -       104      1%
  Real Estate 1,129     8%      482     13%      222      9%       -        -       425      6%
  Retail 637     4%      230     6%      63      2%      2      0%      342     5%
  Technology 2,601    17%     354      9%      185      7%      310     25%     1,752    24%
  Telecommunications 690     5%      363     9%      23      1%      79      6%      225     3%
  Travel and Leisure 349     2%      29      1%      94      4%      65      5%      161     2%
   Utilities 47       0%        -         -         -         -         2       0%       45       1%
Insider Role 15, 012   100%    3, 826    100%    2, 606    100%    1, 252    100%    7, 328    100%
  Non-material 10,109    67%     2,844    74%     1,750    67%      750     60%     4,765    65%
  Material 4,903    33%     982     26%     856     33%     502     40%     2,563    35%
Report Period 15, 012   100%    3, 826    100%    2, 606    100%    1, 252    100%    7, 328    100%
  No 11,422    76%     2,832    74%     1,800    69%     931     74%     5,859    80%
  Yes 3,590    24%     994     26%     806     31%     321     26%     1,469    20%
Market Open 15, 012   100%    3, 826    100%    2, 606    100%    1, 252    100%    7, 328    100%
  Closed 4,760    32%     1,107    29%      862     33%      424     34%     2,367    32%
  Open 10,252    68%     2,719    71%     1,744    67%     828     66%     4,961    68%
Report Day 15, 012   100%    3, 826    100%    2, 606    100%    1, 252    100%    7, 328    100%
  No 14,755    98%     3,769    99%     2,553    98%     1,228    98%     7,205    98%
  Yes 257     2%      57      1%      53      2%      24      2%      123     2%
Relative 15, 012   100%    3, 826    100%    2, 606    100%    1, 252    100%    7, 328    100%
  No 10,257    68%     2,764    72%     1,982    76%     940     75%     4,571    62%
  Yes 4,755    32%     1,062    28%     624     24%     312     25%     2,757    38%
The table above represents descriptive statistics across Stock Exchange Lists for the independent dummy variables covering all transaction in the treatment
period (Covid), covering in total 15,012 transactions. "-" indicates that there is no transaction for that particular combination of variables.

          Appendix C4. Descriptive Statistics Independent Variable: Trans.Size - Pre-Covid (Control Period)

Stock Exchange List N Mean Median Std. Dev. Min Max

All 15, 012 7 ppm 0. 09 ppm 53 ppm ~ 0 ppm 5, 703 ppm

Large Cap 3,826 5 ppm 0.01 ppm 50 ppm ~ 0 ppm 1,412 ppm

Mid Cap 2,606 2 ppm 0.07 ppm 18 ppm ~ 0 ppm 474 ppm

Small Cap 1,252 5 ppm 0.20 ppm 31 ppm ~ 0 ppm 595 ppm

First North 7,328 11 ppm 0.16 ppm 79 ppm ~ 0 ppm 5,703 ppm

The table above shows the descriptive statistics for the independent variable Trans.Size on each stock exchange list and on an aggregated level in the
treatment period (Covid). Transaction size is calculated as the transaction size, in shares, in relation to the company's total number of shares outstanding,
expressed in parts per million (ppm = 0.0001%). The data is comprised of 15,012 purchase transactions across all stock exchange lists.

                                  48
Appendix D: Correlation Matrix Broad Control Variable
                    Group

                                             -     -     -     -     -     -     -     -           -     -     -     -     -     -     -     -     -     -     -     -     -     -     -     -                 -     -     -     -     -     -     -     -     -     -     -                 -     -     -     -     -     -     -
               VIF 1.12 1.29 1.07                                    1.17                                                                        1.24 1.21                                                 1.00 1.06

                (50)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.00


                (49)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.00 (0.23)


                 (48)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.00 (0.23)(0.24)


                 (47)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.00 (0.08)(0.08)(0.08)


                 (46)                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.00 (0.02)(0.07)(0.07)(0.07)


                 (45)                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.00 (0.07)(0.08)(0.24)(0.23)(0.24)


                 (44)                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.00 (0.24)(0.07)(0.08)(0.24)(0.23)(0.24)


                (43)                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.00 (0.04)0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 (0.01)0.02


                (42)                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.00 (0.01)(0.01)(0.01)0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01


                (41)                                                                                                                                                                                               1.00 0.00 0.03 (0.01)0.01 0.01 0.01 (0.02)0.02 (0.01)


                (40)                                                                                                                                                                                            1.00 (0.01)0.00 0.02 (0.02)0.02 (0.01)(0.02)(0.02)0.01 0.01


                (39)                                                                                                                                                                                     1.00 (0.10)(0.02)0.00 0.00 0.01 (0.02)0.01 0.02 0.02 0.00 (0.02)


                (38)                                                                                                                                                                                   1.00 (0.11)(0.06)(0.01)0.02 (0.05)(0.01)0.00 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.00 (0.01)


                 (37)                                                                                                                                                                                1.00 (0.17)(0.28)(0.15)(0.03)0.00 (0.03)(0.01)(0.04)0.00 (0.03)0.03 0.01 0.03


                 (36)                                                                                                                                                                              1.00 (0.29)(0.11)(0.19)(0.10)(0.02)(0.01)(0.01)(0.01)0.03 (0.01)0.02 (0.03)(0.01)0.01


                 (35)                                                                                                                                                                        1.00 (0.10)(0.15)(0.06)(0.10)(0.05)(0.01)0.00 (0.01)0.02 0.00 (0.01)(0.01)0.02 (0.01)(0.02)


                 (34)                                                                                                                                                                1.00 (0.03)(0.07)(0.10)(0.04)(0.06)(0.03)(0.01)0.00 0.06 (0.01)0.02 0.01 0.00 0.00 (0.01)0.00


                 (33)                                                                                                                                                             1.00 (0.06)(0.09)(0.17)(0.25)(0.10)(0.16)(0.09)(0.02)0.00 0.03 (0.01)0.02 0.00 0.01 (0.02)0.02 (0.01)


                 (32)                                                                                                                                                        1.00 (0.06)(0.02)(0.04)(0.07)(0.10)(0.04)(0.07)(0.04)(0.01)0.00 0.03 0.01 (0.01)0.00 (0.01)0.00 (0.01)0.01


                 (31)                                                                                                                                                     1.00 (0.03)(0.08)(0.03)(0.05)(0.09)(0.14)(0.06)(0.09)(0.05)(0.01)0.00 (0.01)0.04 0.00 0.00 0.00 (0.01)(0.01)(0.02)


                (30)                                                                                                                                            1.00 0.03 0.06 0.03 (0.03)0.02 0.03 (0.06)0.00 (0.02)0.00 (0.02)(0.01)(0.03)0.02 0.05 0.00 0.00 (0.03)(0.02)(0.03)


                (29)                                                                                                                                       1.00 (0.05)(0.01)0.06 0.03 0.01 (0.01)(0.05)(0.01)0.04 0.04 (0.09)0.04 0.01 0.06 0.00 (0.02)(0.03)(0.02)0.04 0.00 0.01


                (28)                                                                                                                                   1.00 0.00 (0.02)(0.01)(0.01)(0.01)0.00 (0.02)0.10 (0.05)0.01 0.00 (0.02)0.00 0.00 0.06 (0.01)0.05 0.00 (0.01)(0.03)0.00 (0.01)


                (27)                                                                                                                              1.00 (0.09)(0.05)0.09 (0.02)0.00 0.01 (0.02)0.00 (0.04)0.03 (0.02)0.01 0.03 (0.02)0.00 (0.02)0.00 (0.01)(0.01)0.00 (0.02)0.01 0.02


                (26)                                                                                                                         1.00 (0.07)(0.08)(0.01)0.06 (0.01)0.04 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.02 (0.02)(0.01)(0.01)(0.01)0.03 0.00 0.00 0.02 (0.01)0.00 0.02 0.01 (0.02)(0.01)


                (25)                                                                                                                   1.00 (0.08)(0.09)(0.10)(0.03)(0.15)0.01 (0.02)0.00 0.02 (0.02)0.00 0.01 0.01 0.01 (0.04)0.01 0.00 0.00 (0.03)0.02 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.02 (0.01)


                 (24)                                                                                                                 1.00 (0.12)(0.10)(0.11)(0.12)(0.08)0.09 (0.01)0.03 (0.01)(0.03)(0.01)(0.01)0.04 (0.03)(0.05)0.07 0.00 0.00 0.03 (0.01)(0.02)(0.02)(0.01)(0.02)0.01 0.05


                (23)                                                                                                           1.00 (0.08)(0.07)(0.06)(0.06)(0.07)(0.02)0.13 (0.01)0.01 0.00 0.06 0.02 (0.01)(0.01)0.01 (0.04)0.04 0.00 0.00 (0.02)(0.01)0.02 0.01 0.00 0.01 (0.01)(0.01)


                 (22)                                                                                                       1.00 (0.08)(0.13)(0.11)(0.09)(0.10)(0.11)0.06 (0.03)0.01 (0.02)(0.01)0.00 (0.01)(0.01)0.07 0.03 (0.05)(0.03)(0.02)0.00 0.05 0.00 0.00 0.01 (0.01)0.02 (0.02)0.00


                 (21)                                                                                                   1.00 (0.11)(0.07)(0.11)(0.10)(0.08)(0.09)(0.09)(0.02)(0.10)0.02 (0.01)0.00 (0.02)0.00 (0.04)0.03 (0.01)(0.01)0.03 0.00 0.00 (0.01)0.04 (0.03)(0.01)(0.02)(0.01)0.00 0.02


            Correlation Matrix and VIF-analysis of All Numeric Variables(20)                                                                                             1.00 (0.10)(0.11)(0.07)(0.12)(0.10)(0.08)(0.09)(0.10)0.02 (0.14)0.00 (0.02)(0.01)0.04 0.01 0.03 (0.06)0.04 0.02 (0.03)0.00 0.02 (0.03)0.00 (0.01)0.04 0.04 0.00 (0.02)0.00


                 (19)                                                                                         1.00 (0.11)(0.11)(0.12)(0.08)(0.13)(0.11)(0.09)(0.10)(0.11)0.04 0.11 (0.03)0.02 0.02 (0.03)0.01 (0.03)(0.01)(0.01)0.05 (0.01)0.01 0.01 (0.05)(0.02)0.00 0.00 (0.01)0.07 (0.02)(0.02)


            Appendix D.(18)                                                                                    1.00 (0.10)(0.09)(0.09)(0.10)(0.06)(0.11)(0.09)(0.07)(0.08)(0.09)0.09 0.08 0.05 0.01 0.02 (0.01)0.03 (0.02)(0.04)(0.03)0.04 (0.01)(0.01)0.00 (0.04)0.04 (0.01)(0.01)(0.01)(0.04)0.05 (0.03)


                 (17)                                                                               1.00 (0.06)(0.08)(0.07)(0.07)(0.08)(0.05)(0.08)(0.07)(0.06)(0.06)(0.07)0.00 (0.12)0.01 (0.02)(0.02)(0.01)(0.01)0.03 0.00 0.01 0.01 (0.02)0.01 0.00 0.01 (0.02)0.02 (0.01)0.02 0.00 0.00 (0.01)


                (16)                                                                         1.00 (0.02)(0.05)0.01 0.03 0.04 (0.01)0.01 (0.02)0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 (0.02)0.01 (0.01)(0.05)0.01 (0.02)(0.05)0.02 0.00 (0.08)0.09 (0.02)0.02 0.00 (0.01)0.02 0.01 0.01 0.02 (0.02)(0.02)0.00


                 (15)                                                                     1.00 (0.16)(0.02)(0.01)(0.01)(0.01)(0.01)0.00 (0.03)0.02 0.02 0.01 (0.04)0.06 (0.08)0.10 (0.07)0.09 0.09 (0.05)0.11 0.12 (0.06)0.03 (0.12)(0.10)(0.03)(0.01)0.04 0.00 0.06 0.00 (0.01)(0.01)(0.02)(0.02)


                 (14)                                                                1.00 (0.31)(0.20)(0.03)(0.03)0.04 (0.08)0.10 (0.05)0.02 0.10 (0.05)(0.04)0.07 (0.07)(0.08)(0.01)0.04 (0.06)(0.05)(0.07)0.06 (0.18)0.19 0.12 (0.18)0.16 (0.03)0.00 (0.02)(0.02)(0.02)(0.03)(0.04)0.03 0.00 0.03


                (13)                                                           1.00 (0.55)(0.42)(0.28)0.06 0.06 (0.03)0.06 (0.11)0.05 0.00 (0.10)0.03 0.03 (0.03)0.01 0.15 (0.08)0.03 0.01 (0.03)0.12 (0.11)0.06 (0.12)(0.09)0.21 (0.06)0.04 0.00 (0.01)0.00 (0.04)0.02 0.03 0.00 0.02 (0.01)


                 (12)                                                      1.00 (0.04)0.05 0.01 (0.03)(0.01)(0.04)0.04 (0.01)0.02 0.01 (0.01)0.01 (0.03)(0.01)(0.02)0.02 (0.01)(0.01)(0.05)0.00 (0.02)(0.05)0.01 0.03 0.06 (0.01)(0.06)0.05 (0.01)0.00 (0.08)0.07 0.04 (0.23)(0.25)0.06 0.01 0.00

                (11)                                                 1.00 0.00 0.00 (0.01)0.01 (0.01)(0.01)0.00 0.01 (0.01)0.01 0.00 0.02 0.00 (0.01)0.00 (0.01)0.00 0.03 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 (0.01)(0.01)(0.01)0.01 0.01 (0.01)0.00 0.00 0.01 (0.01)0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.01 (0.01)


                (10)                                            1.00 0.00 0.00 0.05 (0.04)(0.02)0.01 0.00 0.01 (0.01)(0.02)(0.01)0.01 0.02 (0.01)0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 (0.03)0.00 (0.01)(0.01)0.02 0.00 (0.02)(0.02)0.05 (0.02)(0.02)(0.02)(0.01)0.00 (0.01)0.00 (0.02)0.01 0.01 (0.01)0.03 (0.01)


                (9)                                       1.00                   0.02 0.11 0.03          0.00 0.01 0.01     0.00 0.04 0.02          0.01     0.00 0.03     0.02 0.03 0.01          0.00 0.00          0.00 0.07 0.02     0.00 0.02     0.00
                                                                    (0.04)(0.01)(0.01)(0.12)              (0.02)(0.03)              (0.02)              (0.01)(0.02)    (0.15)         (0.02)              (0.02)(0.01)         (0.02)(0.01)              (0.01)         (0.01)    (0.01)


                (8)                                  1.00              0.01 0.07                   0.09 0.07 0.05                                      0.14                   0.01 0.02 0.02     0.01 0.12          0.02              0.01 0.01 0.05
                                                               (0.10)(0.03)(0.01)         (0.03)(0.03)(0.03)(0.03)              (0.03)(0.02)(0.02)(0.03)(0.03)(0.01)(0.02)(0.02)    (0.03)(0.01)(0.01)(0.01)              (0.10)         (0.03)(0.01)    (0.07)(0.02)(0.02)              (0.01)(0.01)


                (7)                             1.00                   0.01          0.05 0.03          0.00 0.01          0.00 0.01 0.01     0.02 0.00     0.04 0.01     0.01     0.01 0.03     0.00 0.00     0.01 0.00     0.02     0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01
                                                          (0.07)(0.10)(0.03)(0.01)    (0.03)(0.03)         (0.01)(0.01)         (0.01)(0.02)              (0.01)         (0.10)         (0.01)    (0.01)         (0.03)         (0.01)         (0.04)    (0.01)                    (0.01)


                (6)                         1.00                        0.00 0.05     0.04 0.06     0.01     0.01 0.00                   0.02     0.06     0.04     0.07 0.02 0.00     0.06     0.03 0.01     0.06 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.04 0.00 0.00     0.01
                                                     (0.12)(0.12)(0.17)(0.05)(0.01)         (0.13)         (0.01)    (0.01)         (0.01)(0.01)(0.02)(0.01)    (0.02)    (0.07)    (0.01)              (0.01)    (0.09)         (0.03)                                   (0.02)    (0.03)


                (5)                    1.00                            0.02     0.23          0.01              0.03     0.02 0.07 0.03     0.03                        0.00     0.03     0.09          0.13     0.00 0.07     0.01              0.01 0.02
                                                (0.21)(0.12)(0.12)(0.18)(0.05)(0.01)    (0.16)    (0.03)(0.05)    (0.04)(0.01)(0.04)    (0.05)              (0.01)    (0.03)(0.20)(0.02)(0.04)(0.03)    (0.03)    (0.08)    (0.05)(0.05)    (0.02)         (0.02)    (0.01)(0.01)(0.01)


                (4)                1.00                                      0.13              0.03 0.00     0.00     0.08 0.01          0.01 0.01     0.30     0.02 0.00     0.01     0.01 0.06 0.00                        0.00     0.00     0.01     0.04
                                           (0.37)(0.36)(0.21)(0.21)(0.30)(0.08)(0.02)(0.02)    (0.05)(0.08)(0.03)         (0.01)    (0.01)         (0.06)(0.02)         (0.01)    (0.03)         (0.03)    (0.03)              (0.02)(0.04)(0.02)(0.01)(0.06)    (0.02)    (0.01)    (0.02)


                (3)           1.00          0.01 0.03 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.03          0.02 0.01     0.02 0.04              0.06          0.03 0.06          0.22 0.01 0.00 0.02     0.00 0.00          0.00 0.01     0.00     0.03              0.03     0.01
                                      (0.02)(0.01)                                   (0.02)(0.01)         (0.03)         (0.04)(0.03)(0.02)    (0.01)(0.04)         (0.03)(0.04)                    (0.01)         (0.01)(0.01)         (0.01)    (0.04)    (0.04)(0.02)(0.02)    (0.01)


                (2)      1.00          0.29              0.00          0.08     0.28                   0.02     0.05     0.03 0.11 0.01     0.06                                          0.13          0.28     0.02 0.00     0.03          0.01 0.00 0.02
                                 (0.03)(0.14)    (0.05)(0.02)(0.07)    (0.02)(0.01)    (0.18)    (0.06)(0.04)(0.02)(0.05)    (0.05)    (0.08)              (0.03)    (0.06)(0.17)(0.04)(0.04)(0.04)(0.06)(0.03)(0.04)(0.08)    (0.07)(0.08)    (0.01)         (0.04)    (0.02)(0.02)


                (1)  1.00     0.02     0.10     0.02 0.14                   0.11                        0.00 0.00 0.01 0.12 0.00     0.03 0.02          0.06 0.01     0.01 0.00 0.01 0.01          0.05 0.05     0.01 0.00 0.02          0.01     0.03     0.01
                            (0.06)    (0.02)    (0.04)         (0.15)(0.01)(0.01)(0.02)    (0.06)(0.05)(0.03)(0.10)(0.01)                         (0.03)         (0.04)(0.02)         (0.01)                    (0.07)(0.01)         (0.02)              (0.01)(0.01)    (0.01)    (0.02)















                    (1) period.treatment(2) incentive.program.log(3) insider.rep.date.log(4) insider.role.adj.board.member(5) insider.role.adj.c.suite(6) insider.role.adj.ceo(7) insider.role.adj.cfo(8) insider.role.adj.chairman(9) insider.role.adj.management.team(10) insider.role.adj.other(11) insider.role.adj.related(12) mark.act.log(13) market.adj.fngm.cap(14) market.adj.large.cap(15) market.adj.mid.cap(16) market.adj.small.cap(17) pub.date.month.1(18) pub.date.month.10(19) pub.date.month.11(20) pub.date.month.12(21) pub.date.month.2(22) pub.date.month.3(23) pub.date.month.4(24) pub.date.month.5(25) pub.date.month.6(26) pub.date.month.7(27) pub.date.month.8(28) pub.date.month.9(29) relative.log(30) report.period.log(31) sector.basic.materials(32) sector.consumer.goods(33) sector.consumer.services(34) sector.energy(35) sector.financials(36) sector.health.care(37) sector.industrials(38) sector.real.estate(39) sector.technology(40) sector.telecommunications(41) sector.utilities(42) trans.of.company(43) transaction.type.log(44) weekday.fri(45) weekday.mon(46) weekday.sat(47) weekday.sun(48) weekday.thu(49) weekday.tue(50) weekday.wedThe table reports the correlation of each numerical variable available in our complete data set, i.e. both continous variables and dummy variables. The analysis has been run on the complete data set of 31,233 PDMR transactions. A VIF-value of "-" indicates that a VIF-analysis was not possible to run for the variable. That is due to the fact that it is part of a dummy variable group that has perfect negative correlation witheach other.

                                  49