TURNING THE TITANS

INSTITUTIONAL OWNERSHIP AND ESG PERFORMANCE IN NORDIC FIRMS

ARAM JIMAL

EELIS PANKOLAINEN

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2022
Turning the Titans: Institutional Ownership and ESG
Performance in Nordic Firms

Abstract:

   This paper examines whether institutional investors drive ESG performance of public
   firms in the Nordic countries and whether the effect differs depending on the type of
   investor. We find evidence that institutional investor ownership in aggregate has a
   positive correlation effect on firm ESG-performance as measured by the Refinitiv
   Eikon index. Furthermore, we find substantial differences between different types of
   institutional investors, with VC and PE having a negative correlation effect.
   Meanwhile, we find a substantial positive effect for hedge funds. Supposing the
   investor groups with the highest effects were to increase or decrease their ownership
   of firms in the Nordic countries in substantial magnitudes, we predict sizeable
   changes in the ESG performance of the firms.

Keywords:

   Sustainability, Nordics, ESG, Institutional investors, Corporate Finance,

Authors:

   Aram Jimal (24895)
   Eelis Pankolainen (24623)

Tutors:

   Adrian d’Avernas, Associate Professor, Department of Finance
   Ye Zhang, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrian d’Avernas, Associate Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Aram Jimal and Eelis Pankolainen, 2022

                                   1
   1. Introduction

The topic of sustainability is rapidly becoming the defining issue of our time, with
increasingly ambitious goals and plans to counter our world's challenges. Measures
related to sustainability are being implemented frequently within a wide range of areas,
and their importance has been increasing for investors as well. According to Bloomberg,
Green Finance was a 31 trillion dollar business already in 2019, and the share of
investments labelled as green is growing fast.

Evidently, societal developments mean that companies today are evaluated in several
different dimensions rather than purely on the bottom line. Popular dimensions for
activists and media to focus on include climate footprint, gender and racial diversity and
corporate governance that balances the tug between economic and social goals in
corporations. These increasing demands cause institutional investors making investment
decisions today to face significant pressure to both assess and measure their ESG impact
(Altinget, 2022; Nielsen, 2014). ESG stands for Environmental, Social & Governance.
The "Environmental" refers to factors such as climate and resource usage, Social is
about working conditions and human rights, and Governance refers to corporate
governance where equality and corruption are examples of issues of interest. It is
unclear whether evaluating investments by ESG metrics is beneficial for investment
returns, but it is evident that ESG analysis is a valuable tool to assess risk (Goldman
Sachs, 2021). What is clear however is that strong societal, institutional and political
pressure is narrowing the addressable investment sphere for many bigger institutional
investors.

As a piece of contemporary evidence, Philip Morris International’s takeover bid on the
Swedish nicotine-product company Swedish Match, considered a national gem in
Swedish industrial history, was shunned by some bigger owners as far below its intrinsic
value - but unlikely to meet resistance due to the lack of Swedish institutional owners.
Sweden’s largest member organisation for private investors, Aktiespararna, stated in an
opinion release that the valuation would most probably be higher if Swedish mutual
funds, avidly regarded as very ESG-minded, had not avoided the stock because of
ESG-reasons. Sweden investors have occupied themselves with “sawing off the branch
they are sitting on”, as a disappointed CEO of a contrarian institutional owner of
Swedish Match regarded the situation. There were calls that this bid would likely lead to
a more nuanced discussion of how investors filter companies on ESG data (Dagens
Industri, 2022).

                                   2
Evaluating company performance in other dimensions than purely financial thus
provides a relatively new and exciting area of financial research. For example, an
empirically studied topic has been if institutional ownership, in contrast with retail and
other non-institutional ownership, has a positive causal effect on a company's ESG
performance (Dyck, Lins, Roth & Wagner, 2017). The effect is hypothesised to be done
mainly through the mechanism the authors label as "Voice", public and private
engagements between investors and firms, emphasising the private ones. The topic has
been engaging to determine if institutional shareholders in aggregate or different types
of institutional shareholders can create real social impact, in contrast to financial such.

Generally, organisations and forums that have held a more “stakeholder-based view” on
corporations and capitalism, such as the Centre for Corporate Governance at LBS, have
in general long held an assumption that institutional investors have the possibility to
influence company priorities and behaviour towards more sustainable operations
(Centre for Corporate Governance, 2022). This hypothesis has mainly centred around
the idea of indirect influence, that by assessing and choosing to invest in more
sustainable companies, less sustainable companies would change course to increase
their attractiveness to investors. That idea differs from investors more directly
influencing company behaviour through its management by using the concrete influence
and mechanisms that being a shareholder gives (Dyck et al., 2017). Thus, that would
show that institutional ownership more directly drives ESG performance rather than
indirectly influencing it.

With this paper, we wish to revisit that topic, using newer data and focusing on listed

        1
Nordic firms with a comprehensive dataset. Testing for a relationship between
institutional investor share ownership and the ESG performance of listed firms, we
examine whether they drive ESG performance evaluated on a set of metrics. That would
mean that institutional ownership would work as a channel for the convergence of ESG
practices in public firms in Nordic countries. Thus, specifically, we aim to answer the
following research questions:

  I. Does institutional investor ownership of public firms in the Nordic countries
       significantly drive firm performance on ESG metrics?
  II. Does the relationship differ based on the type of institutional investor?

1
 With the exception of Iceland, which is normally regarded as a Nordic country.

                                   3
To answer our two research questions, we obtain data on firms' ESG performance from
the Refinitiv Eikon database. The data is divided into eleven total categories, containing
overall ESG scores as well as scores for the ten subcategories for a total of 1714 equity
securities publicly listed in Sweden, Norway, Denmark and Finland. In addition, we
obtain data on institutional investor ownership and select firm financial and qualitative
characteristics from the S&P Capital IQ database. We perform regression analysis using
a one-year lagged relationship between ESG performance as the dependent variable and
institutional ownership as an independent variable. We initially use the pooled OLS
method but subsequently perform additional analysis through the fixed effects model to
control for time-invariant fixed effects, and through the Arellano-Bond model to address
problems of reverse causality. Furthermore, we look at whether the relationship differs
depending on the type of investor. Beyond using the ESG data providers' proprietary
measure, we construct our own with a weighted average of each firm's ten subcategories
category score.

In aggregate, we find a strong, statistically significant positive relationship between
lagged institutional ownership and ESG performance of public firms in the Nordic
countries, as measured by overall ESG score. In addition, we find statistically
significant positive and negative relationships between several subgroups of
institutional investors and ESG performance. The statistical significance for overall
institutional ownership, our first research question, appears solid, but whether the
relationship is causal is not as clear.

Our paper contributes to the broad and general literature on CSR and ESG in corporate
finance. We complement the available by showing that investors' choice of investments
plays a significant role. The impact of institutional investors making investments in
Nordic companies drive wide measures of firm ESG performance.

We investigate a contemporary issue that has been studied before, albeit in somewhat
modified ways and with different datasets, focusing on different regions. Chen, Dong &
Lin (2020) use a quasi-natural experiment to examine in specific the causal effect of
institutional shareholders on corporate social responsibility (CSR), which also is a term
that relates to the social responsibilities of businesses. They find that an increase in the
rate of institutional ownership improves the portfolio firm's CSR performance as
measured by the MSCI ESG KLD database. Moreover, this effect appears more robust
in CSR categories "financially material to firm values", using the SASB Standard

                                   4
industry materiality guidelines to be able to differentiate between sustainability issues
that are more or less material, depending on the industry. This indicates that institutional
shareholders focus more on improving material issues for genuine (including financial)
reasons rather than low-hanging fruit.

The results show to be in line with their "real effort" hypothesis: that institutional
investors generate improvement in the social outcomes of their portfolio firms because
of genuine interest in doing so. These interests include, for example, demand from
clients, fund flow benefits and overall risk reduction purposes. Deriving from this
suggests that sustainable goals benefit investors in the long run. The alternative
hypothesis would be their "catering" hypothesis, that institutional investors do not exert
effort to change how and to what extent portfolio firms work with CSR. The increasing
number of sustainable portfolios that institutional investors manage could merely be a
product to capitalise on investor demand for this in that case, and not much else.
Uniquely as mentioned, the authors provide evidence that the institutional investors are
not merely attempting to capitalise on this but have more internal motivations to focus
on improving CSR-related areas when having the power to do so. The actions taken
benefit them in the long run. With consistent evidence, they show that institutional
investors causally generate improvements in the areas they study. Likewise, Jo and
Harjoto (2011), which they refer to, found that more institutional ownership was
associated with higher CSR scores. However, their results showed an effect of less than
a tenth relative to Chen et al.

On the same theme, Dyck et al. (2019) examined the relationship between international
institutional ownership and ESG by focusing on how social norms influence it, using
data through year-end 2013, which warranted our use of newer data up until the latest
year available. In the paper, the authors managed to find that institutional ownership has

                                                       2
a positive influence on E&S performance , with their tests suggesting that the
relationship is causal. With further tests done, they show that “investors manage to
transplant their social norms” regarding how and to what extent to invest in E&S issues
in the firms they invest in, acting as a convergence mechanism for E&S practices and
ambitions worldwide. A motivation they find that explains investors diverting attention
to issues that may be seen as less "financially material" could be that investment
managers controlling the funds live in communities that strongly value firms with a

2
 ESG and E&S are two closely connected terms. In short, E&S refers to ESG without the governance
aspects.

                                   5
good record on environmental and social issues. Thereby, the investment managers (and
the institutions they represent) receive social rewards and avoid social sanctions by
focusing on improving E&S performance in the firms they invest in. Focusing on less
"financially material" issues may thus be optimal from the manager's view since it
moves the firm in question towards the ideal her community has. Thus, in essence,
strong enough social ideals can overpower market pressures and pure fiduciary
responsibilities.

Our study extends this paper in several dimensions. First, we look at how the effects
differ depending on the type of the institutional investor, dividing up the investor group
into unique subcategories: banks and investment banks, charitable foundations,
corporate pension sponsors, family offices and trusts, government pension sponsors,
hedge funds, insurance companies, investment managers and VC and PE managers. We
also focus solely on the Nordic countries, using newer data in this aspect. Furthermore,
beyond only using third-party ESG metrics, we examine the relationship with a
self-constructed ESG metric using the base data available.

Contrary to Dyck et al., we find that VC and PE investors appear to have a statistically
significant negative correlation to ESG performance. These results are aligned with
experimental evidence that Zhang (2021) presents, finding that start-up firms aiming for
environmental and social impact make investors' expectations of the quality of the
business idea lower. Hence, this reduces financially maximising venture capitalists' and
private equity investors' interest and attention to contact and invest in these start-ups.
The results in the mentioned paper also indicate that sorting may happen as the
investors mentioned above may anticipate less interest shown by the firms toward their
willingness to fund the start-ups. Although these results are for smaller sized and
non-public firms, the effect could be the same even for public ones, as our results may
indicate. Further on the topic, Starks, Venkat & Zhu (2017) found that firms with
high-ESG performance as measured by the MSCI ESG STATs database tend to have
investors with longer investment horizons, and VC and PE investors are generally
considered more short-term investors. The long-horizon investors also tend to behave
more patiently towards their portfolio firms.

However, this does not explain the strong positive effect we found for hedge funds in
our ordinary pooled regression, which we did not expect. Dyck et al. (2019) found no
relationship between hedge funds and E&S performance whatsoever. The investment

                                   6
horizon that hedge funds work with is relatively short term (Cella, Ellul & Giannetti,
2013), which would warrant no significant relationship at all, or a relatively small one,
if not a negative one. As Dyck et al. (2019) used data through year-end 2013, this
suggests that hedge funds, in aggregate, may have in the period we study (2012 until
2021) started to positively affect the firms in which they invest in regarding ESG
aspects. It could also mean that hedge funds in Nordic countries behave differently as
owners compared to hedge funds from non-Nordic firms or when investing in
non-Nordic firms. Many hedge funds are active in their ownership, so the conditions for
affecting the management in a positive ESG-direction through private engagements, for
example, are already there (Becht, Franks & Grant, 2010).

In contrast, the significant positive result for government pension sponsors was in line
with our expectations and something that earlier research also has shown. Pension funds
are generally long-horizon investors, as Cella et al. (2013) found again. In fact, Dyck et
al. (2019) found that pension sponsors, regardless of their country of domicile and
social norms, consistently affected firms to strengthen their E&S performance. The
authors hypothesise that their long investment horizon allows them to incur the costs
associated with this for benefits potentially far away. Furthermore, regarding universal
pension plans in welfare states, there is both a demand and expectation that
governments will regulate pension fund behaviour and assessment routines in making
investments (Altinget, 2022; Nielson, 2014). Riedl & Smeets (2017) showed that
“socially responsible investors” expect and are willing to accept lower returns (thus
paying a premium) in order to invest in socially responsible companies, in line with
their social preferences, and Hong and Kacperczyk (2009), mentioned more in detail
below, show that norm-constrained institutions, such as pension funds, are less likely to
hold "sin" stocks, i.e companies involved in producing alcohol, tobacco and gambling
products.

The paper by Dyck et al. (2019) can be said to be an analogous extension of Aggarwal,
Erel, Ferreira & Matos (2011), who looked at how mainly investors domiciled in the
United States managed to transplant "better" corporate governance practices in foreign
companies which they invested in. Their results show a positive relation between
firm-level governance and grade of institutional ownership. Moreover, the authors find
evidence for a causal relationship, i.e., that changes in institutional ownership over time
drive subsequent changes in firm-level governance, but that the opposite does not hold.
Thus, institutional holdings were a channel for converging governance practices across

                                   7
countries. The causal relationship is crucial as an obvious reverse causality explanation
is an alternative for almost all of the mentioned results. For example, Chung and Zhang
(2011) found that the share of a public company's shares held by institutional investors
increases with the quality of governance. Moreover, the proportion of institutional
investors that hold a firm's shares increases with its governance quality as well, they
find. They hypothesise that institutional investors gravitate to stocks of companies with
a good governance structure to meet fiduciary responsibility and minimise monitoring
and exit costs.

Meanwhile, and maybe as opposed to governance, Gillan, Hartzell, Koch & Starks
(2010) find that institutional investors seemed less likely to own shares of firms with
improved environmental or social responsibility. Still, they do stress that at the same
time, however, institutions appear to prefer firms with fewer corporate governance
concerns, in line with Chung & Zhang (2011). On the same theme, Nofsinger, Sulaeman
& Varma (2019) show that institutional investors appear indifferent to positive E&S
indicators but invest less in stocks with negative such indicators (negative screening).
Again, this pattern appears particularly prevalent for longer-horizon institutions.

A large part of the existing literature has looked at the inverse of our first research
question, i.e., if firm performance on CSR and ESG metrics can say anything about the
level of institutional investor ownership. For example, as mentioned, Hong &
Kacperczyk (2009) studied the effect of social norms on markets by looking at
companies involved in producing alcohol, tobacco, and gambling. Even though
investors lose financially by abstaining from these stocks, as companies involved in
these sectors have higher expected returns than what would be expected, they find that
these companies' stocks are less likely to be held by "norm-constrained institutions".
This provides evidence that they are being neglected due to the effect of norms in
constraining investors. Our study is interesting in this aspect since it partly analyzes
what can be expected if socially conscious investors nevertheless still invest in these
financially ostracised firms. Some reasons justify this, as previous studies have shown
that investors have motivations to improve firms' social outcomes. As earlier mentioned,
there is a public demand for sustainable and socially impactful investment opportunities
(Bloomberg, 2019), and regarding some larger institutions, such as government pension
funds, there is external pressure to regulate the funds' behaviour and investment criteria.

                                   8
   2. Sample and Summary Statistics

2.1 Data Sources

We first obtain data on firms’ ESG performance from the Refinitiv Eikon database.
Refinitiv sources information from company annual and sustainability reports, NGOs,
and news sources for publicly traded companies across 45 countries at an annual
frequency. Refinitiv constructs Overall ESG scores from 0 to 100 for publicly listed
firms based on category scores for Environmental, Social, and Governance. These
categories contain a total of 10 subcategories; 3 for Environmental (Resource Use,
Emissions, and Environmental Innovation), 4 for Social (Workforce, Human Rights,
Community, and Product Responsibility), and 3 for Governance (Management,
Shareholders, and CSR Strategy). Subcategory scores are, in turn, based on a number of
quantitative and qualitative line items which Eikon analysts evaluate. Detailed
definitions of the Overall ESG Score, as well as subcategories, are provided in
Appendix A.

The data obtained from Refinitiv Eikon consists of Overall ESG Scores as well as
subcategory scores for all ten subcategories mentioned above for a total of 1714
common or preferential equity securities publicly listed in Sweden, Norway, Denmark
or Finland for the years 2012 - 2021. We use Overall ESG Score as a primary
measurement of firms’ ESG performance. However, as the exact method used by Eikon
analysts to determine this score is unknown, we also use subcategory scores to construct
a weighted average of all ten subcategories (later termed as “Category Score”). We use
this as an alternative measure of firms’ ESG performance in order to reduce reliance on
effects introduced by database-specific weighting schemes.

We obtain data on firms’ institutional investor ownership and selected financial
characteristics from the S&P Capital IQ database. S&P sources information from
company annual and quarterly reports, company filings with the SEC or other relevant
regulatory entities, NGOs, news sources, and proprietary analysis conducted by S&P
Global Market Intelligence. Capital IQ provides ownership data for insiders,
corporations and institutions, as well as a number of subgroups for each of these
categories.

                                   9
The data obtained from Capital IQ primarily consists of percentage point firm
ownership for All Institutions as well as the following subgroups of institutions;
Banks/Investment Banks, Charitable Foundations, Corporate Pension Sponsors, Family
Offices/Trusts, Government Pension Sponsors, Hedge Fund Managers, Insurance
Companies, Investment Managers, and Venture Capital/Private Equity Firms. The data
also contains Primary Industry and Country of Headquarters to separate industry- and
country-specific effects, as well as Total Assets, Tangible Book Value, Net Debt, Market
Capitalization, and Return on Capital as financial characteristics to measure size,
leverage, tangibility, and profitability. We further use this data to derive Asset
Tangibility as Tangible Book Value divided by Total Assets, Net Debt to Assets, and
Tobin’s Q as Net Debt plus Market Capitalization divided by Total Assets. Data points
are collected for a total of 1820 common or preferential equity securities publicly listed
in Sweden, Norway, Denmark or Finland for the years 2011 - 2020. The time frame
used for this data (2011 - 2020) differs from the time frame used for ESG data (2012 -
2021), as the analysis focuses on investigating a one-period lagged relationship between
ownership and ESG performance.

We combine the data sets by matching ticker symbols and company names, excluding
observations that lack either Overall ESG Score or Total Institutional Ownership. If a
firm has both common and preferential equity listings, the common share is used. The
complete data set contains 2437 firm-year observations for a total of 539 firms over the
time period 2011 - 2021. Of the 539 firms present in the data, only 102 are present in all
periods. Beyond these firms, there is a significant drop in the number of periods for
which firms have been graded by Refinitiv, resulting in half the firm-year observations
(ca 1218) consisting of 142 firms, with the other 397 firms making up the remainder.

2.2 Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 contains descriptive statistics for the complete data set, sorted by country. We
find variation between firms’ ESG performance, institutional ownership, and financial
characteristics across country, industry, and time. We control for this variation through
the inclusion of control variables in our pooled OLS regression analysis and through
within-transformation and first differences of variables in our subsequent fixed effects-
and Arellano-Bond regression analysis, respectively.

                                  10
Table 1: Summary Statistics
This table shows summary statistics of ESG, ownership and firm financial characteristics. Category Score
is calculated as the weighted average of all 10 ESG category scores, Total IO stands for total institutional
ownership in percentages, total assets is measured in USDm, asset tangibility is calculated as tangible
book value to total assets, and Tobin’s Q is calculated as market capitalization plus net debt to assets. The
data are from Refinitiv Eikon and S&P Capital IQ and are obtained for years 2011 - 2021.

                                    11
Of the four Nordic nations, Finland appears to have both the highest mean and median
ESG scores at 58.65 and 60.64, while Sweden has the lowest at 48.83 and 49.45.
Sweden also has the highest standard deviation at 21.71, while Denmark has the lowest
at 17.54. Sweden has by far the largest number of firms at 308, while Denmark has the
lowest at 67. Despite having fewer firms, Denmark still has a higher number of
firm-year observations than Finland and Norway. It is interesting to note that Sweden
has the highest standard deviation in ESG score, despite having the highest number of
firm-year observations (and, therefore, less impacted by outliers). This indicates that
ESG performance is more varied among Swedish firms compared to other Nordic
nations.

Institutional ownership is fairly diverse across nations, with Denmark and Finland
displaying lower median ownership percentages at 28.32 and 35.08, respectively. In
contrast, Norway and Sweden display significantly higher median institutional
ownership at 42.51 and 46.02 percent, respectively. Norway displays a significantly
higher standard deviation of 25.13 compared to other nations, likely due in some part to
the presence of two outlier observations discussed below. Finland and Denmark display
the lowest standard deviations at 12.38 and 15.40, respectively, and the lowest
maximum values at 83.64 and 80.01, indicating clustering of institutional ownership
around 15 - 50 percent in these nations.

Three outlier observations display an institutional ownership rate far in excess of 100,
which should intuitively represent a limit for this value. These observations are from
Norwegian firm Prosafe SE in 2012 and 2013, with an ownership percentage of 113.54
and 238.66, and from Swedish firm Sedana Medical in 2020 with 134.67. The
ownership in all instances consists overwhelmingly of investment managers. We have
been unable to determine the exact reasons behind these anomalies, so we have decided
not to exclude them from the data set. The estimated effect of these observations on the
overall analysis is limited, but in the event that the institutional ownership values are
erroneous, the observations will bias our results slightly negatively as institutional
ownership declines heavily in the subsequent periods with no considerable effect on the
ESG score.

As for firm financial characteristics, Denmark has the largest firms judging by both
mean and maximum asset bases, while Finland has the largest median firm size. Firm
size variation is by far highest in Denmark, likely due to outliers in the data set in the

                                  12
form of Maersk Group and others, with Sweden displaying the second-highest standard
deviation. Norway and Finland display a lower standard deviation and mean firm size
despite outliers like Orkla, Norsk Hydro, Fortum, and Nokia, indicating a relatively
greater concentration of medium-sized firms in these nations. Sweden displays the
greatest concentration of smaller firms, with a median firm size of only $1583 USDm.

Asset tangibility and net debt to asset levels are fairly similar across nations. In both
categories, Sweden displays the highest mean (0.29 for tangibility and 0.26 for net debt
to assets) and standard deviation (0.26 and 0.22 percentage points, respectively).
Profitability measured by return on capital is very widespread both across and within
nations, with Denmark displaying the highest mean profitability at 13.12 and Sweden
displaying the highest standard deviation at 15.06. In contrast, Finland displays both the
lowest mean at 8.00 and the lowest standard deviation at 6.52 percentage points.

                                  13
   3. Does institutional ownership drive ESG performance?

3.1 Initial Analysis: Pooled OLS Regression

To determine whether there is evidence that increased institutional investor ownership
drives firm ESG performance, we perform regression analysis on the previously
established data set. In line with Dyck et al. (2017), we have used a pooled OLS
regression model for our initial analysis. Their analysis provides us with a comparison
point for our results. The pooled OLS model does not address potential biases caused
by, for example, time-invariant fixed effects or reverse causality. However, it serves as a
baseline to which further analysis addressing these problems can be compared to. In this
model, all observations are pooled into a single long regression, and both between and
within variation are used to estimate the parameters. Our regression model is as follows:

    𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒  = β  + β 𝐼𝑂     + β 𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚     + 𝑑 𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒 + 𝑑 𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑦 + 𝑑 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 + ϵ
           𝑖𝑡     0     1   𝑖𝑡−1     2      𝑖𝑡−1     1            2                3                 𝑖𝑡

Where the dependent variable is either the overall ESG score or the category score for
firm i in year t. 𝐼𝑂     is the percentage of institutional ownership in firm i in year t–1.
                               𝑖𝑡−1
𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚     are a set of five firm-level control variables in year t–1; the natural logarithm
         𝑖𝑡−1
of total assets, asset tangibility, net debt to assets, return on capital, and Tobin’s Q. Time,
Country and Industry are dummy variables to control for effects related to year, country
and industry.

We include firm size partly because larger firms are naturally exposed to more
significant external pressures. Furthermore, previous literature has shown that firm size
is a predictor of institutional ownership grade (Dyck et al., 2019). Firm size has also
been shown to be an indicator of the likelihood of engaging in CSR, where larger
companies are more likely to do so, as shown by Ferrell, Liang & Renneboog (2016).

In order to produce a measure of overall financial slack in firms, as this may predict
ESG adoption (Hong & Kacperczyk, 2012), we include Tobin’s Q and return on capital
as measures of financial performance and profitability, and net debt to assets and asset
tangibility as measures of leverage. We have chosen a one-year lag in the independent
variables in line with Dyck et al. (2019). The choice of the model specification is
discussed more in-depth in Section 4.1. We report the main results of this regression
model in Table 2. The regression estimates for the alternative ESG measurement

                                  14
Category Score have been excluded from the main text due to a considerable lack of
goodness-of-fit for the model, but they are included in Appendix B1.

We find a statistically significant positive relationship between lagged total institutional
ownership and ESG performance measured by overall ESG score. In addition, we find
statistically significant positive and negative relationships between several subgroups of
institutional investors.

In Panel A, Total IO displays a positive correlation with overall ESG score at the 0.1%
level, indicating it is highly statistically significant. It also appears to be economically
meaningful, as each 1 percentage point increase in lagged institutional ownership results
in a 0.0966 increase in the overall ESG score. This means a one standard deviation
increase in institutional ownership (18.889 percentage points) results in a 18.889 x
                                                                                     2
0.0966 = 1.825 point increase in firm ESG score the following year. The adjusted 𝑅  of
the model is 0.673, which indicates that the model accounts for 67.3% of the variance in
overall ESG score. This value indicates that the model fit is more than sufficient for our
analysis, but that there is still a considerable amount of unexplained variance in the
                                                  2
dependent variable. For reference, the adjusted 𝑅  of the equivalent model of Dyck et
al. (2019) was 0.543, either indicating that the model explains a greater deal of variance
in firm ESG performance in the Nordics compared to the global average, or that the
time period of our data produces a better fit compared to the period covered by Dyck et
al. (2004 - 2013). With the former interpretation, it could indicate that institutional
investors that are active in the Nordic countries are more concerned with ESG matters,
either exiting the firm if the ESG performance cannot be improved or that such
ESG-performance improving actions are more expected of institutions active in these
countries. Such higher expectations would lead to a larger share of institutional
investors choosing to devote energy and time to improving ESG in the firms in which
they invest in. That case would be in line with evidence of higher social pressures
regarding good ESG behaviour and performance in Nordic countries, compared to the
United States, as an example (Dyck et al., 2019; Botero, Djankov, La Porta,
Lopez-de-Silanes & Shleifer, 2004; World Values Survey).

As for subgroups of institutional investors, we find no statistically significant
correlations between subgroup ownership and ESG performance in Panel A at any level.
It is interesting to note that neither ownership by charities, family offices, or trusts

                                  15
Table 2: Pooled OLS Regression
This table reports regression estimates of ESG scores on institutional ownership and control variables.
The dependent variable is the overall ESG score. Total IO is total institutional ownership, Banks IO is
institutional ownership by banks and investment banks, Charity IO is institutional ownership by
charitable foundations, Corp. Pension IO is institutional ownership by corporate pension sponsors, FO &
Trust IO is institutional ownership by family offices and trusts, Gov. Pension IO is institutional ownership
by government pension sponsors, Hedge Fund IO is institutional ownership by hedge fund managers,
Insurance co. IO is institutional ownership by insurance companies, Inv. Manager IO is institutional
ownership by investment managers, VC & PE IO is institutional ownership by venture capital and private
equity firms, total assets is the natural logarithm of total assets in USDm, asset tangibility is tangible book
value divided by total assets, Tobin’s Q is net debt plus market capitalization divided by total assets. All
independent variables are lagged by one period. The data are from Refinitiv Eikon and S&P Capital IQ
and are obtained for the years 2011-2021.

                                  16
appeared to indicate statistically significant relationships, contrary to expectation. Many
of these institutions pursue social returns as their primary motive.

In Panel B, however, a number of investor subgroups display statistically significant and
economically meaningful results. For example, government pension sponsors show a
0.381 correlation coefficient, significant at the 1% level. This indicates that government
pension sponsors drive 3.94 times more ESG performance improvement than
institutions overall. This is especially interesting in light of the results for corporate
pension sponsors, which were neither strongly positive nor statistically significant,

                                  17
indicating that perhaps government institutions face a greater pressure to drive ESG
development in their holdings. In contrast, corporate actors may be more strongly
incentivized to focus on purely financial returns. As mentioned in the introduction,
pension funds are generally considered to be norm-constrained institutions (Hong &
Kacperczyk, 2009). There are also indicators of public pressure on governments to
regulate government pension fund behaviour so that they take into account
environmental and social concerns when choosing investments (Altinget, 2022; Nielsen,
2014).

Ownership by hedge funds displays a fascinating result, namely an extremely strong
correlation coefficient of 0.873 significant at the 0.1% level, indicating that hedge funds
drive 9.04 times more improvement compared to institutions overall. This is unexpected
given that hedge funds are not generally considered to be as concerned with social
returns as purely financial. Furthermore, as Cella et al. (2013) showed, hedge funds
usually are short-horizon investors. Short-horizon investors have less strong preferences
for high-ESG firms than longer-horizon investors, as Starks et al. (2017) found.

The table also illustrates a 0.152 correlation coefficient among investment managers,
significant at the 0.1% level. This is interesting to compare to the results found from
government and corporate pension sponsors, as these three types of institutional
investors are the most accessible to the public and likely face increased scrutiny
regarding the social effects of their holdings. Ownership by venture capital and private
equity appears to have a very high negative correlation to ESG performance of -0.985
significant at the 0.1% level. This potentially indicates that VC and PE firms take short
positions in firms that actively improve or publicise planned investments into their ESG
work, or that VC and PE firms drive negative development in their holdings’ ESG
work. As the negative correlation is very high compared to that of total institutional
ownership (-0.985 vs. 0.0966) by a factor of 10.2, the results seem very likely to have
economic significance. However, the standard error of the correlation coefficient is also
significantly higher than any other group of institutional owners, meaning that the
estimate is less precise than the estimates of other subgroups with comparable statistical
significance. As earlier mentioned, a negative correlation is aligned with Zhang (2021),
who shows that investors have lower expectations of the quality of business ideas in
start-ups where the aim is environmental and social impact. Although those were for
smaller sized and non-public firms, the effect could be the same even for public ones, as
our results may indicate.

                                  18
The table as a whole also displays some general findings that hold for almost all
investor subgroups. We see a generally stable level of goodness-of-fit across subgroups,
with an adjusted R2 between 0.65 - 0.75, indicating that the model explains a similar
amount of variance in ESG score irrespective of which subgroup ownership is used as
an independent variable. With regard to firm financial characteristics, we find that firm
size, tangibility, leverage and profitability all show a highly significant impact on ESG
performance. In distinction, Tobin’s Q, representing ‘performance’ in line with the
method used by Dyck et al. (2019), does not appear to show a significant relationship.
Particularly firm size, tangibility and leverage show a very strong relationship. This is
somewhat intuitive, as larger firms are naturally exposed to more significant stakeholder
pressure and thus have more robust corporate governance, and more tangible firms have
a relatively greater environmental and social impact, creating more avenues for

                                              3
improvement in ESG performance .

While these initial results derived from the pooled OLS regression are very interesting
and indicate the existence of a significant relationship between lagged institutional
ownership and ESG score, we cannot be certain of their validity due to a number of
statistical biases that could be present in the pooled OLS method. The primary potential
bias is the presence of omitted variables, which could cause a correlation between
explanatory variables and time-invariant fixed effects that would bias the regression
estimates. We address this potential bias in the following section by introducing a
fixed-effects regression model.

3.2 Controlling for time-invariant fixed effects

To address the problem of potential omitted variable bias in our pooled OLS model, we
introduce a fixed-effects regression model. This model utilises within-transformation of
the data to calculate the deviations of all the variables from their individual-specific
means over time, eliminating the presence of time-invariant fixed effects from the
model. The resulting model uses the time-demeaned variables to produce regression
estimates using the pooled OLS method. The fixed-effects model specification is as
follows:

3
 As a side note, Dyck et al. (2019) showed evidence of institutional investors having a more substantial
positive effect on firms with below-median initial E&S scores and subsequently a greater scope to
improve their score as opposed to an above-median subsample.

                                  19
       𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒  − 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = β  * (𝐼𝑂     − 𝐼𝑂 ) + β  * (𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚     − 𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 ) + (𝑢  − 𝑢 )
                𝑖𝑡            𝑖      1        𝑖𝑡−1        𝑖        2            𝑖𝑡−1            𝑖          𝑖𝑡      𝑖

Where the dependent variable 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒  is either the overall ESG score or the category
                                                                                                                     𝑖𝑡
score for firm i in year t. 𝐼𝑂     is the percentage of institutional ownership in firm i in
                                               𝑖𝑡−1
year t–1. 𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚     are a set of five firm-level control variables in year t–1; the natural
                         𝑖𝑡−1
logarithm of total assets, asset tangibility, net debt to assets, return on capital, and
Tobin’s Q. 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 , 𝐼𝑂 , and 𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚 are individual-specific means for each of the
                              𝑖     𝑖       𝑖
previously defined variables. 𝑢  is the idiosyncratic error term. We report the main
                                                                                                   𝑖𝑡
results of this regression model in Table 3. The regression estimates for the alternative
ESG measurement Category Score have been excluded from the main text due to a
considerable lack of goodness-of-fit and/or statistical significance for the model, but
they are included in Appendix B2.

Table 3 shows several interesting results. First, we see that almost all investor subgroups
display very different correlation estimates and levels of statistical significance
compared to the pooled OLS method. For example, in Panel A, Total IO is not
significant at the 5% level, and the correlation coefficient is far lower at 0.0118.
Corporate pension sponsors display a correlation coefficient of -0.738 significant at the
5% level, indicating a strong negative relationship to firm ESG score.

In Panel B, Government pension sponsors and hedge funds display a considerably
smaller and less significant relationship to ESG score, with the correlation coefficient of
government pension sponsors being reduced from 0.381 to -0.384, along with a
reduction in significance from the 1% level to the 5% level. Ownership by hedge funds
shows a reduction from 0.873 to 0.410 with a corresponding reduction in statistical
significance from the 0.1% level to the 5% level. Ownership by insurance companies
shows a very strong negative correlation to ESG score of -1.224, significant at the 1%
level, which is especially interesting considering that insurance companies showed no
statistically significant correlation in the pooled OLS model. Ownership by investment
managers has been strongly reduced in correlation and statistical power, with correlation
to ESG score being reduced from 0.152 to 0.0483 and statistical significance being
reduced from the 0.1% level to below the 5% level. Finally, venture capital and private
equity ownership no longer show a significant correlation to ESG score, contrary to the
strong negative correlation derived in the pooled OLS model.

                                  20
In addition to the results of individual investor groups, we also see a number of general
results from the fixed-effects model. For firm financial characteristics, we see that the
effect of firm size still holds at the 0.1% level. However, tangibility, leverage and
profitability no longer appear to have as strong of a correlation to ESG score.
Independent variables display a generally higher level of standard error relative to the
correlation coefficients, indicating that the estimates derived through this model are not
as precise as those derived through the pooled OLS model. This is further validated by
the fact that the level of goodness-of-fit has been reduced to a practical level of zero,

                                  21
Table 3: Fixed Effects Regression
This table reports regression estimates of ESG scores on institutional ownership and control variables.
The dependent variable is the overall ESG score. Total IO is total institutional ownership, Banks IO is
institutional ownership by banks and investment banks, Charity IO is institutional ownership by
charitable foundations, Corp. Pension IO is institutional ownership by corporate pension sponsors, FO &
Trust IO is institutional ownership by family offices and trusts, Gov. Pension IO is institutional ownership
by government pension sponsors, Hedge Fund IO is institutional ownership by hedge fund managers,
Insurance co. IO is institutional ownership by insurance companies, Inv. Manager IO is institutional
ownership by investment managers, VC & PE IO is institutional ownership by venture capital and private
equity firms, total assets is the natural logarithm of total assets in USDm, asset tangibility is tangible
book value divided by total assets, Tobin’s Q is net debt plus market capitalization divided by total assets.
The data are from Refinitiv Eikon and S&P Capital IQ and are obtained for the years 2011-2021.

                                  22
                2
with adjusted 𝑅  consistently negative for all ownership subgroups, indicating that the
regression model fails to explain any variance in firm ESG score when controlling for
biases caused by time-invariant fixed effects.

These results indicate the presence of omitted variable bias in our pooled OLS model,
which when controlled through the fixed effects method produces an overall lower and
less precise level of correlation and statistical significance between institutional
ownership and ESG score. Despite this reduction, however, the results derived through
this more robust method are still economically meaningful and significant in their own
right.

However, while the fixed effects model is more robust than the pooled OLS model,
there is another statistical concern that is not addressed by it, namely the potential for

                                  23
reverse causality. As previous literature has shown the presence of selection bias among
institutional investors, whereby institutions may self-select investments with higher
ESG scores instead of driving ESG development in their existing holdings, it is possible
that ESG score drives institutional ownership instead of ownership driving ESG score,
creating a bias in our data. While this potential bias could be argued to be somewhat
mitigated by our use of lagged independent variables, as future ESG scores at times t
should not be able to impact ownership at time t-1, it could equally be argued that
investors are able to some extent predict future ESG scores based on current
information from firms on their ESG initiatives and work, which would allow for
reverse causality despite the use of lagged variables. While there is no definitive way to
prevent bias due to reverse causality, we attempt to control for it in the next section by
introducing the Arellano-Bond regression model in line with Leszczensky & Wolbring
(2022), which utilises first differences to control for time-invariant fixed effects while
introducing a lagged version of the dependent variable as an instrumental variable to
address reverse causality by weakening the assumption of strict exogeneity for a subset
of regressors.

3.3 Addressing problems of reverse causality

As the presence of reverse causality introduces correlation between the error term and
future values of independent variables, we must relax the assumption of strict
exogeneity for independent variables in order not to introduce bias to our regression
estimates. To achieve this we introduce an Arellano-Bond model that uses the
generalised method of moments (GMM) to distinguish between strictly exogenous
variables and sequentially exogenous variables. The assumption of sequential
exogeneity allows for correlation between the error term and future (but not past or
present) values of independent variables, resulting in unbiased regression estimates even
in the presence of reverse causality. The model introduces a lagged version of the
dependent variable on the right hand side of the regression equation as an instrumental
variable, and takes first differences to control for time-invariant fixed effects. The
model specification is as follows:

            ∆𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒  = β  * ∆𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒    + β  * ∆𝐼𝑂    + β  * ∆𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚    + ∆ϵ
                       𝑖𝑡     1           𝑖𝑡−1     2       𝑖𝑡−1     3           𝑖𝑡−1       𝑖𝑡

Where the dependent variable ∆𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒  is the first difference of either the overall ESG
                                                                                                                          𝑖𝑡
score or the category score for firm i in year t. ∆𝐼𝑂     is the first difference of the
                                                                                      𝑖𝑡−1

                                  24
percentage of institutional ownership in firm i in year t–1. ∆𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚     are first
                                                                                                               𝑖𝑡−1
differences of a set of five firm-level control variables in year t–1; the natural logarithm
of total assets, asset tangibility, net debt to assets, return on capital, and Tobin’s Q. We
report the main results of this regression model in Table 4. All preceding levels of the
lagged dependent variable are used as instruments. The regression estimates for the
alternative ESG measurement Category Score have been excluded from the main text
due to a considerable lack of goodness-of-fit and/or statistical significance for the
model, but they are included in Appendix B3. Significance level thresholds have been
changed to 10, 5, and 1% in order to highlight a greater number of results.

We see a correlation of 0.0389 between overall institutional ownership and ESG score,
significant at the 5% level. This is weaker than the correlation derived using the pooled
OLS method, which indicates that the former estimate was potentially affected by bias
due to omitted variables or reverse causality. We also see relationships between ESG
score and ownership by banks, corporate pension sponsors, and investment managers,
all significant at the lower 10% level. It is interesting to note that the effect of
investment managers is weaker than that of overall institutions, contrary to previous
models. Corporate pensions sponsors again display a negative relationship to ESG
score, while banks display a more than 4 times stronger correlation to ESG score than
institutions overall. The previously observed significant correlations between ESG
score and ownership by hedge funds, government pension sponsors, venture capital and
private equity, as well as insurance companies appears to no longer be present in the
Arellano-Bond model, indicating that the previously observed effects may have been
caused by model biases. We again observe a higher level of standard errors among
independent variable estimates similar to those observed in the fixed effects regression
model, indicating that the estimates are less precise than those determined using the
pooled OLS model.

Among firm financial characteristics, leverage appears to display the most significant
and strongest relationship to ESG score, contrary to previous regression models where
firm size was most significant. Aside from leverage, other financial characteristics
appear to display inconsistent relationships to ESG score depending on which subgroup
of owners is used for regression estimation, with varying strength and significance
levels across groups.

                                  25
Table 4: Arellano-Bond Regression
This table reports regression estimates of ESG scores on institutional ownership and control variables
using the Arellano-Bond estimator for dynamic panel data. The dependent variable is the overall ESG
score. Lagged ESG Score is the overall ESG score, Total IO is total institutional ownership, Banks IO is
institutional ownership by banks and investment banks, Charity IO is institutional ownership by
charitable foundations, Corp. Pension IO is institutional ownership by corporate pension sponsors, FO &
Trust IO is institutional ownership by family offices and trusts, Gov. Pension IO is institutional ownership
by government pension sponsors, Hedge Fund IO is institutional ownership by hedge fund managers,
Insurance co. IO is institutional ownership by insurance companies, Inv. Manager IO is institutional
ownership by investment managers, VC & PE IO is institutional ownership by venture capital and private
equity firms, total assets is the natural logarithm of total assets in USDm, asset tangibility is tangible book
value divided by total assets, Tobin’s Q is net debt plus market capitalization divided by total assets. All
independent variables are lagged by one period. The data are from Refinitiv Eikon and S&P Capital IQ
and are obtained for the years 2011-2021.

                                  26
27
   4. Discussion

4.1 Data selection and analysis method

This section will discuss the potential shortcomings of our choice of data sources,
variables, and analysis methods. Our method's most outstanding potential issue stems
from our reliance on a singular estimate of ESG performance through the proprietary
scoring of Refinitiv. While this was attempted to be mitigated through the formulation
of an alternative ESG performance estimate, "Category Score", a more robust method
would be to utilise one or several additional database estimates of firm ESG
performance in order to ensure that regression estimates are not dependent on singular
database-specific judgments of ESG performance. In addition, if our database were to
convey erroneous or no information at all, we would expect to find that the dataset is
not correlated to institutional ownership with the significance that we have done.
Finally, our choice of a single data source for ESG data also raises the questions about
how and to what extent the relationship between institutional ownership and ESG
performance is dependent on the aggregation or composition of the ESG score.

Another potential shortcoming is related to the model specification, where we assume
that a one-year lag drives a causal relationship between institutional ownership and ESG
performance. The ‘true’ time lag may be shorter or longer than this, which would cause
our model to return biased estimates. An option and a mitigation mechanism to a
potentially erroneous one-year lag could be to regress changes in ESG performance on
changes in institutional ownership with several time lag periods, such as IOt-2,
IOt-3…IOt-n, to be able to distinguish the relationships between IO with different time
lags and ESG performance. Another option could be to split our sample period into two
portions, one in the earlier part of the period and one in the latter part of the sample, and
to regress changes in ESG performance over the latter part of the time period on
changes in institutional ownership in the earlier period. Such long-run lags could
potentially address the bias if institutions invest in the expectation of future ESG
improvements.

In addition, an inaccurate temporal specification of causal effect also creates problems
in the Arellano-Bond model, which uses a first differencing of variables, causing it to be
sensitive to the correct specification of temporal lags as shown by Vaisey & Miles
(2017). As we observed the presence of omitted variable bias through the inclusion of a
fixed effects model, it is worth considering whether additional explanatory variables

                                  28
should be included to potentially improve the model fit and reduce omitted variable
bias, and if so, which parameters should be chosen.

Finally, while our analysis of ownership subgroups yielded interesting and economically
meaningful results, it was also limited in scope. Further analysis of institutional
ownership categories by subgroups of firms divided by country, industry, or size could
yield additional insights into the relationship between institutional ownership and ESG
performance.

4.2 Economic implications

Our chosen dataset for ESG performance from Refinitiv Eikon measures firms’ relative
ESG performance. The score range is a percentile ranking one and thus ranges from
zero to 100. Therefore, translating statistical measures into economic implications is
challenging, as the ESG measure is in substance unitless.

Nevertheless, with this in mind, relative ordering can still convey information about the
effect that (lagged) institutional ownership has in this ranking. Our results show that
institutional ownership significantly increases firms’ ESG performance, as evidenced by
the significantly positive coefficients of IO in our pooled OLS regression. As shown in
Panel A, Total IO displays a positive correlation with Overall ESG score at the 0.1%
level, indicating it is highly statistically significant. It also appears to be economically
meaningful, as each one percentage point increase in lagged institutional ownership
results in a 0.0966 point increase in the overall ESG score. A one standard deviation
increase in institutional ownership (18.889 percentage points) thus results in a 1.825

                                                                     4
point increase in firm ESG score the following year . This may sound like a relatively
small increase, but the reader should bear in mind that this is a one-year increase.

For comparison, the standard deviation for the full time period and over all countries is
20.06 points. The interquartile range, i.e. the difference between the 75th and 25th
percentiles of the Overall ESG Score data, likewise for the full period and over all
countries, is 29.42 points.

4
 Calculated as (18.889 * 0.0966)

                                  29
In Panel B, we found more substantial effect sizes for several investor subgroups and
thus more economically meaningful results. For example, government pension sponsors
showed a 0.381 correlation coefficient, significant at the 1% level. A ten percentage
point increase in lagged government pension sponsor ownership would thus result in a
10 x 0.381 = 3.81 point increase in firm ESG score the following year. As the standard
deviation of the Overall ESG score for the Nordics in aggregate is 20.06 units, such an
increase in institutional ownership would encompass almost a fifth of a standard
deviation of relative ESG performance.

In the same way, regarding the highly negative correlation coefficient for VC and PE
firms from our pooled OLS regression, a ten percentage unit increase in VC and PE
ownership (lagged) would result in a 9.85 point decrease in ESG performance for the
Nordics in aggregate; a decrease that must be considered highly economically
meaningful. A ten percentage-unit replacement of aggregate VC and PE ownership with
government pension sponsor ownership (lagged) in Nordic public firms would, in this

                                                                      5
case, lead to a 13.66 ESG performance unit increase , which has substantial economic
weight.

Comparing our results with previous literature, Jo and Harjoto (2011) found a relatively
smaller correlation, with a one-percentage increase in ownership associated with a
0.004-percentage point increase in the total CSR score. On the other hand, Chen et al.
(2020) found a much larger effect at over ten times as large as Jo and Harjoto. Dyck et
al. (2019) found that a one-percentage-point increase in ownership had a 0.268 point
positive effect on the ESG performance score. Unfortunately, comparing our effect sizes
is a rather fruitless task as the ESG score databases used are not the same. The authors
of the formerly mentioned two papers used the MSCI ESG KLD database, while the
Thomson Reuters ASSET4 database was used by Dyck et al.

5
 Calculated as (0.381 - (-0.985) * 10)

                                  30
   5. Conclusion

In this study, we use a sample of publicly traded firms in Denmark, Finland, Norway
and Sweden to provide fresh evidence that institutional investor ownership in aggregate
has a positive correlation effect on firm ESG-performance as measured by the Refinitiv
Eikon index. Using data up to the latest year available, we find substantial differences
between different types of institutional investors, with some investor groups even
showing a negative correlation effect. Supposing the investor groups with the highest
effects were to increase or decrease their ownership of firms in the Nordic countries in
substantial magnitudes, we predict sizeable changes in the ESG performance of the
firms.

Our method of investigating a one-period lagged relationship between ownership and
ESG performance suggests causal changes. However, our supplementary fixed-effects
test indicates that potential omitted variable bias and reverse causality bias cannot be
ruled out.

Our paper contributes to both the general ESG and corporate finance literature, but more
specifically to the institutional ownership literature. We complement the available by
showing, once again, that investors' choice of investments may play a significant role.
The impact of institutional investors making investments in Nordic companies drive
wide measures of firm ESG performance.

With our results, we extend the previous research. Contrary to Dyck et al. (2019), we
find that VC and PE investors appear to have a statistically significant negative
correlation to ESG performance. These results are aligned with experimental evidence
that Zhang (2020) presents. We also find a robust positive correlation effect for hedge
funds, which was not expected. This suggests that hedge funds, in aggregate, may have
in the period we study (2012 until 2021) started to positively affect the firms in which
they invest in regarding ESG aspects. It could also mean that Nordic hedge funds
behave differently as owners compared to non-Nordic ones.

As Dyck et al. (2019) used data through year-end 2013, this suggests that hedge funds,
in aggregate, may have in the period we study (2012 until 2021) started to positively
affect the firms in which they invest in regarding ESG aspects. It could also mean that
hedge funds in Nordic countries behave differently as owners compared to hedge funds

                                  31
from non-Nordic firms or when investing in non-Nordic firms. Many hedge funds are
active in their ownership, so the conditions for affecting the management in a positive
ESG-direction through private engagements, for example, are already there (Becht,
Franks & Grant, 2010).

                                  32
References

     13 civil society organisations. (2022). Regeringen måste ta sitt ansvar – skärp hållbarhetskraven för

            AP-fonderna. Altinget.

            https://www.altinget.se/artikel/regeringen-maaste-ta-sitt-ansvar-skarp-haallbarhetskraven-for-ap-fonderna

      Aggarwal, R., Erel, I., Ferreira, M., & Matos, P. (2011). Does governance travel around the world? Evidence

           from institutional investors. Journal of Financial Economics, 100(1), 154–181.

            https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2010.10.018

     Becht, M., Franks, J. R., & Grant, J. (2010). Hedge Fund Activism in Europe (SSRN Scholarly Paper No.

            1616340). Social Science Research Network. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1616340

      Bloomberg. (2019). Green Finance: What It Is And Why It’s Growing.

           https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2019-green-finance/

      Botero, J. C., Djankov, S., Porta, R. L., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., & Shleifer, A. (2004). The Regulation of Labor.

           The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(4), 1339–1382. https://doi.org/10.1162/0033553042476215

     Cella, C., Ellul, A., & Giannetti, M. (2013). Investors’ Horizons and the Amplification of Market Shocks

           (SSRN Scholarly Paper No. 1656723). Social Science Research Network.

            https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1656723

     Centre for Corporate Governance. (2022). What does stakeholder capitalism mean for investors? London

            Business School.

     Chen, T., Dong, H., & Lin, C. (2020). Institutional shareholders and corporate social responsibility. Journal of

           Financial Economics, 135(2), 483–504. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2019.06.007

     Chung, K., & Zhang, H. (2009). Corporate Governance and Institutional Ownership. Journal of Financial and

           Quantitative Analysis, 46, 247–273. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022109010000682

      Dagens industri. (2022). Ägare kritisk mot budet på Swedish Match – ”för lågt”.

            https://www.di.se/nyheter/swedish-match-agare-kritisk-mot-for-lagt-bud-lagt-krokben-pa-oss-sjalva/

      Dyck, A., Lins, K. V., Roth, L., & Wagner, H. F. (2019). Do institutional investors drive corporate social

           responsibility? International evidence. Journal of Financial Economics, 131(3), 693–714.

            https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2018.08.013

      Ferrell, A., Liang, H., & Renneboog, L. (2016). Socially responsible firms. Journal of Financial Economics,

           122(3), 585–606. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2015.12.003

     Gillan, S. L., Hartzell, J. C., Koch, A., & Starks, L. T. (n.d.). Firms environmental, social and governance

             (ESG) choices, performance and managerial motivation. 44.

                                  33
Goldman Sachs Asset Management. (2021). GSAM’s Statement on ESG & Impact Investing.

Hong, H., & Kacperczyk, M. (2009). The price of sin: The effects of social norms on markets. Journal of

      Financial Economics, 93(1), 15–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2008.09.001

Jo, H., & Harjoto, M. A. (2011). Corporate Governance and Firm Value: The Impact of Corporate Social

      Responsibility. Journal of Business Ethics, 103(3), 351–383. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-011-0869-y

Leszczensky, L., & Wolbring, T. (2022). How to Deal With Reverse Causality Using Panel Data?

      Recommendations for Researchers Based on a Simulation Study. Sociological Methods & Research,

     51(2), 837–865. https://doi.org/10.1177/0049124119882473

Nielsen, O. (2014). Responsible investments in the Swedish pension fund system: A case study of institutional

      investors. Uppsala University: Department of Earth Sciences.

Nofsinger, J. R., Sulaeman, J., & Varma, A. (2019). Institutional investors and corporate social responsibility.

      Journal of Corporate Finance, 58, 700–725. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcorpfin.2019.07.012

Riedl, A., & Smeets, P. (2017). Why Do Investors Hold Socially Responsible Mutual Funds? The Journal of

      Finance, 72(6), 2505–2550. https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12547

Starks, L. T., Venkat, P., & Zhu, Q. (2017). Corporate ESG Profiles and Investor Horizons (SSRN Scholarly

      Paper No. 3049943). Social Science Research Network. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3049943

Vaisey, S., & Miles, A. (2017). What You Can—And Can’t—Do With Three-Wave Panel Data. Sociological

      Methods & Research, 46(1), 44–67. https://doi.org/10.1177/0049124114547769

World Values Survey Association. (2020). WVS Database. https://www.worldvaluessurvey.org/wvs.jsp

Zhang, Y. (2021). Impact Investing and Venture Capital Industry: Experimental Evidence [SSRN Scholarly

      Paper]. Social Science Research Network. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3959117

                               34
Appendix

Appendix A1: Refinitiv ESG Category Definitions

    1. ESG Score - Refinitiv ESG Score is an overall company score based on the self-reported
         information in the environmental, social and governance pillars.
    2. Resource Use Score - Resource use category score reflects a company’s performance and
         capacity to reduce the use of materials, energy or water, and to find more eco-efficient solutions
        by improving supply chain management.
    3. Emissions Score - Emission category score measures a company’s commitment and
         effectiveness towards reducing environmental emission in the production and operational
         processes.
    4. Environmental Innovation Score - Environmental innovation category score reflects a
         company’s capacity to reduce the environmental costs and burdens for its customers, and thereby
         creating new market opportunities through new environmental technologies and processes or
         eco-designed products.
    5. Workforce Score - Workforce category score measures a company’s effectiveness towards job
         satisfaction, healthy and safe workplace, maintaining diversity and equal opportunities, and
         development opportunities for its workforce.
    6. Human Rights Score - Human rights category score measures a company’s effectiveness
         towards respecting the fundamental human rights conventions.
    7. Community Score - Community category score measures the company’s commitment towards
         being a good citizen, protecting public health and respecting business ethics.
    8. Product Responsibility Score - Product responsibility score reflects a company’s capacity to
         produce quality goods and services integrating the customer’s health and safety, integrity and
         data privacy.
    9. Management Score - Management category score measures a company’s commitment and
         effectiveness towards following best practice corporate governance principles.
    10. Shareholders Score - Shareholders category score measures a company’s effectiveness towards
         equal treatment of shareholders and the use of anti-takeover devices.
    11. CSR Strategy Score - CSR category score reflects a company’s practices to communicate that it
         integrates the economic (financial), social and environmental dimensions into its day-to-day
         decision-making process.

                                  35
Appendix B1: Pooled OLS Regression
This table reports regression estimates of ESG scores on institutional ownership and control variables.
The dependent variable is the weighted average category ESG score. Total IO is total institutional
ownership, Banks IO is institutional ownership by banks and investment banks, Charity IO is institutional
ownership by charitable foundations, Corp. Pension IO is institutional ownership by corporate pension
sponsors, FO & Trust IO is institutional ownership by family offices and trusts, Gov. Pension IO is
institutional ownership by government pension sponsors, Hedge Fund IO is institutional ownership by
hedge fund managers, Insurance co. IO is institutional ownership by insurance companies, Inv. Manager
IO is institutional ownership by investment managers, VC & PE IO is institutional ownership by venture
capital and private equity firms, total assets is the natural logarithm of total assets in USDm, asset
tangibility is tangible book value divided by total assets, Tobin’s Q is net debt plus market capitalization
divided by total assets. All independent variables are lagged by one period. The data are from Refinitiv
Eikon and S&P Capital IQ and are obtained for the years 2011-2021.

                                  36
37
Appendix B2: Fixed Effects Regression
This table reports regression estimates of ESG scores on institutional ownership and control variables.
The dependent variable is the weighted average category ESG score. Total IO is total institutional
ownership, Banks IO is institutional ownership by banks and investment banks, Charity IO is institutional
ownership by charitable foundations, Corp. Pension IO is institutional ownership by corporate pension
sponsors, FO & Trust IO is institutional ownership by family offices and trusts, Gov. Pension IO is
institutional ownership by government pension sponsors, Hedge Fund IO is institutional ownership by
hedge fund managers, Insurance co. IO is institutional ownership by insurance companies, Inv. Manager
IO is institutional ownership by investment managers, VC & PE IO is institutional ownership by venture
capital and private equity firms, total assets is the natural logarithm of total assets in USDm, asset
tangibility is tangible book value divided by total assets, Tobin’s Q is net debt plus market capitalization
divided by total assets. The data are from Refinitiv Eikon and S&P Capital IQ and are obtained for the
years 2011-2021.

                                  38
39
Appendix B3: Arellano-Bond Regression
This table reports regression estimates of ESG scores on institutional ownership and control variables
using the Arellano-Bond estimator for dynamic panel data . The dependent variable is the weighted
average category ESG score. Lagged ESG Score is the weighted average category ESG score, Total IO is
total institutional ownership, Banks IO is institutional ownership by banks and investment banks, Charity
IO is institutional ownership by charitable foundations, Corp. Pension IO is institutional ownership by
corporate pension sponsors, FO & Trust IO is institutional ownership by family offices and trusts, Gov.
Pension IO is institutional ownership by government pension sponsors, Hedge Fund IO is institutional
ownership by hedge fund managers, Insurance co. IO is institutional ownership by insurance companies,
Inv. Manager IO is institutional ownership by investment managers, VC & PE IO is institutional
ownership by venture capital and private equity firms, total assets is the natural logarithm of total assets
in USDm, asset tangibility is tangible book value divided by total assets, Tobin’s Q is net debt plus
market capitalization divided by total assets. All independent variables are lagged by one period. The data
are from Refinitiv Eikon and S&P Capital IQ and are obtained for the years 2011-2021.

                                  40
41