DISCOUNTS, COMMITMENTS,
AND THE ATTRACTIVITY OF
RIGHTS OFFERINGS

A SWEDISH EXAMPLE

Victor Asp

Alexander Josefsson

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2022
        Discounts, Commitments, and the Attractivity of Rights Offerings:
                           A Swedish Example

Abstract:

   We examine the effect of discounts, subscription commitments, and underwriting
   commitments on the ex-post subscription rate of rights offerings, based on a sample of
   164 manually collected rights issues from Swedish stock exchanges in the period ranging
   from January 1, 2020, to December 31, 2021. Our analysis draws on utility and signaling
   theory, and our findings determine a statistically significant positive effect of the
   subscription price discount to the theoretical ex-rights price on the ex-post subscription
   rate variable which we hold as a proxy for rights offering attractivity. We are unable to
   observe a statistically significant relationship between aggregate commitment coverage
   and the ex-post subscription rate of an offering, and thus find no evidence for positive
   signaling effects of such offerings. We conclude that rights offering commitments,
   despite their lack of signaling value, are efficient instruments for guaranteeing proceeds,
   and that financial managers thereby need not focus solely on the proven effects of
   discounts to certify the value of rights issues.

Keywords:

   Seasoned Equity Offering, Rights Issue, Discount, Commitment, Subscription

Authors:

   Victor Asp (24648)
   Alexander Josefsson (24647)

Tutor:

   Olga Obizhaeva, Assistant Professor, Swedish House of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Swedish House of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Victor Asp and Alexander Josefsson, 2022

     1
I. Introduction

A rights offering is a form of seasoned equity offering (henceforth “SEO”) whereby publicly
traded companies issue and sell new equity as a means of raising capital. This study
contributes to the existing pool of research on SEOs by examining how the ex-post
subscription rate in rights issues is affected by the discount of the subscription price to the
theoretical ex-rights price (henceforth “TERP”) and by the aggregate coverage of
subscription commitments and warranty commitments. Firms may issue equity with
expansive purposes such as to initialize commercialization or to fund new investments, or
they may raise money to cover cash shortages and assure survival. We argue that financial
managers, regardless of the purpose of the offering, are incentivized to make the firm’s
offering sufficiently attractive to make the issue successful, i.e., raise capital. By using the ex-
post subscription rate as a proxy for offering attractivity, we can assess to what extent, if any,
the signaling values of commitments and the value of discounts affect the attractivity of rights
offerings on Nordic capital markets.
      The question of how to make an offering attractive has seldom been as relevant as it
currently is. In a recent chronicle published in the Swedish business magazine Affärsvärlden,
Benson (2022) reported that 400 out of the approximately 1,000 Swedish exchange-traded
companies have exhibited negative operating profits consistently over the last three years.
231 out of these companies were forecasted to run out of cash within twelve months, and at
least 200 are expected to require a rights issue within two years. At the end of the first quarter
of 2022, Swedish North Point Securities (2022) reported that only 17 percent of rights issues
on OM in the finished quarter were either fully or overly subscribed. Our research is of
interest not only to the more than 200 Swedish companies with expected near-time cash
calls, but also to financial managers of similar offerings in the larger Nordic markets,
researchers in the field, and investor collective at large.
      With theory based on perfect capital market theory, we formulate and test the
hypothesis that high discounts to the TERP have a positive effect on the ex-post subscription
rate of rights offerings. Moreover, using the developments of signaling theory from
Balachandran, Faff, and Theobald (2008), we test the hypothesis that using subscription and
warranty commitments on their own, as well as in conjunction with a low discount, can signal
that the firm is of higher quality and subsequently yield a higher subscription rate on the
offering.
      We base our study on a sample of manually collected data from 164 rights offerings
on two main Nordic stock exchanges, Nasdaq Nordic (formerly “Optionsmäklarna”,
henceforth “OM”) and Nordic Growth Market (henceforth “NGM”), over the period
ranging from January 1, 2020, to December 31, 2021. The sample is analyzed with a
hierarchical linear regression model containing aggregate subscription as the dependent
variable, the discount to the TERP and aggregate commitments as predictors, and issuer
market capitalization and issue volume as control variables. The model finds that the
discount variable has a negative regression coefficient (β) of 1.803 with a 1-sided p-value of

     2
0.031, implying that a higher discount to the TERP has a significant positive impact on the
ex-post subscription rate at a 5 percent confidence level. The aggregate commitment variable
on the other hand exhibits a 1-sided p-value of 0.749, and any significant effect of
commitment coverage on subscription outcome can thus not be confirmed.
     A Mann-Whitney U-test is performed to assess whether a defined group of
transactions with high commitment coverage and a low discount yields a higher average
subscription outcome than a defined group of transactions with low commitment coverage
and a high discount. The 1-tailed p-value of 0.114 indicates that there is no significant
difference in outcome between the two groups at a 5 or 10 percent confidence level. As the
group with low commitment coverage and a high discount was assigned a higher mean rank,
the test concludes that offerings with high commitment coverage and a low discount are
more likely to yield lower subscription outcomes than offerings with low commitment
coverage and a high discount, if a significance level of 15 percent is accepted.
      Although there are limitations to consider, meaning that the conclusions should be
interpreted restrictively, the results of the study should make logical financial managers
question the use of ex-ante commitments as a tool for certifying the quality of an offering.
Assuming an objective of maximizing the subscription rate of the rights offering, paying for
warranty commitments should not be considered a substitute for issuing the shares at a
discount to TERP. Instead, we conclude that warranty commitments should be used to
guarantee proceeds and not to signal to the market that the offering is of higher quality or
more attractive. Our study makes no attempt at general validity, and our findings need thus
not be applied to other forms of SEOs, or on rights issues that take place outside the Nordic
capital markets.

II. Related literature

The study draws on the theories developed and formulated by Balachandran et al. (2008).
They investigate the role of ex-ante commitments on announcement stock price reaction and
takeup (subscription rate) on a sample of 636 rights issues in Australia between the years
1995 and 2005. The authors find evidence that ex-ante commitments can signal the quality
identity of the firm and subsequently affect the announcement price reaction and takeup.
Based on their sample, the highest quality firms present rights issues characterized by high
ex-ante commitment coverage and a low discount, and thus experience the least unfavorable
stock price reaction upon announcement. The hypotheses evaluated by Balachandran et al.
are ultimately based on the signaling models of Henkel and Schwartz (1986) and Booth and
Smith (1986) which were originally developed to study the difference in reaction between
underwritten offerings and rights offerings in the United States. Our thesis uses largely the
same theoretical framework and retains some but not all the hypotheses from Balachandran
et al. While the general sentiment is the same, the manually collected Swedish market dataset
enables a few additional hypotheses to be made and tested. We examine the correlation
between discounts and ex-ante commitments. Simultaneously, our dataset and the Swedish

     3
market conventions limit us from making several hypotheses that are enabled by the
Australian market data or irrelevant to the Swedish market. We are unable to reliably obtain
readily available price reaction data and therefore our thesis does not contain hypotheses
related to price reaction mechanisms. Unlike the study by Balachandran et al., the sole
dependent variable examined in our thesis is thus the ex-post subscription rate. We argue
that this is a more direct measure of offering attractivity than price reaction analysis, as the
price reactions incorporate a surprise component and may reflect changes in the wider
market sentiment as well as other information related to the company, but not the offering
per se. For instance, a negative price reaction upon rights offering announcement may be the
result of a lower inferred firm quality due to the sudden communicated need for cash
injection. The negative price movement does not necessarily correspond to the attractiveness
of the offering, and so we resort to studying the subscription outcome instead.
      As for independent variables, rights issue renounceability is evaluated in the study by
Balachandran et al. (2008), but not considered in our thesis as non-renounceable rights are
not permitted in Sweden (Holderness and Pontiff, 2016). All rights issues in Sweden are
renounceable rights issues which means that subscription rights can be sold and exercised by
both existing owners and external investors. Apart from the contribution of the manually
obtained Swedish market dataset, our thesis contributes to the research by specifically
examining the relationship between ex-ante commitments and the subsequent subscription
rate outcome. This has not been identified in the existing literature, and furthermore, no
specific subset analysis of different Discount : Commitment combination implications on
the subscription outcome has been found in the pool of literature. Supplementing the theory
on ex-ante commitments, the perfect market theory highlighted by Mateus, Farinha, and
Soares (2016) makes the important prediction that participating investors should be price
insensitive. Considering this to be the case and incorporating the presence of external
investors who can benefit through high discounts from passive right holders gives rise to the
hypothesis of the relationship between the discount to TERP and the subscription rate. By
collecting subscription data with and without the use of subscription rights separately, and
by accounting for the existence of the passive and external investors, we can differentiate
our thesis and test for the impact of subscription price discounts on the subscription rate in
the Swedish and Nordic capital markets.

III. Theory and hypothesis

First, we introduce the mechanics of the conventional rights issue method in Sweden. The
rights offering builds on the idea that existing shareholders have prioritized claims over
outside shareholders to subscribe to equity offerings. As such, the method is built up of a
system where the existing shareholders receive a number of subscription rights with primary
entitlement to new equity in the SEO that corresponds to their pro-rata share of the firm’s
equity. These subscription rights give the owner a prioritized right to purchase a certain
number of new shares in the company. If all existing shareholders subscribe to their pro-rata

     4
share of the offer, the previously existing ownership structure remains. However, it is rarely
the case that every existing investor is able or willing to contribute the additional capital. The
rights can, during a predefined period, be sold on the open market if the shareholder does
not want to exercise their rights. Through trade of the rights, both existing and new investors
can take part in the offering. If there are any unexercised rights at the end of the subscription
period, shares not subscribed to by the holders of the rights are allocated to other investors,
who have expressed interest in an additional subscription, regardless of whether such
investors are previous owners or external investors. If this aggregate interest exceeds the
remaining number of unexercised rights, not all investors will be allocated part of the
offering. If, on the other hand, there are no such additional expressions, or they are
insufficient to cover the entire issue, the remainder or part of the remainder can be covered
by one or more warranty commitments, if such agreements exist. These are made by
investors, usually institutions, and work similarly to insurance or put options. If the interest
in the issue is insufficient to reach full subscription, the party that has agreed to a warranty
commitment will purchase the additional shares to secure the wanted capital infusion for the
emitting firm. Again, similar to insurance or put options, the warranty commitment issuer
will charge a premium for this service. Finally, if there are no such warranty commitments,
the issue will not reach full subscription.
      The success of a rights offering can in part be measured by its subscription rate, or in
other words, what percentage of the offering is being subscribed to by the market. Rights
offering failures through insufficient subscription are costly to companies since there are
large unrecoverable direct costs associated with the issuance process. These include clerical
fees, legal fees, marketing costs, etc. Additionally, the need for capital may be time-sensitive,
meaning that a second issue attempt is not a viable option. An offering failure may thus have
impactful indirect costs such as foregoing value-creating investments or failing to honor
debts. To shield against costly failures, firms usually make rights offerings at a considerable
discount compared to the current share price and even to the TERP that would be expected
after dilution. Discounting is especially important if the rights issuer expects the share price
to decline during the subscription period. The discount purchase price of the share gives the
subscription rights an initial intrinsic value since it enables the right-holder to buy stock at a
price lower than what initially prevails in the open market. The function of the discount is to
make the exercise of the rights more likely and thus increase the likelihood that the equity is
raised. Theoretically, all rights with a positive intrinsic value should and will be exercised. In
reality, they are not always exercised. Furthermore, the offering may be insufficiently
discounted and the rights therefore may not carry any intrinsic value. In a perfect market
scenario highlighted by Mateus et al. (2016), so long as the price of the new shares is lower
than the price of the shares at announcement, the pricing of the offering should be irrelevant.
Theoretically, the value of the discount is offset by the value of the right and as long as the
right can be sold, the wealth of the existing shareholders should be unaffected. The exception
to this would be the passive shareholders who neither sell their rights nor subscribe to them.
The cost to them is the value of the right. This means that to active investors, the pricing

     5
should not matter. To outside investors, this represents an opportunity if they can be allotted
any unexercised rights, and more heavily discounted offerings hence attract more interest
from outside investors. This leads us to hypothesize that a higher discount in the subscription
price of a rights offering will imply a higher ex-post subscription rate. A high discount to the
theoretical ex-rights price means that it is costlier to be a passive investor and not exercise
your rights, and is also prone to generate more interest from external investors. Our first
hypothesis is thus as follows:

     H1: An offering with a higher discount to the TERP will exhibit a higher
aggregate subscription rate than an offering with a lower discount to the TERP.

      Looking further at the role of ex-ante commitments, the hypothesis formulations in
the paper by Balachandran et al. (2008) are founded on a quality signaling perspective which
we are utilizing, albeit with some modifications to suit the dataset of the Swedish market. To
better understand the hypothesis formulations of this paper, one can look at the research of
Heinkel and Schwartz (1986) and Booth and Smith (1986). As highlighted in these papers,
there is a fundamental information asymmetry between the firm and outside investors when
raising seasoned equity. The firm and its insiders are assumed to be more informed regarding
the future cash flows and value of the firm and its projects. To insiders, there is partly an
incentive to effect a wealth transfer from outside investors and there is thus, ceteris paribus,
a higher proportion of over-valued firms seeking new equity issuance than their natural
proportion of the firm population. Announcements of the intent to raise new equity by a
firm provide investors with information in the form of a signal. In this case, the signal is that
there is a higher than proportional probability that the firm is overvalued, and the market
response is thus often an instant price decline in accordance with the degree of overvaluation
perceived by the market. The decision to issue equity under these circumstances warrants
that the investment opportunities of the firm are sufficiently valuable to overcome this loss
and further, that they are transitory and cannot be postponed at a low cost.
       When contemplating the effects of ex-ante commitments in a rights issue environment,
we are basing our hypothesis on the modified Heinkel and Schwartz (1986) model used by
Balachandran et al. (2008). A basis for this theory is that firms can signal their quality by the
choice of underwriting and ex-ante subscription commitments. The argument that follows is
that high-quality or undervalued firms are willing to bear the costs of investigation to an
underwriter and will thus elect to issue fully underwritten rights issues. Reversely, low-quality
firms are, based on a signal cost/benefit perspective, unwilling to bear the costs of
investigation to fully underwrite the issue. Furthermore, low-quality firms are likely to lack
confidence in raising the necessary financing through completely uninsured rights issues due
to poor subscription rates. They must therefore partially underwrite the rights issue to secure
financing. When electing to study the relationship between the ex-ante commitments and
attractivity of the offering, it is important to make the distinction between what Balachandran
et al. (2008) refer to as underwritten offerings which correspond to the Swedish equivalent
of warranty commitments, and the subscription commitments which are made by existing

     6
investors with subscription rights without any compensation. Since our dataset contains
subscription commitments to a large extent, the hypothesis must be restated. We hypothesize
that there will be a positive relationship between the degree of commitments and the
attractivity of the offering since subscription and warranty commitments are assumingly
made by investors who are more informed than the common investor collective, and that
their informed actions are thus interpreted as a sign of strength. Our second hypothesis is
thus as follows:

     H2: An offering with a higher aggregate ex-ante commitment coverage will
exhibit a higher aggregate subscription rate than an offering with a lower ex-ante
commitment coverage.

      When looking at specific combinations of discounts and insurance levels,
Balachandran et al. (2008) found that the most attractive offerings in terms of announcement
price reaction have a high degree of ex-ante commitments and a low discount. Assuming
these observations hold true for the Swedish dataset, subscription rates for offerings with
Low Discount : High Commitment combinations should be higher than offers that have
High Discount : Low Commitment combinations. Our third hypothesis is thus as follows:

     H3: Offerings that have a combination of a high degree of aggregate
commitments and a low discount are more attractive than offerings that have a low
degree of commitments and a high discount.

      Moreover, when contemplating the implications of Balachandran et al. (2008) in their
claim that firm quality is negatively correlated with discount, it also stands to reason that
there exists a negative correlation between the offering discount to TERP and the degree to
which it has been covered by ex-ante commitments. Given the claim that high-quality firms
generally have a lower discount to the TERP (Balachandran et al., 2008), such firms are is
also ceteris paribus more attractive for issuers of subscription and warranty commitments. It
therefore stands to reason that high-quality firms are likely to be covered by commitments
to higher extents since actors who commit to their rights offerings have more to gain from
the discount in the event of insufficient subscription. A similar reverse logic can also be
applied to low-quality firms. If an offering is not covered by commitments to a high degree,
the firm has to offer the equity at a larger discount in order to receive the necessary funding.
Additionally, both discounted offers and warranty commitments are to an extent costly ways
for a financial manager to increase the likelihood that the rights offering reaches full
subscription. Given a finite budget restriction, financial managers are possibly faced with a
trade-off of either discounting an offering or raising commitments to guarantee full
subscription. Our fourth hypothesis is thus as follows:

     H4: There is a negative correlation between the degree to which the offering has
been covered by commitments and the offering discount relative to TERP.

     7
      An important consideration to this hypothesis is that although it is reasonable to
assume that high-quality firms should, ceteris paribus, have greater commitment coverages,
highly discounted offerings that stem from low-quality firms could also be perceived as safer
and cheaper for external actors to make commitments on. This effect is difficult to estimate
in relation to the reasoning put forth in the works of Balachandran et al. (2008). In the case
that the positive effect is significant or even larger than the negative effect suggested, the
correlation may be close to zero, or even positive.

IV. Research design

Equipped with our research question and the hypotheses outlined above, we move on to
describe our research process below, starting with the data collection (Section IV.i.), then
defining our key variables (Section IV.ii.), and lastly describing our test methods (Sections
IV.iii–v.).

IV.i. Data and sample

We use a sample of 164 rights issues offered by publicly traded companies in Sweden on two
main Nordic stock exchanges, OM and NGM, over the period ranging from January 1, 2020,
to December 31, 2021.
      Several considerations underlie our choice of sample:

   1. Geography: According to Holderness and Pontiff (2016), the financial markets’
       appetites for rights offerings vary substantially across countries. While they rarely occur
      in the United States, Israel, and Canada, rights issues are more common in Italy,
      Sweden, Singapore, and the United Kingdom. To control for the geographical variance
      in rights offering appetite, our study centers on the Swedish equity markets, where
      rights issues constitute 85 percent of the value raised through SEOs (Cronqvist and
      Nilsson, 2005, in Holderness and Pontiff, 2016).
   2. Time period: We perceive the market’s sentiment and investment strategies as timely
      matters which are subject to change. Hence, to maintain the relevance of our research,
      we focus on a recent sample period of two years, ranging from January 1, 2020, to
      December 31, 2021. This sample period is suitable not only because it is recent in time,
      but also because it captures periods of growth as well as downturn in the Swedish
      economy’s gross domestic product, as illustrated in Figure 1. In accordance with
      Tomić, Šimurina, and Jovanov’s (2020) conclusion that there is a causal relationship
      between economic sentiment indicators and gross domestic product, we induce that
      our sample may capture periods of both positive and negative market sentiment,
      possibly making our results more generalizable and less dependent on the state of the
     economy.

     8
   3. Sample size: In general, a greater sample size, i.e., a longer sample period, would
      strengthen the confidence in any results our study is to produce. However, due to the
      time constraints that we face, and due to the fact that our method requires time-
      consuming manual data collection, we settle for a sample period of two years.
   4. Characteristics: The extracted sample must be homogenized on the basis of
       transaction characteristics, to lessen the risk of having other variables affect the results.
     We decide to focus on rights issues in their simplest form, i.e., pure stock offerings, as
      such offerings are observed to be the most common ones on the Swedish markets.

Figure 1: GDP growth rates in Sweden, 2020–2021

                                            7

                                                                     1,9
                                                           1,3              1,1
              0,5                                               0,8
                     0,1 0,1                        0,1

                                         -0,8                                                            -0,4

                                                 -7,8

            Jul-19 Jan-20 Jul-20 Jan-21 Jul-21 Jan-22

 Figure 1: Quarter-wise GDP growth rates in Sweden between July 2019 and April 2022. The figure presents
      GDP growth percentages on a 3-month basis. Adapted from TRADING ECONOMICS (2022).

     We use the Capital IQ database hosted by S&P Global Market Intelligence to extract
all public transactions that meet the following screening criteria: i) they are public follow-on
equity offerings; ii) the transactions were announced on a date within the two-year period
ranging from January 1, 2020, to December 31, 2021; iii) they are specified as a rights
offering; and iv) the transactions occurred on an exchange within Sweden. A total of 222
samples are extracted, each with supplementary data variables such as ex-ante issuer market
capitalization (one day before announcement), gross offering amount, offered price per
share, maximum number of shares offered, and issuer financials such as the latest annual
revenue, EBITDA, and net income of the issuer at announcement.
      As the data offered by the Capital IQ database alone does not suffice for our desired
research method, we manually collect additional information regarding the discount,
commitments, and subscriptions for every transaction in our sample. For this data collection
process, an array of different sources is used. Rights issues in Sweden are subject to national

     9
as well as transnational regulations. The EU Prospectus Regulation 2017/1129 requires that
a prospectus with specific information requirements is established and made public in
advance of a rights offering’s subscription period. Although Sweden’s law (2019:414) of
complementary prescriptions to the EU Prospectus Regulation withdraws the prospectus
obligations for companies who issue stock volumes to the public of less than EUR 2.5 million
per twelve months (first paragraph, second chapter), OL and NGM still require such
companies to establish and publish memorandums with similar information requirements as
the prospectuses. The prospectuses and memorandums are generally made available on the
websites of each respective issuer as well as on the website(s) of the designated bookrunner(s)
and sometimes on the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority’s website. As such, the
prospectuses or memorandums of each rights offering constitute a suitable and accessible
resource in the manual gathering of sample information for this study.
      Prior to the publication of the prospectus or memorandum, it is common practice for
a company listed on the Swedish stock market to announce their rights offering in a press
release (henceforth “PR”) to the public market, in accordance with the EU Market Abuse
Regulation. The same regulation also requires the issuer to publish information on the
outcome of each rights offering after the offering completion, including investor
subscription data and issue volume data. We utilize Modular Finance AB’s news database,
mfn.se, to gain access to the press releases published by the rights issuers identified in the
dataset extracted from Capital IQ. From these press releases, we gather data on stock offering
price, stock issue ratio (i.e., how many new stocks are issued per existing stock), subscription
commitments, underwriting commitments, post-offering subscription rates subscribed with
the use of subscription rights, and post-offering subscription rates subscribed without the
use subscription rights. For the transactions whose issue volume has not been extracted from
Capital IQ, the PRs are used to add this information. In the event the press releases do not
suffice for our manual data collection, we turn to the prospectuses or memorandums released
in connection with the transactions as previously described. Furthermore, we use Avanza
Bank AB’s stock exchange platform, Avanza, to obtain the adjusted close price of each issuer
prior to the announcement of their rights offering to compute the discounts of the offering
prices. For the issuers whose market capitalization has not been provided by Capital IQ,
Avanza’s data is used. All variables are defined in the next subsection, IV.ii. Key variables and
assumptions.
     Of the 222 transaction samples extracted from the Capital IQ database, 193
transactions remain after we have analyzed each transaction and omitted any observations
which either turned out to be (i) directed issues, (ii) duplicates of other rights issues in our
extracted sample, (iii) renounced issues (canceled), or (iv) issues by companies whose ex-ante
stock prices are not observable if the company was not exchange-listed at the time of
transaction announcement. Of the remaining 193 observations, 29 of the transactions are
unit offerings (issuing bundles of stock and warrants) which we omit in accordance with the
sample considerations presented earlier. Thus, our final sample consists of 164 rights
offerings on OM and NGM from February 1, 2020, to December 31, 2021.

     10
IV.ii. Key variables and assumptions

The key variables along with their definitions, and source and computation, are summarized
in Table 1.
      In accordance with the theoretical section and the hypotheses outlined therein, we
identify three variables from Table 1 as variables of particular interest, namely AgSub,
DiscTERP, and AgCom.

IV.ii.i. Dependent variable (AgSub)

We use the aggregate subscription variable (AgSub) as the dependent variable. This variable
is suitable because it is arguably the purest measure of rights issue attractivity. While
Balachandran et al. (2008) include the issuer’s stock price reaction following the rights issue
announcement as a measure of market reaction and a proxy for stock offering attractivity,
this measure hardly isolates the attractivity component of the market’s perception of the
offering. We believe that stock price reactions reflect a surprise component and an often-
negative sentiment derived from the realization that the company is in sudden need of cash.
The aggregate subscription, on the other hand, reflects the actual volume that the market
wishes to purchase in an offering given the fundamental characteristics of the rights issue,
i.e., the attractivity of the offering. We do, however, recognize that aggregate subscription is
not entirely unrelated to the stock price reaction, as the latter is sure to affect the potential
gains of investing perceived by the investor.
     We identify the aggregate subscription rate (AgSub) as the total cash volume
subscribed to with and without the exercise of subscription rights divided by the maximum
issue volume (Volume) according to the offering’s transaction structure. We thus present the
AgSub outcome as a percentage of Volume. Naturally, the lower limit of this variable is 0
since subscriptions cannot be negative. The upper limit, however, is per our definition
infinite – while the subscription rate with subscription rights (RightSub) can only amount to
100 percent of Volume, there is no upper demarcation for the subscription rate without
subscription rights (NoRightSub). As such, our measure of AgSub reflects the attractivity of
an offering, i.e., to what extent the market is willing to participate in the offering, rather than
the gross proceeds a company is able to raise through its offering (Proceeds) which would
have an upper limit of 100 percent.

IV.ii.ii. Independent variables (DiscTERP & AgCom)

It is a common perception that investors are more willing to participate in an offering if they
perceive that the price to which they are offered to subscribe for is lower than the actual
value of the security they are buying (which would be akin to an arbitrage trade). In our
context, it suggests a relation between the attractivity of an offering (AgSub) and the discount
of the offering’s price to real value. In the Swedish financial industry, it is common practice
to use the volume-weighted average price (henceforth “VWAP”) of a stock during a specific

     11
Table 1: Definitions of key variables

 Key variable Definition Source and Computation

 Close Stock’s latest closing price per share before   (Avanza)
               announcement of the offering (SEK)
 Price Offered subscription price per share (SEK) (PR)
 Old Existing number of shares in the company (PR/Memorandum/Prospectus)
 New Maximum number of shares issued in the    (PR/Memorandum/Prospectus)
                offering
 DiscClose Subscription price’s discount to closing      = Price / Close – 1
                price (% of Close)
 DiscTERP Subscription price’s discount to the           = Price / ((Close * Old + Price
                Theoretical Ex-Rights Price (% of Close)     * New) / (Old + New)) – 1
 SubCom Offering’s subscription commitment        (PR/Memorandum/Prospectus)
               coverage (% of Volume)
 WarCom Offering’s warranty commitment coverage   (PR/Memorandum/Prospectus)
              (% of Volume)
 AgCom Aggregate degree of commitments (% of    = SubCom + WarCom
             Volume)
 RightSub Subscription outcome with subscription      (PR)
               rights (% of Volume)
 NoRightSub Subscription outcome without subscription  (PR)
               rights (% of Volume)
 AgSub Aggregate subscriptions (% of Volume) = RightSub + NoRightSub
 WarEx Subscription through exercise of warranty    (PR)
             commitments
 Proceeds Gross proceeds (% of Volume) = max(AgCom; AgSub)
 Volume Offering’s maximum gross inflow of cash    (Capital IQ)
                to the issuer (SEK million)
 MarketCap Issuer’s market capitalization, one day        (Capital IQ)
               before announcement (SEK million)

 Table 1: Summary of the variables extracted and collected from the sample, along with definition, and source
 and computation. The first fourteen variables (1–14) were collected manually. The last two variables (15–16)
   were obtained through the sample extraction from the Capital IQ database, and as such, the data of said
                                variables have not been revised by the authors.

     12
short-term period (commonly 10 days) to indicate the true value of said stock according to
the market. This method has the benefit of lowering the impact of temporary fluctuations in
the stock price. We use the latest closing price of the issuer’s stock (Close) as a proxy for the
actual value of the stock because it is more easily accessible and computable than the VWAP,
and because it requires fewer considerations regarding the horizon of the VWAP. Since the
closing prices retrieved from Avanza are split-adjusted, we readjust the prices for any stocks
that have undertaken one or multiple splits or reverse splits after the transaction date. We
compute two measures of rights offering discounts, the first one being a straightforward
discount of the offering price (Price) to the (Close), i.e., DiscClose. Our second discount
measure is the discount of Price to the TERP, which is defined as the ex-post theoretical
value of each stock in the event of full subscription. This measure incorporates the effect of
dilution that occurs as a consequence of the offering, and we therefore believe that the
discount to TERP (DiscTERP) serves as a better measure of the true offering discount
compared to DiscClose. We reiterate that the DiscTERP assumes full subscription and full
dilution of the offering. If the offering is not fully subscribed, the DiscTERP underestimates
the true discount of the rights issue. Our DiscTERP parameter has a lower limit of -100
percent (signifying a 100 percent discount), and no upper limit. Positive values on the
DiscTERP parameter imply a premium of the offering price compared to the assumed true
value of the stock (Close). A lower value on the DiscTERP variable corresponds to a higher
discount, and a higher value corresponds to a lower discount.
      The computation of the commitment coverage is subject to fewer considerations than
the former independent variable. We look at the aggregate subscription rate (AgSub) as a
measure of the degree of security in an offering. Regardless of whether the issuer is in a cash
call or simply presents the offering to fund an expansion or investment, the maximum issue
volume is often set to ensure the capital the company needs, and seldom much more. Most
investors are probably not willing to invest in an issue if they perceive that the company will
not raise the capital needed for survival or expansion. The aggregate commitment rate sets a
lower bound of the final subscription rate and can thus be used to assure the investor that
the company will in fact raise capital up to a certain threshold. We define AgSub as the sum
of the subscription commitment rate (SubCom), i.e., binding ex-ante commitments by
specific investors to subscribe to the offering using subscription rights they possess or will
possess, and the warranty commitment rate (WarCom), i.e., binding ex-ante commitments
by specific investors to subscribe to the offering to the extent that the aggregate subscription
reaches a certain level (e.g., 80 percent). Subscription commitments usually cover less than
half of the Volume, and Warranty commitments only cover the residual remaining up until
a predefined level. The bounds of the AgSub variable thus range from 0 percent to 100
percent. Although there is a standard form for warranty and subscription commitments as
we have described them so far, they are in their essence merely dispositive contracts and may
thus come in different alterations. An alternative form of subscription commitment is a
declaration of intent (henceforth “DOI”) to subscribe with subscription rights. Although the
DOI is not legally binding, our sample indicates that it occurs as a substitute for true

     13
commitments. We believe that the observed DOIs bear the same signaling effects as true
commitments, and we reason that any actors who announce DOIs are incentivized to fulfill
their intents since a failure of doing so would yield a bad reputation for the actor in the dense
financial market of Sweden. Therefore, we count the DOIs to the SubCom variable in the
few cases they occur. As for the warranty commitments, we make no difference in our data
collection between different variations of such commitments, whether regular, bottom, top,
or top-down warranties. Although these different forms have different implications for the
guarantor, we conduct this study from the perspective of the issuer and the investors to
whom these different warranty types all present similar signaling effects and implications.

IV.ii.i. Control variables (Volume & MarketCap)

To isolate the effects of the DiscTERP and AgCom variables on the AgSub outcome, we
include another set of control variables that could affect the subscription outcome in our
regressions. While many different circumstances could affect the outcome, such as industry,
market sentiment, rights offering frequencies, etc., we resort to variables that are readily
available. In the extraction from the Capital IQ database, we retrieve data on the issuer’s one-
year total revenue, EBITDA, and net income, as per the announcement of the offering. We
also retrieve the Volume and MarketCap variables, the latter of which does arguably
incorporate the former three variables.
      We use the Volume and MarketCap variables as control variables. A higher market
capitalization should arguably signal a more valuable business and thus potentially a higher
stock offering attractivity. However, a higher MarketCap could also imply a higher burn rate
and larger investment volumes, and thus a potential positive correlation with the Volume
variable. The volume of the offering, in turn, could likely have a negative effect on the
aggregate subscription outcome, since it should be potentially more difficult to attract
sufficient subscription for offerings that call for more money. Any effects of the Volume and
MarketCap variables are controlled for in the following regression.

IV.iii. Multiple regression

We use a multiple regression model and the least squares method to examine the impact of
the discount and commitment coverage on the average subscription rate and attempt to draw
conclusions about H1 and H2. We use the AgSub variable as the dependent variable, and
DiscTERP and AgCom as the predictors. To control for Volume and MarketCap, a
hierarchical linear regression is performed with MarketCap and Volume as independent
variables in the first block, and with DiscTERP and AgCom added in the second block.
      In the hierarchical linear regression model, the following regressions are executed:

                  𝐴𝑔𝑆𝑢𝑏𝑖 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖 + 𝛽2 × 𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑖 (1)

     14
                 𝐴𝑔𝑆𝑢𝑏𝑖 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖 + 𝛽2 × 𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑖
                                                                                                (2)
                           + 𝛽3 × 𝐴𝑔𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑖 + 𝛽4 × 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑇𝐸𝑅𝑃𝑖

where ß0 represents the model’s intercept, ß1 represents the regression coefficient of the
issuer’s market capitalization, ß2 represents the regression coefficient of the issue volume, ß3
represents the regression coefficient of the offering price’s discount to the TERP (i.e., the
impact on AgSub of incrementing DiscTERP), ß4 represents the regression coefficient of the
aggregate commitment coverage (i.e., the impact on AgSub of incrementing AgCom), and εi
captures the residual errors of the regression.
      The hierarchical linear regression model is a special form of the population
multiple regression model. It is suitable because attempts to infer the nature of any
relationship between a dependent variable and a set of independent variables, while
controlling for the effect attributable to a set of other variables, based on a sample from the
population (Newbold et al., 2013, 479). Our study uses the hierarchical linear regression
model in two blocks on the form corresponding to equations (1) and (2) above, and relies
on the following five standard assumptions (Newbold et al., 2013, 482):

   1. Randomness: The independent variable data are fixed numbers or realizations of
      random variables that are independent of their error terms.
   2. Linearity: The expected value of the random dependent variable is a linear function
       of the independent variables.
   3. Normality and homoscedasticity: The error terms are normally distributed random
        variables with a mean of 0 and a uniform variance.
   4. No multicollinearity: The random error terms are uncorrelated with each other.
   5. Independent inputs: There is no direct linear relationship between the independent
        variables.

      We argue that our sample satisfies the randomness assumption based on the unbiased
collection of all stock rights issues on the OM and NGM between January 1, 2020, and
December 31, 2021. We also argue and rely on the possibility that the incremental effects of
AgCom and DiscTERP on AgSub could indeed be linear. The normality assumption can be
justified by applying the Central Limit Theorem (henceforth “CLT”) if the sample is random,
independent, and sufficiently large (usually, the threshold is 30 observations). The remaining
assumptions of homoscedasticity, no multicollinearity, and the use of independent inputs,
will be assessed with robustness tests (Section IV.iii.).
      There is a distinction between offering attractivity, as measured by the aggregate
subscription rate, and between offering success, as measured by the gross proceeds the firm
succeeds in raising through the offering. For the sake of interest and discussion, we repeat
the method outlined above and perform a hierarchical linear regression with Proceeds as the
dependent variable, to see how the independent variables affect offering success. In the
second hierarchical linear regression model, the following regressions are executed:

     15
                𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑠𝑖 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖 + 𝛽2 × 𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑖

                𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑐𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑠𝑖 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 × 𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖 + 𝛽2 × 𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑖
                          + 𝛽3 × 𝐴𝑔𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑖 + 𝛽4 × 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑇𝐸𝑅𝑃𝑖

where ß0 represents the model’s intercept, ß1 represents the regression coefficient of the
issuer’s market capitalization, ß2 represents the regression coefficient of the issue volume, ß3
represents the regression coefficient of the offering price’s discount to the TERP (i.e., the
impact on Proceeds of incrementing DiscTerp), ß4 represents the regression coefficient of
the aggregate commitment coverage (i.e., the impact on Proceeds of incrementing AgCom),
and εi captures the residual errors of the regression.

IV.iv. Mean comparison

We divide our sample into groups and use a mean comparison test to examine whether
offerings with high commitment coverage and low discounts yield higher ex-post
subscription than offerings with low commitment coverage and high discounts, to draw
conclusions about H3.
      We define the thresholds for high and low commitments and discounts respectively
based on the sample descriptive characteristics (Section V.i.). Any offerings with a DiscTERP
                                                  th
equal to or lower than -30.29 percent (25  percentile) are characterized as offerings with a
High Discount and any offerings with a DiscTERP equal to or higher than -16.94 percent
    th
(75  percentile) are characterized as offerings with a Low Discount. We identify any offering
with an AgCom equal to 100,00 percent as an offering with High Commitment, and any
offering with an AgCom of less than 100,00 percent as an offering with Low Commitment.
      The High Discount and Low Discount segments each consist of 41 transactions. The
High Commitment segment hosts 84 transactions and the Low Commitment segment
contains 79 transactions. Any transactions which belong to both the Low Discount and High
Commitment segments are added to the Low Discount : High Commitment group. Any
transactions which belong to both the High Discount and Low Commitment segments are
added to the High Discount : Low Commitment group. The Low Discount : High
Commitment group consists of 25 transactions, and the High Discount : Low Commitment
group amounts to 18 transactions.
      A Student’s t-test is executed to compare the mean subscription rates that result from
the two distinguished groups. The Student’s t-distribution is preferential because it allows us
to test for the difference between two normal population means with independent samples,
where the populations’ variances are unknown and the sample sizes do not exceed 100
(Newbold et al., 2013, 393). The Student’s t-distribution takes on the following assumptions
(Newbold et al., 2013, 394):

     16
   1. Randomness: The samples are independent and random.
   2. Equal variances: The observations are drawn from populations with equal variances.
   3. Normality: The observations are drawn from normally distributed populations.

      In accordance with prior reasoning regarding the hierarchical linear regression model
(Section IV.iii.), we make the case that our sample transactions are indeed randomly selected
and independent of each other. Normal distribution in the underlying variable is a necessary
Student’s t-test assumption only for small sample sizes (usually, the threshold is 50
observations). Unlike with the hierarchical linear regression model which enabled the CLT
to justify normal distribution in the sample, the CLT cannot be used to approximate normal
distribution in the population and justify the Student’s t-distribution. Hence, if the equal
population variance assumption or normality assumption is proven to be violated in the
robustness tests (Section IV.v.), a non-parametric Mann-Whitney U-test is used to supplement
the mean comparison test.
     The Mann-Whitney U-test tests the null hypothesis that the central locations of two
different populations are the same, based on an ascending ranking of the samples’
observations. It relies on the normal distribution assumption, which is approximated for
large sample sizes (usually, the threshold is 10 observations per sample) (Newbold et al.,
2013, 629).

IV.v. Robustness tests

Several tests are performed to assess whether the underlying assumptions of the regression
and mean comparison tests are satisfied. For the hierarchical linear regression model, the
normality assumption is assessed with a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test and a Shapiro-Wilk
test respectively, both with the null hypothesis that the sample is normally distributed. We
define Res as the unstandardized residual from the hierarchical linear AgSub regression, and
Pred as the unstandardized predicted value from the hierarchical linear AgSub regression.
ResSquare is then defined as the Res variable squared, and PredSquare as the Pred variable
squared. The homoscedasticity assumption is then assessed with a Breusch-Pagan test by
performing a regression with ResSquare as the dependent variable and Volume, MarketCap,
DiscTERP, and AgCom as the independent variables. If no regression coefficients are
significantly different from 0, the homoscedasticity assumption cannot be rejected. White’s
test may be used to supplement the Breusch-Pagan analysis if the Breusch-Pagan assumption
of normally distributed error terms is rejected in a second set of Kolmogorov-Smirnov and
Shapiro-Wilk tests. White’s test performs a regression with ResSquare as the dependent
variable, and Pred and PredSquare as the independent variables. It tests the same assumption
as the Breusch-Pagan test by examining the regression coefficients. The multicollinearity
assumption is assessed with a Variance Inflation Factor (henceforth “VIF”) test. Lastly,
the assumption of independent inputs is assessed with the Pearson correlation coefficient
on all variables of interest. While we examine the correlation coefficient and test against the

     17
null hypothesis of no correlation, and specifically when we examine the coefficient between
AgCom and DiscTERP, we are also able to infer conclusions about H4.
      Another set of robustness tests is conducted for the mean comparison test to conclude
whether the Student’s t-test or the Mann-Whitney U-test is preferential. The Student’s t-
distribution assumption of equal group variances is assessed with Levene’s test. The
assumption of normally distributed populations is assessed with the aforementioned
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test and a Shapiro-Wilk test respectively.

V. Results

In this section, we begin by describing the characteristics of our data sample (Section V.i.).
We then move on to regress our dataset (Section V.ii.) and perform mean comparison tests
(Section V.iii.) to infer conclusions about our hypothesis and answer our research question.
Additionally, we perform and include a set of robustness tests to see if the assumptions which
underlie our tests hold.

V.i. Descriptive characteristics

Table 2 presents descriptive characteristics for each variable of interest with data obtained
from the 164 stock rights issues that occurred on the Swedish OM and NGM exchanges in
Sweden between January 1, 2020, and December 31, 2021.

     18
                   66.      75.
                           70%.sdev85%.     86%.     27%.     81%.     23%.     05%.     54%.     09%.     78%.         iables
               396,    472  16   12   30   22   31       24       18
      tandardeviation2                               135      124      128
     S D

          ax     56.     16.
        M               53%.    22%.    00%.    50%.    00%.    00%.    00%.    00%.    00%.    00%.
               915,     994  29   25        88                      69
              25   3             100      100      100
                                             1380     1281     1380

         th                                                                                                     e presents the number of observations,
                   58.      29.
     75            08% 94% 00% 00% 70% 78% 60% 43% 00% 78%
                                                 .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .
              334  100                                      0
                         22-    16-         43   76        95
         ercentile                100           193      100      193
       P

                   43.      50.
                     30   80%.     82%.     00%.     35%.     29%.     00%.     00%.     50%.     00%.     00%.
        edian 161                                          0
       M             31-    22-        24  56       88  47
                                100           138               138

          th
                   08.      00.
     25            65% 29% 08% 73% 75% 95% 34% 10% 00% 00%
                         52     20     .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .
                                    3                      0
                         40-    30-    70        29   75   61   12
          ercentile                                                  100
       P

                                                                                                                are defined in Table 1.
          in      45.     50.
        M     6    1    03%.    71%.    00%.    00%.    00%.    21%.    22%.    30%.    00%.    21%.
                                0    0    0        9    0    0
                          74-    65-                    16                  16

s
                   21.      08.
      ean          32% 77% 43% 58% 90% 99% 88% 43% 29% 33%
             M                      .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .
              676  165                                      9
                         31-    22-    79   26   51        76   80
                                             157               167

                                                                                            percentile value, median value, 75th percentile value, and maximum value for each respective variable outlined below. The var
    N
              164  164  164  164  164  164  164  164  162  162  164  164

            p
              a
: Sample descriptive characteristic
 2                                                                                : Sample descriptive statistics summary illustrating the 164 sample observations different variable characteristics. The tabl
                                                                                 2

                                                                                           Tablemean value, minimum value, 25th
Table       MarketCVolumeDiscCloseDiscTERPAgComSubComWarComAgSubRightSubNoRightSubWarExProceeds

    19
      We define a dummy variable ComDist as the commitment distribution variable, which
takes a value of 0 for each transaction that has an AgCom of 0.00 percent, a value of 1 for
each transaction with an AgCom greater than 0.00 percent but less than 100.00 percent, and
a value of 2 for each transaction with an AgCom of 100.00 percent. The frequency table for
the ComDist variable is presented in Table 3.

Table 3: ComDist frequency table

                          Frequency Percent Cumulative Percent
 0 13 7.9 7.9
 1 66 40.2 48.2
 2 85 51.8 100.0
 Total 164 100.0

 Table 3: Frequency table of the commitment distribution (ComDist) dummy variable presenting frequency,
   percent, and cumulative percent. A value of 0 indicates that the offering had no commitment coverage, 1
 indicates partial commitment coverage, and 2 indicates that the offering was fully covered by commitments.

      Out of 164 sample transactions, 85 of the offerings are fully covered by subscription
commitments and/or warranty commitments, corresponding to 51.8 percent of the sample.
13 of the offerings have no commitment coverage, corresponding to 7.9 percent of the
sample, and the remaining 66 offerings (40.2 percent) are partially secured by subscription
commitments and/or warranty commitments.
      We define another dummy variable FullSub as the subscription distribution, which
takes a value of 0 for each transaction that has an AgSub of less than 100.00 percent, and a
value of 1 for each transaction with an AgSub of 100.00 percent or more. The frequency
table for the FullSub variable is presented in Table 4.

     20
Table 4: FullSub frequency table

                          Frequency Percent Cumulative Percent
 0 52 31.7 31.7
 1 112 68.3 100.0
 Total 164 100.0

Table 4: Frequency table of the full subscription (FullSub) dummy variable presenting frequency, percent, and
  cumulative percent. A value of 0 indicates that the offering was not fully subscribed, whereas a value of 1
                                          indicates full ex-post subscription.

      Out of the 164 sample transactions, 112 of the offerings are fully subscribed or
oversubscribed, corresponding to 68.3 percent of the sample. The remaining 52 offerings
(31.7 percent) do not generate full subscription.

V.ii. Multiple regression

A hierarchical multiple regression is run with AgSub as the dependent variable, MarketCap
and Volume as the control variables in block 1, and AgCom and DiscTERP added as the
predictors in block 2. The aim is to assess whether there is any relation between the discount
to the TERP and ex-ante commitment coverage on the ex-post subscription rate of a rights
offering, and thus to conclude whether there is support for H1 and/or H2. For the sake of
discussion, another hierarchical multiple regression is run with Proceeds as the dependent
variable, MarketCap and Volume as the control variables in block 1, and AgCom and
DiscTERP added as the predictors in block 2. Furthermore, in the robustness tests of said
models, the Pearson correlation coefficient between any pair of the aforementioned variables
is assessed, and any correlation between AgCom and DiscTERP is examined to conclude
whether there is support for H4.
      The regression coefficients obtained from the hierarchical multiple regressions with
AgSub and Proceeds as the respective dependent variables are presented in Tables 5–6.

     21
Table 5: AgSub regression coefficients

 Model Unstandardized β Coefficients       t Significance
                                           Standard Error
 1 (constant) 160.790 11.345 14.173 <0.001
          MarketCap 0.001 0.005 0.168 0.867
          Volume -0.020 0.025 -0.820 0.413
 2 (constant) 111.689 33.814 3.303 0.001
          MarketCap 0.000 0.005 -0.056 0.955
          Volume -0.020 0.025 -0.811 0.419
         AgCom 0.110 0.343 0.321 0.749
          DiscTERP -1.803 0.826 -2.182 0.031

     Table 5: Regression coefficient analysis showing the unstandardized coefficient (unstandardized β),
 coefficient standard error, the t-value (t), and the 1-tailed p-value (Significance) of the Student’s t-test against
the null hypothesis that the coefficient is 0, for each regression variable. Model 1 regresses AgSub on Volume
 and MarketCap (control variables). Model 2 regresses AgSub on Volume and MarketCap (control variables),
                                    and DiscTERP and AgCom (predictors).

Table 6: Proceeds regression coefficients

 Model Unstandardized β Coefficients       t Significance
                                           Standard Error
 1 (constant) 170.499 10.801 15.785 <0.001

                                                            -5
          MarketCap -3.231×10               0.005 -0.007 0.994
          Volume -0.019 0.024 -0.807 0.421
 2 (constant) 113.747 32.182 3.534 <0.001
          MarketCap -0.001 0.005 -0.208 0.836
          Volume -0.019 0.023 -0.825 0.411
         AgCom 0.259 0.326 0.796 0.427
          DiscTERP -1.617 0.786 -0.161 0.041

      Table 6: Regression coefficient analysis showing the unstandardized coefficient (unstandardized β),
 coefficient standard error, the t-value (t), and the 1-tailed p-value (Significance) of the Student’s t-test against
   the null hypothesis that the coefficient is 0, for each regression variable. Model 1 regresses Proceeds on
 Volume and MarketCap (control variables). Model 2 regresses Proceeds on Volume and MarketCap (control
                           variables), and DiscTERP and AgCom (predictors).

     22
      The regression coefficient analysis implies that the market capitalization (MarketCap)
of the issuer has no direct implication for the ex-post aggregate subscription (AgSub)
outcome when the other variables of interest are considered. The issue volume (Volume) has
a negative, albeit insignificant effect on the AgSub. The aggregate commitment coverage
(AgCom) exhibits a positive coefficient which suggests, much in line with our prior reasoning
and theory, that higher commitments yield higher subscription rates. However, this
coefficient cannot be statistically rejected from 0 at any reasonable confidence level. Hence,
H2 is not supported by our data. The offering’s discount to the TERP (DiscTERP), however,
has a negative β of -1.803, which is significant at a 5 percent confidence level. H1 is thus
supported. This is to be expected since the AgSub variable captures subscriptions made with
subscription rights (RightSub) and those made without the support of subscription rights
(NoRightSub). While existing shareholders, i.e., the primary receivers of subscription rights,
have little to gain from a higher discount, external investors can profit from participating in
highly discounted rights issues at the expense of any holders of subscription rights which are
not executed for subscription. A highly discounted, low DiscTERP, should thus make the
offering more attractive primarily to external investors. However, the second hierarchical
linear regression with Proceeds as the dependent variable suggests otherwise. While
MarketCap, Volume, and AgCom are all insignificant variables in this regression, DiscTERP
has a negative β of -1.617, which also is significant at a 5 percent confidence level. Since
subscriptions with subscription rights have primary entitlement to the issued shares,
RightSub tends to dominate the ex-post distribution of shares and represent a majority of
the Proceeds. Since subscription rights are handed to existing investors, the RightSub
variable, and thus also the Proceeds variable, should act as a reasonable proxy for the offering
attractivity perceived by existing investors. Since our theoretical section has made the case
that existing investors do not gain from higher discounts, it was less expected that the
DiscTERP variable would have the same influence on Proceeds as to AgSub.
      It should be noted that the ANOVA analyses of the two respective regression models
(see Appendix Table X2 and Table X5) do not allow us to statistically reject the null hypothesis
that all regression coefficients are equal to 0 with reasonable significance. The coefficient of
                        2
determination (R ) only amounts to 3.5 percent in the AgSub regression, and to 3.6 percent
in the Proceeds regression (see Appendix Table X1 and Table X4) suggesting that the
predictive power of our model is very weak and that many other factors could play a more
important role in determining the attractivity and success of rights offerings.
      On the positive side, our sample does indeed fulfill the necessary assumptions that
underlie the hierarchical linear regression model. While the Kolmogorov-Smirnov and
Shapiro-Wilks (see Appendix Table X10) tests both reject the assumption of normal
distribution in the DiscTERP and AgCom variables, the sample size of 164 is more than
sufficient to approximate normality with CLT. Since linearity is rejected for the Res and
ResSquare terms (see Appendix Table X10), the Breusch-Pagan test does not provide a
statistically reliable means of confirming homoscedasticity. White’s test (see Appendix Table
X16) does however not reject uniform variance in the error terms, so homoscedasticity can

     23
be assumed. The VIF test (see Appendix Table X17) yields VIF statistics for all variables of
interest below the most conservative 2.5 threshold, so the no-multicollinearity assumption is
not rejected.
      The final standard assumption of no linear relationship between the independent
variables is assessed with the Pearson correlation coefficient. The findings are summarized
in Table 7.

Table 7: AgSub regression correlations

                        AgSub MarketCap Volume AgCom DiscTERP
 Pearson       AgSub 1.000 -0.015 -0.065 0.031 -0.170
 Correlation   MarketCap -0.015 1.000 0.420 0.001 -0.110

                Volume -0.065 0.420 1.000 0.050 -0.032
               AgCom 0.031 0.001 0.050 1.000 -0.057
                DiscTERP -0.170 -0.110 -0.032 -0.057 1.000
 Significance AgSub . 0.423 0.204 0.345 0.015
                MarketCap 0.423 . 0.000 0.496 0.081
                Volume 0.204 0.000 . 0.264 0.340
                AgCom 0.345 0.496 0.264 . 0.234
                DiscTERP 0.015 0.081 0.340 0.234 .

     Table 7: Correlations analysis of the regression variables Agsub, MarketCap, Volume, AgCom, and
DiscTERP. The table presents the Pearson correlation coefficient (Pearson’s r) for each pair of variables, and
 the 1-tailed p-values (Significance) of the Pearson correlation coefficient test against the null hypothesis that
                              there is no correlation between the pair of variables.

      Although there is a significant positive correlation of 0.420 between the MarketCap
and Volume variables at a 1 percent confidence level, this violation of the standard
assumption is not particularly troubling since the two hierarchical linear regressions
attributed a close-to-0, insignificant regression coefficient for each of said variables. A
negative correlation coefficient of -0.110 is observed between the MarketCap and DiscTERP
variables. This negative correlation is significant at a 10 percent confidence level, which is
unexpected, albeit not of any particular concern for the same reason outlined above. No
other correlations between any pair of independent variables are significantly distinguishable
from 0 at a reasonable level of confidence. Thus, the hypothesis of a negative correlation
between the DiscTERP and AgCom variables, H4, cannot be supported. While it was
hypothesized that the issuer’s financial management would perceive a trade-off between
discounts, which are costly to passive shareholders, and warranty commitments, which are
costly to the firm, it was also believed that a higher discount in the offering price would make

     24
the offering more attractive to external investors and incentivize such actors to sign warranty
commitments. The rejection of H4 does thus not necessarily imply that there is no trade-off
between the costs of discounts and commitments but could potentially reflect instead the
idea that such trade-offs are completely offset by the incentive synergies that arise.

V.iii. Mean comparison

The sample is divided into three groups to assess H3 with a test for equality of means whether
offerings with high commitment coverage and low discount yield more ex-post subscriptions
than offerings with low commitment coverage and high discount. The High Discount : Low
Commitment group consists of 18 transactions, and the Low Discount : High Commitment
group consists of 25 transactions. A third group consisting of the remaining 121 transactions
is omitted in accordance with the test design. The descriptive characteristics of the High
Discount : Low Commitment group and the Low Discount : High Commitment group are
summarized in Table 8.

Table 8: AgSub group statistics

                                                                  Standard
         Group N Mean Min Median Max
                                                                   Deviation
 AgSub 1 18 168.47% 17.40% 147.10% 553.00% 129.68%
           2 25 120.34% 41.00% 98.50% 310.90% 74.51%

 Table 8: Descriptive statistics table summarizing the number of sample transactions in each group as well as
 their mean value, minimum value, median value, maximum value, and standard deviation, all in terms of the
 AgSub variable. Group 1 denotes the High Discount : Low Commitment group. Group 2 denotes the Low
                                Discount : High Commitment group.

      Although Levene’s test (see Appendix Table X18) cannot reject equality of variances
between the two groups on a 5 percent confidence level, the Kolmogorov-Smirnov and
Shapiro-Wilks tests (see Appendix Table X10) both reject the assumption of normal
distribution in the AgSub variable. Since normal distribution is a necessary assumption for
Student’s t-test with small sample sizes, a non-parametric Mann-Whitney U-test is performed
in place of the Student’s t-test. The findings are summarized in Table 9.

     25
Table 9: Mann-Whitney U-test group test statistics

                                                         AgSub
 Mann-Whitney U 175.000
 Z -1.219
 Exact Significance (2-tailed p) 0.228
 Exact Significance (1-tailed p) 0.114
 Point Probability 0.002

Table 9: Summary of the Mann-Whitney U-test for equality of means in the AgSub variable between the High
  Discount : Low Commitment group and Low Discount : High Commitment group, presenting the Mann-
Whitney U-statistic, Z-value, 1- and 2-sided p-values against the null hypothesis that the mean difference is 0,
                                         and point probability of the test.

      We cannot, according to the Mann-Whitney U-test, statistically reject the null
hypothesis that the mean difference is 0 on a 10 percent confidence level. However, the 1-
tailed p-value of 0.114 suggests, with a 15 percent confidence level, that the High Discount :
Low Commitment group does indeed have a higher central value than the Low Discount :
High Commitment group. Thus, the result does not provide support for H3, and if any
conclusion were to be drawn from the performed test, it would have been the opposite of
the evaluated hypothesis. Although this finding goes against the theoretical reasoning behind
the hypothesis, it is very much in line with the prior results from the mean regression, which
suggest that the DiscTERP variable, unlike the AgCom variable, has a significant negative
impact on the AgSub variable. In other words, while the commitment coverage of a rights
offering has not been proved to affect the subscription outcome, a higher discount does
indeed increase the ex-post subscriptions, according to our data.

VI. Discussion

Dissecting the meaning of the results by hypothesis, we start with H1. The causal relationship
between DiscTERP and AgSub is negative, meaning that a larger discount, i.e., a more
negative DiscTERP value, will effect a higher aggregate subscription rate. With a 1-sided p-
value of 0.031, this is a statistically significant result at a 5 percent confidence level. Referring
back to the theoretical section, this result strengthens the notion that a deep discount to the
TERP has a positive effect on the existing shareholders’ propensity to exercise or sell their
rights as the cost of passivity increases. The driver of this result may also be the increased
interest in the offering from external investors, or a combination of the two. Important to
note is that although the DiscTERP variable shows a statistically significant relationship to
AgSub, the explanatory value of the model is relatively minuscule. Considering that the
                                            2
coefficient of determination (R ; see Appendix Table X1) for the block 2 of the hierarchical

     26
linear AgSub regression, including predictors and control variables, is only 3.5 percent, it is
clear that there are a large number of other parameters that affect the ex-post subscription
rate and attractivity of the offerings in the sample.
      Continuing with H2, the null hypothesis that there exists no significant relationship
between ex-ante commitments and subsequent subscription rate cannot be rejected. Thus,
the study cannot show a statistically significant relation, either positive or negative, between
the two variables. While this is not in line with the stated hypothesis based on existing theory,
it does have important implications, nonetheless. Given our understanding that subscription
rate is the best proxy for attractivity of the rights offering, our inability to show a significant
relationship between aggregate commitment coverages and ex-post subscription rates
suggests that commitments may not have the positive signaling impact on attractivity that we
hypothesized. Taking this fact into consideration, the question of whether logical financial
managers should spend time, energy, and oftentimes pay premiums of 8–12 percent of the
committed volume for commitments is highlighted. If the ultimate motivation for
commitments is to ensure that cash for the firm is raised, costly warranty commitments may
still serve a purpose of securing proceeds. If, however, the motivation is to use underwriting
as means of certification to justify a lower offering discount, the results of this study cannot
support that purchasing warranty commitments is a logical action for a financial manager
seeking to raise capital through an SEO.
     Looking at H3, the null hypothesis that there exists no significant difference in average
subscription rate between offerings with High Commitment : Low Discount combinations
(group 1) and those with Low Commitment : High Commitment (group 2) cannot be
rejected. Since no rejection can be made, the study cannot find support for any subset having
a higher subscription rate based on its identity as either of the two subsets. Given the
understanding of subscription rates as a proxy for attractivity of the offering, the study does
not confirm the hypothesis that the market finds group 2 inherently more attractive than
group 1. In fact, the result points in the opposite direction, and suggests at a 15 percent
confidence level that offerings with High Discount : Low Commitment yield higher
subscriptions than those with Low Discount : High Commitment. This finding is very much
in line with the findings from the regression studies that found a significant positive effect
on aggregate subscription from higher discounts, but not for commitments. The implication
of this finding for financial managers is that there is no inherent reason to pay for costly
warranty commitments if the objective of the purchase is to automatically make the offering
more attractive. There may of course exist situations where warranty commitments make the
offering more attractive in the eyes of market participants, but this is not something that can
be observed across a larger sample of cases.
     Finally, examining the results relating to the H4, we are unable to find any significant
correlation between the aggregate ex-ante commitment coverage and the offering discount
to the TERP. Since the study cannot confirm that aggregate commitments are indeed
positively correlated with firm quality or attractiveness of the offering, which was the case

     27
for Balachandran, et al. (2008), the premising reasoning on which our hypothesis rests finds
no support.
      Reflecting upon the study and its scope, it is likely that it would have been valuable to
obtain data on the rights issue firm price reaction upon announcement in order to widen the
scope to include the more commonly used proxy for attractivity of rights offerings. This was
the main variable tested in Balachandran et al (2008). Since the data obtained on the
commitment coverages for the Swedish market has a large portion of offerings with 100
percent commitment coverage, the variability in the AgCom variable was limited to a small
sample of firms. Complementing the subscription rate variable with the market
announcement price reaction which likely has a higher and less clustered variance could be
useful to supplement the study on the attractivity of rights offerings. Moreover, it would
provide a useful comparison not only between the Swedish and Australian markets, but also
between the use of subscription rate versus announcement price reaction to gauge the
attractiveness of an offering. While we still favor the analysis of subscription rate outcome
over announcement price reaction as it is arguably a purer measure of how attractive an
offering is, the sample size likely must be larger to motivate the use of this measure, due to
low variability in the explanatory variables of our sample. With more resources, the price
reaction is not unfeasible to obtain but under the given constraints, the laborious manual
data collection of subscription rates was prioritized.
      As a final statement of limitation, we want to stress that the findings of our study stem
from a sample that is highly concentrated in terms of time and place. It is thus not necessary
that our conclusions are applicable outside the Nordic capital markets, nor is it certain that
they will hold true in the far future. Limitations aside, our topic is ever so relevant, as many
firms in Sweden are soon to need new capital infusions, and we posit that more research on
the topic would be to the benefit of such troubled firms, financial managers, and the investor
collective at large.

V. Conclusion

Given that the discount to TERP is the only tested variable that can be confirmed as having
statistically significant explanatory value to the subscription rate of rights offerings, we
conclude the study by relating our findings back to financial managers attempting to raise
seasoned equity through the rights offering method. Seeing that we find support for the
subscription rate being affected by the discount of the offering but not the aggregate
commitment coverage, we encourage financial managers to consider the reason for electing
to pay for warranty commitments. If electing to pay for such agreements, the intention
should mainly be to secure proceeds and not to signal the quality of the offering to the
market. Simultaneously, we encourage caution to be taken when using the findings of this
study as the scope is limited and subscription rate rarely is the only relevant measurement
financial managers seek to maximize. The study can be seen as a piece in a larger puzzle
financial managers need to lay when deciding when, where, and how to raise capital.

     28
IX. References

      Balachandran, Balasingham, Faff, Robert, and Theobald, Michael, 2008, Rights
offerings, takeup, renounceability, and underwriting status, Journal of Financial Economics,
89 (2), 328–346.

      Benson, Peter, 2022, Hundratalet börsbolag i riskzon för krisemission, Affärsvärlden,
February 17, available on https://www.affarsvarlden.se/kronika/hundratalet-borsbolag-i-
riskzon-for-krisemission, retrieved on May 15, 2022.

      Booth, James R., and Smith, Richard, 1986, Capital raising, underwriting and the
certification hypothesis, Journal of Financial Economics, 15 (1–2), 261–281.

      Heinkel, Robert L., and Schwartz, Eduardo S, 1986, Rights versus Underwritten
Offerings: An Asymmetric Information Approach, Journal of Finance, 41 (1), 1–18.

      Holderness, Clifford G., and Pontiff, Jeffrey, 2016, Shareholder nonparticipation in
valuable rights offerings: New findings for an old puzzle, Journal of Financial Economics,
120 (2), 252–268.

      Mateus, Cesario, Farinha, Jorge, and Soares, Nuno, 2017, Price Discounts in
Rights Issues: Why Do Managers Insist On What Investors Hate?, European Business
Review, 29 (4), 457–475.

       Newbold, Paul, Carlson, William L., and Thorne, Betty M., 2013, Statistics for
Business and Economics, 8th ed. Essex, England: Pearson Education Limited.

     Swedish North Point Securites AB, 2022, Endast tolv företrädesemissioner under
första kvartalet 2022, available on https://northpointsec.com/endast-tolv-
foretradesemissioner-under-forsta-kvartalet-2022/, retrieved on May 15, 2022.

     Tomić, Daniel, Šimurina, Jurica, and Jovanov, Luka, 2020, The Nexus between
Economic Sentiment Indicator and Gross Domestic Product; a Panel Cointegration
Analysis, Zagreb International Review of Economics & Business, 23 (1), 121–140.

     TRADING ECONOMICS, 2022, Sweden GDP Growth Rate, available on
https://tradingeconomics.com/sweden/gdp-growth, retrieved on May 7, 2022.

Data Sources

      Avanza Bank AB, Avanza, available on https://www.avanza.se/, retrieved on May 8,
2022.

      Modular Finance AB, mfn.se, available on https://mfn.se/, retrieved on May 8, 2022.

      S&P Global Market Intelligence, Capital IQ, available on https://capitaliq.com/,
retrieved on March 13, 2022.

     29
X. Appendix

X.i. Multiple regression

X.i.i. Aggregate subscription multiple regression

Table X1: AgSub regression model summary

                                     2               2
 Model R       Adjusted R     Standard Error of Estimate
 1 0.004 -0.008 135.771%
 2 0.035 0.010 134.539%

 Table X1: Model summary of hierarchical linear regression presenting the coefficient of determination (R2),

 adjusted coefficient of determination (adjusted R2), and the residual standard error. Model 1 regresses AgSub
on Volume and MarketCap (control variables). Model 2 regresses AgSub on Volume and MarketCap (control
                           variables), and DiscTERP and AgCom (predictors).

Table X2: AgSub regression ANOVA

 Model Sum of Squares df Mean Square F Significance
 1 Regression 13,110.523 2 6,555.262 0.356 0.701
          Residual 2,967,848.973 161 18,433.845
          Total 2,980,959.496 163
 2 Regression 102,931.917 4 25,732.979 1.422 0.229
          Residual 2,606,991.985 159 16,396.176
          Total 2,703,416.103 163

 Table X2: Analysis of variance (ANOVA) for hierarchical linear regression presenting the sum of squares of
 residual error, degrees of freedom, mean square of residual error, F-statistic of the regression, and 1-tailed p-
   value (Significance) of the F-test against the null hypothesis that all group means are equal to 0. Model 1
  regresses AgSub on Volume and MarketCap (control variables). Model 2 regresses AgSub on Volume and
                  MarketCap (control variables), and DiscTERP and AgCom (predictors).

     30
Table X3: AgSub regression residuals statistics

                                                                  Standard
                              Minimum Maximum Mean
                                                                   Deviation
 Predicted Value 59.510% 237.985% 157.987% 25.129%
 Standard Predicted Value -3.919 3.183 0.000 13.070
 Standard Error of Predicted Value 10.972 119.902 19.547 13.070
 Adjusted Predicted Value 33.785% 409.450% 159.194% 32.843%
 Residual -158.504% 1,203.090% 0.000% 132.878%
 Standard Residual -1.178 8.942 0.000 0.988
 Studentized Residual -1.184 8.994 -0.003 0.998
 Deleted Residual -293.050% 1,217.175% -1.207% 136.931%
 Studentized Deleted Residual -1.185 12.793 0.022 1.227
 Mahalanobis Distance 0.090 128.468 3.976 12.148
 Cook’s Distance 0.000 0.754 0.008 0.061
 Centered Leverage Value 0.001 0.788 0.024 0.075

  Table X3: Regression residuals statistics showing the minimum values, maximum values, mean values, and
    standard deviations for prediction and residual parameters derived from the regression with AgSub as
 dependent variable, Volume and MarketCap as control variables, and DiscTERP and AgCom as predictors.

     31
Figure X1: Agsub regression normal P–P plot of standardized residual

Figure X1: Normal probability–probability plot of regression standardized residual with observed cumulative
 probability (x-axis) and expected cumulative probability (y-axis), derived from the regression with AgSub as
 dependent variable, Volume and MarketCap as control variables, and DiscTERP and AgCom as predictors.

Figure X2: AgSub regression residual scatterplot

  Figure X2: Scatterplot depicting the relation between regression standardized predicted value (x-axis) and
   regression standardized residual (y-axis), derived from the regression with AgSub as dependent variable,
          Volume and MarketCap as control variables, and DiscTERP and AgCom as predictors.

     32
X.i.ii. Gross proceeds multiple regression

Table X4: Proceeds regression model summary

                                     2               2
 Model R       Adjusted R     Standard Error of Estimate
 1 0.005 -0.007 129.263%
 2 0.036 0.011 128.048%

 Table X4: Model summary of hierarchical linear regression presenting the coefficient of determination (R2),

     adjusted coefficient of determination (adjusted R2), and the residual standard error. Model 1 regresses
    Proceeds on Volume and MarketCap (control variables). Model 2 regresses Proceeds on Volume and
                  MarketCap (control variables), and DiscTERP and AgCom (predictors).

Table X5: Proceeds regression ANOVA

 Model Sum of Squares df Mean Square F Significance
 1 Regression 13,299.621 2 6,649.811 0.398 0.672
          Residual 2,690,116.481 161 16,708.798
          Total 2,703,416.103 163
 2 Regression 96,424.118 4 24,106.029 1.470 0.214
          Residual 2,606,991.985 159 16,396.176
          Total 2,703,416.103 163

 Table X5: Analysis of variance (ANOVA) for hierarchical linear regression presenting the sum of squares of
 residual error, degrees of freedom, mean square of residual error, F-statistic of the regression, and 1-tailed p-
   value (Significance) of the F-test against the null hypothesis that all group means are equal to 0. Model 1
  regresses Proceeds on Volume and MarketCap (control variables). Model 2 regresses Proceeds on Volume
                and MarketCap (control variables), and DiscTERP and AgCom (predictors).

     33
Table X6: Proceeds regression residuals statistics

                                                                  Standard
                              Minimum Maximum Mean
                                                                   Deviation
 Predicted Value 74.911% 238.628% 167.334% 24.322%
 Residual -117.116% 1,191.831% 0.000% 126.467%
 Standard Predicted Value -3.800 2.931 0.000 1.000
 Standard Residual -0.915 9.308 0.000 0.988

  Table X6: Regression residuals statistics showing the minimum values, maximum values, mean values, and
   standard deviations for prediction and residual parameters derived from the regression with Proceeds as
 dependent variable, Volume and MarketCap as control variables, and DiscTERP and AgCom as predictors.

Table X7: Proceeds regression correlations

                       Proceeds MarketCap Volume AgCom DiscTERP
 Pearson      Proceeds 1.000 -0.030 -0.070 0.068 -0.161
 Correlation   MarketCap -0.030 1.000 0.420 0.001 -0.110

                Volume -0.070 0.420 1.000 0.050 -0.032
               AgCom 0.068 0.001 0.050 1.000 -0.057
                DiscTERP -0.161 -0.110 -0.032 -0.057 1.000
 Significance Proceeds . 0.352 0.186 0.194 0.020
                MarketCap 0.352 . 0.000 0.496 0.081
                Volume 0.186 0.000 . 0.264 0.340
               AgCom 0.194 0.496 0.264 . 0.234
               DiscTERP 0.020 0.081 0.340 0.234 .

   Table X7: Correlations analysis of the regression variables Proceeds, MarketCap, Volume, AgCom, and
DiscTERP. The table presents the Pearson correlation coefficient (Pearson’s r) for each pair of variables, and
 the 1-tailed p-values (Significance) of the Pearson correlation coefficient test against the null hypothesis that
                              there is no correlation between the pair of variables.

     34
Figure X3: Proceeds regression normal P–P plot of standardized residual

Figure X3: Normal probability–probability plot of regression standardized residual with observed cumulative
probability (x-axis) and expected cumulative probability (y-axis), derived from the regression with Proceeds as
 dependent variable, Volume and MarketCap as control variables, and DiscTERP and AgCom as predictors.

Figure X4: Proceeds regression residual scatterplot

  Figure X4: Scatterplot depicting the relation between regression standardized predicted value (x-axis) and
  regression standardized residual (y-axis), derived from the regression with Proceeds as dependent variable,
          Volume and MarketCap as control variables, and DiscTERP and AgCom as predictors.

     35
X.ii. Mean comparison

X.ii.i. Student’s t-test mean comparison

Table X8: T-test for equality of group means

                                         Significance Standard
                                                    Mean     Error
                              t df 1-sided p 2-sided p  Difference  Difference
 AgSub Equal
        variances       1.540 41 0.066 0.131 48.135% 31.255%
        assumed
        Equal
          variances
                       1.415 25.039 0.085 0.169 48.135% 34.006%
         not
        assumed

  Table X8: Summary of the Student’s t-test for equality of means in the AgSub variable between the High
 Discount : Low Commitment group and Low Discount : High Commitment group, presenting the Student’s
 t-value, degrees of freedom (df), 1- and 2-sided p-values against the null hypothesis that the mean difference
      is 0. The test statistics are presented with and without the assumption of equal AgSub variances.

X.ii.ii. Mann-Whitney U-test mean comparison

Table X9: Group ranks

           Group N Mean Rank Sum of Ranks
 AgSub 1 18 24.75 445.50
             2 25 20.02 500.50
             Total 43

 Table X9: Summary of rank statistics presenting the number of sample transactions in each group as well as
 the mean rank and sum of ranks for each group, ranked in ascending order of the AgSub variable. Group 1
     denotes the High Discount : Low Commitment group. Group 2 denotes the Low Discount : High
                                     Commitment group.

     36
X.iii. Robustness tests

X.iii.i. Normal distribution tests

Table X10: Tests of normality

                   Kolmogorov-Smirnov Shapiro-Wilk
               Statistic df Significance Statistic df Significance
 DiscTERP 0.080 164 0.013 0.976 164 0.006
 AgCom 0.266 164 <0.001 0.698 164 <0.001
 AgSub 0.165 164 <0.001 0.660 164 <0.001
 Res 0.146 164 <0.001 0.670 164 <0.001
 ResSquare 0.438 164 <0.001 0.099 164 <0.001

   Table X10: Tests for normal distribution in the DiscTERP, AgCom, and AgSub variables based on the
   Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (with Lilliefors Significance Correction) and the Shapiro-Wilk test. The table
    presents the test statistic, degrees of freedom (df), and the 1-tailed p-value (Significance) against the null
                        hypothesis that the variable is normally distributed, for each test.

X.iii.ii. Breusch-Pagan homoscedasticity test

Table X11: Breusch-Pagan regression model summary

                                     2               2
 Model R       Adjusted R     Standard Error of Estimate
 1 0.002 -0.011 113,945.414
 2 0.008 -0.017 114,281.095

 Table X11: Model summary of hierarchical linear regression presenting the coefficient of determination (R2),

     adjusted coefficient of determination (adjusted R2), and the residual standard error. Model 1 regresses
   ResSquare on Volume and MarketCap (control variables). Model 2 regresses ResSquare on Volume and
                  MarketCap (control variables), and DiscTERP and AgCom (predictors).

     37
Table X12: Breusch-Pagan regression ANOVA

 Model Sum of Squares df Mean Square F Significance
 1 Regression 1,571,593,844.8 2 1,785,796,922.4 0.138 0.872

                                              12
         Residual 2.090×10   161 12,983,557,461

                                              12
         Total 2.094×10   163
 2 Regression 17,357,541,018 4 4,339,385,254.4 0.332 0.856

                                              12
         Residual 2.077×10   159 13,060,168,579

                                              12
         Total 2.094×10   163

Table X12: Analysis of variance (ANOVA) for hierarchical linear regression presenting the sum of squares of
 residual error, degrees of freedom, mean square of residual error, F-statistic of the regression, and 1-tailed p-
 value (Significance) of the F-test against the null hypothesis that all group means are equal. Model 1 regresses
   ResSquare on Volume and MarketCap (control variables). Model 2 regresses ResSquare on Volume and
                  MarketCap (control variables), and DiscTERP and AgCom (predictors).

Table X13: Breusch-Pagan regression coefficients

 Model Unstandardized β Coefficients       t Significance
                                           Standard Error
 1 (constant) 19 299.138 9 521.205 2.027 0.044
          MarketCap -0.487 4.104 -0.119 0.906
          Volume -8.606 20.805 -0.414 0.680
 2 (constant) -7 592.648 28 722.220 -0.264 0.792
          MarketCap -0.758 4.141 -0.183 0.855
          Volume -9.113 20.901 -0.436 0.663
         AgCom 190.651 290.933 0.655 0.513
          DiscTERP -527.726 701.890 -0.752 0.453

   Table X13: Regression coefficient analysis showing the unstandardized coefficient (unstandardized β),
 coefficient standard error, the t-value (t), and the 1-tailed p-value (Significance) of the Student’s t-test against
   the null hypothesis that the coefficient is 0, for each regression variable. Model 1 regresses ResSquare on
Volume and MarketCap (control variables). Model 2 regresses ResSquare on Volume and MarketCap (control
                           variables), and DiscTERP and AgCom (predictors).

     38
X.iii.iii. White’s homoscedasticity test

Table X14: White’s regression model summary

                                     2               2
 Model R       Adjusted R     Standard Error of Estimate
 1 0.006 -0.006 113,694.017

 Table X14: Model summary of hierarchical linear regression presenting the coefficient of determination (R2),

    adjusted coefficient of determination (adjusted R2), and the residual standard error. Model 1 regresses
                                  ResSquare on Pred and PredSquare.

Table X15: White’s regression ANOVA

 Model Sum of Squares df Mean Square F Significance
 1 Regression 12,785,297,765 2 6,392,648,882.7 0.495 0.611

                                              12
         Residual 2.081×10   161 12,926,329,486

                                              12
         Total 2.094×10   163

Table X15: Analysis of variance (ANOVA) for hierarchical linear regression presenting the sum of squares of
 residual error, degrees of freedom, mean square of residual error, F-statistic of the regression, and 1-tailed p-
 value (Significance) of the F-test against the null hypothesis that all group means are equal. Model 1 regresses
                                  ResSquare on Pred and PredSquare.

Table X16: White’s regression coefficients

 Model Unstandardized β Coefficients       t Significance
                                           Standard Error
 1 (constant) -39,748.606 171,152.002 -0.232 0.817
          Pred -0.073 7.244 -0.010 0.992
          PredSquare 374.442 2,223.846 0.168 0.866

   Table X16: Regression coefficient analysis showing the unstandardized coefficient (unstandardized β),
 coefficient standard error, the t-value (t), and the 1-tailed p-value (Significance) of the Student’s t-test against
the null hypothesis that the coefficient is 0, for each regression variable. Model 1 regresses ResSquare on Pred
                                           and PredSquare.

     39
X.iii.iv. Multicollinearity test

Table X17: VIF test for multicollinearity

 Model Collinearity Tolerance Statistics VIF
 1 MarketCap 0.823 1.215
          Volume 0.823 1.215
 2 MarketCap 0.813 1.229
          Volume 0.821 1.219
          DiscTERP 0.984 1.016
          AgCom 0.994 1.006

Table X17: Variance inflation factor (VIF) analysis showing the collinearity tolerance and VIF statistic. Model
 1 regresses AgSub on Volume and MarketCap (control variables). Model 2 regresses AgSub on Volume and
                  MarketCap (control variables), and DiscTERP and AgCom (predictors).

V.iii.v. Student’s t-distribution equality of variances test

Table X18: Levene’s test for equality of group variances

                                              F Significance
 AgSub 2.891 0.097

   Table X18: Summary of Levene’s test for equality of variances in the AgSub variable between the High
   Discount : Low Commitment group and Low Discount : High Commitment group, presenting the F-test
               statistic and the 1-sided p-value against the null hypothesis that variances are equal.

     40