LEARNING FROM INVESTOR ATTENTION

EXAMINING THE PREDICTIVE POWER OF INVESTOR ATTENTION
ON MARKET RETURNS WITH MACHINE LEARNING

LUDVIG HARTLER

LUKAS UHRSTR ¨OM

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2022
Learning From Investor Attention: Examining the Predictive Power of
Investor Attention on Market Returns with Machine Learning

Abstract:

   We study the predictive properties of investor attention on time series market returns.
   Extending an earlier proposed index of investor attention aggregated from twelve
   popularly studied attention proxies, we show that it strongly predicts excess returns
   on the stock market. Adding to an inconclusive body of literature, our results suggest
   that when attention is high, the market earns higher returns in the subsequent months.
   Uniquely, we examine whether a deep learning method from the machine learning
   catalog, Long-Short Term Memory, can enhance the predictability. Our results show
   that the nonlinear patterns in the data studied in this paper are not strong enough to
   yield economic gains.

Keywords:

   investor attention, machine learning, PLS, LSTM, RNN, time series, stock market,
   stock returns, nonlinearity

Authors:

   Ludvig Hartler (24672)
   Lukas Uhrstr¨om (24706)

Tutor:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Ludvig Hartler and Lukas Uhrstr¨om, 2022

                                      1
Attention is inherently limited (Kahneman, 1973). While much research has been devoted
to understanding its effects on stock-specific returns (Barber & Odean, 2008; Ben-Rephael,
Da, & Israelsen, 2017; Da, Engelberg, & Gao, 2011; Dellavigna & Pollet, 2009; Peng &
Xiong, 2006), recent literature suggests it has a market-wide impact (Chen, Tang, Yao, &
Zhou, 2022). Given the presence of behavioral biases in the decision making of investors
and the complex features of the market, this impact might not necessarily be linear in
nature (Banerjee & Green, 2015; Hsieh, 1991). Despite the growing interest in nonlinear
technical analysis since the entrance of machine learning in asset pricing, there is yet little
empirical research on the nonlinear relationship between investor attention and time series
market returns.
    This article adds to the subfield of stock prediction studying the impact of investor
attention on the time series of market returns. Our starting point is twelve proxies for
investor attention put forth by Chen et al. (2022), with which we test for a combined
predictive power on market returns in and out of sample. Subsequently, we broaden the
understanding of nonlinearity in the data by applying a machine learning method capable
of modeling complex relationships. In contrast with prominent cross-sectional literature
claiming stock prediction to be enhanced by allowing for nonlinearity (Gu, Kelly, & Xiu,
2020; Kozak, Nagel, & Santosh, 2020), we find no robust evidence for the same applying
to the predictive power of investor attention.
    Our contributions are fourfold. First, we add to the evidence that investor attention
has predictive power on market returns and uniquely show its maintained impact beyond
2017. Second, we show that a linear regression on components following a dimensionality
reduction outperforms our nonlinear machine learning model as the chosen method for
our dataset, which directly contributes to answering Chen et al. (2022) who called for
machine learning applications as important future research on the topic. Third, we
enrich the discussion surrounding the sign of the coefficient explaining the relationship
between investor attention and stock returns. The literature is inconclusive (Campbell &
Thompson, 2007), presenting evidence for positive (Gervais, Kaniel, & Mingelgrin, 2001; Li
& Yu, 2012) and negative (Barber & Odean, 2008; Chen et al., 2022) slope signs depending
on the examined measure used to proxy investor attention. By adopting identical methods
and still finding results opposing those of Chen et al. (2022), we show that minor data
differences can yield an impact on the direction of the slope. Lastly, we provide the most
comprehensive investor attention index to date (to the authors’ knowledge at the time
of writing), extending the time horizon of the attention index developed by Chen et al.
(2022). In aggregating the twelve individual proxies for the attention of investors, the
                                      2
index widely encapsulates market-level investor attention. Thus, its usage areas extend
outside stock market return prediction, much like the more well-researched sentiment
indices (Baker & Wurgler, 2007; Huang, Jiang, Tu, & Zhou, 2015).
   The main empirical approach of this paper is as follows. Given the inherently unob-
servable nature of investor attention (Chen et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2015), we consider
a number of frequently used proxies. In spite of their low individual contribution to
predictive power, a combination of these proxies has shown to have predictive power on
market returns (Chen et al., 2022). In order to separate the investor attention from these
proxies and disregard noise, we use two separate approaches. In the linear benchmark, we
extract the common components through a factor structure model before doing repeated
regressions maximizing explanatory power and minimizing the error term. In our search
for nonlinearity, we relax the assumption of a factor structure model to allow Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNNs) to instead rid itself of noise by training itself on data before
measuring its maximum predictive power on a separate test set.
   Our model choice for the linear benchmark is Partial Least Squares (PLS), which
since its creation by Wold (1966) has been subsequently developed into the version we
apply (Kelly & Pruitt, 2015; Light, Maslov, & Rytchkov, 2017). In short, PLS was chosen
due to being the best approach applied by Chen et al. (2022) since it elegantly deals
with dimensionality reduction and autocorrelation, and because it has a strong history of
successful applications in quantitative finance (Chen et al., 2022; Light et al., 2017).
   We then apply a Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) to identify potential nonlinearity
in the relationship between investor attention and market returns through a comparison
with our linear results (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997). LSTMs have a built-in memory
making it apt for time series analysis (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) and have been
successful in financial modeling (Roondiwala, Patel, & Varma, 2017). Additionally, LSTM
employs a rolling time window, allowing it to mitigate the issue of concept drift in public
markets - a phenomenon that is well-known, unsolved as an issue and associated with
market efficiency (Nagel, 2021).
    We find that our PLS investor attention index, used as a single predictor, has significant
predictive power of excess returns. Regressing excess returns of the stock market on our
investor attention measure, we are able to predict stock returns on a forecasting horizon
                                                                  2
from one month up to two years. We find an in-sample R of 12.23% for yearly excess
returns. Interestingly, we find that high (low) investor attention predicts higher (lower)
subsequent excess returns on the stock market. This finding contradicts earlier empirical
findings within the investor attention domain (Chen et al., 2022). It is in line, however,
                                      3
with the economic logic and theory laid out by Gervais et al. (2001) and Li and Yu
(2012). For all forecasting periods, we obtain highly significant and strictly positive slopes
peaking at 0.90% for monthly predictions and shrinking in increasing prediction horizon
to 0.28% at the two year forecast. This means that a 1% increase in investor attention
today predicts a 0.90% increase in next month’s excess return of the stock market. We
turn to forecasting out-of-sample using our investor attention measure and find that the
                                                                                                   2
predictive power remains for prediction horizons up until a year. We obtain an ROOS of
3.37% for monthly excess returns and 2.37% for yearly forecasts. The coefficients remain
strictly positive, in line with our findings in-sample.
   With the results of PLS as a benchmark, we then turn to predicting the excess
stock market return using LSTM. We find that LSTM underperforms relative to PLS.
                                                           2
Occasionally, we are able to obtain a positive ROOS on par with PLS (2.23% for the six
month forecast). However, the results are not robust over the prediction horizons and
highly volatile depending on hyperparameter choices.
    Our main points of analysis begin with the finding of a positive correlation between
investor attention and market excess returns, as indicated by the sign of the prediction
coefficient. The literature is inconclusive on what sign the coefficient should have, but
our analysis shows that the timing of investor attention vis-a-vis market returns may
be impactful. Our test examining the potential to enhance predictive power of investor
attention on stock returns show that nonlinear patterns are not sufficiently detectable
to yield economic gains. However, doubts pertaining to the compatibility between our
dataset and LSTM means that we are unable to make general conclusions.
    Our findings challenge the notion that increased investor attention predicts decreased
future returns, mainly argued to stem from the reversal of temporary price pressure (Chen
et al., 2022). Rather, the results we present suggest a stronger prevalence of increasing
visibility driving shocks in trader interest, and thus increasing demand in the short term,
aligned with the findings of Gervais et al. (2001).

In brief, our research question is:

Does investor attention have predictive power on market returns and can it be enhanced
                              by allowing for nonlinearity?

This article builds on several contemporary themes in financial research. First, our analysis
complements earlier literature studying the predictive power of investor attention on stock-
returns (Barber & Odean, 2008; Ben-Rephael et al., 2017; Da et al., 2011; Dellavigna &
                                      4
Pollet, 2009; Gervais et al., 2001; Peng & Xiong, 2006). Specifically, we expand on the
body of work examining the impact of investor attention on the aggregate market. Li and
Yu (2012) show that nearness to the Dow 52-week high, as a proxy for investor attention,
has predictability of aggregate market returns. Yuan (2015) finds in-sample evidence of
the relationship between investor attention and the stock market. We expand on the
research by Chen et al. (2022). First, we provide a direct extension of their suggested
investor attention index. Second, we put their twelve proxies for investor attention in a
machine learning context. Our findings adds to the inconclusive literature examining the
slope of coefficient in predicting returns from investor attention (Barber & Odean, 2008;
Chen et al., 2022; Da et al., 2011; Gervais et al., 2001; Li & Yu, 2012).
    We benchmark the application of machine learning models with linear models in asset
pricing, in coherence with Gu et al. (2020) and Kozak et al. (2020). Their work, however,
focuses not on time series but on the cross-section of returns, a subject attended to more
extensively in previous research. As such, we add to the relatively sparsely researched
field of machine learning applied to time series analysis of stock market returns (Cao, Lin,
Li, & Zhang, 2019; Roondiwala et al., 2017; Zhang, Chu, & Shen, 2021).
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I describes data and the
construction of proxies for investor attention. Section II explains the empirical approach.
Section III presents the empirical results and analysis. Section IV concludes.

    I Data and Construction of Attention Proxies

    We gather data and construct a series of attention proxies, based on the assumption
that true aggregated attention of investors is unobservable (Chen et al., 2022; Huang et al.,
2015). Despite the literature suggesting weak results for many proxies used in isolation,
Chen et al. showed investor attention to have strong predictive power once combined 2022
by aggregating twelve attention proxies. We follow their approach and use the following
proxies: abnormal trading volume (Barber & Odean, 2008), extreme returns (Barber &
Odean, 2008), past returns (Aboody, Lehavy, & Trueman, 2010), nearness to the Dow
52-week high and nearness to the Dow historical high (Li & Yu, 2012), analyst coverage
(Hirshleifer & Hong Teoh, 2003; Hirshleifer, Hsu, & Li, 2013; Peng, 2005), changes in
advertising expenses (Lou, 2014), media coverage (Barber & Odean, 2008; Fang & Peress,
2009), mutual fund inflow and outflow, Google search volume (Da et al., 2011), and the
number of document downloads on EDGAR (Drake, Roulstone, & Thornock, 2015; Lee,

                                      5
Ma, & Wang, 2015). We follow Chen et al. (2022) in collecting and computing these
measures. Here follows a detailed description of our data construction. Any discrepancies
contra Chen et al. (2022) is noted and explained.
                                               AV ol
   For abnormal trading volume A   , we compute the abnormal trading volume as
volume traded at the end of the month (EOM) for f irmi during montht in relation to the
average trading volume of f irmi during the last twelve months (LTM). We define extreme
          ERet
returns A     as the ratio of return for f irmi during montht to its average during LTM.
                 P Ret
Past returns A    are calculated as the cumulative monthly return for f irmi over LTM
at montht.
                                                 52wH
   We define nearness to the Dow 52-week high A    as the ratio between the level of
the Dow Jones EOM at montht to its highest level in the past 52 weeks at montht, and
                                      HisH
Nearness to the Dow historical high A    is computed as the ratio between the level of
the Dow Jones at EOM on montht to its highest historical level up to montht.
                       #AC
   For analyst coverage A   , we count the number of analyst forecasts of earnings
                                                                 CAD
per share (1 year ahead) for each f irmi. For changes in advertising expenses A
we calculate the log change in advertising expenses between yeart−1 and yeart. Due to
restricted access to the Compustat database where the data is collected, we deviate from
Chen et al. (2022) who collect monthly changes in advertising expenditure. We use the
yearly change for each company across all months during the year.
                                                  EDGAR
   To obtain the number of document downloads on EDGAR A     , we follow Ryans
(2017) in line with Chen et al. (2022). We download the pre-cleaned EDGAR Log File
Dataset and choose “Rpv” as the measure for number of document downloads on EDGAR.
Here, it is not clear which measure of EDGAR document downloads Chen et al. (2022)
uses. However, “Rpv” is suggested by the author Ryans (2017) since it was shown to
minimize bot downloads which can be considered noise (Ryans, 2017).
                                     Outf low
   For mutual fund outflows A      we calculate fund outflows using redemption of
                                                                                Inf low
shares for each mutualf undi during montht, and for fund inflows A      we aggregate
total new shares sold and “other sales” for each mutualf undi during montht.
                                                  M edia
   In collecting media coverage data A    , due to restricted access to the RavenPack
database used by Chen et al. (2022), we compute media coverage as the number of
news articles covering the largest companies in North America with respect to market
capitalization during the data time period, 2004 to 2021, simulating a value-weighted
approach adopted by Ma, Wang, and Zhang (2017). As suggested by Da et al. (2011) we
search for stock tickers in order to obtain results likely to contain news read by investors.
See Appendix I for a step-by-step description of how we filter and collect the data.
                                      6
                                    Google
   For Google search volume A     we obtain the Search Volume Index (SVI) from
Google Trends. It is indexed so that the montht where search volume peaked for f irmi
during the time period takes a value of 100 for f irmi. Here we obtain data for the same
                     M edia
tickers used in A    , a deviation from Chen et al. (2022) who uses all tickers on NYSE,
NASDAQ and AMEX. The lower quantity of data from Google Trends is countered by
the higher quality reached from manual downloads, since neither an API nor web crawler
can select the correct topic ID. We thus assure that a search of e.g. “COP” refers to the
searches interpreted by Google as pertaining to the stock of ConocoPhillips (including
misspellings) instead of the exact word “cop”. The manually collected data is available for
                                1
free public use on our github  and might itself constitute a small contribution to further
studies since the problem is noted in the literature (Da et al., 2011).
   Lastly, we obtain the data for our target variable, excess stock returns R, which we
define as monthly value-weighted aggregate stock return minus the U.S Treasury Bill-rate.
    All cross-sectional equity data is collected from companies listed on the three major
American stock exchanges NYSE, AMEX or NASDAQ during each respective period. We
                 AV ol   ERet   P Ret   52wH    HisH    #AC       CAD
obtain data for A   , A    , A   , A    , A    , A    and A    for the time period
                                                 Outf low    Inf low    M edia        Google
January 1980 to October 2021. Data for A      , A     , A     and A     is obtained
                                            EDGAR
from January 2004 to October 2021. Finally, for A      the only available data extends
                                       2
from January 2004 to June 2017 .
                 AV ol    ERet    P Ret    Outf low   Inf low
   Data for A   , A   , A   , A      A     are obtained from the Center for Re-
                                                                 52wH       HisH
search in Security Prices (CRSP) database. We collect data for A    and A    from
                                  #AC
the Capital IQ database. The data for A    is obtained through the Institutional Brokers
                                        CAD
Estimate System (IBES) database, data for A    collected from the Compustat database
                               M edia
and the news counts for A     are obtained from the Dow Jones Factiva. Lastly, we
                  Google                                                         EDGAR
extract data for A     from Google Trends by manual downloads and data for A
from the EDGAR log file dataset provided by Ryans (2017). Table 1 reports a summary
of the construction of our twelve investor attention proxies.

   1
    github.com/lukuhr
   2
    We contacted the Structured Data division at the SEC who claimed they can provide no information
on why the EDGAR log file dataset only extends to 2017. The same limit is imposed on the research
conducted by Chen et al. (2022).
                                      7
                    Table 1: The Twelve Proxies

                Name Source Sample period

                       AV ol
              A          CRSP Jan 1980 - October 2021
                    ERet
              A          CRSP Jan 1980 - October 2021
                      P Ret
              A          CRSP Jan 1980 - October 2021
                   52wH
               A         Capital IQ Jan 1980 - October 2021
                    HisH
               A         Capital IQ Jan 1980 - October 2021
                 #AC
              A           IBES Jan 1980 - October 2021
                 CAD
              A         Compustat Jan 1980 - October 2021
                       Inf low
              A          CRSP Jan 2004 - October 2021
                      Outf low
              A          CRSP Jan 2004 - October 2021
                      M edia
               A          Factiva Jan 2004 - October 2021
                      Google
               A       Google Trends Jan 2004 - October 2021
                 EDGAR
              A           Ryans Jan 2004 - June 2017

                Table 1 summarizes all variable names, the source from
                where the data was obtained and the sample periods for
                 our twelve proxies of investor attention.

   We compute monthly measures at the firm level before aggregating up to market-level
for all attention proxies. For all measures where available, we use equal weighting in order
to capture investor attention from a variety of different stocks and thus avoid biasing
the attention towards firms with high market capitalization. Equal weighting is also
applied by (Chen et al., 2022; Jondeau, Zhang, & Zhu, 2019; Rapach, Ringgenberg, &
Zhou, 2016). Table 2 describes the median, first- and third- quartile, skewness, first-order
autocorrelation and sample period of the twelve investor attention proxies.

                                      8
                    Table 2: Summary Statistics

           Name 1st Quartile Median 3rd Quartile Skewness p(1)

               AV ol
           A            -0.65 -0.14 0.45 1.40 0.50
              ERet
           A            -0.47 0.12 0.60 -0.80 0.17
               P Ret
           A            -0.64 0.05 0.52 0.08 0.92
             52wH
           A            -0.20 0.41 0.64 -2.42 0.86
             HisH
           A            -0.36 0.40 0.77 -1.71 0.93
           #AC
           A            -0.83 0.07 0.81 -0.04 0.98
            CAD
           A            -0.42 -0.13 0.43 1.67 0.90
               Inf low
           A            -0.37 -0.37 -0.37 2.46 0.94
               Outf low
           A            -0.37 -0.36 -0.36 2.79 0.90
               M edia
           A            -0.47 -0.13 0.25 1.92 0.60
               Google
           A            -0.73 -0.22 0.31 1.74 0.93
            EDGAR
           A            -0.56 0.14 0.68 -0.43 0.82

            Table 2 reports the 1st- and 3rd quartiles, median, skewness and first-
                                                                           AV ol    ERet
          order autocorrelation of the twelve attention proxies A    , A    ,
             P Ret   52wH   HisH    #AC    CAD   Inf low   Outf low   M edia   Google
          A    , A    ,A    , A    , A    , A     , A      , A    , A    and
          EDGAR
        A     . All variables are standardized to normal.

   We restrict the data set to the time period 1980 to 2017 in order to compare the
distribution of our data proxies vis-`a-vis those constructed by Chen et al. (2022).We
conclude that our data aligns closely to the measures presented by Chen et al. (2022) for
the data obtained through CRSP, Capital IQ, IBES and Compustat. As expected, there
                                       CAD   M edia   Google       EDGAR
are discrepancies in the distributions of A   , A    , A    , and A      where we are
restricted by database access to reproduce identical data. In particular, we are cautious
of the discrepancies in collecting Google Search- and Media Coverage data. The proxies
could pick up different signals due to the value-weighted nature of our approach. Table
A.2 reporting the summary statistics of our data during the time period January 1980 to
December 2017 can be found in the Appendix.

                                      9
                 II Empirical Approach

A Partial Least Squares

Methodologically, we begin by applying Partial Least Squares (PLS) as a benchmark to
our nonlinear approach. Since introduced by Wold (1966), PLS has been refined and
popularized as a method related to both principal component analysis (PCA) and ordinary
least squares (OLS), but different from both. Instead of maximizing variation of the
independent variables, they are maximized according to their explanatory power vis-a-vis
the dependent variable. Its dimensionality reduction tackles the problem of autoregression
and makes it particularly useful for time series analysis, and the method has found plenty
of popularity in finance research (Chen et al., 2022; Kelly & Pruitt, 2015; Light et al.,
2017).
    In this subsection, we consider a model in which excess returns on the stock market is a
                                                                      ∗
linear function of the true but unobservable investor attention A plus some unpredictable
                               ∗
noise-term ε unrelated to A  as depicted in equation (1).

                                                          ∗
                              rt+1 = α + βAt + εt+1 (1)

where rt+1 is the realized excess stock return at time t + 1. Due to the unobservable
               ∗
nature of A , equation (1) describes the optimal but infeasible best forecast (Kelly &
                                                                                     ∗
Pruitt, 2015). In our case, the true but unobservable investor attention A  is a latent
factor that drives the systematic variation of both our target variable, excess returns on
the stock market, and our predictors, the twelve investor attention proxies. Intuitively, we
are in need of a factor estimation step where we can identify the true investor attention
driving excess returns from our proxies and remove all noise of the individual attention
proxies unrelated to excess returns. To do so, we assume the data can be described by
an approximate factor model. Specifically, we assume a linear factor structure for our
investor attention proxies. Let At represent an N × 1 vector of our attention proxies at
                                     T
time t such that At = (A1,t, ..., AN,t) , where N is the number of attention proxies. The
structural model for Ai,t(i = 1, ..., N ) is given by

                                                      ∗
                         Ai,t = ηi,0 + ηi,1At + ηi,2Et + ei,t (2)

         ∗
where A  is the true and unobservable investor attention in equation (1), ηi,1 is the factor
                                                                            ∗
loading that captures the sensitivity of attention proxy Ai,t to A , Et is the approximation-

                                      10
error common for all proxies that are unrelated to excess return, and ei,t is the noise
idiosyncratic to attention proxy Ai .
    In order to make predictions, we extract the subset of factors that influences our
target variable, stock market excess returns, by implementing Partial Least Squares (PLS).
Technically, the method we apply is a special case of the Three-Pass Regression Filter
(3PRF) pioneered by Kelly and Pruitt (2015) and further developed by Light et al. (2017).
It serves as a way to replicate a PLS forecast by running three passes through separate OLS
regressions, given three assumptions: 1) the predictors are standardized in a preliminary
step 2) the first two OLS regression passes are run excluding constants and 3) proxies
are automatically selected (Kelly & Pruitt, 2015). We will refer to them both as PLS
throughout this paper since they are used synonymously in adjacent research (Chen et al.,
2022). The first pass is a time series regression of our attention proxies Ai,t on realized
excess return rt+1 as a proxy for future excess returns on the stock market.

                              Ai,t = π0 + πirt+1 + ui,t, (3)

where πi is the slope to be estimated and serves as each individual attention proxy’s
loading on the true target variable, excess returns. Consider equation (1), where rt+1 is
                                                        ∗t
driven by the true investor attention A . Then follows that equation (3) describes how
                        ∗t
Ai,t is related to A  instrumented by future excess returns rt+1. The second pass is a
cross-sectional regression of Ai,t on the estimated loadings in equation (3) πiˆ  for each time
period t
                                                     P LS
                              Ai,t = ct + At πˆi + vi,t, (4)

          Attention
where At is the estimated measure of true investor attention at time t. The collective
output of equation (4) is our investor attention index and predictor used to estimate
equation (1) and forecast stock market excess returns. Note that if the true loadings πi are
unknown, and thus the slope πˆi in equation (3) approximates the loadings πi. Naturally,
                                                                                                          ∗
if the true relationship between our attention proxies Ai,t and true investor attention At
                                                                                                  Attention
were known, we could consistently estimate our investor attention measure At by
running cross-sectional regressions of Ai,t on πi for each period. Figure 1 describes the
time series index of market-level investor attention between January 1980 and October
2021. All numbers are standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of
zero. Investor attention was abnormally low during the 2008 financial crisis. Sicherman,
Loewenstein, Seppi, and Utkus (2015) finds that attention falls by almost 10% after market
declines. This phenomenon was attributed to the ostrich effect (Karlsson, Loewenstein,
                                      11
& Seppi, 2009) coined after the metaphor of sticking one’s head in the sand. Notably,
this psychological bias is not detectable in the data pertaining to the COVID-19 crisis.
Investor attention reaches its all-time high in March 2020 and continues on a high-level
throughout the data period’s end in October 2021.

                                                                          Attention
  Figure 1 displays the market-level Investor Attention Index A       over the the
   time period Jan 1980 to Oct 2021. The index is standardized to normal.

    In the empirical implementation described in Section I, we apply the third pass OLS to
                                                                    Attention
examine the forecasting power of the attention index A      . Crucially, we complement
the assessment of investor attentions’ predictive power by testing our model out-of-sample.

B Long-Short Term Memory

The Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) is a type of Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
and differs from traditional neural networks by its ability to store an internal state
generally considered as a memory (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997). As demonstrated by
Zhang et al. (2021) this makes LSTM models well suited for handling complex non-linear
relationships in time series data. Additionally, its application of a rolling window is a
technique appropriate for mitigating concept drift (Nagel, 2021). The model is restricted
at each month t to only consider data w months back, where w is the size of the time
window.

                                      12
   The following description of our LSTM method assumes the reader possesses prior
knowledge of the basic mechanisms of a traditional neural network. Appendix II provides
a more detailed description of Neural Networks and LSTM. For a thorough guide on
Neural Networks and Deep Learning, see Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville (2016) and
for a well-written book on machine learning applications in finance, consult Nagel (2021).
    The units, often referred to as ’neurons’ in the machine learning literature, in an LSTM
hidden layer are linked together by the network’s feedback connections. At each time step
the LSTM neuron passes information downstream in the network for a prediction at time
t. However, the same information is also passed sideways to the next neuron in line to be
considered in the prediction at time t + 1.
    Each LSTM neuron consists of four essential parts: A cell state Ct−1,passed on from
previous LSTM units, acts as the network’s long term memory. Second, a forget gate ft
controls what should be removed from the cell state. Third, an input gate determining
what should be added to the cell state Ct. Finally, the output gate ht executes the
LSTM’s output at time t that serves two purposes: as the network’s prediction at time t
and its short-term memory at time t+1. Below follows a condensed description of the
processes inside an LSTM unit. The first process takes place in the forget gate. The
process defining what part of the cell state Ct−1 to forget is given by

                               ft = σ (Wf [xt, ht−1] + bf ), (5)

where σ is a sigmoid function with output between 0 and 1; Wf a matrix of parameters
commonly referred to as weights; xt the vector of inputs at time t; ht−1 the short term
memory and prediction in the previous time step; and bf the noise-term of the forget gate
ft. The second process determines what new information to combine with the remainder
of old cell state Ct−1 and subsequently form the updated cell state Ct. The process of
updating is given by
                                 it = σ (Wi [ xt, ht−1] + bi), (6)

                            C˜t = tanh (WC [ xt, ht−1] + bC ), (7)

                                 Ct = Ct · it + Ct−1 · ft, (8)

where σ is a sigmoid function; tanh a hyperbolic tangent function with output between
-1 and 1; Wi and WC are weight matrices; and bi and bC the noise-terms of it and C˜t
respectively. The third and final process constructs the prediction at time t by means of
two subsequent calculations considering both the new information xt combined with the
                                      13
short term memory ht-1 and the updated cell state Ct. The output process is given by

                                  ot = (Wo[xt, ht−1] + bo), (9)

                                    ht = ot · tanh(Ct), (10)

where ot is the part of the output at time t contributed to by xt and ht − 1; Wo a weight
matrix; and bo the noise-term of ot ; ht the prediction at time t; and Ct the cell state
formed in equation (9).
   Next, preparatory choices are considered in order to optimize the model. LSTMs and
other neural networks have the capacity to approximate any underlying model and thus
make predictions with arbitrary accuracy in-sample (Cybenko, 1989). This is by virtue of
their nonlinear nature and vast number of trainable parameters (Cybenko, 1989). Thus, a
main challenge while applying an LSTM is how to avoid overfitting the sample data and
optimize for out-of-sample accuracy (Gu et al., 2020).
   First, the tuning of hyperparameters controls a model’s complexity and works as
machine learning’s major antidote to overfitting. There is no universally applicable
method of how to best tune hyperparameters (Gu et al., 2020; Nagel, 2021). We follow
prominent research by Gu et al. (2020) and dedicate a set of our data as a validation
sample in order to choose hyperparameters adaptively. In chronological order, we split our
data into a training, validation and test set. The first data set is dedicated to training the
model. The second part serves as a benchmark in a simulated out-of-sample test in the
current state. The validation data is thus being restricted from the model during training,
and used to evaluate prediction accuracy before the model adjusts its weights again. The
test data is left untouched for true out-of-sample prediction evaluation. To simulate
real-time out-of-sample testing while predicting, it is crucial that the network is set up so
that it is not informed at time t by information occurring in time t + 1. Thus, we normalize
the three data sets separately according to its own mean and standard-deviation.
   We apply Mean Squared Errors (MSE), also used by Gu et al. (2020) to evaluate the
model’s accuracy on validation data, and Adam optimization algorithm to minimize the
loss, also applied by Yadav, Jha, and Sharan (2020) and Zhang et al. (2021). To avoid
overfitting, we add two regularization terms to the loss function called elastic. Elastic
net combines lasso regularization (L1) and ridge regularization (L2). L1 regularization
serves to penalize the number of weights used in the model, incentivizing the model to
rid non-essential parameters. The L2 regularization term penalizes the total absolute
values of the weights in the network which prompts to shrink the size of any individual
                                      14
parameter. In effect, the network is incentivized by the elastic net regularization to find
the best balance between minimizing in-sample errors, the number of parameters and
shrinking the size of parameters in use. The extended loss function is given by
                                              
                     ˆ          ˆ        1 − α   ˆ2       ˆ
                 Lenet( β) = M SE( β) + λ        Σ βi + αΣ|β  i|               (11)
                                               2

where βˆ are the trained parameters , MSE the Mean Squared Error-term, λ the learning
rate and α the parameter balancing the presence of added penalty terms. Remaining
preparatory steps include selecting the number of epochs, the time window size and the
network’s depth and width. The number of epochs refers to the number of passes of
training and validating the model taken before choosing the best performing model. Thus,
an increasing number of epochs allows more parameter updates. The depth and width of
a network describes how many parameters each layer contains and secondly how many
layers of neurons the network should include. Here again, no universal best-practices
apply (Gu et al., 2020; Nagel, 2021) and we exercise recursive testing to obtain the best
prediction accuracy.
   Given the aforementioned opaque nature and strong ability of LSTM networks to
model complexity, in-sample predictions are rarely of interest while applying machine
learning models of akin character. Thus, our focus while applying LSTM is solely to
compare its out-of-sample accuracy to our PLS model. Next, we conduct empirical testing
and benchmark the prediction accuracy of our linear and nonlinear models.

          III Empirical Results and Analysis

In this section we forecast stock market returns using our PLS. Sequentially we compare
the methods in order to bring light to our hypothesis of nonlinearity in the relationship
between investor attention and excess market returns.

A Partial Least Squares

To examine the in-sample predictive power of investor attention on excess market returns
we apply the third pass regression of PLS, which is a univariate predictive regression given
by
                                                        Attention
                          Rt+h = α + βAt + εt+h, (12)

                                      15
where Rt+h is the average excess stock return over the forecast horizon h, where h = 1,
                                 Attention
3, 6, 12 and 24 months; At is the estimated slope in equation (4) and measure of
investor attention at time t; β the slope to be estimated; and εt+h the noise-term unrelated
      Attention
to At .
   For in-sample predictions, we use the full data set spanning from January 1980 to
                                       AV ol   ERet   P Ret   52wH       HisH
October 2021 for attention measures A   , A   , A   , A    and A    ; from January
                                Inf low    Outf low    M edia        Google
2004 to October 2021 for A     , A      , A     and A    ; and January 2004 to June
         EDGAR
2017 for A       to approximate the loadings πˆi in equation (3) and sequentially estimate
  Attention
At in equation (4). We forecast excess returns Rt+h in the predictive regression
displayed in equation (12) over the full time period. To evaluate the in-sample prediction
                                       2
we use the commonly applied R -metric, also used by Chen et al. (2022).
    We find that the market-level investor attention has in-sample predictive power over
stock returns. Our results are significant for all forecasting horizons. In predicting next
                                                                                       2
month’s return between January 1980 and October 2021 we find an in-sample R of 3.21%
                                                                                       2
and the explanatory power increases until the yearly forecast horizon where R peaks at
                            Attention
12.23%, implying that A       can explain 12.23% of the time variation in the yearly
excess return of the stock market. Furthermore, the betas are significant for all prediction
horizons. The largest coefficient slope is obtained for monthly forecasts and declines as
the prediction horizon increases. The coefficient under monthly predictions is 0.90%. The
corresponding for 24 months is 0.28%. Since all our data is standardized, this means that
1 standard-deviation increase in investor attention at time t predicts a 0.90% increase
in excess returns in the consecutive month. Annualized, this equates to 10.8%, which
is in the higher ranges of common macro economic predictors. An equal increase in the
dividend–price ratio, and the net payout ratio approximately increases the risk premium
by 3.60% and 10.2% per year, respectively (Jacob Boudoukh & Roberts, 2007; Lettau &
Ludvigson, 2001).
    Our in-sample prediction performs significantly better than Chen et al. (2022) who’s
  2
R results are lower for all forecast horizons. However, the time periods over which we
conduct in-sample predictions differ, and thus we proceed by restricting the data set
                                                                                                          2
to the same time period, January 1980 to December 2017. Notably, our in-sample R
increases to 3.31% at the monthly horizon and reaches 14.5% at the yearly horizon. All
coefficient slopes are significant and follow the same pattern - positive slopes decreasing
                                                                                2
in the prediction horizon. Table 3 summarizes the in-sample forecast R and betas over
both time periods.

                                      16
                     Table 3: In-Sample Results

    Time Period Statistic h = 1 h = 3 h = 6 h = 12 h = 24

                                            2
                         In-sample R (%) 3.24 3.69 6.96 12.23 5.82
    Jan 1980 - Oct 2021                         ∗∗∗     ∗∗∗     ∗∗∗     ∗∗∗     ∗∗∗
                           β (%) 0.90     0.58     0.57     0.55     0.28
                                            2
                         In-sample R (%) 3.21 5.96 10.69 14.55 9.52
    Jan 1980 - Dec 2017                         ∗∗∗     ∗∗∗     ∗∗∗     ∗∗∗     ∗∗∗
                           β (%) 0.88     0.73     0.71     0.56     0.30

      Table 3 reports the in-sample results and β over the two time periods Jan 1980 -
       Oct 2021 and Jan 1980 - 2017. The results follow from the predictive regression in
                                                             Attention
      equation (12) where Rt + h is regressed on A       . *** indicate a p-value
       below 0.001.

In-sample prediction allows for usage of all available data and thus offers more accurate
forecasting. However, prominent financial research such as Campbell and Thompson
(2007) and Welch and Goyal (2008) widely argues that out-of-sample predictions more
authentically reflect real-time predictive power. Accordingly, we proceed by applying PLS
on out-of-sample forecasting.
    In forecasting out-of-sample, we are restricted to use only the data available up until
time t to make a prediction of stock returns at time t + 1. Sequentially, the latest time
period used in the first pass given by equation (3) is rt, and as such the latest observations
                                                                                      Attention
of our attention proxies Ai are at time t − 1 . In the second pass At is estimated
using data from month 1 through t. We apply the latest available loadings πi at every
month t in the second pass of estimating the model. Using all the sample data we estimate
the initial predictive regression in equation (12). Thus the out-of-sample forecasting
regression is given by equation (13) where αˆ and βˆ are the estimated coefficients of
equation (12). As we predict the stock return later in time we repeat the passes and
re-estimate equation (13) for each month using the latest available data. For instance, to
forecast excess returns at time t + 3 we use data up until t + 2 to estimate our predictive
regression.
    We follow Chen et al. (2022) and devote 40% of the data to fit the initial predictive
            3
regression . However, we add two months to have the sample data end at the end of a
calendar year. Our sample data thus spans from January 1980 to December 1996 and we
forecast monthly out-of-sample stock market returns between January 1997 and October

    3
    Chen et al. (2022) uses 180 out of 456 months as their initial sample which is 39.5%, circa 40% of
the data rounded to end at the calendar year.
                                      17
2021. To measure the accuracy of our out-of-sample predictions we apply the commonly
         2
used ROOS metric proposed by Campbell and Thompson (2007), also used by Chen et al.
                  2
(2022). The ROOS metric benchmarks the prediction against the historical average from
the first month in the sample until time t. Logically, the model’s prediction is deemed to
be insignificant if the performance is worse than the historical average.
    We find that our predictions are still significant for all forecasting horizons but 24
                                                                                       2
months, in line with the findings of Chen et al. (2022). We obtain an ROOS of 1.09% on
the monthly horizon and 1.76% for predictions 3 months ahead.
    We continue by imposing theoretically motivated restrictions and adjustments to the
predictive model. First, we force predictions of excess returns - the market premium -
to be non-negative in line with economic theory suggested by Campbell and Thompson
(2007). We find that non-negative restriction improves prediction accuracy to 1.74 %
at the monthly horizon, and peaking at 2.29% for quarterly forecasts. Second, Light
et al. (2017) suggests that the loadings πi can be substituted by the average loadings πi
of the previous periods to estimate the coefficient in equation (4) more precisely. This
assumes that time does not influence the relationship between investor attention and
excess returns on the stock market (Chen et al., 2022; Light et al., 2017). We use both the
historical average of the loadings πi at each month t as well as a 5 year averaging scheme.
In contrast to Chen et al. (2022) we observe that applying the most recently estimated
loadings πi yields the most accurate predictions. This suggests that the relationship
between investor attention and stock returns changes over time (Light et al., 2017) and
hints at the potential of LSTM to improve prediction accuracy.
                                                                          2
   We observe that Chen et al. (2022) obtains a higher ROOS , and thus we proceed
by examining what differs between our tests. First, we change the data time period to
January 1980 to December 2017, and split our in-sample and out-of-sample data according
                                                                                     2
to Chen et al. (2022). In shortening the time period, we find a higher ROOS for all forecast
horizons culminating during monthly predictions at 3.37%. Notably, we find a significant
  2
ROOS for the 24-month forecast of 0.55%, not found by earlier research. Still, the results
during shorter prediction horizons are still not quite in line with Chen et al. (2022).
    Second, we impose a non-negative return premium, as reported by Chen et al. (2022).
Interestingly, this deteriorates the prediction performance, albeit still yielding significant
results. Chen et al. (2022) applies different averaging schemes of loadings πi including 5
year average, 10 year average and the average of all available loadings at time t. They do
                                                                                   2
not, however, report which averaging scheme yields their presented ROOS . We implement
                                                                                           2
all their reported averaging schemes, but do not observe an improved ROOS . All else
                                      18
equal this should yield equal results. Thus, we have replicated all implementations of
out-of-sample forecasting reported by Chen et al. (2022). We conclude that the one source
                                                                         CAD   M edia
left to explain the discrepancy lies in our data differences for the variables A    , A     ,
  Google       EDGAR
A    and A     . Table 4 summarizes the out-of-sample predictions using the best
performing models for each respective time period.

                   Table 4: Out-of-sample Results

                                 2
                      ROOS (%) for Data Period: 1980 - 2021

      Forecast Horizon Unrestricted Forecast Restricted for Non-negative Prediction
           h = 1 1.09 1.74
           h = 3 1.76 2.29
           h = 6 1.48 2.24
           h = 12 0.01 1.60

                                 2
                      ROOS (%) for Data Period: 1980 - 2017

      Forecast Horizon Unrestricted Forecast Restricted for Non-negative Prediction
           h = 1 3.37 1.81
           h = 3 2.10 1.11
           h = 6 2.67 1.82
           h = 12 2.37 1.80

       Table 4 shows the out-of-sample results and β for the two time periods Jan 1980
       - Oct 2021 and Jan 1980 - 2017 over the prediction horizon h, where h = 1, 3, 6
       and 12 months. In the Restricted for Non-Negative Prediction, we impose the
       economic restriction of a non-negative market premium, substituting negative
        forecasts by 0. No economic restrictions are imposed on the Unrestricted Forecast.
       *** indicate a p-value ¡ 0.001.

    A notable aspect of our results is the positive sign of the prediction coefficient, which
is different from the negative coefficient identified by Chen et al. (2022) with a similar
array of proxies. However, the literature suggests that the sign of the slope is not definite
(Andrei & Hasler, 2020; Campbell & Thompson, 2007). The positive predictability of
investor attention is in line with the theory presented by George and Hwang (2001) and Li
and Yu (2012) present evidence that attention, captured by nearness to the 52-week high,
positively predicts excess market returns. Our findings support the economic phenomenon
                                      19
suggested by Gervais et al. (2001) who show that high attention, proxied by trading
volume, leads to future increases in stock returns driven by shocks in trader interest
from its increased visibility. However, we conclude that minor data differences yielded
an impact on the direction of the slope contra Chen et al. (2022), and thus we echo the
inconclusiveness regarding the coefficient previously addressed in the literature (Andrei &
Hasler, 2020; Campbell & Thompson, 2007).
   We observe that the effect is strongest in the short term (one month’s horizon) and
declines over time, in line with economically expected phenomena such as reversal from
temporary price pressure (Barber & Odean, 2008; Da et al., 2011) harmonious with the
theory of mean reversion to a stocks’ fundamentals, first presented by De Bondt and
Thaler (1985).

B Long-Short Term Memory

We begin our application of LSTM by testing the out-of-sample prediction accuracy, which
is then compared with the results of the PLS analysis.
    In order to find the best model setup for out-of-sample predictions, we make repeated
tests where a single variable is changed while the rest are held constant. We cycle through:
learning rates of 0.01 and 0.001; the number of epochs set to 100, and 200; window step
size of 6, and 12; and the elastic net penalization constant α to 0.1. Importantly, we reset
the layer weights after each test. A summary of the model setups examined is reported in
Table 5.

                  Table 5: LSTM Model Setup

   LSTM Architecture Hyperparameters and Regularization Data Split

   Input Layer (11 and 12 inputs) Learning Rates: 0.01 and 0.001 Training 80%
   LSTM Layer (8 Neurons) Dropout: 0.2 and 0.4 Validation 5%
   Dense Layer (4 Neurons, ReLU) Window Step Size: 6 and 12 Test 15%
   Output layer (1 Neuron, Linear) Alpha: 0.1 and 0.01

   Table 5 summarizes the LSTM model setup used in our tests. The left-most column
   describes the network architecture. The middle column describes hyperparameter and
    regularizer choices. The right-most column describes the share of data dedicated to
    training, validation and test data.

                                      20
   For comparison with PLS, we predict excess returns Rt+h over the same prediction
horizons where h = 1, 3, 6, 12 and 24 months. LSTM requires that all predictors, the
twelve attention proxies in our case, have the same time period. We restrict the dataset
from January 2004 to June 2017 and call this Data04−17. We also run the model omitting
              EDGAR
the predictor A      (which only has data until 2017) in order to extend all other
predictors to October 2021 and refer to it as Data04−21. We attribute the first 80% of the
months in each data set to training, 5% for the validation and use the remaining 15%
as test data. Running each respective model described in Table 5 we find that the best
performing model applies a learning rate of 0.01, 100 epochs and a window step size set to
                              2
6 months and yields an ROOS of 2.23% for Data04−21 which is on par with what we obtain
using PLS (2.24%). The data set in the LSTM is notably shorter however, considering all
proxies begin in 2004.
   We find that our LSTM model fails to outperform the PLS model in out-of-sample
predictions. While the is able to impressively fit in-sample data, we obtain negative
  2
ROOS scores for all horizons except for the half-year forecast using Data04−21. Adjusting
hyperparameters to mitigate the bias-variance trade-off (Kozak et al., 2020) improves the
forecast but yields no significant results.
   As neural networks is far from closed-form mathematics and more often likened to
a black box, identifying shortcomings is similarly more about trial-and-error debugging
than the transparent inference commonly possible in traditional statistics (Chollet, 2021).
That is why we turn towards finding and rectifying any eventual shortcomings in our
model with alternative means below.
   In order to draw conclusions on the absence of nonlinearity in our data, we intend
to set up a test where we can expect our LSTM to perform well out-of-sample. If our
LSTM accurately predicts a nonlinear relationship we know exists, we can discard that
the failure to find predictive power on excess returns in our investor attention data is due
to a computing problem. First, we measure the first-order autocorrelation of our excess
return data and find that it increases drastically as the prediction horizon expands. The
autocorrelation for average 24-month excess returns reaches 0.97 .
   We add a variable containing past returns up to time t to the input data that the
LSTM can use to predict returns at time t + 1. Given the high degree of autocorrelation
in the 24 month average excess return, we would expect to observe a substantial increase
in prediction performance, unless there is an issue in the model or data setup. We run the
                                                                                        2
LSTM prediction horizon and we instantly find a considerable spike in ROOS . Predicting
                                                                          2
average excess returns over the coming 24 months yields an ROOS of 40% without tuning
                                      21
any hyperparameter. This supports our ability to make conclusions about our data.
   LSTMs primary advantage over PLS is that it allows for nonlinear relationships
and interactions between the input variables and the predicted target. Hence, our null
hypothesis that there is insufficient nonlinearity in the data to improve its predictive
performance cannot be rejected. Our tests conclude that the existence of nonlinear
interplay between the twelve attention proxies and market returns is not great enough to
enhance prediction performance, at least within the data set used in this paper. However,
we are careful about generalizing our conclusion to an external setting.

                   IV Conclusion

Behavioral patterns and cognitive constraints have long been known to impact investors
decision-making on public markets, yet its impact on market returns has been sparsely
examined. This paper makes several contributions to this relatively thin body of research.
Chief of our findings is that the relationship between investor attention and market returns
is strong enough for economically meaningful gains to prediction. While the result has an
intuitive theoretical underpinning in the limitations of the human mind, no consensus has
been reached on whether the correlation is or ought to be positive or negatively correlated.
Our findings show that when attention is high, subsequent market returns are predicted
to increase in the following months.
    Uniquely, we examine whether the predictive abilities of investor attention are enhanced
through a Long-Short Term Memory, a machine learning model capable of predicting
complex nonlinear relationships. We find that closed-form dimensionality reduction
remains triumphant, and conclude that the existence of nonlinear interplay between the
twelve attention proxies and market returns is not great enough to enhance prediction
performance, at least within the data considered in this paper.
   Future research would do well to compare this predictive performance with a series
of cross-sectional and macro predictors to evaluate whether investor attention would
improve all-encompassing predictive models. With professional quantitative finance
steering towards character rich modeling, investor attention shows the potential to improve
prediction models similar to Kozak et al. (2020). Additionally, researchers could further
widen the understanding of investor attention by allowing for larger datasets and the
testing a broader series of machine learning methods. This could entail higher statistical
power in testing.

                                      22
References

Aboody, D., Lehavy, R., & Trueman, B. (2010). Limited attention and the earnings
       announcement returns of past stock market winners. Review of Accounting
       Studies, 15, 317–344.
Andrei, D., & Hasler, M. (2020). Dynamic attention behavior under return pre-
       dictability. Management Science, 66 (7), 2906–2928.
Baker, M., & Wurgler, J. (2007). Investor sentiment in the stock market. Journal
       of Economic Perspectives, 21 (2), 129–152.
Banerjee, S., & Green, B. (2015). Signal or noise? uncertainty and learning about
       whether other traders are informed. Journal of Financial Economics, 117 (2),
      398–423.
Barber, B. M., & Odean, T. (2008). All that glitters: The effect of attention and
       news on the buying behavior of individual and institutional investors. Review
       of Financial Studies, 21, 785–818.
Ben-Rephael, A., Da, Z., & Israelsen, R. D. (2017). It depends on where you search:
       Institutional investor attention and underreaction to news. The Review of
       Financial Studies, 30 (9), 3009–3047.
Campbell, J. Y., & Thompson, S. B. (2007). Predicting Excess Stock Returns
       Out of Sample: Can Anything Beat the Historical Average? The Review of
       Financial Studies, 21 (4), 1509–1531.
Cao, H., Lin, T., Li, Y., & Zhang, H. (2019). Stock price pattern prediction based
       on complex network and machine learning. Complexity, 2019, 1–12.
Chen, J., Tang, G., Yao, J., & Zhou, G. (2022). Investor attention and stock returns.
       Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 57 (2), 455–484.
Chollet, F. (2021). Deep Learning with Python (1st edition). Manning Publications.
Cybenko, G. (1989). Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function.
       Mathematics of Control, Signals and Systems, 2 (4), 303–314.
Da, Z., Engelberg, J., & Gao, P. (2011). In search of attention. Journal of Finance,
      66, 1461–1499.
De Bondt, W. F. M., & Thaler, R. (1985). Does the stock market overreact? Journal
       of Finance, 40, 793–805.
Dellavigna, S., & Pollet, J. M. (2009). Investor inattention and friday earnings
       announcements. The Journal of Finance, 64, 709–749.
Drake, M., Roulstone, D., & Thornock, J. (2015). The determinants and conse-
       quences of information acquisition via edgar. Contemporary Accounting
       Research, 32, 1128–1161.

                                   23
Fang, L., & Peress, J. (2009). Media coverage and the cross-section of stock returns.
       The Journal of Finance, 64 (5), 2023–2052.
George, T. J., & Hwang, C. -Y. (2001). Information flow and pricing errors: A
        unified approach to estimation and testing. Review of Financial Studies, 14,
      979–1020.
Gervais, S., Kaniel, R., & Mingelgrin, D. H. (2001). The high-volume return
       premium. The Journal of Finance, 56 (3), 877–919.
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., & Courville, A. (2016). Deep learning. MIT Press.
Gu, S., Kelly, B., & Xiu, D. (2020). Empirical Asset Pricing via Machine Learning.
       The Review of Financial Studies, 33 (5), 2223–2273.
Hirshleifer, D., & Hong Teoh, S. (2003). Herd behaviour and cascading in capital
       markets: A review and synthesis. European Financial Management, 9 (1),
       25–66.
Hirshleifer, D., Hsu, P. -H., & Li, D. (2013). Innovative efficiency and stock returns.
       Journal of Financial Economics, 107 (3), 632–654.
Hochreiter, S., & Schmidhuber, J. (1997). Long short-term memory. Neural compu-
       tation, 9 (8), 1735–80.
Hsieh, D. A. (1991). Chaos and nonlinear dynamics: Application to financial
       markets. Journal of Finance, 46, 1839–77.
Huang, D., Jiang, F., Tu, J., & Zhou, G. (2015). Investor Sentiment Aligned:
       A Powerful Predictor of Stock Returns. The Review of Financial Studies,
       28 (3), 791–837.
Jacob Boudoukh, M. R., Roni Michaely, & Roberts, M. R. (2007). On the impor-
       tance of measuring payout yield: Implications for empirical asset pricing.
       The Journal of Finance, 62, 877–915.
Jondeau, E., Zhang, Q., & Zhu, X. (2019). Average skewness matters. Journal of
       Financial Economics, 134 (1), 29–47.
Kahneman, D. (1973). Attention and effort. Prentice-Hall Inc.
Karlsson, N., Loewenstein, G., & Seppi, D. (2009). The ostrich effect: Selective
       attention to information. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 38, 95–115.
Kelly, B., & Pruitt, S. (2015). The three-pass regression filter: A new approach to
       forecasting using many predictors [High Dimensional Problems in Econo-
       metrics]. Journal of Econometrics, 186 (2), 294–316.
Kozak, S., Nagel, S., & Santosh, S. (2020). Shrinking the cross-section. Journal of
       Financial Economics, 135 (2), 271–292.
Lee, C. M., Ma, P., & Wang, C. C. (2015). Search-based peer firms: Aggregating
       investor perceptions through internet co-searches. Journal of Financial
       Economics, 116 (2), 410–431.
                                   24
Lettau, M., & Ludvigson, S. (2001). Measuring and modelling variation in the
       risk-return trade-off (Vol. 3105). Centre for Economic Policy Research.
Li, J., & Yu, J. (2012). Investor attention, psychological anchors, and stock return
       predictability [Special Issue on Investor Sentiment]. Journal of Financial
       Economics, 104 (2), 401–419.
Light, N., Maslov, D., & Rytchkov, O. (2017). Aggregation of Information About
       the Cross Section of Stock Returns: A Latent Variable Approach. The Review
       of Financial Studies, 30 (4), 1339–1381.
Lou, D. (2014). Attracting investor attention through advertising. The Review of
       Financial Studies, 27 (6), 1797–1829.
Ma, Q., Wang, H., & Zhang, W. (2017). Trading against anchoring. Review of
        Behavioral Finance, 9.
Nagel, S. (2021). Machine learning in asset pricing (Vol. 8). Princeton University
       Press.
Peng, L. (2005). Learning with information capacity constraints. The Journal of
       Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 40 (2), 307–329.
Peng, L., & Xiong, W. (2006). Investor attention, overconfidence and category
       learning. Journal of Financial Economics, 80, 563–602.
Rapach, D. E., Ringgenberg, M., & Zhou, G. (2016). Short interest and aggregate
       stock returns. Journal of Financial Economics, 121 (1), 46–65.
Roondiwala, M., Patel, H., & Varma, S. (2017). Predicting stock prices using lstm.
        International Journal of Science and Research (IJSR), 6.
Ryans, J. (2017). Using the edgar log file data set. Research Methods & Methodology
        in Accounting eJournal.
Sicherman, N., Loewenstein, G., Seppi, D. J., & Utkus, S. P. (2015). Financial
       Attention. The Review of Financial Studies, 29 (4), 863–897.
Welch, I., & Goyal, A. (2008). A comprehensive look at the empirical performance of
       equity premium prediction. The Review of Financial Studies, 21, 1455–1508.
Wold, H. (1966). Estimation of principal components and related models by iterative
       least squares. Multivariate analysis, 391–420.
Yadav, A., Jha, C. K., & Sharan, A. (2020). Optimizing lstm for time series pre-
       diction in indian stock market [International Conference on Computational
       Intelligence and Data Science]. Procedia Computer Science, 167, 2091–2100.
Yuan, Y. (2015). Market-wide attention, trading, and stock returns. Journal of
       Financial Economics, 116 (3), 548–564.
Zhang, Y., Chu, G., & Shen, D. (2021). The role of investor attention in predicting
       stock prices: The long short-term memory networks perspective. Finance
       Research Letters, 38 (100).
                                   25
                    Appendix I

                        Table A.1: Correlation Plot

           AV ol  ERet  P Ret  52wH  HisH  #AC  CAD  Inf low  Outf low  M edia  Google  EDGAR
        A     A     A     A     A     A     A     A      A       A      A      A

 AV ol
A            1 0.01 0.19 0.11 0.14 -0.14 0.07 0.31 0.27 0.13 0.33 -0.04
 ERet
A                    1 0.06 0.17 0.15 -0.01 0.15 0.09 0.06 0.05 0.04 0.03
 P Ret
A                            1 0.7 0.29 0.12 0.61 -0.36 -0.4 0.24 -0.24 0
 52wH
A                                     1 0.77 0.39 0.66 -0.41 -0.43 0.39 -0.13 -0.05
 HisH
A                                              1 0.43 0.54 -0.26 -0.25 0.39 0.15 -0.12
 #AC
A                                                      1 0.24 -0.63 -0.52 0.46 -0.43 0.46
 CAD
A                                                              1 -0.39 -0.43 0.28 0 -0.1
 Inf low
A                                                                       1 0.96 -0.34 0.39 -0.11
 Outf low
A                                                                                 1 -0.33 0.34 -0.03
 M edia
A                                                                                         1 -0.12 0.12
 Google
A                                                                                                 1 -0.35
 EDGAR
A                                                                                                     1

           Table A.1 shows the cross-correlation between the 12 investor atten-
                          AV ol   ERet   P Ret   52wH   HisH    #AC    CAD   Inf low
          tion proxies A    , A    , A    , A    ,A    , A    , A    , A     ,
              Outf low   M edia   Google       EDGAR
          A      , A    , A    and A      .

           Table A.2: Summary Statistics Jan 1980 - Dec 2017

                   Name 1st Quartile Median 3rd Quartile Skewness p(1)

                       AV ol
                   A            -0.72 -0.10 0.52 0.98 0.48
                     ERet
                   A            -0.49 0.10 0.60 -0.63 0.18
                       P Ret
                   A            -0.64 0.08 0.53 0.02 0.93
                    52wH
                   A            -0.18 0.41 0.64 -2.40 0.88
                     HisH
                   A            -0.41 0.39 0.80 -1.63 0.94
                  #AC
                   A            -0.84 0.03 0.76 -0.11 0.99
                  CAD
                   A            -0.45 -0.05 0.61 0.88 0.93
                        Inf low
                    A            -0.64 -0.32 -0.31 2.08 0.80
                       Outf low
                    A            -0.60 -0.35 -0.27 2.31 0.77
                       M edia
                   A            -0.44 -0.12 0.22 1.71 0.61
                       Google
                   A            -0.63 -0.20 0.33 0.91 0.90
                  EDGAR
                   A            -0.56 0.14 0.68 -0.43 0.82

                      Table A.2 reports the 1st- and 3rd quartiles, median, skewness and
                                                                                                  AV ol
                    first-order autocorrelation of the twelve attention proxies A    ,
                     ERet   P Ret   52wH   HisH    #AC    CAD    Inf low   Outf low
                   A    , A    , A    ,A    , A    , A    , A     , A      ,
                           M edia
                   A     ,
                    Google      EDGAR
                A     and A      for the time period Jan 1980 to June 2017
                      (when all measures are complete). All variables are standardized to
                    normal. This time frame is the same as the one studied by Chen
                        et al. (2022).

                                         26
    Appendix II: A Brief Introduction to Neural
                   Networks

Imagine a neural network containing one input layer, one hidden layer with two neurons
and an output layer. From the input layer, input values are sent to each neuron inside the
hidden layer. Inside each neuron, weights are assigned to the inputs and a bias is added.

                       x1 → (x1 · w1) + x2 → (x2 · w2) + bias (1)

At this point, what we have is equal to a multivariate linear regression:

                                (x1 · w1) + (x2 · w2) + b (2)

Before the value is fed to the output layer however, the hidden layer applies a nonlinear
activation function (·) to the sum of (1):

                              y = (x1w1 + x2w2) + b (3)

Normally, the activation function “squashes” the sum of (1) so that its output takes a
value where y is
                          1 ≤ y ≤ 1, 0 ≤ y ≤ 1 or 0 ≤ y (4)
Lastly, each neuron in the hidden layer feeds its output to the output layer where the same
process is repeated in an output neuron, though not necessarily using the same activation
function. Some of the most common nonlinear activation functions ReLu, Tanh, Sigmoid
and Softplus. Neural Networks are able to model high-dimensional relationships between
variables and can become highly complex as more hidden layers are added to the network,
thus they are called Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) when more hidden layers are added.
   Albeit being highly effective for many nonlinear prediction situations, the neural
network we have studied above suffers when the prediction problem is of a time series
nature. In a time series, the prediction of yt+1 at timet is potentially dependent on earlier
information from time t , t − 1 and t − 2 and so on. As the timesteps relevant to predict
yt+1 increases, the neural network, more specifically called a feed-forward neural network,
runs into problems since it has no notion of order in time. The information inside a
feed-forward neural network can not run in “cycles” and thus it has no “memory” of earlier
timesteps. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) mitigate this problem by containing loops
that allow the information to cycle through the network. The RNN can be thought of as
several copies of the same neural network for each time step that each can feed information
to the network next to it such that N Nt−1 feeds to N Nt that feeds to N Nt+1 and so on.
In effect, information can be stored across time steps as memory for predictions. Thus,
RNNs are especially effective when combating sequential data such as natural language
processing, speech recognition and time series prediction.
    A traditional RNN often becomes futile when one is dealing with predictions dependent
on information many time steps apart. Hochreiter and Schmidhuber (1997) introduced
the Long-Short Term Memory Network (LSTM), a type of RNN that is able to store both
long- and short term memory.
                                      27