1E: KID 21 7HE B/2CK

HOW IPOS AFFECT LISTED INDUSTRY PEERS SHORT-TERM
STOCK PRICE PERFORMANCE

EDDIE HAGBERG

PHILIP KRISTOFFERSSON

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2022
New kid on the block:  How IPOs affect listed industry Peers short-term stock price
performance

Abstract:

   We analyze the effect of completed initial public offerings (IPOs) on listed industry peers
   around the time of an IPO within  the same industry, in the Swedish market. Providing
   evidence that industry peers experience negative stock price reaction, in relation to a
   comparable index, in the period before the IPO. After the IPO however,  we do not find
   any significant results about  the incumbent peers' stock price reactions, in relation to the
   index or to that of the IPO itself.  Further, our thesis provides evidence that the stock price
   of peers correlates with the index movements before and after the IPO, as well as
   correlating with the stock price of the IPO in the period after its completion. Our results are
   consistent with the existence of IPO underpricing and IPO related competitive advantages.
   Other mechanisms such as uncertainty, fund flows and market cyclicality are extensively
   discussed to explore how the IPO, the new kid on the block, affects the market.

Keywords:

   Sweden, IPOs, Short-Run Performance,  Industry  Peers, Stock Price Reaction

Authors:

   Eddie Hagberg  (24704)
   Philip Kristoffersson  (24660)

Tutors:

   Ran Guo,  Visiting Teacher, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d´Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
©  Eddie Hagberg and Philip Kristoffersson, 2022
1.  InWrodXcWion

1.1  Background
Initial public offerings (IPOs) is the process in which a company becomes a publicly traded
company and is characterized by an intensive time-period to prepare legal structures, receive
approvals, attract financing as well as to spread information to potential investors. IPOs are an
important process for companies to gain capital for further expansion, founders and investors
to sell off shares and for the public market to broaden its array of companies available to the
public (Forbes, 2022). Studies by Jean  Helwege and Nellie Liang (2004) show that the IPOs
tend to be most frequently  occurring  in hot periods with growing economy, low interest rates
as well as high valuations of public companies.

Earlier studies have researched extensively the performance of  IPOs both operationally as well
as from the standpoint of an investment. Jay Ritter (1991) researched this area extensively back
in the nineties. His research showed that IPOs will have the initial trading price and valuation
will often be higher than subsequent years after the IPO. Ritter also showed that IPOs will
generally underperform the market and comparable peers in subsequent years. A study by Jain
Bharat and Kini Omesh (1994) into the operational performance of companies before and after
going public showed that companies underperformed significantly in the time period after the
IPO. Overall IPOs tend to be a symptom of hot markets, and generally a lucrative way for
founders, as well as PE-  and VC-  firms to make an exit (Crunchbase, 2021). On the other  hand,
new investors tend to, in the long-run, have been better off investing in other companies rather
than the IPO (CBS NEWS, 2012).

With IPOs being an important function for the public market as well as having historically been
a characteristic of certain periods, its competitive advantages and performance provides insight
into other aspects of the public market apart from the IPO. Already listed competitors or peers
are affected by the IPO, with regards to operational performance, which has been documented
by Hsu, Reed and Rocholl (2010). Given the extensive process and preparation for an IPO, as
well as critical information reaching the market just weeks before, new information is priced in
real time for both the IPO and the peers. (Forbes, 2022). This paper has the purpose of finding
additional   evidence   for   this   effect   by   answering   these   two   research   questions:

    x    Is there an effect on  the short-term stock price performance of listed peers around the
       completion of an IPO within the same sector?
    x    Can potential effects from the IPO be explained by characteristics of the IPO as well as
        the identified peers?

By looking at IPOs completed at  the Nasdaq Stockholm main exchange in the time period 2010
to 2022 and comparing the short-term stock price returns for peers and IPOs against the relevant
index for this market, OMXSPI, we aim to find if peers performs significantly worse or better
than  the comparable index 30 days before respectively 30 days after the IPO in the industry and
why this could be the case. Our findings suggest that industry peers perform significantly worse
than OMXSPI in the period before the IPO. The performance of the peers also covariates with
both the performance of OMXSPI and that of the IPO. However, in the period after the IPO,
the only certainty about the direction of the stock price development of peers and IPOs, in
relation to OMXSPI, is that it is uncertain. A mechanism discussed for why these findings are
obtained are due to fund flows from investors, specifically institutional investors, who hold
around 73 to 80 percent of the public equity market capitalization according to the SEC (2013)

                                                                           1
and Pensions & Investments (2017). In order to avoid the uncertainty of the stock price returns
associated with the period after the IPO, they sell-off the industry peers. Simultaneously, these
findings could be consistent with IPO underpricing,  incentivizing  institutional investors to sell-
off the industry peers, to keep the same industry exposure, and invest in the IPO, which has a
greater expected short-run performance. This would lead to a significant decrease in the  peers¶
stock price in the period before the IPO. Furthermore, Sweden being a relatively small market
could potentially be another contributing mechanism explaining our results as well, since this
leads to relatively fewer peers. Resulting in IPOs having a higher relative impact on listed
industry  peer¶s  performance compared to studies conducted in the U.S, where there are more
peers in each industry leading to a larger and more dispersed market setting. As an effect, each
IPOs relative size to the industry as a whole is much smaller compared to the Swedish market.
Another mechanism being discussed is how the timing of IPOs with regard to the number of
occurrences is different months, affects the measured returns in the study. We find that certain
months are overrepresented and have different average returns than other months, as recorded
by Dagens Industri (2021). The average performance for OMXSPI in our study is affected by
this in-year market cyclicality.

1.2  Literature review
There has been wide and particular research into the area of IPOs historically. A critical article
is the Long-Run Performance of Initial Public Offerings by Jay Ritter (1991), which examines
the underpricing of IPOs, showing that underpricing is a short-run phenomenon. The article
also concludes that IPOs significantly underperformed a sample of matching firms when
measuring 3-year price development from the closing price of the first day of trading. The
article researches IPOs between 1975 to 1984 and solely on the U.S market. There are two main
takeaways from the findings presented. First is that companies doing an IPO will often have a
higher initial trading price and valuation than in the subsequent years after the IPO. Second is
that IPOs will generally underperform the market and comparable peers in subsequent years.
The article also  suggests that several other factors may be essential in determining subsequent
price development of the IPO.

Paula Gompers and Alon Bravan  (1997) published their research specifically examining the
effects of venture capital prior to an IPO for the performance of the company. The notion seems
to only hold true for the smallest venture-backed IPOs. Another factor was analyzed by Chris
Yung, Gönül Çolak and Wei Wang, who examined the cyclicality in the market and its effects
on IPO underpricing and adverse selection. For instance IPOs during hot periods, tend to have
greater cross-sectional return variance and higher incidence of delisting. The  implication of
which is that IPOs in hot markets tend to underperform to a greater extent.

One critical phenomenon related to the performance of IPOs is underpricing, which contributes
to generating extraordinary first day returns for IPOs. Underpricing of IPOs is defined, by Philip
Lee et al (1999) as setting the price at level below the expected real value on the stock market.
The purpose of which is to attract institutional as well as retail investors to invest in the
company. This is related with the  documented empirical evidence from Laura Field and
Michelle Lowry (2009) about sophisticated and unsophisticated investors, where institutional
investors (sophisticated) to a higher degree subscribe to IPOs that are expected to perform well
and retail investors (unsophisticated)  cannot  assess whether the IPO will perform well or not.
Leading to sophisticated investors getting full allocation in ³good´ IPOs and retail investors
only getting full allocation in ³bad´ IPOs. Thus, IPOs have to be underpriced in  order for retail
investors to want to participate. Underpricing is related to the scope of our thesis by providing
a clear incentive for institutional investors such as pension-  and index funds to invest in IPOs,

                                                                           2
which in turn could create a need to reallocate capital to free up sufficient funds to invest in the
IPO. However, other studies have found that the long-term stock price performance is worse
for the IPO, when comparing the development to that of industry peers. In addition to this,
another study  found that IPOs operational performance and financial performance decreases in
the year after completing an IPO according to Jain Bharat and Kini Omesh (1994).

The angle of approach for this thesis paper correlates well with the research into performance
of companies conducting IPOs, since the research also carries implications for the comparable
peers. For instance, many companies tend to have their peak valuation at the point of IPO (Jay
Ritter, 1991), and also that this tendency increases when the IPO  is conducted during a hot-
market period (Paula Gompers and Alon Bravan 1997). The implication could be interpreted
that IPOs could be a symptom of sector specific hot periods. Resulting in an incentive for
founders and other shareholders to IPO when valuations and trading multiples are high, which
would then also implicate how sector peers will perform and should be valued based on the
IPOs implication for the future development of the listed peers.

One of the most eminent studies looking specifically at  the immediate stock price reaction for
peers, when there are plans for an IPO from an industry competitor, was performed by Hsu,
Reed and Rocholl (2010). The analysis was performed by looking at 134 completed IPOs and
37 withdrawn IPOs, with a total of 8,966 and 3,903 peers respectively. Their study provided
two main takeaways relevant for our thesis. The first area being the effect on the operational
performance. The argument being that being a listed company provided competitive advantages
such as losing  financial constraints, financial intermediary certification and the presence of
knowledge capital. The study found significant negative effects on the operational performance
of the peers after a completed IPO, with regards to both  sales  growth and financial metrics such
as ROA. The second takeaway being that incumbent firms (i.e.  peers) saw a statistically
significant negative abnormal return prior to a completed IPO within the same sector. As
indicated by the following graph, from their paper, average returns for incumbent firms is
shown for completed and withdrawn IPOs.

    Illustration 1: Mean cumulative abnormal return (CAR) for incumbent industry firms to completed and
   withdrawn IPOs (Hsu, Reed and Rocholl, 2010).

On the other hand, Hsu, Reed and Rocholl (2010) shows that peers have a positive reaction for
non-completed IPOs. They conclude that the reason for this is that incumbent firms will not be

                                                                           3
negatively  affected  by  the competitive advantages  that the IPO  company  would  have
experienced. They point out three key competitive advantages for a listed company, being the
loosening of financial constraints, financial intermediary certification and the presence of
knowledge capital, which combined would explain the decreased operational performance of
the peer after an IPO within their sector. Hsu, Reed and Rocholl (2010) conducted their study
by measuring abnormal returns of peers within a  61-calendar  day period around the IPO.
Abnormal returns for incumbent firms were  calculated using the difference between the actual
stock price return for each day and the estimated average return using daily returns for the 255
days ending 42 days prior to the first trading day of the IPO.

1.3  Contribution
From the previous literature there is a void with regards to the specific mechanism at play in
explaining the short-term decrease in stock prices prior to an IPO within the same industry.
This thesis paper provides an additional perspective by focusing exclusively on the Nasdaq
Stockholm main stock exchange, which is in number of listed and average market capitalization
smaller than previous studies conducted in this research area. As a  result,  IPOs tend to be more
significant to the particular sector they  are active in, since there are relatively fewer peers. This
thesis also takes place in a more modern setting, focusing on listenings between 2010 and 2022.
Comparing the listed industry peer¶s short-term stock price return with the benchmark index
OMXSPI also makes the study more relevant for industry practitioners, such as mutual funds
managers, whose performance often is benchmarked against a specific index. In addition, the
index benchmarking of the stock price developments, in order to find whether or not differences
in returns are significant, is also considered to be a method improvement compared to previous
research on the topic. Another method improvement from previous research is our quantitative
method of selecting industry peers. This is considered to be more accurate than previous
research peer selection criteria. Further, looking at companies listed on the same stock market
exchange and thus having to follow the same regulations provides a more just and equal
competition environment for the companies in the study.

                                                                           4
2.  H\poWheViV deYelopmenW

Wanting to investigate whether and how IPOs impact the short-term stock price development
of listed industry peers on Nasdaq Stockholm¶s main exchange, and if this impact is significant
compared to the  comparable OMXSPI index development during this period we have
formulated the following four hypotheses:

    x   Hypothesis 1: Listed industry peers' stock price will decrease more than index in the
       period before the IPO.
We believe that this could be the case since investors would rationally want to decrease their
exposure in a specific sector, sell-off peer stocks, in order to invest in order to reduce their
uncertainty. This was also implicated by the previous study performed by Hsu, Reed and
Rocholl (2010). This should short-term lead to a decrease, greater than index, for the
incumbent industry  peers if this is the case.

    x   Hypothesis 2: IPOs and peers together will outperform index in the period after the
      IPO.
IPOs and peers should receive increased attention and fund flows from investors due to
extensive marketing by the financial industry in the period before and during the IPO., In
addition to reduced uncertainty in the industry after the IPO completion, should lead to
increased investor funds flows and thus an increase in the industry's short-term stock prices to
a greater extent than that of the index.

    x   Hypothesis 3: The incumbent industry peers' stock price development will outperform
        index in the period after the IPO.
This is in line with hypothesis 2, that increased industry attention and reduced uncertainty in
the period after the IPO, should increase investor fund flows to incumbent peers as well. Thus,
leading to an increase in their stock price greater than index in the period after the IPO.

   x   Hypothesis 4: IPOs will outperform peers' stock price development in the period after
       the IPO.
This is reasonable to assume due to IPO expected high initial returns of the IPOs in the short-
run in relation to incumbent industry peers. There could also be a large influx of capital from
investors that did not receive allocation in the IPO offering at first.

                                                                           5
3.  DaWa

3.1  Data description and collection

3.1.1  Time period and short-term return
We have delimited the timeframe of our study to looking at IPOs for the years 2010 to 2022.
This was done in order to balance getting as high relevance as possible, while still getting
enough data to properly research the chosen subject. The second component of this study is to
define the short-term period, which will be measured and examined. A previous study
performed in the U.S by Hsu, Reed and Rocholl (2010) provides inspiration. They measure the
short-term stock price performance reaction from 30 calendar days before, and 30 calendar days
after the IPO. In this study, the time period for each IPO will be based on the first trading day
constituting day 0, and 30 days prior as  -30 and 30 days after as 30. We deem this period to be
long enough to not miss  any potential effect an IPO has on existing industry peers' stock price,
while also being short enough that the short-term return is to the least extent possible, affected
by other events such as quarterly reports, change in other market conditions etc. On  the other
hand,  Hsu, Reed and Rocholl (2010) set the base value for day  -30, constituting the first day
from which returns are calculated. This study will set the basis value to day 0, being the first
trading day. The reason for doing so is to compare with the IPOs which lack stock prices for
the first 30 days.  Also,  it provides a better benchmark when putting all dates in relation to the
event date, being the first trading day of the IPO.

3.1.2  Stock market selection
Three out of our four hypotheses look at whether the peers' stock price performs worse or better
than index short-term. There are several reasons for why we benchmark their performance
against a stock market index.

One is that it becomes an  important delimitation criterion  when selecting which IPOs and
respective peers to include in our study. By only including IPOs and peers from a specific stock
exchange we make sure that they all have to follow the same financial market regulations and
reporting standards and thus face as much as possible similar market conditions as one another.
We have found that many other studies look at IPOs' short-term stock price performance, in a
specific country, overall and not separately for which stock exchange they become listed on.
This we believe makes the  results more difficult to interpret since the difference in regulations,
liquidity  and reporting standards can be vastly different between different stock exchanges,
creating different market conditions for the IPOs and peers depending on where they are listed.
Thus, by choosing to look at IPOs and peers in a specific stock market minimizes the difference
in market conditions and their possibility of affecting the data collected.

Another reason for looking at a specific stock market is to stay relevant for industry
practitioners, such as mutual fund managers, since their performance often is benchmarked
against a specific stock market index. Thus, we hope that by benchmarking our selected
industry peers to the development of a stock market index for the same period we will get more
relevant results and provide information with our research so as to help them in their work
of  allocating  capital as efficiently as possible.

Having motivated the selection of a specific stock exchange to look at, we have  decided to look
at the Swedish stock market and more specifically  Nasdaq Stockholm¶s main stock exchange.

                                                                           6
Being a smaller market with similar reporting standards, currency, laws and taxation also
increases the comparability between the companies being studied.

The Nasdaq Stockholm main stock exchange is covered via an index called OMXSPI. The
index is the largest and broadest index in Sweden.  So,  by choosing to look at IPOs and peers
listed and included in this index only, we make it possible to get data  on as many IPOs and
peers as possible since no other index in Sweden includes more companies. It also allows the
performance of the peers and IPOs to be compared to companies in the same market in order
to identify extreme performance.

3.1.3  Industry definition and identifying sectors
The aforementioned study by Hsu, Reed and Rocholl (2010) used two  digits  SIC codes, which
sorts companies into 62 different industries, in order to obtain relevant listed peers to the
company doing an IPO. However, we found this industry definition to be too broad. Since when
implemented on the U.S market as well as the Swedish market generated many peers that did
not provide the same services or products as the firm doing the IPO. Thus, a decision was made
to use the Thomson Reuters Business Classification (TRBC) instead, which is widely used in
the financial investment and advisory space to identify and select groups of comparable
companies. Using this industry  classification,  a much higher accuracy was achieved when
identifying industry peers to the company doing an IPO. Using the TRBC industry classification
on the fourth-level of detail, where companies are sorted into a total of 154 different industries,
the classification system provided enough granularity in the data so that the companies are
similar while still not missing relevant peers. No industry definition is of course perfect but
looking at other industry classifications and comparing the SIC  two-digit peers with the TRBC
peers the accuracy was higher and an obvious better choice. Another option would have been
to implement a more qualitative approach, but for the purpose of this study and possible
replication studies in the future we choose to go with the latter option relying on a  third-party
quantitative classification rather than inventing our own qualitative classification system.

3.1.4  IPO dataset
In order to generate data for the IPOs completed at Nasdaq Stockholm main market, for the
relevant time period, the Refinitive Eikon database was used. A total of 164 IPOs  was
identified, following the predefined time criteria, in a total of 54 different industries. The dataset
only included completed IPOs as well as companies that had delisted or gone bankrupt after
completing the IPO. For the total dataset of 164 IPOs some data points were collected. The first
datapoint was the sector according to TRBC industry classification. The second datapoint was
the first trading day of the IPO.

Based on the defined TRBC industry classification for each IPO as well as the data of the first
trading day, the Refinitive Eikon database was used to identify companies within the same
industry that were listed at the same time as the completion of the IPO. In order to find the
relevant industry peers at the time of the listening, peers that had gone bankrupt or delisted at
the time of the data collection, but still were listed at the time of the IPO in that specific industry,
were included in the dataset.  Similarly,  for the peer dataset data points were collected for the
market  capitalization  (MCAP) of peers at the point of IPO, MCAP of the company completing
an IPO, sector and subsector of each peer as well as the relative size of the peer in relation to
the IPO. The MCAP here refers to the closing price of the first day of trading times the
outstanding shares at the time. The relative size was calculated as:

                                                                           7
                                          0
                              MCAP Peer
                                        0    =  Rel. size
                              MCAP IP୓

The total dataset generated containing all the identified peers for  each IPO included a total of
1714 peers related to 141 of the 164 IPOs. The IPOs that were excluded did not have any peers
in the same sector at the point of listing. These IPOs were therefore excluded from this dataset
and provide no use for this study.

                                                                           8
4.  MeWhodolog\

4.1  Refining dataset and generation of stock price
For the 164 IPOs completed in the time period relevant for this study, a total of 1714 peers have
been identified. This dataset was then subject to adjustments in order to better fit the scope and
purpose of this study. From the 1714 peers, a total of 379  were excluded for not being listed at
the time of the IPO they were related to. In  addition,  some IPOs as well as its identified peers
were excluded. The IPOs that were excluded meet two critical criterias. The first critical criteria
were  if the IPO happened in the Real Estate Rental sector. The reason for excluding this sector
specifically was the different market and profitability dynamics, companies often being niched
in specific parts of the county. Real estate  companies  valuation is also to a large extent affected
by the reporting standards with regard to IFRS meaning that their assets, mainly buildings, are
valued at their market prices, which leads to stock price development being affected by real
estate prices, rather than competitive environment. The real estate sector also tends to have a
higher degree of cross-ownership in new IPOs as well as other listed peers. The Real Estate
Rental sector was also most frequent in terms of IPOs as well having significantly more peers,
which would have resulted in the Real estate sector dominating the study, decreasing the study¶s
explanatory value as a whole by getting too focused on a specific sector. The second criteria
were  a manual adjustment for IPOs with non-relevant peers with regards to operational scope
or business models. After the adjustments a total of 88 IPOs met the criterias and were included
in our study. Refining the peer dataset for the excluded IPOs a total number of 559 peers were
left.

Based on the compiled list of 88 IPOs with the related  559 peers the stock price for the
individual IPO and the set of identified peers was generated. As previously  mentioned,  this
thesis focuses on general patterns during a  61-calendar  day period.  Therefore,  intraday trading
activity was of low importance and  data was exclusively collected for closing prices for each
individual day. The price data was generated via Excel and extracting stock price information
from Microsoft Bing Corporation. The input values into the Excel model were the IPO and the
identified  peers, the model then generated the closing stock prices for each day for the chosen
time period. For specific calendar days where no closing price could be generated due to
weekends or closed trading, the closing price from the prior or subsequent day was used,
depending on which was closest to the first trading day. Using the same Excel  model,  the
closing values of the OMXSPI index for each day in the period was also generated. The
OMXSPI was also subject to the same adjustments with regards to missing values due to
weekends or closed trading.

From the generated stock price series for each peer, covering the  61-calendar day period around
a completed IPO, an index for the stock price development of each individual peer was created.
                                                                                   0               ௧
Where the closing price on the first trading day constituted the basis value  𝑃  and where  𝑃
constituted the closing price for any other day in the period. This generated a unique value with
the first trading day constituting the basis of 100 and each other date having a comparable value.
The model to calculate the index value for day t was:

                                                        ୲
                                   P                 ୲
                               0 × 100 = Index
                          P

For the company completing an IPO, stock price data was available first from day 0, which is
the first trading day. This stock price data series, of 31 price points for each IPO was then

                                                                           9
indexed, the same way as their peers, by setting their closing stock  price on the first trading day
to index value 100. This resulted in IPO indexes for each of the 88 IPOs that were studied. For
the OMXSPI during the period relevant for each IPO, closing value data was gathered for 30
days before the IPO to 30 days after.  This created one index series for the OMXSPI index
relating to each of the 88 IPOs studied.

4.2  Aggregate price indexes composition and construction
From the stock price generation there were three groups of indexes: the first group of 88 IPOs,
second group of 559 peers and third group of 88 OMXSPI indexes.

To get an overview of the general patterns of the data collected, an aggregate average index for
each of the groups was created. Filtering out the series belonging to each group the index values
were summarized and divided by the total number n in the group, where  Rഥxi constituted  the
index value for the whole aggregated group for one specific day,  𝑅௫1  the index value for each
individual within the group and n the total number of  individuals.

                                  Rx1 + Rxଶ+ . . . +Rxn
                          Rഥxi  =
                                    n

This aggregated series for each group was then  showcased  graphically alongside the other
aggregated series. The aggregation of the data as well as the graph was generated via Excel.

4.3  Design of Statistical Tests
We have used Excel for all the statistical tests performed. In order to test our hypotheses, we
have assumed that the stock price returns and index returns for the periods tested are normally
distributed. This is the standard convention when looking at previous studies and their used
methodology to analyze the results and was made in order to perform relevant statistical tests
for the mean returns. For all the statistical tests conducted, in order to test our hypotheses, a
significance level of 10 percent is considered to be significant. Meaning that we will reject a
specific null hypothesis if the p-value is less than 10 percent.

4.3.1  Testing hypothesis 1
In order to test the validity of hypothesis 1, whether Listed industry peers' stock price will
decrease more than index in the period before the IPO. We performed statistical tests with the
goal of assessing whether the mean return for the peers was lower than the for the OMXSPI 30
days before the IPO to the day of the IPO. To determine which statistical test to use for testing
this we began by looking at the indexed stock price data for the  559 peers and 88 OMXSPI
periods. Then we calculated the return from 30 days before the IPO to the day of the IPO by
dividing the indexed stock price of day 0 with the indexed stock price at day  -30 and then
subtracting this with 1.

This was repeated for all 559 peers identified in the study and also repeated for the 88 OMXSPI
time period series ranging from day  -30 to 0. Since we do not have the full population and only
samples of  data,  we do not know the population variances. Thus, we can¶t use a Z-Test  in order
to test the difference in population means, since known population variances are required in
order to perform such a test. However, we were able to use the sample variances in order to
determine if the population variances for the two samples, the  559 peers and 88 OMXSPI
periods, could be similar by using a statistical F-Test. Depending on the result of this F-Test, if

                                                                          10
the variances for the population could significantly be the same or different, a T-Test for
samples assuming equal or unequal variances was used to further analyze if the mean return for
the peers was lower than that of the OMXSPI during these time periods. The decision tree for
which statistical test we performed is illustrated below.

                                     Is the variance of the
                               two populations known?

                                No

                                   T-test: Can the variance
                                  of the two populations
                                 be assumed to be equal?

         Yes                                           No

       Perform T-Test for                                   Perform T-Test for
      sample means assuming                           sample means assuming
       equal variances                                       unequal variances

   Illustration 2: Decision  tree for which statistical tests to use when testing the hypotheses.

The hypothesis tested using the statistical T-Test is as  follows:

                    H0:  μRe୲୳rn ୭୤ Peers−య0:0  −  μRe୲୳rn ୭୤ ୓Mଡ଼ୗPI−య0:0  ൒  0

                    H1: μRe୲୳rn ୭୤ Peers−య0:0  − μRe୲୳rn ୭୤ ୓Mଡ଼ୗPI−య0:0  <  0

Thus, if the null hypothesis can be rejected, this result will tell us that the alternative hypothesis
is true and that peers mean return is significantly lower than the OMXSPI mean return in the
period before the IPO.

4.3.2  Testing hypothesis 2
To test hypothesis 2, that IPOs and peers together will outperform Index in the period after the
IPO. We used the same methodology as described above. Beginning with calculating the
individual returns for the 88 IPOs, 559 peers  and  88  OMXSPI periods based  on their indexed
stock price development for period 0:30.

Forming two samples of 88 IPOs together with 559 peers and 88 OMXSPI time series, the two
samples variance in returns was then analyzed with a F-Test in order to check whether or not
they have similar variances, the same test conducted for hypothesis 1. And then based on the
result a T-Test for equal or unequal variances assumption was used, in accordance with
illustration 2.  The hypothesis tested using the statistical T-Test is as follows:

                  H0:  μRe୲୳rn ୭୤ IP୓s ୟnd Peers0:య0  −  μRe୲୳rn ୭୤ ୓Mଡ଼ୗPI0:య0  ൑  0

                  H1: μRe୲୳rn ୭୤ IP୓s ୟnd Peers0:య0  − μRe୲୳rn ୭୤ ୓Mଡ଼ୗPI0:య0  ൐  0

                                                                          11
Where a rejection of the null hypothesis leads to an acceptance of the alternative hypothesis
and the implication that the IPOs and peers outperforms OMXSPI in the period after the IPO.

4.3.3  Testing hypothesis 3
The same method as the one above was also used to test hypothesis 3. That the incumbent
industry peers' stock price development will outperform index in the period after the IPO. With
the difference that the samples included returns for the 559 incumbent peers and the
corresponding 88  indices  return periods, excluding the return of the IPOs from day 0 to 30.
Where the incumbent peers  refer  to the peers that were listed before the IPO. The hypothesis
tested using the statistical T-Test is as follows:

                     H0: μRe୲୳rn ୭୤ Peers0:య0  −  μRe୲୳rn ୭୤ ୓Mଡ଼ୗPI0:య0  ൑  0

                      H1: μRe୲୳rn ୭୤ Peers0:య0  − μRe୲୳rn ୭୤ ୓Mଡ଼ୗPI0:య0  ൐  0

Thus, we will accept hypothesis 3, that peers  outperform  OMXSPI, if we can reject the null
hypothesis.

4.3.4  Testing hypothesis 4
To test if IPOs will outperform peers' stock price development in the period after the IPO.  The
same method used for  testing the previous hypotheses was used. First performing a F-Test and
then a T-Test based on the result of the F-Test. The hypothesis tested using the statistical T-
Test is as follows:

                       H0:  μRe୲୳rn ୭୤ IP୓s0:య0  −  μRe୲୳rn ୭୤ Peers0:య0  ൑  0

                       H1: μRe୲୳rn ୭୤ IP୓s0:య0  − μRe୲୳rn ୭୤ Peers0:య0  ൐  0

With the implication that if the null hypothesis can be rejected, the alternative hypothesis will
be accepted and thus our hypothesis is true, that the IPOs outperform their peers in the period
after their listening.

4.4  Multivariate Regression Analysis
The second component of this study is to identify patterns for the immediate stock market
reaction and which independent factors may affect the return of the peers prior and after the
IPOs first trading day. The regression was performed for two periods. The periods prior (-30:0)
and the period after (0:30). The return of this period prior was defined as:

                                      0          −ଷ0      −ଷ0:0
                         Index − Index   = 𝑅

The return for the period after was defined as:

                                          ଷ0           0      0:ଷ0
                          Index  − Index = 𝑅

       0:ଷ0        −ଷ0:0
The  𝑅    and  𝑅     constituted  the dependent y variable in the regression model. The model
included three independent variables for the proceeding time period and five independent
variables for the subsequent time period.

The structure of the regression model used for the  time proceeding the first trading day was:

                                                                          12
                     Yi  =  β0  +  β1  x1,  i  +  βଶ  xଶ,  i  +  βଷ  xଷ,  i  +  εi

The three independent variables were defined as:

 Log (MCAP of Peer)    The total market capitalization of the peer based on the closing price
                         on   the   first   trading   day   of   the   IPO.   Values   were   loged.

 Log (MCAP of IPO)     The total market capitalization of the IPO based on the closing price
                           on the first trading day. Values were loged.

 Index performance      The total negative or positive return (R) for period -30:0 calculated
                            as:
                               0          −ଷ0      −ଷ0:0
                        Index   − Index     = 𝑅

The structure of the regression model used for the subsequent time after the FTD is:

          Yi  =  β0  +  β1  x1,  i  +  βଶ  xଶ,  i  +  βଷ  xଷ,  i  +  βସ  xସ,  i  +  βହ  xହ,  i  +  εi

The five independent variables were defined  as

 Log (MCAP of Peer)    The total market capitalization of the peer based on the closing price
                         on   the   first   trading   day   of   the   IPO.   Values   were   loged.

 Log (MCAP of IPO)     The total market capitalization of the IPO based on the closing price
                           on the first trading day. Values were loged.

 Index performance      The total negative or positive return (R) for period 0:30, calculated
                                   ଷ0          0      0:ଷ0
                       as:  Index   − Index   =  𝑅

 IPO performance        The total negative or positive return for the period, calculated as:
                                ଷ0          0      0:ଷ0
                        Index    − Index   = 𝑅

 Positive IPO            A dummy variable defined as if IPO performance is higher or lower
 performance            than   zero,   with   value   1   attributed   to   IPOs   with   positive
                        performance.

In addition to this, adjustments for fixed factors were performed. Specifically, adjustments for
fixed year effects done. The reason for this was that certain years could have higher or lower
returns depending on the year in which the IPO was completed. Certain years could for instance
have higher volatility due to macroeconomic factors. By adjusting for the fixed year effects
such factors do not affect the results of this study. To practically implement this in the
regression models dummy variables were created for all years except 2010.

                                                                          13
5.  Empirical ReVXlWV

5.1  Aggregate price indices development and analysis
Illustration  3,  as  seen  on  the following  page,  shows  the aggregated  performance and
development during the  61-calendar  day period which this study examines. Based on the
aggregated development there are some trends that clearly stand out. The peer index can be
observed decreasing for the whole time period prior to the IPO and the OMXSPI index
decreases less than the peers. This indicates that peers perform worse prior to an IPO, which is
not reflected by a general decrease in stock prices across the market. The development of the
companies completing an IPO showed the highest return from the time of the IPO to 30 calendar
days after, increasing more than both the peer-  and OMXSPI index. Based on the graph
however, the IPOs can be observed having a higher volatility, with a price decrease of close to
1 percent in the first five days and then having an improved performance and ending up with a
positive performance close to 4 percent at the last day of the period. The OMXSPI index can
also be observed having a positive development for the period subsequent to the first trading
day, ending with a total positive return of close to 2 percent. In  addition,  the peers which
experienced close to a 3 percent decrease for the period prior to the IPO show a positive return
and end up at a level similar to what was recorded before the IPO. Based on the observed results
in this graph the trends that could be observed visually had to be tested statistically. To test if
the trends visible in this graph are in line with our hypotheses. Visually the graph indicates that
further analysis and testing could be interesting in order to better understand if there is any
significance in the trends observed in the aggregated indices.

                                                                          14
                              Illustration  3: The aggregated price development of Peers, IPOs and OMXSPI for period  -30:30

105

104

103

102

101

100

 99

 98
     -30-29-28-27-26-25-24-23-22-21-20-19-18-17-16-15-14-13-12-11-10  -9  -8  -7  -6  -5  -4  -3  -2  -1  0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30
                                                      Peer Index             IPO Index             OMXSPI Index             First Trading Day

             The illustration reports the aggregated price performance  for the three independent groups. Each index series was computed summarizing the value of
     15      each individual within the group and dividing the by total number of individuals (n).  Each group had an average value of 100 on day 0 being the basis for
              each index series. The event date, being the first trading day of the IPO, is marked by a vertical line in the graph.
                                                                                                                           15
5.2  Statistical Test Results
Table 1 below shows the descriptive statistics for the variables used to test our hypotheses.
Looking at the table, the difference in return of peers compared to the return of OMXSPI in the
time period  -30:0 stands out, where the mean return of peers is much lower. Noteworthy is also
the higher variance of the return of IPOs, roughly as high as the mean return for the variable.
Visible is also the negative return of OMXSPI and peers in the period before the IPO and the
positive return for the two variables in the period after the IPO. The return of the IPOs and
peers, separately and together, is greater than OMXSPI in the period 0:30 and the variance of
the variables, but for OMXSPI, in the same period is also high.

                             Table 1: Descriptive Statisctics
 Time period     Variable                      N    Mean          Var
                Return of Peers                 559   -2,743029%     2,045020%
 -30:0
                Return of OMXPI               88    -0,388316%     0,314877%
                Return of IPOs                 88    3,553827%      3,542380%
                Return of Peers                 559   2,505188%      1,897877%
 0:30
                Return of IPOs and Peers         647   2,637906%      2,102009%
                Return of OMXSPI             88    1,839920%      0,176955%
 The table reports the descriptive statistics for the return of the peers, OMXSPI and IPOs. The time
 period -30:0 refers to 30 days before to the first trading day of the IPO and the time period 0:30
 refers to the first trading day to 30 days after the IPO. Return is calculated by dividing the stock
 price in the end of the time period with the stock price in the beginning minus one.

As described in the methodology, we first want to test if the variance of the two variables used
in each of the four hypotheses is significantly different from one another by using a F-Test.
Below follows table 2, showing the result of these tests. The variance of the variables ³Return
of Peers'' and ³Return of IPOs and Peers´ is tested on whether it is unequal to the variance of
the ³Return of OMXSPI´ for the corresponding time period,  -30:0 and 0:30. Whether the
variance of ³Return of IPOs´ is unequal to  the ³Return of Peers´, for the time period 0:30, is
also tested in order to decide which T-Test to perform for hypothesis 4. Looking at the table,
all the above described tests show significant results. Meaning that the two variables for each
hypothesis have, at a p-value lower than 0.01, different variances than one another.

                     Table 2: Unequal Variances F-Test Results
 Time period      Variable                         Var
                 Return of Peers                  2,045020%***
 -30:0
                 Return of OMXPI                 0,314877%
                 Return of IPOs                   3,542380%***
                  Return of Peers                    1,897877%***
 0:30
                  Return of IPOs and Peers           2,102009%***
                Return of OMXSPI              0,176955%

                                                                          16
 The table reports the variance for return of peers, OMXSPI and IPOs. The time period -30:0 refers
 to 30 days before to the first trading day of the IPO and the time period 0:30 refers to the first
 trading day to 30 days after the IPO. F-tests were used to test whether the "Return of Peers" and
 "Return of IPOs and Peers" has unequal variances compared to the variance of the "Return of
 OMXSPI" for the same time periods. The "Return of IPOs" was tested against the "Return of
 Peers" to test if they had unequal variances as well.
 ***p-value<0.01, **p-value<0.05, *p-value<0.10

Due to the results, showing that the variables tested in each hypothesis have significantly
different variances, the next step is the performance of  Welch¶s  T-Tests for each hypothesis i.e.
T-Tests for samples assumed to have unequal variances. Below follows Table 3, which shows
the results from the T-Tests used to test our four hypotheses about the mean differences in
return.

                   Table 3: Mean Return Differences T-Test Results
 Time period       Variable                        Mean
                    Return of Peers                    -2,743029%***
 -30:0
                 Return of OMXPI                -0,388316%
                  Return of IPOs                   3,553827%
                  Return of Peers                   2,505188%
 0:30
                  Return of IPOs and Peers          2,637906%
                 Return of OMXSPI              1,839920%
 The table reports the means for the return of peers, OMXSPI and IPOs. The time period -30:0 refers
 to 30 days before to the first trading day of the IPO and the time period 0:30 refers to the first trading
 day to 30 days after the IPO. Welch¶s T-Tests were used to test whether the mean of "Return of Peers"
 was smaller than the mean of "Return of OMXSPI" for the time period -30:0. For the time period 0:30
 it was tested whether the mean of "Return of IPOs" is greater the mean of "Return of Peers" and if the
 mean of "Return of Peer" and "Return of IPOs and Peers" is greater than the "Return of OMXSPI".
 ***p-value<0.01, **p-value<0.05, *p-value<0.10

For the first hypothesis, testing whether the mean return of peers is lower than that of OMXSPI,
the results show that the p-value of that the return of peers is greater than the return of OMXSPI
is less than 0.01, leading to the rejection of this null hypothesis. And  thus,  acceptance of our
first hypothesis, that peers indeed has a lower mean return than index in the period before the
IPO.

For our second, third and fourth hypothesis we cannot significantly reject the null hypotheses,
since they all have  p-values greater than 0.10. For hypothesis two and three respectively this
means that we  cannot  reject that the mean return of IPOs and peers and that of the peers alone
is lower than that of OMXSPI, for the time period 0:30. For hypothesis four this means  that we
cannot  reject that IPOs mean return is lower  than that of the peers in the period after they have
been listed.

To conclude, the Welch¶s  T-Test performed shows us that thesis hypothesis one is true and
significant due to the acceptance of the alternative hypothesis and that the other hypotheses are
false and insignificant due to failure to reject the null hypotheses.

                                                                          17
5.3  Multivariate Regression Analysis

5.3.1  Descriptive statistics for datasets

                Table 4: Descriptive statistics for IPOs and selected Peers
 Variable               Observations   Std. Dev    Mean    Median   Minimum   Maximum

 MCAP of IPO (MSEK)        88       16012,10    6124,65   1864,56      13,25   108298,80
 No. of peers per IPO           88           4,13       6,26      6,00        1,00       18,00
 MCAP of Peer (MSEK)       559       42241,01   15002,79   1972,22      37,19   402429,37
 Relative size (Peer/IPO)       559          16,10       4,62      0,55        0,00      163,82

 The table presents the descriptive statistics for IPOs and selected Peers. MCAP of IPO refers to the
 total market capitalization based on the closing price on the first trading day. No. of peers per IPO
 refers to the total number of peers that have been included in this study. MCAP of Peers refers to
 the total market capitalization based on the closing price on the first trading day. Relative size refers
 to the MCAP of each peer divided by the MCAP of the related IPO.

Table 4 presents the  descriptive statistics for 88 IPOs that were included in this study. The
MCAP refers to the total market capitalization on the closing price for the first trading day,
measured in MSEK. No. of peers refers to the total number of peers related to each IPO that
has been used in this study. The MCAP refers to the total market capitalization of the peers in
the dataset at the point of an IPO in the same sector. Relative size to IPO is based on the market
capitalization for the peer compared to the market capitalization of the company completing an
IPO.

As can be observed in Table 6 in the appendix there are no  occurrences  if IPOs having a first
trading day in the month January and July, and only one  occurrence  documented in August.
The month June and April however, had the highest number of completed IPOs. For the sectors,
the five sectors in which most IPOs occurred were Biotechnology & Medical Research; Medical
Equipment,   Supplies   &   Distribution;   Construction   &   Engineering;   Software   and
Pharmaceuticals, which  can be found un appendix Table 7. The five largest IPOs, measured in
market capitalization, are presented in Table 8 in the appendix. The five largest are Epiroc AB,
EQT AB, Storskogen Group AB, Nordnet AB as well as Dometic  Group AB.

5.3.2  Regression for factors

           Table 5: Regression model and results for period -30:0 and 0:30
 Time period               -30:0           -30:0          0:30            0:30

 IPO performance                                    0,084**         0,077*
                                                           (0,037)          (0,042)
 Dummy: IPO
 positive performance                                   -0,472           -0,208
                                                           (1,469)          (1,522)
 Log (MCAP of Peer)       1,671*          1,652         -0,173           -0,236
                            (1,028)          (1,053)        (0,317)           (0,32)
 Log (MCAP of IPO)       -0,149          -0,339         -0,285           -0,362

                                                                          18
                            (1,179)          (1,58)         (0,37)           (0,483)
 Index Performance       1,598***       1,572***      0,712***        0,656***
                             (0,37)           (0,42)          (0,16)           (0,18)
 Intercept                 -14,387         -13,166         4,312           -0,260
                           (10,515)        (21,914)        (3,243)          (6,743)

 Adj. for year fixed
 effects?                  No          Yes         No              Yes
 Observations              559          559         559              559
 R Square                 0,036         0,048        0,051             0,084
 Adjusted R Square         0,030         0,023        0,043             0,057
 The table represents the regression results from four regressions. Two measuring the return for the
 period prior to the IPO and two for the period after. Return is calculated as the change in index
 values. Return and Index performance is adjusted depending on the period of study. The
 regression covers all identified peers of 559. Two different regressions for each period were
 performed. One only including the independent variables, and one additonal including the
 independent variables adjusted for fixed year effects from year. First number represents coefficient
 and paranthesis ( ) represents the standard error.
 ***p-value<0.01, **p-value<0.05, *p-value<0.10

Table 5 shows the regression analysis performed for the return for the period  -30:0 and provides
an R Square of 0.048, which indicates that the identified independent variables can indicate
about 4.8 percent of the return. Before adjusting for the year fixed effects there are significant
results at a p-value of 0.10 for MCAP of the peer as well as index performance. After adjusting
for year fixed  effects,  the results are only significant for the index performance. This is a
positive relationship indicating that if OMXSPI has positive return, the peers also have higher
returns. The non-significant results MCAP of peers after adjusting for year fixed effects
indicates that there are effects, but those effects can be explained via performance differences
in years, which decreases the p-value for this variable.

The regression analysis performed for period 0:30 provides an R Square value of 0,084, with
two independent variables being significant. The R Square being higher than the period prior
to an IPO indicates the independent variables provide higher explanatory value for the period
after. Similar to the preceding period there are significant results for index performance in line
with the preceding period. The implication of which is that positive index performance has a
positive effect on the performance of the  peers. Another significant independent variable is the
IPO performance from which is the calculated return for period 0:30. There is a small positive
coefficient of 0.08, indicating the positive IPO performance corresponds to higher return for
the peers.  On the other  hand,  there are no significant results for the dummy variable based on
if the IPO return is positive or negative, which indicates that high return has more effect on the
peers than smaller return.

                                                                          19
6. DiVcXVVion

6.1  Analysis

The results  of our study based on the aggregated indices presented in Illustration 3 show that
prices of the peers decreased for the entire period prior to an IPO. These results are also
significant for hypothesis 1 that peers underperform the comparable OMXSPI index  leading up
to an IPO within the same sector. On average the peers can be observed having a negative return
of close to 3 percent for  -30:0. These results, however, differ from the results of the U.S study
performed by Hsu, Reed and Rocholl, in which the peers started to experience a negative CAR
from day  -10 to the first trading day with about 0.5 percent. These differences can be explained
by two main factors. The first being that the Swedish market is different from the U.S market.
Sweden is a relatively  smaller market, the consequence of which being that in any given sector
the number of companies in the U.S is significantly more than on the Swedish market. This
increases the relative importance of the IPO, when comparing with for instance 3 peers instead
of 10. This would explain why there are significantly worse returns on the Swedish market
compared to the U.S market. In addition to this Sweden is a much more concentrated market
and smaller economy which could indicate fiercer competition between the few firms that are
listed. This means that the competitive advantages found by Hsu, Reed and Rocholl are
intensified on the Swedish market, while companies could for instance be targeted against
different geographical markets in the U.S. The second explanation for the differences in
performance and timing could be due to the methodology of each study. As previously
described Hsu, Reed and Rochol used two  digits  SIC codes, dividing the market into 62
different industries. Our study however uses the TRBC industry classification dividing the
market into 154 industries. As a  result,  our study could be better at defining the exact
comparable peers, which leads to larger effects being recorded rather than if less related
competitors were included in the peer group to each IPO.

The methodology is one of the key areas in which this thesis paper provides a development of
previous research papers. The first area is with regards to how performance of both peers and
IPOs is benchmarked to index performance. The abnormal  returns in the paper by Hsu, Reed
and Rocholl is calculated as the difference between the actual return for the stock and the
expected return using a model with average daily returns for 255 days ending 42 days prior to
the first trading day of the new IPO. We consider this to be  a  flaw  since returns and price of a
stock is highly volatile and the average return for one period can obviously not be used to
predict the return in another period. Our study however provides a materially better model for
comparing the abnormal returns with the returns of the OMXSPI index during the same time
period. The flaw in the study by  Hsu, Reed and Rocholl is that another abnormal event could
occur in the studied time period, which causes a large fall in stock prices unrelated to the IPO,
which is then captured by the way that the CAR is calculated. This effect would however not
affect our study since the same fall would also be reflected in the OMXSPI index. The second
area in which our paper is eminent is with regards to  industry definition and relevance of peers.
The study from Hsu, Reed and Rocholl has a total of 8,966 related to a total of 134 completed
IPOs, an average of 66.9 peers for each IPO for a  twenty-year  time period. Our study however
with a total of 88 IPOs,  has an average of 6.3 peers for each IPO. This results in  a substantially
better comparison group which also would correspond to being able to record higher effects on
close competitors, which is also proved by the negative return we record being six times as
large as the one seen in their paper.

                                                                          20
Reviewing the results of our thesis we could say with significance that listed peers¶ short-term
stock prices perform worse and decreased more than the OMXSPI in the  30-day  period before
the IPO. As well as that there is a significant correlation with the peers' stock price development
and  that of  the OMXSPI  price development.  However,  we  cannot  say  anything  with
significance about how stock prices for IPOs and peers will perform in relation to OMXSPI,
and about  how peers will separately perform against OMXSPI or whether or not IPOs will
outperform their peers short-term, in the  30-day  period after their first initial trading day. What
was significant when looking at the period after the IPO was that the peers' stock price
development was correlated with both the performance of the IPO and the performance of
OMXSPI. Viewing Table 1 as well we see that all the variables mean returns before the IPO is
negative and that all the mean returns after the IPOs are positive. To summarize, our results
seems to indicate that you can be certain about the fact that peers will perform worse than
OMXSPI before the IPO but the only thing you can say significantly about the period after the
IPO is that you  cannot  predict how the stock prices of peers, IPOs and OMXSPI will develop
in relation to each other.

Reasons for why we would have these results could be due to several factors. One theory is that
investors want to avoid uncertainty and thus act rationally, selling off the peers  since they do
not know how the IPO will affect the industry regarding short-term stock price development.
And then this sell-order on the industry peers, to avoid uncertainty, drives down their stock
prices and leads to a performance worse than OMXSPI in  the time before the IPO. Thus, since
we do not know what the performance will look like after the IPO it could be reasonable to
expect that it will depend on how the IPO affects the industry dynamics and this effect is known
first after the IPO has taken place. That could explain why we see a significant correlation
between peer-, IPO-  and OMXSPI performance. That is the performance shows a correlation
but we do not know in which direction in relation to one another the performance of peers, IPOs
and OMXSPI  will go, leading to the uncertainty previously explained created by the IPO.
Another reason for why we see a significant decrease in the peers stock price compared to
OMXSPI, in the 30 days before the IPO, could be that institutional investors are selling  of
shares in the incumbent industry peers in order to buy shares in the IPO in order to still keep
the same percentage of industry exposure in the fund. Not excluding any peers in order to avoid
not getting exposure to the whole industry. In this case they would have to reallocate capital,
selling off listed peers in favor of investing in the IPO to keep the same industry exposure not
excluding any companies in the industry. These types of actions could supposedly mainly be
seen by index funds and pension funds wanting to get a broad and diversified exposure to equity
rather than for specialized funds pursuing more niche investing strategies. This would be
consistent with the fact that when looking at Illustration 3 the peers recover after the IPO, due
to the fact that the sell-off previously having nothing to do with the industry as such being
overvalued rather the decrease in stock price is due to this special occasion sell-off done by
institutional investors to rebalance their portfolios. Why we believe that this theory could be
plausible is due to the fact that institutional investors own 73-80 percent of the public equity
market. Thus, they are the one investor category that can affect stock prices the most, which
makes it reasonable to assume that they  are the ones selling the peers and that a reason for this
could be in order to rebalance their portfolios. Since if this sell-off mainly was driven by retail
investors we probably would not have significant results for  this, due  to the fact that they own
a too small share of the market capitalization in the public equities market, and thus would not
be able to create such a large significant effect. Another reason, that simultaneously could
explain, why investors would want to sell-off peers before the IPO could be due to IPO
underpricing, which is the fact that the IPOs often are priced well below what they actually are
worth in order to attract investor fund flows, often creating a high short-term return on the first
trading day  of the IPO, an effect which is documented by Philip Lee et al. In order for

                                                                          21
institutional investors to invest in underpriced IPOs they would have to free up liquidity, which
our study indicates could be done by the selling of peers. IPOs also create several competitive
advantages  for  the firm doing  it,  such  as  loosening  of  financial constraints,  financial
intermediary certification and the presence of knowledge capital, as found in the study by Hsu,
Reed and Rocholl. Which has been found, in the same paper, to affect the operational and
financial performance of listed industry peers after the IPO starts benefiting from the
competitive advantages of being a listed company. This creates further incentives for investors
to divest in the listed peers due to the  documented negative effect on operational performance
for the peers. All of the above explanations regarding fund flows affecting the short-term stock
price, would also be consistent with the higher relative importance of an IPO in Sweden
compared to that  of an IPO in the U.S. Whereas in a smaller market, with only a handful of
companies within each sector, the relative importance of the IPO is very high and could
potentially be the cause of a larger sell-off in the already listed companies. Compared to a  larger
market with tens of listed peers where each peer only experiences a smaller sell-off in order to
avoid uncertainty and make sufficient funds available to invest in the IPO.

However, two results that could be inconsistent with this theory about fund flows, is that our
regression model does not show significant results with regards to correlation between return
of peers and the market capitalization of both the peers and the IPO. Why this is inconsistent
with the fund flows theory is because larger IPOs would lead to a greater sell-off in peers, in
order to free up liquidity to invest in the IPO. Meaning that there should be correlation between
the market  capitalization  of the IPO and the short-term stock price performance of industry
peers. When looking at the data in detail of each IPO however, another picture arises. More
specifically we can observe that the largest IPOs in our dataset are Epiroc and EQT, then a large
leep down to Storskogen and Nordnet at a market capitalization 61  512  MSEK  and 26  250
MSEK. Beginning with Epiroc, which was a spin-off from Atlas Copco, which means this IPO
was not subject to a traditional book building process and raising capital. EQT being well
financed by largest shareholders  Investor. The effect of this is that  our dataset includes
relatively few relevant large IPOs, this could be an explanation for not finding significant results
for MCAP of IPOs. The other aspect being with regards to the market capitalization of peers, it
is inconsistent to not find a significant correlation between the market capitalization and peer
returns. The intuition behind this being that the larger the peer the more likely it is to be affected
by the competition of the IPO, since its broader geography and product portfolio has a greater
chance of overlapping with that of the IPO. And since the IPO, as previously explained, gets
competitive advantages in the process this will hit this larger peer¶s short-term stock price
harder than a smaller peer not being directly affected by the IPOs competition specifically due
to a for example more niche competitive strategy. Another factor that could simultaneously be
at play is that larger peers should be relatively less affected by a sell-off caused by an IPO in
their industry, since they have a larger relative market capitalization. On the other hand, larger
companies also  tend  to have a higher relative ownership from institutional investors. Meaning
that  there  could  be  three  effects,  moving  in  different  directions,  between  the  market
capitalization of peers and peer performance when studying the possible explanations above.
Which could be why we do not get any significant results for this independent variable.
Specifically,  this would be consistent with our regression being significant before adjusting for
the fixed year effects with a positive coefficient of 1.671 indicating that peers with higher
market capitalization tend to have a less negative return than smaller peers. These results were
however not significant after adjusting for fixed year effects, meaning that there could be other
dynamics at play in different years, like large peers being hit harder because of greater overlap
with the competition from the IPO.

                                                                          22
A strange trend that can be spotted in our graph for aggregated indices is the  increase in the
OMXSPI index for the time period after the event date, which is the first trading day of the IPO.
This increase in price could logically not be related to the IPO happening. There would also be
occurrences  of both positive and negative returns in the 61-day  period if one picked 88 random
dates over the year, and the returns would even each other out. This implies that the increase in
OMXSPI recorded after an IPO would be abnormal. The dates when IPOs happen are however
not random dates, rather certain periods of the year are heavily overrepresented. This is an effect
of the intensive process leading up to an IPO with regards to  book building, legal preparations,
approvals and coordination with Nasdaq which is disrupted and affected by vacations for
different parties in the financial industry. This is also reflected in the data for first trading days
for the IPOs. Where no IPOs are completed in January, July and only one in August. In  addition,
some months during the year historically have higher average return, which means that if
months with higher average return for our 12-year time period is overrepresented with IPOs it
would correspond to increases recorded in the OMXSPI. Also based on historical performance
the status quo is not unchanged  but rather slightly positive returns due to inflation, generally
growing economy and good stock market environment in the time period we study. The effect
of cyclicality with regards to years is also an area that this paper does not explore in great detail,
covering the time period between 2010 and 2021 generally being characterized as a hot period
as defined by Chris Yung, Gönül Çolak and Wei Wang. This would also provide a great area
for future research looking at and comparing returns of peers in hot periods compared to cold
periods. Our study has however adjusted for these effects by adjusting for fixed year effects in
the regression analysis.

In addition to the explanations we provide for the results being documented in this paper there
are other alternative explanations for the results being recorded.  Specifically,  for the increase
in stock prices for the peers after the IPO, these results are however not significant as recorded
for failing to reject the null-hypothesis in hypothesis 3. The regression  model also fails to find
an independent variable other than return for IPOs and OMXSPI that can predict the return for
period 0:30. As we examined the negative returns prior to an IPO happening in an industry
could be explained by increased uncertainty with regards to the competitive advantages effect
on operating performance within the sector, as well as changed fund flows due to rebalancing
of fund portfolios and IPO underpricing. An alternative explanation to these results could be
that after the IPO is  completed the uncertainty is removed and therefore prices recovers for the
peers. The intuition behind this being that IPOs can provide a point of reference for valuation
of the peers, as well as peers creating this reference point for the IPO. For instance, as recorded
in the study by Jay Ritter, companies will often IPO at its peak price and relative valuation
based on trading multiples tend to be at its peak upon IPO. As a result of this, peers can also
look relatively cheaper when a new IPO has entered  the sector and therefore challenge the
trading multiples within that sector. This would be consistent with the increase in stock price
for the IPOs after the first trading day as well as the positive returns for the peers. This paper
has however failed to  show that the peer return is significantly higher than the OMXSPI index.
Further, uncertainty seen before the IPO, not knowing how it will affect the peers and how their
performance will compare to that of the OMXSPI, could partially be resolved after the  IPO has
taken place. This could explain why we see the recovery of peers, when looking at Illustration
3, which could have caused sell-off in peers in the period before the IPO only due to
uncertainties about whether the new company would affect the industry.

6.2  Limitations
The purpose of this study has resulted in measurable results that can be explained by a variety
of mechanisms such as fund flows, uncertainty caused by the IPO as well as cyclicality of the

                                                                          23
market. There are however limitations and disadvantages with the methodology and way in
which the analysis was performed and the extent to which they can explain real world events.

The first limitation being how IPOs were selected. From the total dataset of 164 IPOs a total of
88 ended up being used. The selection process which we used, for instance choosing to exclude
companies within the real estate sector can have influenced the results. Especially with regards
to the companies that were excluded by manual adjustment based on  skewed  peer groups. If
instead extra effort had been put into manually finding relevant peers supplementing with
alternative industry classifications, the results could have been different.  However,  the reason
for these adjustments was that the scope of the study is to specifically examine the effects of
IPOs on industry competitors. Companies that are affected by other market dynamics such as
reporting standards or cross-ownership have therefore not been included, in order to not skew
the results and decrease the relevance  of the study. Also, having too many manual adjustments
for the selection of peers would also have resulted in larger effects from biases and less
replicability of the study. In addition to this, our paper has a relatively high number of IPOs
considering that the study from Hsu, Reed and Rocholl, which covered a larger market and
longer time period, had a total of 134 completed IPOs.

The second limitation is the time period studied, more specially having a  61-day  calendar
period. As our results show we see a statistically significant decrease in stock prices for the
period  -30:0. Being that this decrease is recorded from the first day  of the period we are unable
to pinpoint exactly when this trend begins, and there could theoretically be other dynamics in
play before the 61 day period we study. The same goes for the period subsequent to the IPO.
The reason for not extending the time periods is that there was no indication prior to this study
that there would be short-term price effects before the period. The study by Hsu, Reed and
Rocholl recorded the effects of the first 10 days prior to the first trading day. In addition to this
there  is often limited information available to the market more than a month prior to the IPO.
Prospectus, investor meetings and roadshows may have not been published or performed and
final valuation is often not clear until a week before the IPO. If the period  was broadened too
much other effects would also come into play which could result in other factors being
measured unrelated to that of the IPO and its effects on the short-term performance of the peers.

The third limitation is using stock prices as well as OMXSPI index that has not been adjusted
to include the positive return effect of dividends.  However,  this has not had an effect on our
study overall. The reason being that we exclude dividends and only look at stock price
development for all the peers, therefore the relevant benchmark index should also be excluding
dividends since performance could otherwise be affected by dividends from large OMX30
companies which might not be included in the specific peer groups. IPOs also do not perform
dividends in the first 30 trading days, being consistent with the way dividends are dealt with
for peers and OMXSPI.

The fourth limitation is that the aggregated indices graph, Illustration 3, was generated early in
the study. This might have resulted in  preconceived notions about the results, which could have
influenced the statistical methods that were used as well as the independent variables included
in the regression model.

The fifth limitation is that we did not perform comprehensive tests for all  the different short-
term time periods within the scope of this study. The T-Test and regressions were only
performed for returns between  -30:0 and 0:30. Leading to the fact that there could be significant
results in other time periods such as  -10:20 or 0:10 for example. And the potential and
unexplored findings in these periods maybe shows a different story than the one being depicted

                                                                          24
in our thesis. These periods could especially be explored with regards to the regression analysis
where different factors could influence the development for different periods, for instance
MCAP of the IPO could have an effect on the immediate period of 10 days closest to an IPO.
The reason for not extending this study for this was that previous literature on the topic and the
aggregated graph, Illustration 3, did not indicate any such relationships. In addition, performing
this analysis could lead to skewed  results,  measuring such short time periods where the
differences in return seems to be even lower in the dataset.

                                                                          25
7. ConclXding remarkV

7.1  Conclusion
Studying whether and how IPOs affect already listed industry peers¶ short-term stock price
development. Our paper has looked at how the returns of industry peers before and after the
IPO have developed and benchmarked this development with an appropriate stock price index.
In order to see if the change in return is significantly greater or smaller than the change in the
index for the same time period. The study takes place in the context of the Swedish stock market
looking  at IPOs and peers in the period from 2010 to 2022 at the Stockholm Nasdaq main stock
exchange specifically. The results obtained is that from 30 days before the IPO to the day of
the IPO industry peers stock price return is significantly lower than that of the appropriate
index, OMXSPI. In the period after the IPO, from the first trading day of the IPO to 30 days
after, we cannot get any significant result of whether IPOs and peers or peers alone outperforms
OMXSPI or not. It was also not possible to significantly say if IPOs outperformed their peers¶
stock price return for this period. In order to analyze the factors that could influence these
results, such as performance of the OMXSPI index, performance of the IPOs as well as factors
relating to the peers  and IPOs with regards to market capitalization, a multivariable regression
analysis was performed. The results from this regression model indicate that there is a clear
correlation between the OMXSPI index, IPO performance and returns of the peers.

The dynamics that we have used to explain the findings touches four key areas. The first area
being the differences between the U.S and Sweden with regards to size of the market as well as
number of listed companies. The second area being the fund flows and trading patterns of
institutional  investors  that  sell-off  prior  to  an  IPO  due  to  uncertainty  in  competitive
environment, rebalancing of fund portfolios, freeing sufficient liquidity for investments into the
new IPO. Reasons for why these actions are taken could be due to both IPO underpricing and
competitive advantages of the IPO decreasing the operational performance of peers in the long-
run. The third key area, being uncertainty leading up to the IPO caused by missing information
in the market, specially related to valuation and investor interest in the IPO, and negative price
effects caused by the IPOs disappearing once this information is available. The fourth area
being that IPOs are affected by the cyclicality in the market, specifically  to monthly cyclicalities
during the year in which IPOs occur and the trends of hot and cold markets on a year-to-year
basis.

Based on the results that have been recorded for the peers, as well as the movements in IPOs
and OMXSPI index after an IPO, the key takeaway from  these explanations as well as the
results of this paper is that there could  be  a  lot of mechanisms at play simultaneously. In line
with previous research which has shown that IPOs benefit from competitive advantages after
being listed, which in turn has a  negative effect on the operational performance of its listed
peers. This phenomenon combined with the rebalancing of funds as well as general uncertainty
introduced into the sector from the IPO could lead to the negative price effects observed for the
listed peers. In conclusion, while IPOs serve as an important function to promote growth and
innovation to companies as well as sectors, there is also a high degree of uncertainty introduced
as a result of having a new kid on the block.

7.2  Future Research
While IPOs is an established and well researched area there are aspects of it which still lack
sufficient studies and research. The area of IPOs effect on the operational performance of its

                                                                          26
competitors is one area where studies have found significant effects caused by the competitive
advantages of being a listed company compared to private. On the other  hand,  relatively,  few
studies have been performed looking particularly at how those competitive advantages as well
as uncertainty is priced in for the listed  peers. This study fills this void by providing historical
data specifically for the Swedish stock exchange and market. The findings of which show that
IPOs within a sector leads to increased uncertainty and reduced prices for its peers, in relation
to the  comparable index, prior to the completion of the IPO. The findings in this paper indicates
that those effects could be explained by fund flows as well as general market sell-off due to
uncertainty. There are also results indicating that the performance of  the IPOs tends  to correlate
with the performance of the peers for the subsequent time period. One reason for this could be
that IPOs can provide guidance for the valuation. For  instance,  imagine a new electric vehicle
(EV) producer completing an IPO with  the relevant peers being large auto conglomerates with
a product portfolio of both EV, diesel cars, motorcycles, trucks and sports cars. In such a
scenario the small EV IPO could show hidden values within a specific division within the large
auto-conglomerate. Additional research into this exact relationship could focus on change in
trading multiples for peers compared to IPOs, change in reporting standards, change in general
approach with regards to investor relations or even increased frequency of spin-offs within the
same sector. Another aspect that could be the subject of further research is if it is possible to
observe generally increasing interest in a sector where an IPO is completed. The intuition
behind this would be that when a company is in the process of going public the IPO attracts
interest in that specific sector when the market dynamics of that sector is challenged. Since in
the event of an IPO it attracts interest into that specific industry and forces analysts, institutions
and retail investors to examine valuations as well as market dynamics within this sector, which
could lead to increased interest in the peers. For instance, does the number of analysts covering
peers increase, does the number of mentions for peers in newspapers and forums  such as Reddit
or Twitter increase or even the number of shareholders in peers. Since this study focuses
exclusively on the Swedish stock market the component of the sector has not been explored to
a large extent. The reason being that most sectors only have few IPOs occurring during the full
time period from 2010 to 2022  and  most  of the sectors not having an IPO at all. Performing a
similar study on a larger market such as the U.S or a combination of markets could provide
insight into different dynamics in different sectors. For instance, within the medical fields where
medicines and other key products can be protected via patent, competition can be different.
Resulting in no negative effects from IPOs on peers with regard to competitive advantages. In
such  sectors the effects of an IPO could be positive, rather than negative as found in this study,
due to attracting interest and analytical coverage into its peers. An additional area for future
research regards the effects of IPOs on the trading multiples of  its listed peers. This would relate
to our alternative explanation for the positive return recorded for the peers after the completed
IPO.

                                                                          27
ReferenceV

Ashford, Kate, and Schmidt, John, 2022, ³WhaW IV AQ IPO?´, Forbes, March 24.

Dagens  Industri, 2021, ³´K|S WiOO ViOOeQ Rch VlOM WiOO NUlfWRUQa´´,  June 23.

Excel, via Microsoft Bing Corporation. ³STOCKHISTORY function,
      https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/office/stockhistory-function-1ac8b5b3-5f62-4d94-
      8ab8-7504ec7239a8).´ Accessed Mar. 14, 2022.

Field, Laura Casares, and Michelle Lowry. ³Institutional versus Individual Investment in IPOs:
      The Importance of Firm Fundamentals.´  The Journal of Financial and Quantitative
      Analysis  44, no. 3 (2009): 489±516.

Helwege, Jean, and Nellie Liang. ³Initial Public Offerings in Hot and Cold Markets.´ The Journal
      of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 39, no. 3 (2004): 541±69.

Jain, Bharat A., and Omesh Kini. ³The Post-Issue Operating Performance of IPO Firms.´ The
     Journal of Finance 49, no. 5 (1994): 1699±1726.

Kunthara, Sophia, 2021, ³The Market Minute: How Long Do Startup Founders Lead Their
     CRPSaQieV?´, Crunchbase, December 3.

Lee, Philip J., Stephen L. Taylor, and Terry S. Walter. ³IPO Underpricing Explanations:
      Implications from Investor Application and Allocation Schedules.´  The Journal of
      Financial and Quantitative Analysis  34, no. 4 (1999): 425±44.

Nasdaq OMX Nordic.  ³Index > OMX Stockholm_PI > Historiska kurser,
      http://www.nasdaqomxnordic.com/index/historiska_kurser?Instrument=SE0000744195  .´
      Accessed Apr. 2, 2022.

Pensions & Investments. ³80% of Equity Market Cap Held By Institutions, 2017,
      https://www.pionline.com/article/20170425/INTERACTIVE/170429926/80-of-equity-
      market-cap-held-by-
     institutions#:~:text=Institutions%20own%20about%2078%25%20of,in%20the%20S%26P
     %20Euro%20index.´ Accessed Apr. 5, 2022.

Refinitive Eikon. ³Market Screening,  https://eikon.thomsonreuters.com/index.html.´ Accessed
      Mar. 14, 2022.

Refintiteve. ³ TRBC Sector Classification,  https://www.refinitiv.com/en/financial-
      data/indices/trbc-business-classification#overview.´  Accessed Mar. 4, 2022.

Ritter,  Jay R. ³The Long-run Performance of Initial Public Offerings´ Journal of Finance 46, no. 1
      (1991): 3±27.

Swedroe, Larry, 2012, ³Wh\ IPOV XQdeUSeUfRUP´, CBS News, November 15.

U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. ³Institutional Investors: Power and Responsibility,
      2013,  https://www.sec.gov/news/speech/2013-spch041913laahtm.´ Accessed Apr. 2, 2022.

                                                                          28
Appendi[

                     Table 6: Number of IPOs completed in each month

 18

 16

 14

 12

 10

  8

  6

  4

  2

  0

            Table 7: Number of IPOs completed within the 12 most occuring sectors

               35

               30

               25

               20

               15

               10

                5

                0

                                                                          29
                            Table 8: Market capitalization of 10 largest IPOs

    Byggfakta Group
  Munters Group AB
      Cint Group AB
       Truecaller AB
   Hemnet Group AB
  Dometic Group AB
        Nordnet AB
Storskogen Group AB
         EQT AB
          Epiroc AB
                      0         20000       40000       60000       80000       100000      120000
                                          MCAP in MSEK

                                                                        30