NB

THE POWER OF MOMENTUM

AN ANALYSIS OF MOMENTUM EXTREMES WITHIN SPORTS
BETTING

CARL HELLMAN

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2022
The power of momentum: An analysis of various instances of momentum and
behavioral biases within sports betting

Abstract:

In this paper I examine 20862 betting contracts within the sport of soccer for the last
decade within 5 major leagues. I perform tests of pricing anomalies for different
instances of momentum by using sports betting as a laboratory environment. I find
evidence of overreaction within the general price movements and for standard
momentum portfolios. I do not find sufficient evidence to conclude the economic
magnitude of momentum extremes which could be explained by the characteristics of
the chosen dataset.

Keywords:

   Behavioral finance, Financial markets, asset pricing, cognitive bias, misreaction

Authors:

   Carl Hellman (24314)

Tutors:

Mehran Ebrahimian, Assistant professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

Adrian d’Avernas, Assistant professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Carl Hellman, 2022

                                   1
Introduction

During the last couple of decades there has been dramatic progress within the
phenomenon of predicting expected returns within financial assets. Numerous findings
have been presented aimed at analyzing security characteristics and behavioral factors
in order to determine the cause of mispricing and anomalous returns. The discussion of
mispricing is related to the phenomenon of market efficiency, where a central point of
discussion has been to determine whether behavioral factors are driven by irrationality,
thereby causing market inefficiency. Despite progress, the reliability of recent findings
has become somewhat debatable as a result of inability to come to a final consensus
regarding which behavioral factors that are driving market inefficiencies and the actual
magnitude of their effect Jensen (1978).

One of the underlying reasons for why the validity of results has been questioned is
related to the recent findings of Fama and French(1991) who proposed the joint
hypothesis problem. The hypothesis is built upon the inherent difficulties of testing for
market efficiency, as it requires theoretical returns generated by asset pricing models.
They proposed the dilemma that each test for market efficiency will subsequently be
impossible to perform without theoretically assumed expected returns. In addition, it
becomes impossible to determine whether anomalous returns are driven by market
inefficiency or estimation errors within the pricing model used to perform the actual
test.

In this paper I intend to build upon the previous work of Moskowitz (2020) who
proposes that the very platform of financial markets constitute a flawed empirical
laboratory to even assess the behavioral factors of investors, as preferences and the
degree of rationality is unobservable to a high extent. In line with the core argument of
his paper, I will take use of the fact that one is able to circumvent many of the dilemmas
related to the joint hypothesis problem by using sports betting contracts as a laboratory
setting. These contracts are by their nature idiosyncratic with no relation to risk premia
and the contracts are associated with an actual terminal value with little relation to price
movements. In contradiction to the continuous financial market, an analysis of sports
betting contract also provides the option to detect mispricing as the terminal values
directly resolves the uncertainty. Important to note is that changes within risk premia for
the overall economy might imply shits in terms of betting activity and price movements,
which is also confirmed by Edmans et al (2007) who concludes that systematic forces
may affect sport betting markets as well as financial markets. However, sports betting
markets provides contracts with terminal values independent of betting activity, which
implies little to no sensitivity to systematic risk in regard to actual outcome.

The analysis which I will conduct will be built upon the most prominent behavioral
factor proposed within previous research which is momentum. In contradiction to the
method proposed by Moskowitz (2020) I choose to ignore the behavioral factors value
and size, as momentum has been proven to be the least controversial factor, enabling a
more direct comparison of findings between the two markets. By retrieving actual
betting lines from one of the largest bookmakers, I am able to perform various analysis
on behavioral theories within decision making within a platform uncontaminated by
systematic risk.

                                   2
The methodology follows the intuition of previous literature which tests whether
previous performance and price movements has any predictive implication for future
return. By observing the price movements within opening to closing odds and its
relation to the predictive value of end to outcome returns I am able to propose different
hypothesis which separates theories of behavioral decision making.

One apparent uncertainty with the proposed method is the ability to directly apply the
findings to the financial market. The arbitrage possibility for investors within financial
market is largely affected by systematic risks which implies that anomalous returns and
price fluctuations are driven by other factors besides behavioral misreactions(Sullivan &
L Feijoo 2016). The results will to some extent be somewhat speculative, but I argue
for a suggestive applicability of results due to the highly similar characteristics between
the two markets in accordance to Moskowitz (2020). Levitt(2004) propose that both
market contains strong elements of profit seeking, arbitrage activity and investor beliefs
which is heterogenous. The anomalous returns within both markets are to a high extent
explained by the same factors of behavior which strengthens the argument for the use of
sports betting as a laboratory environment Feddersen et al (2013)

Related literature and contribution

The contribution I will make within this study is that I will extend the analysis of
Moskowitz (2020) and replicate his method on a different data set where I incorporate
extreme shapes of momentum. It has been provenly difficult to determine the actual
magnitudes of behavioral factors as a result of the continuous structure of the financial
market. Carhart(1997) has concluded that asset pricing models need to incorporate
irrational behavioral reactions from momentum to reduce the model’s estimation error.
As a result, an extensive four factor component formula was constructed where
momentum return is defined and calculated in accordance with the established long-
short momentum strategy where investors take a long position on high momentum
stocks and a short position on low momentum stocks

Fama and French(1991) conducted a study with the aim of analyzing the reliability of
this enhanced asset pricing model where they suggested that it poorly predicts portfolios
with extreme tilts towards winners or losers. By combining the methodology of
Moskowitz (2020) I can evaluate the proposed critique towards the four-factor
component model, as I am able to extend their work by circumventing potential joint
hypothesis problems. As a result of the exogeneous terminal value within sports betting
contracts, I can determine the actual magnitude of irrational misreactions caused by
extreme instances of momentum. I believe that my contribution would be of value to the
literature since it provides speculative insights regarding how decision making is
affected once momentum increases to more extreme instances. I make the choice to
solely look on sports betting contract within soccer as it has been proven to contain
strong evidence of momentum given the large discrepancies between teams within the
major leagues(Wheatcroft 2020).

                                   3
Research question

How and to what magnitude are extreme shapes of momentum affecting behavioral
biases and investor decision making?

Theoretical assumptions and Methodology

In this section I will provide detailed explanations regarding the theoretical assumptions
and methodology which constitutes my analysis.

Price movements and contract horizons

I have retrieved data containing information regarding opening odds, closing odds and
game outcome for actual historical games within the major league in soccer for the last
decade. The opening price of any betting contract is initially set by a bookmaker
through relatively advanced calculations on their belief of probability of outcome. Once
odds are released investors are allowed to take position at any time up until the game
starts. Just as within financial markets prices are driven by the purchase activity of the
investors, with the difference that investors within sports betting market receive the
odds offered at the time of investment regardless of future price movement. In
accordance with previous literature, I make the theoretical assumption that one can only
take a position either at the opening right after odds are released or at the closing when
the game is about to start. This theoretical assumption results in three prices for each
contract: Open, Close and terminal

                                   4
According to the theoretical limitation that investors can only take positions at the
opening and closing I implement the assumption regarding contract horizon and return
periods according to (Moskowitz 2020)

Figure 1 Contract timeline: the figure illustrates the three different prices within sports
betting contract as well as the different returns investors can obtain at respective
horizon.

The test I will perform is based on the assumptions regarding the theoretical contract
horizons presented above, where I explore whether the price movements within
𝑅𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑛:𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒 = 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛: 𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒 has any predictive value for 𝑅𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒:𝑒𝑛𝑑 =
𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒: 𝑒𝑛𝑑. I incorporate tests for irrationality and rationality based on the
assumption that if a contract is priced efficiently at T=1 at close:end you can conclude
that regardless of movement in price, there will be no return predictability for period
T=1 to t=T. As derived from figure 1 above we can express the return from the
open:end as:

 𝑅𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑛:𝑒𝑛𝑑 = 𝑅𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑛:𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒 + 𝑅𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒:𝑒𝑛𝑑. 𝐸(𝑅𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒:𝑒𝑛𝑑) = 0 if efficient

Aligning with the method presented by (Moskowitz 2020) I implement the first
equation for regression:

Equation (1). 𝑅𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒:𝑒𝑛𝑑 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1 ∗ 𝑅𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛:𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒. + 𝜖

                                   5
Through equation 1 I am able to construct 3 separate predictions which explains
different outcomes for movement through behavioral effects.

Prediction 1: The market’s response is rational, and prices move accordingly: 𝑃0 ≠ 𝑃1
and 𝛽1 = 0

In addition to prediction 1 there is a possibility that the prices could move related to
reasons unrelated to any information. In that case we will observe incorrect prices at
closing which will be corrected once the exogenous price is presented. Given the
noninformation price movement we cannot use closing price as a good estimator for
game outcome. Once investors act on no information it follows intuitive sense that
close:end returns are negatively predicted by open:close returns resulting in prediction 2

Prediction 2: price movements based on noninformation. 𝑃0 ≠ 𝑃1, 𝛽1 = −1

Lastly, there is the scenario of mispricing as a result of cognitive biases or an irrational
response to news or information. Previous literature make two distinctions between
irrationality in the shape of underreaction and overreaction(Said Musnadi et al 2018)
Unlike prediction 2 where prices are incorrectly set at the closing but are corrected on
the game’s outcome, irrational investor response suggests that open:close returns will
have predictive power for the close:end return as shown in the figure below.

                                   6
Figure 2: graphical illustration of prediction 2

I implement the mathematical intuition used by (Moskowitz 2020) to define
measurements for under-or-overreaction. A market overreaction would imply that
investors has driven the prices in the direction of past performance. The open:close
return would therefore negatively predict close:end returns. Underreaction suggests the
opposite, where close:end returns are positively predicted since the market responds
slowly to the news.

Prediction 3: prices move on market information but decision making is driven by
irrationality. 𝑃0 ≠ 𝑃1,

   a) 𝛽1 => 0 indicated underreaction
   b) 𝛽1 =< 0 indicates overreaction

As is observed, the predictions above is derived from equation 1. By implementing
these theories of behavioral biases, I am able to extend the analysis to more extreme
shapes of momentum. By performing various tests on sports betting contracts within
soccer I am able to determine if there are any differences in terms of decision-making
once momentum is increased to more extreme instances by analyzing the trend.

Danie and Moskowitz performed a study with the aim of analyzing differences in
behavioral biases when reaching more extreme shapes of momentum and was able to
conclude evidence of overreaction and an increase in prices for normal instances of
momentum. Once momentum is increased sufficiently however, investor’s express a
skepticism towards purchasing as a result of fear of potential crashes in combination
with a subjective belief that the assets are overpriced as they are also affected by
overreaction(Daniel, Moskowitz 2016). My approach enables me to conclude whether
trends within more extreme momentum confirms or contradicts similar findings.

                                   7
Figure 3: Graphical illustration of prediction 1 and

As is shown in the figure above, the differences between overreaction and underreaction
is the change in directions for the graphs once reaching the close:end period. Since
overreaction proposes a negative return predictability for open:end from open:close the
signs of 𝛽1 and 𝛽𝑇 will be the opposite, whilst they are the same for underreaction.

In contrast to (Moskowitz 2020) I collect data for only one type of contract, namely
standard odds contracts, which implies a potential flaw within my proposed method. My
data set is very comprehensive in terms of lookback horizon and sample size. I retrieve
data dating back one decade from several major and minor leagues in order to avoid any
league-related bias. Similar studies have been conducted earlier under similar data
sample containing only one contract and one sport, where potential flaws were raised
related to the problems of omitted variables. I will elaborate further on this subject more
thoroughly in a later section.

Overall, I believe that my data sample is in many ways sufficient to provide reliable
results given the large sample size and comprehensive lookback horizon. In stark
contrast to multiple studies I use actual betting lines from the same bookmaker
throughout my data which is considered relatively extensive compared to the quality of
previous datasets Gandar et al (1988) and Avery and Chevalier (1999). By computing
actual returns from historic betting contracts and observe various contract horizons I am
able to determine the economic magnitude of behavioral effects through the same
approach as Moskowitz(2020). I am able to make my own contribution by observing the
trend in terms of economic magnitude once momentum is increased where results of
different momentum limits are directly comparable as a result of the exogenous terminal
value within the contracts unlike financial markets.

The purpose of this study is ultimately to conclude the magnitude of behavioral biases
and its effects on price movements and anomalous returns within financial markets by
using sports betting as a laboratory environment. I refer to recent findings and argue

                                   8
that the strong similartities within the two financial market in addition to the
comprehensive comparison performed by (Moskowitz 2020) provides sufficient
evidence to conclude that behavioral factors are driving decision making within sports
betting markets, eliminating the need to further test my result in a financial market
setting.

Return characteristics of contracts

The fundamental assumption of this paper is that behavioral characteristics such as
momentum will generate implications for return predictability where the former is
excluded from equation 1. Following the same theoretical assumptions presented above
I derive the following regression equation in line with previous literature.

Equation (2) 𝑅𝑗,0:1 = 𝛼1 + 𝛽1𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑗 + 𝜖𝑗,0:1

The equation examines whether price movements from open:close is related to different
characteristics such as momentum.

The same intuition can be applied to regress the relationship between characteristics and
movement in closing:end returns.

Equation (3) 𝑅𝑗,1:𝑇 = 𝛼𝑇 + 𝛽𝑇𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑗 + 𝜖𝑗,1:𝑇

By deriving the relationship of returns according to the two steps in equation (1) and (2)
I can test for specific price movements solely as a result of characteristics of
momentum. Just as (Moskowitz 2020) I present 4 alternative hypothesis similar to the
predictions 1 to 3 presented above with the modification that characteristics of a betting
contract is assumed to affect return predictability where Equation 2
𝛽1 − 𝛽𝑇 reflects the total price movement from open:close and consequently 𝛽1 + 𝛽𝑇
equals the total price movement from open:end.

Hypothesis 1: No relevance, the characteristic of the contract is not related to any
information. 𝛽1 = 𝛽𝑇 = 0

Hypothesis 2: Information efficiency, prices are set efficiently, and the characteristic is
related to information. 𝛽1 = 𝛽𝑇 = 0

Hypothesis 3: Noninformation/noise, Prices are driven up as a result of market
responding to noninformaton, 𝛽1 ≠ 0, 𝛽𝑇 = −𝛽1

Hypothesis 4: information inefficiency, prices move 𝛽1 ≠ 0 as the characteristic is
related to information. The market response is however inefficient implying two types of
misreactions:

   a) Underreaction: 𝛽1 × 𝛽𝑇 > 0
   b) 𝛽1 × 𝛽𝑇 < 0

                                   9
Hypotheses 1 and 2 imply identical results in terms of relationship between betas which
makes them indistinguishable, both imply no relationship between returns and
characteristic. The former suggests a scenario in which characteristics does not contain
relevant information or attributes which affect investors while the latter does contain
relevant information which however is efficiently incorporated in the set price.

Hypotheses 3 and 4 constitute the behavioral models which are aimed at explaining the
irrational misreactions of investors. Barberis(2018) proposes that there are two
fundamental ways in which a behavioral model could deviate from rational
expectations: differences in beliefs or nonstandard preferences. Hypothesis 3 illustrates
the problem of omitted variables and team specific match-biases where investors are
prone to cause price movements as a result of different preferences in the shape of
favorite team etc which is concludes in their paper Newall, Cortis (2021). As my dataset
only contains one type of contract it is important to note that my results could
potentially be affected by noninformation price movements which is confirmed by
Avery and is in line with previous literature(Avery 1999).

Hypothesis 4 suggests that the beliefs are affecting the price movements where
characteristics are related information content but not fully reflected in the actual price
since the market misreacts. Given that my extension is built upon analyzing eventual
patterns for behavioral effects once momentum increases, I wish to test the results
presented by Lukis and Zhang(2022) among others who proposes that greater
momentum causes results in larger instances of overreaction as investor believe that
recent performance is not sufficiently captured within the proposed price.

Consistent with the predictions presented for equation 1, the factor which distinguishes
overreaction and underreaction within hypothesis 4 is the sign of return predictability
from open:end from open:close. Overreaction drives prices in the direction of past
performance which is corrected by the game’s outcome and is associated with an
opposite sign, while an underreacting market are slow to react to additional information
implying the same sign for return predictability and price movements.

Derivation of betting contract returns, odds and bookmaking

I examine one type of contract within the sport of soccer which is the standard odds
contracts. If one considers the scenario in which team 1 plays a game vs team 2, an odds
contract allows the investor to take a position on who wins. If 𝑇𝑒𝑎𝑚 1𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑑 >
𝑇𝑒𝑎𝑚 2𝑝𝑜𝑖𝑛𝑡 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑑 the return would be positive for a long position at team 1 and a short
position on team 2. Odds are expressed as the total amount investors receives for a 1-
dollar bet. Offered odds of 1,5 would result in a return of 0,5 dollar return for every
dollar invested in the case of a win. A positive return is only obtained in the event that
the investor’s chosen team wins, whilst both draw and loss results in a return of -1 per
dollar invested.

                                  10
The contract horizon is identical for every sport where various bookmakers determine
the initial price of each contract with the purpose of maximizing profit. Price
movements are purely dependent on the betting volume on respective sides(team 1 and
2) which occurs immediately after odds are released. Odds are continuously balanced
throughout the contract horizon in accordance to changes in amount placed on each
team within the market. The efficiency of bookmaker prices is tested within hypothesis
2 where 𝛽1 = 𝛽𝑇 = 0 where recent performance is efficiently incorporated in the price
if held true.

Contract returns and constraints

As illustrated in figure 1, My method follows the intuition of (Moskowitz 2020) who
makes the theoretical assumption that betting is only possible at two distinct points in
time, at the opening and at the closing and seeing it through till the outcome of the
game. According to figure 1, 𝑅𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛:𝑒𝑛𝑑 makes up the entire contract horizon from odds
release to game outcome and terminal value. Mathematically the interval of 𝑅𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛:𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒
can then be derived as 𝑅𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛:𝑒𝑛𝑑 − 𝑅𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛:𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒 which is equivalent to a strategy where
an investor takes a long position at the opening and a short position right before the
game starts at the closing. The open:close return could be viewed as the residual
between these two actual contract returns and to be representative of the total price
movement during the betting horizon of the contract. Multiple studies within the area
implements the theoretical approach that investors have an option to take a short
position of any contract, which in practice would be impossible given that only
bookmakers are granted that possibility. However, loosening the short-position
constraint allow for the construction of hypothetical momentum portfolio strategies
which are implemented in the financial markets regularly built on taking a long position
on the “winners” and a short position on the “losers”( Jegadeesh and Titman. 2001)).

In line with the approach of (Moskowitz 2020) I perform my analysis from the
perspective of always betting on the favored team, since results are proven to be
identical regardless if you take the perspective of the favorites or the home team. This
constraint is implemented to ensure that various portfolio strategies does not allow for
multiple bets on the same game.

                                  11
Data description and valuation

The data sample is retrieved from football-data.co.uk who provides historical betting
lines for multiple major and minor leagues within soccer. The database contains
information regarding actual betting lines as well as information regarding game
outcome and point differential. I observe contracts within Premier League, Bundesliga,
La Liga, Serie A and Ligue 1 for every game within each season starting at 2012/2013
to the most recent season 2022. As described above, my method contradicts with that of
(Moskowitz 2020) in terms of number of contracts used per game, where I only look at
odds contract whereas he uses more extensive data set including over/under, money line
and point spread contracts. Betting lines from other contracts besides odds are only
available for the last year which would imply a hefty reduction in sample size especially
for analysis on more extreme shapes of momentum. Future researchers would generate
more reliable results by implementing the method on a more extensive data set where
multiple contracts are incorporated to avoid favorite team-biases.

Unlike previous studies who uses opening and closing betting lines from different
bookmakers my data set includes contract prices from Pinnacle Sports for each contract
which enables more reliable test for behavioral asset pricing models. A direct
comparison between the opening and closing is enabled where real returns for contracts
and portfolios can be constructed. The data which I retrieve does not contain the actual
opening odds rather pre-closing as they are collected with a slight delay from Pinnacle,
Friday afternoon for weekend games and Tuesday mornings for mid-week games. This
could suggest that some observation generate weaker economic magnitude as prices
changes drastically relatively instantaneous after the price of the contract has been
release. Much of the total price movement could potentially already have occurred
according to the theory of immediate arbitrage exploitation and market reaction (Fama
1991). However, I mainly seek to analyze the direction of mispricing caused by
irrational behavior and determine the general trend once momentum increases. I
therefore argue that the results might bear lower absolute economic magnitude, but it is
reasonable to assume that the results will follow the same economic interpretation in
terms of return predictability.

The data set contains a total of 20862 contracts with date of match played, actual point
differentials as well as information on home/away team given that my method will be
analyzed from the perspective of betting on the favorites in line with (Moskowitz 2020).

                                  12
Results

In this section I present the results found

General contract descriptives

table 1 provides descriptive general statistics of the collected betting contracts. Every
game is associated with three possible outcomes(home win, draw or away win). The
table shows the average closing line from the perspective of betting on the favorites
represented by the mean. The standard deviation, standard error and confidence levels
are also computed.

table 1: descriptive statistic for contract returns.
   Soccer betting contracts from Premier league, La liga, Serie A, Bundesliga, Ligue 1:
                              Seasons from 2012-2022

 Mean Stdev Standard error count Confidence level

 1,93 0,46 0,003 20861 0,0063

Price movements

Table 2 provides tests of predictions 1 through 3 by running the regression stated in
equation 1 𝑅𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒:𝑒𝑛𝑑 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1 ∗ 𝑅𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛:𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒. + 𝜖. Panel A runs the regression on a full
sample where I almost identical results to (Moskowitz 2020) in terms of beta value. The
result indicates a very statistically significant negative 𝛽1 which suggests that increase
in price movements from open:close are associated with negative return predictability
for close:end. I am able to reject prediction 2 as the regression coefficient is statistically
different from 0. The results confirm prediction 3b which implies that investors act in
accordance to overreaction where roughly half of total price movement is reversed once
reaching the terminal value and game outcome.

In the data section I discussed the potential risks involved with not using actual opening
lines but argued that the direction of price movement would be the same despite
economic magnitude being a bit lower. For robustness of my paper, I therefore perform
the same analysis again where non-changing betting lines are excluded from the sample.
The results are almost identical so I can conclude that negative 𝛽1 in panel A does not

                                  13
occur due to an overrepresentation of contracts with no price movements. The result
indicates that investor have a tendency to overreact.

Table 2: testing for general price movements.
                        Panel A: full sample size of odds contracts

           Regression variables regression output

                      𝛽1                                           -0,494

                 T-statistic                                    (-33,1)

              Panel B: odds contract without price movements excluded

           Regression coefficients regression output

                      𝛽1                                           -0,496

                 T-statistic                                    (-32,3)

Presented within figure 1(see appendix) is a graphical illustration over the average
returns for open:close and close:end strategies. The results confirms the findings in table
2 where a large portion of the price movement is reversed at the game’s outcome.
Important to note is that these results argue for the reliability of my data set as I
conclude that prices may move by very little on average, but the economic interpretation
and proportion of reversal are unaffected.

                                  14
Trading strategies and momentum

The fundamental assumption within this paper lies within the hypothesis that
characteristics such as momentum are related to contract returns. In this section I will
introduce the concepts of momentum for the first time, and in detail explain how I
assess relationship between contract characteristics and returns. By incorporating the
fundamentals presented by many previous studies and the adaption to sports betting
market in accordance to (Moskowitz 2020) I am able to compute actual trading
strategies.

The method of portfolio structuring is built on ranking each contract based on the
characteristics of momentum. In line with how these theories are implemented within
financial markets I create momentum indexes for each team on each contract based on
both number of past wins as well as cumulative point differentials. Determining the
appropriate lookback horizon is relatively difficult as there are few papers built on this
methodology and approach. Jeegadesh and Titman(1991) conclude that momentum can
be found within the 6-12 month range which most likely is a much longer lookback
horizon than needed once analyzing sports betting contracts given their short maturity
dates(Moskowitz 2020). Among the few existing papers, a variety of lookback horizons
are presented most commonly ranging from 4-8. I set the limit to 8 since I am interested
in capturing the more extreme instances of momentum.

Indexes are created by observing the cumulative wins and point differentials for the last
8 games. Point differentials are included as there is a risk of misrepresenting investor
subjective beliefs if solely looking at past wins. Name presents that the subjective
valuation of sports teams rises if they reach momentum through scoring more
goals(Benz 2019). Each measure is incorporated by taking an equally weighted average.

As is standard for typical momentum strategies, the fundamental is built around buying
positive momentum stocks(winners) and shorting low momentum stocks(losers).
Momentum portfolios are constructed by dividing the sample size of momentum index
In desired upper and lower limits, where you take a long position in contracts within the
upper limits and a short position within lower limit contracts. In contrast with previous
literature I construct upper and lower limits on a weekly basis instead of daily, as games
by nature does not occur on the same day as frequently between major leagues.

In accordance to Moskowitz(2020) I construct three different strategies which stems
from the theoretical framework presented earlier. The idea is to construct portfolios with
different characteristics where different values for regression coefficient reveals the
degree of irrationality within the market.

                                  15
𝑃𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑓𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑜𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛:𝑒𝑛𝑑. Represented by a long and short position at the opening horizon.

𝑃𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑓𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑜𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒:𝑒𝑛𝑑 Represented by a long and a short position at the closing horizon

𝑃𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑓𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑜𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛:𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒 A residual off 𝑃𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑓𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑜𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛:𝑒𝑛𝑑 − 𝑃𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑓𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑜𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒:𝑒𝑛𝑑

Portfolio returns are computed by taking positions according to the following weights:

                                                        1(𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑖,𝑡−1∈𝑋𝑁)          1(𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑖,𝑡−1∈𝑋1)
Equation (4). 𝑤𝑖 = 𝑁               − 𝑁
                                                  ∑𝑖 =1 1(𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑖,𝑡−1∈𝑋𝑁)    ∑𝑖 =1 1(𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑖,𝑡−1∈𝑋1)

Where N represents the upper limit chosen to construct the portfolio. If portfolios are
constructed by only incorporating top 5% of the data set, N has a value of 20 since data
is divided into parts of 20. Returns are computed through 𝑤𝑖 × 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 for each type of
portfolio

Regression of portfolio returns under normal instances of momentum

The following table and analysis constitute a mere replication on the exact method
proposed by (Moskowitz 2020). The limit for portfolio construction is set to
quintiles(upper and lower 20%). The portfolio returns are regressed on:

equation 2(𝑅𝑗,0:1 = 𝛼1 + 𝛽1𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑗 + 𝜖𝑗,0:1) for the open:close

equation 3(𝑅𝑗,1:𝑇 = 𝛼𝑇 + 𝛽𝑇𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑗 + 𝜖𝑗,1:𝑇) for the close:end.

The open:end return values are derived through the sum of open:close and close:end as
illustrated in figure 1 and provides tests for whether prices are efficiently incorporating
the previous values of momentum.

                                  16
Table 3: regression on q5:q1 portfolios
                           Portfolio regressions(Q5:Q1-strategy)

                   Open-to-close(1) Close:end(2) Open:end(1+2)
 𝛽                      0,0271 -0,381 0,11

 T-statistic             1,95 -3,52 0,20

An economic interpretation of the above results suggests that an increase in momentum
positively predicts the price movements. The open:close portfolio show a regression
coefficient of 0,027 which is remarkably close to being statistically significant with a t-
statistic of 1,95. An increase in betting prices from open:close also suggests that
investors misreact to information by driving the prices in the direction of past
performance which is also confirmed by the statistically significant negative regression
coefficient for the close:end portfolio of -0,381(t-statistic of -3,52). As the open:end
portfolio results in a regression coefficient which is statistically insignificant and no
different from 0 I find evidence that prices are not moving on noninformation reasons as
the positive relation between momentum and price movements from open to close is
reversed for the close:end.

Regression on portfolio returns under extreme instances of momentum

As I am able to easily manipulate the specified limit for momentum of the portfolio, I
can make my own contribution by extending the previous analysis to more extreme
instances of momentum. By increasing(decreasing) the upper(lower) limit from
quintiles I am able to analyze the change in behavioral effects for different instances of
momentum and determine whether the results are consistent and generates some sort of
a pattern.

The analysis I perform in this section does not make any alterations in regard to the
method used to generate table 3 except that the momentum limits is changed. As the
limit is manually altered to reflect more extreme instances, the sample size reduces as
fewer contracts contain sufficient momentum indexes which potentially affects the t-
statistics generated. I am interested in analyzing the general trends and patterns however
which implies that the results presented below still provides interesting economic
interpretations.

                                  17
Table 4: regression on q10:q1 portfolios
               Panel A: Portfolio regression(Q10:Q1-strategy) N=376

                   Open-to-close(1) Close:end(2) Open:end(1+2)
 𝛽                      0,0274 -0,28 0,04

 T-statistic             0,96 -2,35 0,47

The table above presents regression coefficients and T-statistics for portfolio returns
when the limit is set to top/bottom 10% of observations. By analyzing the output for the
returns in isolation I conclude identical results as in table 3. Open:close returns are
positively predicted by increases in momentum which once again shows that investors
drives the prices in line with past performance. The regression coefficient is not
statistically significant but provide indications that the price movement is still positively
predicted by an increase in momentum to a higher degree than for the Q5:Q1 portfolio.
Overreaction is suggested to drive decision making for these portfolios returns as well
as we observe the statistically significant beta value with the t-statistic of -2,35. If
making a direct comparison between table 3 and 4 I can conclude that the magnitude of
overreaction has decreased

Table 5: regression on q20:q1 portfolios.
               Panel B:Portfolio regression(Q20:Q1-strategy) N=349

                   Open-to-close(1) Close:end(2) Open:end(1+2)
 𝛽                       -0,01 -0,05 0,00

 T-statistic              -1,10 -0,36 -0,01

I define the most extreme instance of momentum as the q20:q1 portfolio as it only
contains the top 5% observations. None of the values within the regression shows a
statistically significant correlation. An interpretation of the economic results would

                                  18
suggest that for most extreme instances of momentum portfolios, prices are negatively
predicted by an increase in momentum. The evidence is consistent with the prediction
of underreaction but cannot be determined since beta value for close:end is not
statistically different from 0.

Economic interpretation of behavioral trend

The regressions run on the various portfolio returns result in a mixture of statistically
significant and insignificant result. Before discussing the validity and generability of my
findings I will provide the economic interpretation of the patterns shown in the analysis.

Figure 4: Behavioral trend within overreaction

The result indicates that investors do have a tendency to overreact to momentum. For
the portfolio representing the normal momentum instances(q5:q1) the result is
statistically significant where prices move in the direction of past performance and the
effect is reversed by the game’s outcome. When increasing the limit of momentum by
analyzing the q10:q1 portfolio the same pattern emerge. Investors overreact as
momentum effects are reversed by the game’s outcome with statistical significance but
to a much lesser extent in absolute measures compared to the q5:q1 analysis. Despite
the regression output being very week in terms of statistical significance, the q20:q1
portfolio provides the same economic interpretation. Namely that more extreme
instances of momentum relate to a diminishing effect of overreaction.

These findings proposes a trend which aligns with previous work who states that once
momentum is increased sufficiently, investors expresses a subjective belief that the
asset is overpriced or that the risk of future stock crashes is more adjacent once
momentum is extreme(Lukis. Zhang 2022). My findings indicates that more extreme
instances of momentum results in a negative trend in terms of overreaction effects. In
line with the literature, this phenomenon can be explained by the fact that investor
perceive the contracts as more risky given the risk of future crashes, which explains the
movement in close:end betas.

                                  19
Discussion

In this section I discuss the need for additional robustness tests and potential flaws
within the chosen method or data sample. I also provide insights regarding the result
validity.

Statistical significance

Just as (Moskowitz 2020) argues, results are only applicable to the financial market if
they are of statistical significance. Namely, it bears little explanatory power that my
results indicated no statistical relationship. My results implicates that the relationship
between momentum and return predictability is nonexistent for more extreme instances
which strongly misaligns with the previous papers from the financial markets. It would
therefore be flawed to suggest that my findings would invalidate the existence of this
relationship within financial markets. A non-statistically significant result within a
laboratory platform does not provide many insights regarding behavior within financial
markets.

Sample size and lookback horizon for portfolio construction:

One of the potential explanations of the statistical insignificance is the relatively small
sample size used as input for each regression in table 4 to 5. As we move toward more
extreme instances of momentum, the sample size gets reduced since fewer observations
are included which is confirmed in the top panel of table 4 and 5 where the number of
observations is reduced by 27 observations. A lower sample size is proven to have a
negative effect on statistical significance of t-tests. As we move towards more
extremely tilted portfolios, results are of lesser statistical significance.

The validity of the suggested approach to derive the momentum portfolios could also
constitute potential explanation for the non-significant results. My approach contrasts to
that of (Moskowitz 2020) by observing upper and lower momentum limits on a weekly
basis instead of daily, as my dataset by nature contained too few observations per day to
construct more extreme momentum portfolios. This trade-off intuitively generates a
much lower sub sample where each observation now contains contracts from a 7-day
period. Further research would obtain more reliable results by expanding the analysis to
multiple sports as it increases the number of observations per day on average.

Different levels of lookback horizons for momentum will affect the acquired results
when constructing portfolios as a longer horizon indicates more extreme shapes of
momentum. I implement the regularly used approach where a lookback horizon is set
constant throughout the analysis and momentum indexes are constructed for each point
in time accordingly. The set limit of 8 matches used in the analysis bears relatively low
motivation in previous literature as the available guidance is somewhat limited. Much
more extensive research would increase the robustness of results where the lookback
horizon limit is not held constant. More reliable composite momentum index could be
constructed if the lookback horizon is altered within a given range which is confirmed
by Jeegadesh and Titman(1993). It is plausible to assume that the results would become

                                  20
more reliable as it enables the analysis to determine for which lookback horizon
momentum appear to be strongest.

Omitted variables

favorite team preferences have been proven throughout the literature as one potential
explanation to price movements due to noninformation reasons discussed in prediction
2. (Moskowitz 2020) performs a regression analysis on contract returns and dummy
variables with a home/away structure in order to determine the effects on team-specific
biases. The results are implying that more extensive datasets, enabling a cross sectional
analysis through multiple contracts such as Over/under, can circumvent omitted variable
problems as they difference out. Confounding variables and price movements due to
noninformation reasons compromises the validity of results for non-cross-sectional
analysis in line with the above reasoning. The statistical insignificance within the results
grants explanatory power to the requirement of performing the analysis through a cross
sectional approach as the price movements caused by omitted variables is unobservable
to a high extent and thereby unavoidable.

Conclusion

This paper aims to implement the approach of (Moskowitz 2020) where sports betting
markets are suggested to be a better laboratory environment for testing behavioral
factors than the financial markets. I am able to find a general price movement within
sports betting contracts corresponding to the irrational cognitive mechanism of
overreaction where open-to-close price movements negatively predicts close-to-end
returns.

By constructing momentum portfolio strategies in accordance with previous literature I
am able to test the economic magnitude of behavioral mispricing models for various
limits of momentum. I obtain results which conclude that for lesser or normal instances
of momentum return predictability is statistically significant and is consistent with the
hypothesis stating that investors drive prices in the direction of past performances which
are reversed at the game’s outcome due to strong overreaction.

The main contribution I make is that my proposed method enables the direct
comparison between economic magnitudes for various Portfolios once momentum is
gradually tilted towards the extremes. I am able to deduce a suggestive pattern where
investors continue to overreact and drive prices in the direction of past performance but
to a much lesser extent as a result of potential fear of crashes similar to recent findings
within financial markets.

As a general theme within the robustness section, the proposed method presents many
interesting contributions to the literature in terms of possibility for analysis. However,

                                  21
the relative weaknesses of the results confirm the requirement for a more extensive
dataset where multiple sports and contracts are implemented in order to avoid problems
related to omitted variables. The limitation of the dataset causes a subsequent trade off
within the chosen method of portfolio structuring which lower the reliability of results.

As I obtain non-significant results, I am unable to make any suggestive insights in
regards to investor behavior within financial markets as well as confirming the recent
findings stating that advanced asset pricing models still fail under more extreme
portfolio tilts. I am still arguing for the positive contribution of this paper as there is
reason to believe that many of the problems in terms of reliability could be managed by
future researchers by performing the same analysis on a more extensive dataset.

                                  22
Reference list

Avery and Chevalier 1999 identifying investor sentiment from price paths: the case of
football betting, Journal of Business 72, 493-512

Carhart 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance. The journal of finance, 52-
80.

Daniel, Moskowitz, 2016, Momentum crashes, Journal of financial economics. 221-242

Edmans, Garcia, Norli 2007, Sports sentiments and stock returns, journal of finance 62,
1967-1973

Feddersen, Humphreys, Soebbing 2013 Sentiment biases and Asset prices; Evidence
from sports betting market, university of Denmark, 1-27

Football-data.co.uk (https://www.football-data.co.uk/)

Gandar, Dare, Brown, Zuber, 2002, The Journal of Finance 53, 385-401

Rodney N, Sullivan & Luis Garcia Feijoo, An Examination of Timeout Value, Strategy,
and Momentum in NCAA Division 1 Men’s Basketball2016, financial analyst journal
72, 36-45

Jegadeesh and Titman, 2001, Profitability of Momentum Strategies: An Evaluation of
Alternative Explanations,. The Journal of Finance 56, 699-720

Jensen 1978, Some anomalous evidence regarding market efficiency, Journal of
financial economics, 2-5

Levit, 2004, The economic journal 114, 223-244

Lukis. Zhang, 2022, Why momentum concentrates among overvalued stocks 2022.
University of British Columbia, 1-55

Moskowitz, 2020, asset pricing and sports betting, The Journal of Finance, 1-72

Musnadi, Faisal, Majid, 2018, Overreaction and underreaction anomalies in the
Indonesian stock market: a sectoral analysis, universitas Syiah Kuala. 442-450

Phillip W, S Newall, 2021, Are Sports Bettors Biased toward Longshots, Favorites, or
Both? A Literature Review, University of Malta. 1-9

Wheatcroft, 2020, Profiting from overreaction in soccer betting odds. Journal of
quantative analysis in sports. 194-204

                                  23
24
25