Corporate Bond Inventories
and Liquidity Risk Pricing

Effects on Expected Corporate Bond Return

ALEXANDER EKMAN

OMAR ABOUMARIA

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2022
Corporate Bond Inventories and Liquidity Risk Pricing: Effects on Expected Corporate
Bond Return

Abstract:

   This paper studies the pricing of liquidity risk in the cross section of corporate bonds for
   the period of October 2004 to December 2020 following the method presented by Lin et
   al. (2011). Furthermore, it examines the relationship between liquidity pricing and
   inventory cycles. No significant results for general pricing of liquidity risk are found for
   the full sample period, however significant pricing is found after the financial crisis.
   Market-wide liquidity is priced to a lesser extent as peak inventory grows. We find no
   significant relationship between a proxy for individual liquidity and inventory cycles.

Keywords:

   Liquidity Pricing, Corporate Bonds, Inventory cycles

Authors:

   Alexander Ekman (24533)
   Omar Aboumaria (24348)

Tutors:

   Adrien d´Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d´Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Acknowledgments: We would like to thank our tutor Adrien d’Avernas for his valuable input.
We also wish to thank Martin Waibel for his guidance, insights, and invaluable support.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Retail Management
Stockholm School of Economics
© Alexander Ekman and Omar Aboumaria, 2022
                                1. Introduction
Since the conclusion of the financial crisis an increase in regulatory interventions has made
bond inventory provisioning more costly and attention is therefore now directed to how post-
crisis regulations have affected dealer behavior. This is especially important because
corporate bonds are traded over the counter (OTC), and trades are thus heavily dependent on
dealer willingness to intermediate (Duffie et al, 2005). With increased bond inventory
provision costs, the level of inventory absorbed onto the balance sheet and the willingness to
make market should be affected. Waibel (2021) finds that imposed regulations have resulted
in constrained dealers reducing market-making in high inventory bonds and selling balance
sheet concentrated bonds. The reduced market-making hence is coupled with a reversal in
position. As inventory becomes positive or negative, i.e., points of continued - customer
selling or customer buying, there are stages throughout this cycle where positions are
reversed, and market-making is reduced. Inventory risk is managed by lowering ask prices as
dealer inventory reaches a positive peak and increasing bid prices as dealer inventory reach a
negative peak (Amihud and Mendelson, 1980). Corporate bonds are expected to become
more illiquid as reduced market-making and lower potential transactions, and consequently
have a potential effect on liquidity risk pricing in corporate bonds.
        The body of literature concentrating on liquidity risk pricing in corporate bond returns
is substantial. Studies suggest that liquidity risk, i.e., the risk that the bond’s return responds
to improvements or deteriorations of aggregate liquidity in the market, is priced in the cross-
section of corporate bonds (E.g., Lin et al, 2010; Bao et al, 2011; Bongaerts et al, 2017).
However, the majority of such studies examine relatively short periods of time, up until the
financial crisis. Furthermore, evidence of dealer inventory impact on liquidity risk pricing in
corporate bonds returns remains limited. An interesting route for research is to increase the
understanding of how liquidity pricing changes based on the level of intermediation dealers
chose to provide, identified through the dealer inventory cycle, and if post financial crises
regulations have affected this relationship.
        This paper examines market-wide liquidity risk pricing in the cross-section of U.S.
corporate bond returns and investigates possible variations throughout the inventory cycles,
i.e., when absolute dealer inventory is high respectively low. This is accomplished by
replicating and extending upon the study of Liquidity risk and expected corporate bond
returns by Lin et al. (2010), with U.S. market data from 2004 to 2020. Dealer inventory
cycles are obtained in accordance with Anands et al. (2020) and acquired through Waibel
(2021). As regulations have had a potential effect on dealer behavior, in terms of how much
inventory they choose to absorb and market-making activity, this paper also investigates
possible variations of liquidity risk pricing through inventory cycles, by testing the potential
relationship across regulatory periods.
        The purpose of this paper is to further the understanding of liquidity risk pricing in the
cross-section of corporate bonds and how it is affected by dealer intermediation activities.
The contribution is firstly made by providing an updated outlook on Lin et al. (2011)
and its replicability with new data and a more complete data set from TRACE, with regards
to if liquidity risk is priced in the cross-section of corporate bond returns. Information on
dealer inventory cycles on individual corporate bond levels allows us to disentangle the
potential impact of variations in dealer inventory on liquidity risk pricing in corporate bond
excess returns. Presented studies show evidence towards the notion that dealer intermediation
and thereby the inventory dealers absorb have been affected by regulations directed by the
Basel accords and the Volcker rule. This additionally presents an opportunity to establish the
potential impact of regulatory metrics on liquidity pricing in the cross-section of corporate
bond excess returns, through the perspective of dealer inventory levels and dealer
intermediation willingness.

       The aim of the paper is henceforth to answer the following:

     Is liquidity risk priced in the cross-section of corporate bond excess returns? How do
 variations in dealer inventory affect the pricing, and can discrepancies between regulatory
                                    periods be identified?

The employed method follows Lin et al. (2011) with some modifications. Utilizing the
Amihud (2002) bond market liquidity factor, Lin et al. (2011) provide a method that tests if
the liquidity measure is priced in the cross-section of expected corporate bond excess returns
and a portfolio sorting methodology that we modify for the inclusion of inventory cycles. The
transaction data sample is used for the study, covering the period Oct 2004 to Dec 2020,
where transaction data from the Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine (TRACE) is used.
        To begin, we build the aggregate market-wide liquidity measure, following Amihud
(2002), a prominent measure of liquidity in the literature. Through the regression method by
Fama and MacBeth (1973), the effect of liquidity risk in expected corporate bond excess
returns is tested.

The linear factor model is employed to assess the importance of liquidity risk relative to the
effect of other common risk factors as established by Fama and French (1992;1993),
liquidity, and bond characteristics on expected corporate bond returns. The empirical
evidence derived from this study finds no support for the pricing of liquidity risk in expected
corporate bond returns when investigating the full sample period. However, after making a
time-based split in the data, with a Pre-Crisis/Crisis period and a Post Crisis period, we find
evidence for a significant positive relation between expected corporate bond returns and
liquidity beta in the cross-sectional regression. Note that, the pre-Crisis/Crisis timeframe
overlaps with Lin et al. (2011). The evidence from the Post Crisis cross-sectional regression
strongly suggests that liquidity risk is priced in corporate bond returns.
        Further, a portfolio-based approach dating back to Black, Jensen, and Scholes (1972)
is used, where portfolios are based on the pre-ranking of absolute peak dealer inventory for
individual bonds in a cycle, on a monthly basis. The test between high and low portfolio
liquidity betas finds evidence supporting the notion that market liquidity risk is priced to a
lesser degree when peak inventory is high, and dealers are constrained. This difference shows
to be statistically significant.
        In addition, the bond market liquidity factor is substituted, and the portfolio sorts are
replicated using a bond-specific liquidity proxy. Contrasting the market-wide liquidity
pricing against the bond specific-liquidity pricing, we find no significant differences between
the portfolios where dealers are most constrained compared to portfolios where the dealers
are least constrained. These differences are not significant for the entire sample and no clear
relationship can be established.
        Lastly, the portfolio sorting is again replicated with respect to different regulatory
periods where literature has found support for impact on dealer behavior and market-making.
Here the previously established relationships, i.e., for both bond market liquidity and bond-
specific liquidity, still find support. Bond-market liquidity is priced to a higher extent when
peak inventory is low and bond-specific liquidity is priced to a higher extent when dealer
peak inventory is high. This stands for the Post-Crisis, and Leverage Ratio periods, but not
during the Crisis, where the relationships find no significant support.
       The remaining parts of the paper proceed as follows: Section 2; discusses the relevant
literature; Section 3; describes the data and presents the methodology; Section 4; presents and
discusses the empirical results, and Section 5; concludes the paper.

2. Literature Review
The literature regarding liquidity in publicly traded assets is prevalent and covered through
different studies. Acharya & Pedersen (2005) summed up that investors should care about the
liquidity of the market, concluding that the required return of a security is affected by the
liquidity in the market.
        Lin et al. (2011) finds significant evidence for liquidity risk being priced in the cross-
section of corporate bond excess returns, using the liquidity measures of Amihud (2002) and
Pastor and Stambaugh (2003). For the period 1994 to 2009, they show support for a positive
relationship between liquidity risk and expected corporate bond returns, managing to
apprehend the possible effects of default information “embedded” in the variables. Bao et al.
(2011) also verifies these findings, by computing their own illiquidity measure that explains
individual bond yield spreads significantly both in the time-series and cross-section of
corporate bonds. In addition, Bongaerts et al. (2017), find support for the notion that equity
market liquidity risk, following Amihud (2002) as well as Pastor and Stambaugh (2003), and
corporate bond liquidity as defined by Roll (1984), is priced in the corporate bond returns.
This was done using the model by Archya and Pedersen (2005), for the sample period 2003-
2006.
        Bessembinder et al. (2018), finds evidence that liquidity provision is evolving away
from the commitment of bank-affiliated dealer capital to absorb customer imbalances and that
post-crisis banking regulations are probable contributors. Bao et al. (2018) further suggest
that bond illiquidity grows as the Volcker rule influenced dealers to decrease market-making
activities during times of market stress. Being the main liquidity providers in the market,
others have not counterbalanced this decreased activity. Waibel (2021) additionally finds that
constrained dealers intentionally reduce market-making in high inventory bonds, selling them
on a net basis. This is a result of the increasingly binding constraints as required by the Basel
accords, increasing risk-taking of dealers as of the resulting changes in balance sheet size.
        Related to dealer behavior, Anand et al. (2020) finds that there is a subset of funds
that supply liquidity through periods of prolonged customer selling when dealer inventories
are large and dealer liquidity demands are high. Whilst most funds demand liquidity, the
subset keeps supplying, alleviating market fragility risk. The literature suggests support of a
connection between dealer behavior, in form of market-making willingness and inventory
absorption to post-crisis regulations, affecting liquidity. Our intended contribution, in terms
of literature, is to display if liquidity risk pricing in expected corporate bond returns varies
with dealer inventory levels. Specifically, how liquidity risk pricing differs when inventory
levels become large, and dealers become constrained, demanding liquidity. We want to
further this by presenting if this relationship has changed with the introduction of post-crisis
regulations, as liquidity provisioning costs have increased. Hence, the aim is to provide a
more direct link between liquidity risk pricing and dealer inventory levels.
                     3. Data & Methodology

In the third section of the paper, firstly, the data and its construction will be presented,
followed by an outline of the dealer inventory cycle. Afterward, the framework used to
compute the measure of the Amihud (2002) market-wide liquidity risk factor in the corporate
bond market is presented. Lastly, a presentation of the empirical methodology used in the
analysis of liquidity risk linkage to the excess return of corporate bonds and dealer inventory
will be provided.

3.1 Data

The primary data source used in this paper is the Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine
(TRACE) issued by Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA), obtained through
Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS). Data regarding corporate bond transactions are
obtained from TRACE. Contained in each transaction is information with reference to bond-
specific trade price, traded volume as well as trade time. This data is used in the computation
of the Amihud liquidity risk factor as specified in Section 3.3. The collection of end-of-month
transaction prices allows for the calculation of monthly returns used as the dependent variable
in the empirical methodology. The transaction data from TRACE is paired with bond-specific
characteristics, i.e., issue size, coupon, bond rating, offering date, and maturity date, from the
Mergent Fixed Income Securities Database (FISD), acquired through the Swedish House of
Finance (SHOF). As TRACE initial launch did not include all corporate bonds the sample
period has been limited to the period after the Phase III expansion on October 1st, 2004. The
sample period therefore covers the period from October 1, 2004, to December 31, 2020.
        In accordance with Lin et al. (2010), the sample is restricted to returns with a track
record of 15 or more months. Unregular coupons (Incl. variable/floating rate), if any,
unidentified bond ratings, and bonds without any reported maturity, are excluded from the
sample. Because of low liquidity and high risk of pricing errors in short maturity corporate
bonds, bonds with a maturity of less than a year are also excluded. Further, the following
bond types: convertibles, puttable, callable, sinking fund, and exchangeable types, are all
excluded. The intention is to exclude the effects of all embedded options. Bonds that are
classified as part of the 144A bond group are excluded, as they can only be traded by specific
certified traders. Ratings are collected in accordance with Moody’s and S&P’s ratings.
Moody’s are primarily used and if not available S&P ratings are used. Additional cleaning of
the TRACE data was done in accordance with Dick-Nielsen (2014), correcting for duplicates
and known errors. This should reduce the sample by roughly 35%. The final Sample includes
9561 Corporate bonds: 202 Aaa bonds, 2224 Aa bonds, 3865 A bonds, 1736 Baa bonds and
1534 speculative bonds.
       The collection of monthly common factors of Fama and French for the sample period
is made from WRDS. Specifically, this regards the factors SMB, small minus big; HML,
standing for high minus low; MKT, The excess return on the market. Also, data were derived
for the default premium (DEF), defined as the difference between the monthly returns of
long-term investment grade bonds in the sample and ten-year government bond returns. The
term premium (TERM) is defined as the difference between ten-year government bond
returns and the one-month T-bill rate. The monthly returns of long-term government bonds
and the one-month T-bill are acquired from the Center for Research in Security Prices
(CRSP) and the Federal Reserve Board (FRB).
3.2 Dealer Inventory

The dealer behavior in this paper is proxied by inventory cycles. The inventory cycles
utilized in the subsequent analysis are acquired through the work of Waibel (2021), following
the methods of Anand et al. (2020).
       Using TRACE bond trading data on a trade price, trade size, and identification of
dealer’s trades with customers, it is possible to measure the inventory position of market
intermediaries for a specific corporate bond and compute its cumulative inventory.
       The cumulative inventory is the signed aggregate dollar inventory for a corporate
bond based on all dealer trades with customers. For each bond trading day, the cycle shows
how dealers assume large inventory positions through customer trades only, in both positive
and negative directions. Cumulative inventory, for each bond and day, is derived using
customer trades from the introduction of the cycle, given that the cycle inception is less than
3 months ago. If the introduction of the cycle is more than 3 months from the calculated date,
the inventory is constructed on customer imbalance over a rolling past 3-month period. This
is done to avoid the compounding of large reporting errors. In addition, a 3-month period
allows for gradual development and unraveling of inventory, as the corporate bond market is
illiquid. The cycle begins when the cumulative inventory of all dealers’ changes from zero
and ends when it resumes at zero. At zero, selling and buying behavior are essentially offset
by each other. When cumulative inventory drifts from (reverts to) zero it is specified as the
loading (unloading) phase. A positive(negative) inventory cycle is a cycle where cumulative
inventory is positive(negative), i.e., dealers are buying more than selling (buying less than
selling). The number of calendar days in an inventory cycle constitutes the cycle length. The
sample period for this set of data is Oct 2004 to Mar 2018. Also, note that cycles are
restricted to a minimum of $10 million and a cycle length of at least 5 calendar days. A
volume-weighted average price of trades is used in order to calculate the bond return between
two trading days.
        The inventory cycles are further converted to the bond-year-month level for the
purpose of the paper, where the year-month in a given year is observed. For cases where
several cycles were observed in a bond per month, the cycles that dominated in terms of
length in a given month were chosen.
       Furthermore, peak inventory is derived from each cycle. It is the largest cumulative
inventory, in par value terms, during the cycle. When peak inventory is high (low) in absolute
terms, the difference in aggregate selling and buying is large (small). Hence, when the peak
inventory of a bond is high relative to other bonds in the same month it indicates that the
bond is a balance sheet intensive bond at that period of time and therefore a high inventory
bond.
3.3 Liquidity Factor

We estimate the liquidity measure employed by Amihud (2002). Using the Amihud
illiquidity measure we look at the price impact of trades. If little price impact is present for a
large, traded volume, liquidity is high and vice versa for large price impacts of small volume
trades. The measure is defined as:

                                                                                                                      𝐷𝑎𝑦𝑠𝑖𝑡
                                                                              1                 |𝑟𝑖,𝑗,𝑡|
                        𝐼𝐿𝐿𝐼𝑄𝑖𝑡 =     ∑
                                                                                                 𝐷𝑎𝑦𝑠𝑖𝑡               𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑖,𝑗,𝑡
                                                            𝑗=1
                                               (1)

Where 𝑟𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 is the return for bond i on day j of month t, 𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑖,𝑗,𝑡 is the dollar volume, 𝐷𝑎𝑦𝑠𝑖𝑡 is
the number of days that we have transaction data on for bond i in month t. 𝐼𝐿𝐿𝐼𝑄𝑖𝑡 is the
period average of the ratio of absolute stock return to its dollar volume traded. The measured
is averaged across months for each individual bond. Amihud (2002), explains that the
measure can be interpreted as a daily price reaction associated with one dollar of trading
volume and hence an approximate measure of price impact.
        Market-wide liquidity 𝐼𝐿𝐿𝐼𝑄𝑀𝑡 is then obtained by the aggregation of individual
illiquidity measures month by month, for the sample:
                                                                                                  𝑁𝑡
                                     1
                              𝐼𝐿𝐿𝐼𝑄𝑀𝑡 =   ∑ 𝐼𝐿𝐿𝐼𝑄𝑖𝑡
                                                                      𝑁𝑡
                                                            𝑖=1
                                               (2)

Where Nt is the amount of bonds included in month t. The individual bond ILLIQ is
winsorized at 1% each month, preventing outliers from impacting the results. The reasoning
behind this is that the Amihud measure is sensitive and becomes less accurate when not using
microstructure data, however, this allows for broader analysis (Amihud and Noh, 2017).
Monthly differences are scaled by the ratio of capitalization of bonds, by month t:

                         𝛥𝐼𝐿𝐿𝐼𝑄𝑀𝑡 = (𝑀𝑡/𝑀1)(𝐼𝐿𝐿𝐼𝑄𝑀𝑡 − 𝐼𝐿𝐿𝐼𝑄𝑀𝑡−1)
                                               (3)

Where Mt refers to the market capitalization of all bonds included in month t and M1 refers to
the market capitalization of all bonds in the first month of the sample.
Liquidity Innovations are obtained from the following time-series regression:

     𝛥𝐼𝐿𝐿𝐼𝑄𝑀𝑡 = 𝛼0 + 𝜙1𝛥𝐼𝐿𝐿𝐼𝑄𝑀𝑡−1 + 𝜙2(𝑀𝑡/𝑀1)(𝐼𝐿𝐿𝐼𝑄𝑀𝑡−1) + 𝜀𝑡 + 𝜃1𝜀𝑡−1 + 𝜃2𝜀𝑡−2
                                               (4)

Following Lin et al. (2011) the innovation series 𝜀𝑡 is converted by adding a negative sign,
which results in the Amihud measure (−𝜀𝑡 ). This measure is further standardized by
normalizing its standard deviation to 1. This innovation is what is used as the measure for
bond market liquidity and henceforth will be referred to as the Amihud liquidity factor.
Figure 1

Fig. 1. Plots the Amihud liquidity innovations over the sample period from October 2004 to
December 2020.

3.4 Statistical Model

3.4.1 Regressions
In order to recognize if liquidity risk is priced into corporate bond excess returns, we examine
variations in corporate bond excess returns following fluctuations in market risk factors and
liquidity risk. Specifically, this examination makes use of common risk factors in corporate
bond literature and the measure of liquidity risk by Amihud (2002) as specified in Section
3.3. Default- and term premia are factors shown to be significant for corporate bonds by
Fama and French (1993). common risk factors employed in this paper, follow Fama and
French (1993), extended by Elton et al. (2001), where default- and term premia are
complemented by the Fama-French three common factors (Fama and French, 1992), as the
factors have been shown to explain corporate bond returns. Inclusion of the Fama-French
factors is based on the premise that corporate bonds and stocks may share similar variations
in returns, as they are both “claims on the value of the same underlying” (Elton et al, 2001).
Also, there is an evident relationship between the expected default loss and equity price. As
equity value increases, there is a decrease in risk of default, hence affecting the returns of
corporate bonds. The incorporation of the five factors and liquidity risk in a linear factor
model for corporate bond pricing is made.
        To examine if liquidity risk is priced with time and in the cross-section of corporate
bond excess returns, the following linear model is adopted:
               𝑟𝑖𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽𝑖𝑀𝐾𝑇 𝑀𝐾𝑇𝑡 + 𝛽𝑖𝑆𝑀𝐵 𝑆𝑀𝐵𝑡 + 𝛽𝑖𝐻𝑀𝐿 𝐻𝑀𝐿𝑡 + 𝛽𝑖𝐷𝐸𝐹 𝐷𝐸𝐹𝑡
                                + 𝛽𝑖𝑇𝐸𝑅𝑀 𝑇𝐸𝑅𝑀𝑡 + 𝛽𝑖𝐿𝐿𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡
                                               (5)

This is consistent with the regression model used by Lin et al. (2011). Above, 𝑀𝐾𝑇𝑡 is the
excess return of the stock market, 𝑆𝑀𝐵𝑡 being the size factor, 𝐻𝑀𝐿𝑡 representing the book-
to-market factor, 𝐷𝐸𝐹𝑡 being the default premium and 𝑇𝐸𝑅𝑀𝑡 standing for the term
premium, and lastly 𝐿𝑡 being the added liquidity factor. All else constant, the coefficient of
the liquidity factor, 𝛽𝑖𝐿 , captures the sensitivity of bond returns to fluctuations in market-wide
liquidity. 𝒓𝒇𝒕 represents the return of the one-month T-bill.
        Following Lin et al. (2011), a time-series regression is employed, based on the model
presented in Eq.5, where betas are estimated over the whole sample period, allowing for an
indication of how corporate bond returns covary with factors over time. To understand if an
observable market-premium for the liquidity risk factor can be seen in the cross-section of
corporate bond excess returns, a cross-sectional regression test of individual bonds, as
outlined by Fama and MacBeth (1973) is further employed. This is done with respect to the
linear factor model in Eq.5 over the whole sample period, i.e., Oct 2004 to Dec 2020. Betas
are initially derived from a time-series estimate, for a rolling 60-month window for each
bond. Bonds are only included if they have transactions for at least 15 of the previous 60
months. The beta estimates are then used in a cross-sectional regression for the following
month, as an independent variable, allowing for analysis of the pricing of risk. Both
independent and dependent variables are winsorized at the 1% level, to minimize the impact
of outliers.

        In equilibrium, the bond expected excess return is connected factor loadings cross-
sectionally:

     𝑟𝑖𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓𝑡 = 𝛾0 + 𝛾1𝛽𝑖𝑀𝐾𝑇 + 𝛾2𝛽𝑖𝑆𝑀𝐵 + 𝛾3𝛽𝑖𝐻𝑀𝐿 + 𝛾4𝛽𝑖𝐷𝐸𝐹 + 𝛾5𝛽𝑖𝑇𝐸𝑅𝑀 + 𝛾6𝛽𝑖𝐿 + 𝑢𝑖𝑡
                                               (6)

The estimated slope coefficient 𝛾6 captures if there is any observable market-premium for
liquidity risk in the cross-section, henceforth explaining if there is a pricing of liquidity risk.
Accordingly, a significantly positive 𝛾6 can be interpreted as support for the notion that
liquidity risk is priced into the excess returns of corporate bonds. The pricing would mean
that corporate bond excess returns should increase as market-wide liquidity risk rises.
        To add a dimension of comparison to Lin et al. (2011), a time-based split is added.
Beyond the analysis of the full sample, a Fama and MacBeth regression is additionally made
for the timeframe that overlaps with the paper of Lin et al. (2011), i.e., Oct 2004 to March
2009, respectively the data that we extend the study with, i.e., March 2009 to Dec 2020. Also,
the split approximately splits the data into a Pre-Crisis/Crisis period and a Post-Crisis period.
        Following the model adopted above, issue size, coupon rate, age, and ratings are
further included as explanatory variables in the cross-sectional regression of Fama and
MacBeth (1973). The inclusion of bond-specific characteristics together with the common
factors is done to test the robustness of the liquidity beta in the cross-section of expected
corporate bond excess returns. The relative importance of the liquidity risk betas can be
accessed in a more robust manner and uncertainty with regards to the accuracy of the
liquidity risk measure can be resolved. Past studies reveal that bond-specific characteristics
show explanatory power for cross-sectional variations in bond returns (Green and Odegaard,
(1997); Chordia and Subrahmanyam (1998); Houweling et al. (2005); Bao et al. (2011)),
hence their consideration in this study.
       This analysis is again done in accordance with Fama and MacBeth (1973), where
betas are derived from a time-series estimate for a rolling past 60-month window and used in
a cross-sectional regression for the following month, allowing for an analysis on pricing of
risk.
       The model in Eq.6 is hence adopted as:

        𝑟𝑖𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓𝑡 = 𝛾0 + 𝛾1𝛽𝑖𝑀𝐾𝑇 + 𝛾2𝛽𝑖𝑆𝑀𝐵 + 𝛾3𝛽𝑖𝐻𝑀𝐿 + 𝛾4𝛽𝑖𝐷𝐸𝐹 + 𝛾5𝛽𝑖𝑇𝐸𝑅𝑀 + 𝛾6𝛽𝑖𝐿
                         +𝐶𝑃𝑁𝑅𝑖 + 𝐶𝑅𝐸𝐷𝐼𝑇𝑖 + 𝐴𝐺𝐸𝑖 + 𝑆𝐼𝑍𝐸𝑖 + 𝑢𝑖𝑡
                                               (7)
Where CPNR is the coupon rate, CREDIT stands for the credit rating, AGE is the age of the
bond and SIZE represents the issue size, all for individual bonds i.

3.4.2 Portfolio sorts

Market-wide liquidity

While the preceding linear model allows for pricing of risk in the cross-section of corporate
bonds, it does not factor in if the pricing of liquidity risk differs through inventory cycles. It
would be beneficial to understand if liquidity risk is priced to a different degree as dealers
reduce intermediation and start to unload, particularly as absolute peak inventory is high
respectively low, and dealers become constrained respectively unconstrained.
       Bonds are sorted into ten portfolios each month, with an equal number of bonds in
each portfolio, based on pre-ranking of absolute peak inventory. Time-series estimates of
betas are calculated over rolling past 60-month periods for each individual bond, in line with
Eq.5. Liquidity betas are estimated using the Amihud bond market liquidity factor. Equal-
weighted mean pre-ranking liquidity beta, default, and term- premiums are calculated for
each ex-post dealer peak inventory portfolio. In addition, mean excess return (in percentage),
issue size, coupon rate, and rating, is calculated for each ex-post dealer peak inventory
portfolio. With the excess return, we refer to the average monthly return of the individual
both less the one-month T-bill rate. Moreover, differences in average liquidity beta (Diff)
between the high and low dealer peak inventory portfolio and the corresponding t-statistic are
reported. Note that this analysis is done for the period Oct 2004 to Mar 2018, due to the
sample period of the dealer inventory cycles.
        The purpose of the above portfolio sorts is to investigate the role of liquidity beta in
the cross-section of corporate bonds returns when absolute dealer peak inventory levels are
high respectively low, as these are stages where dealers are expected to be constrained
respectively relaxed.
       Furthermore, different regulatory periods are expected to have affected the bonds
inventory provisioning costs over time. Naturally, this change has suggested a difference in
behavior of dealers in terms of market-making willingness and inventory absorption. The
previous portfolio sorting analysis is replicated, with the addition of a time-based split. The
four regulatory periods are defined as October 2004-June 2007 for the Pre-Crisis Period, July
2007 to April 2009 for the Crisis Period, May 2009 to December 2014 for the Post-Crisis
Period and 2015 forward for the Leverage Ratio Period. The first two periods, Pre-Crisis and
Crisis, are defined in accordance with Bessembinder et al. (2018). Du et al. (2018) is
followed in the definition of the Post-Crisis and Leverage-Ratio periods, heeding to the
establishment of specific regulations. The period split allows for further analysis into how
liquidity risk pricing in the cross-section of corporate bonds, by ranking of peak inventory,
possibly has evolved through the regulatory periods.

Individual bond liquidity

The portfolio sort with betas including the Amihud liquidity measure is complemented by
betas based on individual bond liquidity. The portfolio sorting methodology for market-wide
liquidity presented in Market-wide Liquidity is replicated, however, instead of using the
market-wide liquidity risk measure presented in Eq.4, we instead use the Amihud ILLIQ Eq.1
as a bond-specific liquidity proxy. This measure is not standardized which means it cannot be
directly compared to the market wide measure. This test permits us to identify if there are any
potential differences in bond-specific and market-wide liquidity, concerning liquidity risk
pricing in the cross-section of corporate bonds, by the ranking of dealer peak inventory.
4. Results and Empirical Analysis

In this section of the paper, we examine liquidity risk pricing in the cross-section of corporate
bond excess returns and investigate if the pricing of risk differs throughout the dealer
inventory cycles. This analysis is divided into three parts. First of all, we examine if liquidity
risk is priced in the cross-section of corporate bond excess returns using the method presented
by Fama and MacBeth (1973). Next, we test if the pricing of risk differs through the dealer
inventory cycles, by the ranking of peak inventory. We implement a portfolio sorting
analysis, where 10 liquidity beta portfolios are created based on the ranking of absolute
dealer peak inventory for the corporate bonds. Looking at the difference between portfolios,
we gain an understanding of possible variations in liquidity pricing. This is done on a market-
wide and bond-specific liquidity basis. To further nuance the portfolio analysis. Lastly, we
repeat the portfolio sorting analysis, but introduce a time-based split, by different regulatory
periods, analyzing is, if possible, whether variations of liquidity pricing in the dealer
inventory cycles have changed over time.

4.1 Liquidity pricing in the cross-section of corporate bonds

Table 1

Time-series regression estimates of individual bond betas

Table 1 presents summary statistics of a time-series regression on the full samples, i.e., Oct
2004 to Dec 2020, as well as the time period that overlap with Lin et al. (2011) and the
extension period, where betas are estimated following the model in Eq.5:

  𝑟𝑖𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽𝑖𝑀𝐾𝑇 𝑀𝐾𝑇𝑡 + 𝛽𝑖𝑆𝑀𝐵 𝑆𝑀𝐵𝑡 + 𝛽𝑖𝐻𝑀𝐿 𝐻𝑀𝐿𝑡 + 𝛽𝑖𝐷𝐸𝐹 𝐷𝐸𝐹𝑡 + 𝛽𝑖𝑇𝐸𝑅𝑀 𝑇𝐸𝑅𝑀𝑡
                  + 𝛽𝑖𝐿 𝐿𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡

Where 𝐿𝑡 is the Amihud bond-market liquidity factor. The return dependent variable is the
return of an individual bond, 𝑟𝑖𝑡, less the one-month T-bill rate, 𝑟𝑓𝑡, in month t. The return
dependent variable is based on the cross-sectional distribution of mean excess returns for
every bond in the sample, in percentage terms. Individual bonds mean and median t-values of
betas estimates are presented together with the aggregate t-statistic, T for the entire sample.
Panel A represents the full sample, Panel B represents Oct 2004 to March 2009, and Panel C
represents April 2009 to Dec 2020. Note that ratings are measured on a nominal scale, where
AAA is equal to 0 and B3 and below are equal to 15.
Table 1
For Panel A in the above table full sample beta estimates are documented, when including the
Amihud bond market liquidity factor. For the default and term premia, average beta values of
0,73 and 0,54 are reported, which are greater relative to the smaller average beta value of the
common factors by Fama and French, some of which displayed negative beta averages. By
contrast to the default and term premium, the liquidity beta has a mean average of 0,08. All
variables show significant betas in aggregate, at a 1% level. On average term factor is
significant at the 5% level and default at the 10% level.
Table 2 Asset pricing of individual bonds

The table presents the results of cross-sectional regression tests on individual bonds, by employing the methodology of Fama & Macbeth (1973)
in line with Eq.6. For each bond, betas are estimated over rolling past 60-month periods. Bonds are only included if it has been traded in at least
15 months of the 60-month window of the rolling beta regression. The intention of the regression is to assess if liquidity risk is priced into
corporate bond excess returns for the sample period Oct 2004 to Dec 2020. The dependent variable is the monthly return less the one-month T-
bill rate, and 𝛽𝑀𝐾𝑇 𝛽𝑆𝑀𝐵 𝛽𝐻𝑀𝐿 𝛽𝐷𝐸𝐹 𝛽𝑇𝐸𝑅𝑀 , are betas of the common factors used. As part of the beta estimation, the Amihud corporate bond
liquidity factor, 𝛽𝐿 as presented in Section 3.3., is used. Further, all independent variables are normalized by their respective cross-sectional
standard deviation every month. Therefore, the coefficient is understood as the premium per unit standard deviation of the respective variable.
[Bond characteristics, i.e., coupon rate, age, issue size, and ratings are included for robustness concerning the liquidity factors]. Note that the t-
value is presented in parentheses.
Based on time-series estimates from Eq. 5, Table 2 displays the results of the cross-sectional
regressions tests, with the inclusions of the Amihud bond-market liquidity factors. Row 1
reports results showing the significance of the MKT beta coefficient at a 10% level, with a
reported t-value of 1,85. The coefficient of the liquidity beta displays a t-value of 0,02 and
shows no significance. We cannot therefore conclude if liquidity risk has a positive effect on
expected corporate bond returns.
       With regards to how liquidity fares against the common factors and the inclusion of
bond characteristics in the cross-section of expected corporate bond returns, characteristics
are shown to be insignificant, except for coupon rate and age, which are found to be
significant at a 1% and 5% level. The coefficient of the liquidity beta drops in t-value to -0,21
and remains insignificant after controlling for the effects of bond characteristics. In contrast
to Lin et al. (2011), no evidence of liquidity risk being priced in the cross-section of corporate
bond returns is found.
Table 3 Asset pricing of individual bonds (Pre and Post crisis)

The table presents the results of cross-sectional regression tests on individual bonds, by employing the methodology of Fama & Macbeth (1973)
in line with Eq.6. For each bond, betas are estimated over rolling past 60-month periods. The intention of the regression is to assess if liquidity
risk is priced into corporate bond excess returns. Panel A displays the results for the sample period Oct 2004 to March 2009, and Panel B
displays the results from March 2009 to Dec 2020. The dependent variable is the monthly return less the one-month T-bill rate, and
𝛽𝑀𝐾𝑇 𝛽𝑆𝑀𝐵 𝛽𝐻𝑀𝐿 𝛽𝐷𝐸𝐹 𝛽𝑇𝐸𝑅𝑀 , are betas of the common factors used. As part of the beta estimation, the Amihud corporate bond liquidity factor,
 𝛽𝐿 as presented in Section 3.3., is used. Further, all independent variables are normalized by their respective cross-sectional standard deviation
for every month. The coefficients are therefore understood as the premium per unit standard deviation of the respective variable. Note that t-
values are presented in parentheses.

Table 3
Based on time-series estimates from Eq. 5, Table 3 displays the results of the cross-sectional
regressions tests, with the inclusions of the Amihud bond-market liquidity factors, for two
different time periods. Panel A documents result from the Pre-Crisis and Crisis periods,
overlapping with Lin et al. (2011), whilst Panel B documents result from the extending data,
i.e., the Post-Crisis Period.
        Looking at Panel A, no significant results can be identified, except for SMB at a 5%
level. Besides, the term premium, all beta coefficients show negative averages, with a mean t-
value of -0.78 for the coefficient of the Amihud market liquidity beta. When introducing the
bond characteristics, no major difference is identified, except for SMB, MKT and rating
showing significance on at least a 10 % level
       By contrast the results of Panel B show significant support for bond liquidity to be
priced in the cross-section of expected corporate bond returns. The beta coefficient for
market-wide liquidity is significantly positive at the 1% level, with a mean coefficient of
0.08. The significance remains at the 1% level after the inclusion of bond characteristics for
robustness, dropping to a mean coefficient estimate of 0.061. All characteristics are
significant in the cross-section of expected corporate bond returns on at least a 10% level.
       Regarding the liquidity beta coefficient estimate in Row 1 in Panel A, a one standard
deviation over the cross-sectional mean of the liquidity beta is linked with a rise in the excess
return by 8 points every month. A rise of 8 points per month makes up around 3% of the
monthly standard deviation of the corporate bond excess return.
       Panel A and Panel B provide different results that oppose and support liquidity risk
pricing. This can be further compared to the full sample in Table 2. Based on the period post-
crisis, evidence shows liquidity risk being a determinant of expected corporate bond return.
This could possibly suggest that the 2004 to 2009 period in the sample, including the
financial crisis, is what distorts the data and makes the results in Table 2 insignificant. It
could possibly also suggest that the positive significant results of Lin et al. (2011) are
strongly influenced by the earlier parts of the sample, ranging from 1994 to 2004.
4.2 Liquidity risk pricing variations through dealer inventory cycles

In this section investigate variations in liquidity risk pricing through dealer inventory cycles,
by testing the difference in liquidity betas when peak inventory is high respectively low.

Table 4

Bonds are sorted into ten portfolios each month, each with an equal number of bonds, by the
pre-ranking of associated absolute peak dealer inventory. The sample period is from Oct 2004
to Mar 2018. Liquidity betas are estimated over rolling past 60-month periods for each
individual bond along with DEF, TERM, and other betas in the time-series regression.
Liquidity betas are estimated using the Amihud bond-market liquidity factor. Average pre-
ranking DEF, TERM and liquidity betas are calculated for each dealer peak inventory
portfolio. In addition, issue size, coupon rate and ratings are calculated for every ex-post
dealer inventory portfolio. Return is again average monthly returns (in %) of individual bonds
less the one-month T-bill rate. Differences in Liquidity betas (Diff) between the high and low
dealer inventory portfolios and the corresponding t-statistics are reported.

Table 4 reports results of the portfolio sort by ranking of absolute peak dealer inventory as
presented by Anand et al. (2020). The results display a pattern where market-wide liquidity
risk is priced to a lower extent as peak inventory grows larger and dealers become
constrained. The difference between the high and low portfolio is significant at a 1% level.
When dealer peak inventories are closer to zero and thus dealers are not constrained the
market liquidity significantly affect excess bond returns. When dealer peak inventories are
higher, and dealers constrained the bond excess return does not depend on the market
liquidity.
Table 5

Bonds are sorted into ten portfolios each month, each with an equal number of bonds, by the
pre-ranking of associated absolute peak dealer inventory. The sample period is from Oct 2004
to Mar 2018. Liquidity betas are estimated over rolling past 60-month periods for each
individual bond along with DEF, TERM and other betas in the time-series regression.
Liquidity betas are estimated using the Amihud bond-specific liquidity proxy, as presented in
Eq.1. Average pre-ranking DEF, TERM, and liquidity betas are calculated for each dealer
peak inventory portfolio. Liquidity Betas are presented in thousands (000) In addition, issue
size, coupon rate and ratings are calculated for every ex-post dealer inventory portfolio.
Return is again average monthly returns (in %) of individual bonds less the one-month T-bill
rate. Differences in Liquidity betas (Diff) between the high and low dealer inventory
portfolios and the corresponding t-statistics are reported.

There is no significant difference in betas of the individual bond liquidity when comparing
the high and low peak inventory portfolios. Due to no clear pattern being present a
relationship cannot be established between the peak inventory of a current inventory cycle
and the individual bond liquidity bond betas.
4.3 Regulation impact on liquidity risk pricing through the inventory cycles
We investigate how liquidity risk pricing through inventory cycles changes with different
regulatory periods. The analysis in Section 4.2 is repeated for all four regulatory periods.

Table 6
Bonds are sorted into ten portfolios each month, each with an equal number of bonds, by the
pre-ranking of associated absolute peak dealer inventory. This is done for the four regulatory
periods. Panel A concerns the sample period Oct 2004 to June 2007, representing the Pre-
Crisis period. Panel B concerns the sample period July 2007 to April 2009, representing the
Crisis period. Panel C concerns the sample period May 2009 to Dec 2014, representing the
Post Crisis period. Panel D concerns the sample period Jan 2015 to Mar 2018, representing
the Leverage Ratio period. Liquidity betas are estimated over rolling past 60-month periods
for each individual bond along with DEF, TERM, and other betas in the time-series
regression. Liquidity betas are estimated using the Amihud bond-market liquidity factor.
Average pre-ranking DEF, TERM and liquidity betas are calculated for each dealer peak
inventory portfolio. In addition, issue size, coupon rate and ratings are calculated for every
ex-post dealer inventory portfolio. Differences in Liquidity betas (Diff) between the high and
low dealer inventory portfolios and the corresponding t-statistics are reported.
Table 6
There are no significant differences in liquidity betas for the Pre-Crises and Crises periods.
The pattern of Table 4 establishes itself in the Post-Crises period and in the Leverage Ratio
period. Both periods show a difference in liquidity betas to be significant at the 1% level,
suggesting that bond returns depend on market liquidity only when dealers are not
constrained.

Table 7

Bonds are sorted into ten portfolios each month, each with an equal number of bonds, by the
pre-ranking of associated absolute peak dealer inventory. This is done for the four regulatory
periods presented in Table 6. Panel A concerns the sample period Oct 2004 to June 2007,
representing the Pre-Crisis period. Panel B concerns the sample period July 2007 to April
2009, representing the Crisis period. Panel C concerns the sample period May 2009 to Dec
2014, representing the Post Crisis period. Panel D concerns the sample period Jan 2015 to
Mar 2018, representing the Leverage Ratio period. Liquidity betas are estimated over rolling
past 60-month periods for each individual bond along with DEF, TERM and other betas in
the time-series regression. Liquidity betas are estimated using the Amihud bond-specific
liquidity proxy, as presented in Eq.1. Average pre-ranking DEF, TERM, and liquidity betas
are calculated for each dealer peak inventory portfolio. Liquidity betas are displayed in
thousands (000). In addition, issue size, coupon rate, and ratings are calculated for every ex-
post dealer inventory portfolio. Differences in Liquidity betas (Diff) between the high and
low dealer inventory portfolios and the corresponding t-statistics are reported.
Table 7
Table 7 shows how individual bond liquidity pricing changes over the four-time periods. In
the Pre-Crisis period, we find significant pricing of individual bond liquidity at 1% where
dealers are more relaxed. In the crisis period, there is no significant difference between the
high and low portfolios. In the post crisis and leverage ratio periods, there is a difference
between the low and high portfolios significant at the 5% level. As with the whole sample
period the results broken down by time period does not show any clear patterns.
                              5. Conclusion

In this paper, we provide evidence that suggests that liquidity risk in the corporate bond
market is not priced to the extent that is proposed by Lin et al. (2011). We use the Amihud
measure as a proxy for market-wide liquidity factor combined with bond characteristics to
test robustness. By looking at the time period from October 2004 to December 2020 we find
no significant pricing of liquidity risk in the cross-section of corporate bond returns. This is
especially the case for the period of our sample that overlaps with the period in the
aforementioned paper from October 2004 to March 2009. We do find significant pricing in
the post-crisis period, April 2009 to December 2020, suggesting that the effects of the
financial crisis might influence the results for the comparatively short period of overlap.

Using the peak inventory value calculated by Waibel (2021) we show that there is a
significant difference in the pricing of liquidity risk between bonds where dealers are
constrained compared to those where the dealers are not constrained. Market-wide liquidity is
priced to a lower extent (higher extent) in bonds when dealers are constrained (not
constrained). Conversely, using a proxy for individual bond liquidity we find no significant
relationship. This paper does not find a difference between the low peak inventory and high
peak inventory with a statistically significant difference and the results does not present a
clear relationship. The measure is not an ideal proxy for individual bond liquidity; another
proxy would ideally be used to determine the effect.
                                     References

Acharya, V.V. and Pedersen, L.H., 2005, “Asset Pricing with Liquidity Risk”, The Journal of
Financial Economics, vol. 77, no. 2, pp. 375-410.

Adrian, T., Fleming, M., Shachar, O. and Vogt, E., 2016, “Market Liquidity after the Financial
Crisis”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 796

Amihud, Y., 2002, “Illiquidity and stock returns: cross-section and time-series effects”, The
Journal of Financial Markets, vol. 5, no. 1, pp 36-51.

Amihud, Y. and Mendelson, H., 1980, “Dealership market: Market-making with inventory”,
The Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 31-53.

Amihud, Y. and Noh, J., 2021, “Illiquidity and Stock Returns II: Cross-section and Time-
series Effects”, The Review of Financial Economics, vol.34, no. 4, pp. 2101–2123.

Bao, J., Pan, J. and Wang, J., 2011, “The Illiquidity of Corporate Bonds”, The Journal of
Finance, vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 911-946.

Bao, J., O’Hara, M., and Zhou, X.A., 2018, “The Volcker Rule and corporate bond market
making in times of stress”, The Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 130, no. 1, pp. 95-113.

Bessembinder, H. and Jacobsen, S., 2018, “Capital commitment and illiquidity in corporate
bonds”, The Journal of Finance, vol. 73, no. 4, pp. 1615-1661.

Bongaerts, D., De Jong, F. and Driessen, J., 2017, “An Asset Pricing Approach to Liquidity
Effects in Corporate Bond Markets”, The Review of Financial Studies, vol. 30, no. 4, pp.
1229-1269.

Chordia, T., and Subrahmanyam, A., 1998, “Alternative factor specifications, security
characteristics, and the cross-section of expected stock returns”, The Journal of Financial
Economics, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 345-373.

Dick-Nielsen, J., 2014, “How to Clean Enhanced TRACE Data”, Copenhagen Business
School- Department of Finance.

Du, W., A. Tepper, and A. Verdelhan (2018). “Deviations from covered interest rate parity”.
In: The Journal of Finance 73(3), pp. 915–957.

Duffie, D., Gˆarleanu, N., and Pedersen, L.H., 2005 “Over-the-counter markets”,
Econometrica, vol. 73, no. 6, pp. 1815-1847.

Elton, E.J., Gruber, M.J., Agrawal, D. and Mann, C., 2001, “Explaining the Rate Spread on
Corporate Bonds”, The Journal of Finance, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 247-277.
Fama, E.F. and French, K.R., 1993, “Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
bonds”, The Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 3-56

Fama, E.F. and French, K.R., 1992, “The Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns”, The
Journal of Finance, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 427-465

Fama, E.F. and MacBeth, J.D., 1973, “Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests”, The
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 81, No. 3, pp. 607-636

Green, R.C., and Odegaard, B.A., 1997, “Are There Tax Effects in the Relative Pricing of
U.S. Government Bonds?”, The Journal of Finance, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 609-633.

Houweling, P., Mentink, A. and Vorst,T., 2005, “Comparing Possible Proxies of Corporate Bond
Liquidity”, Journal of Banking and Finance, vol.29, no. 6, pp.1331-1358.

Lin, H., Wang, J., and Wu, C., 2011, “Liquidity risk and expected corporate bond returns”,
The Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 99, no. 3, pp. 628-650

Pastor, L. and Stambaugh R.L., 2003, “Liquidity Risk and Expected Stock Returns”, Journal
of Political Economy, vol.111, no. 3, pp. 642-685.

Roll, R., 1984, “A Simple Implicit Measure of the Effective Bid-Ask Spread in an Efficient
Market”, The Journal of Finance, vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 1127-1139

Waibel, M., 2021, “Unintended Consequences of Regulation in the U.S. Corporate Bond
Market”, Working paper, the Swedish House of Finance.