The acute effects of gun violence
on the local housing market

EVIDENCE OF FATAL AND NON-FATAL SHOOTINGS IN
NORTHERN STOCKHOLM

SAYFA BUNPUCKDEE

NASER QADIRI

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2022
The acute effects of gun violence on the local housing market: evidence of fatal and
non-fatal shootings in northern Stockholm

Abstract

   This study estimates the effects of gun violence on local housing markets in northern
   Stockholm, divided by fatal, injurious and non-harmful shootings using data on apartment sales
    between 2018-2021. A significant effect at the 5% level is found for non-harmful shootings, with
   the occurrence of such shootings increasing apartment prices by 10,9%, and a significant effect
   at the 10% level is found for the occurrence of fatal shootings, increasing apartment prices by
   1.3%. The estimated impacts on apartment prices are inconclusive in implications for residents'
   crime aversion. The occurrence of gun violence during the marketing period of apartments is
   found to be significantly correlated with price concessions and housing liquidity in terms of
   time on the market.

Keywords
 Gun violence, Shootings, Vulnerable areas, Housing market, Apartment sales prices

Authors

   Sayfa Bunpuckdee (24456)
   Naser Qadiri (24597)

Tutor

   Marieke Bos, Deputy Director, Swedish House of Finance Researcher, Swedish House of
   Finance

Examiner
   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Acknowledgements

   We would like to direct our gratitude toward Marieke Bos for guidance and valuable
   feedback and Hans Flink for providing data on housing prices.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Sayfa Bunpuckdee & Naser Qadiri, 2022
1. Introduction
This study investigates the potential existence of causal effects of gun violence on
surrounding housing markets in urban Sweden. Apartment sales prices are set as the
dependent variable in a hedonic pricing regression, with apartment sales close to a
shooting and sales a bit further away comprising the treatment and control group in a
difference-in-differences methodology. Additionally, housing liquidity and price
concessions are cross-sectionally studied in local housing markets of areas subjected to
shootings. The subject and statistical framework of this paper are inspired and heavily
based on the paper “Estimates of the Impact of Crime Risk on Property Values from
Megan’s Laws” by Leigh Linden and Jonah E. Rockoff (2008).
               Over the past twenty years, Sweden has been subject to the largest increase
in incidences of gun violence with fatal outcomes of all the European countries, with
most of the incidences being related to criminal milieus in socially vulnerable areas
(National Council for Crime Prevention, 2021). Gun violence entails serious incidents
with common injurious or fatal outcomes that generate a lot of attention in the media
and in the political debate. Gun violence affects people and especially residents of crime-
dense areas by increasing the fear of being subjected to gun violence but also fear of crime
in general. The terms gun violence and shooting are henceforth used to denote shootings
of any outcome, fatal, injurious or non-harmful.

1.1 Purpose
Socially vulnerable areas are burdened not only by unemployment, economic
marginalisation, and a lower standard of living but also by the presence of criminality and
the occurrence of gun violence which sometimes results in the death or injury of
individuals unrelated to the gang-related conflict that spurred the incident. We aim to
investigate what consequences the occurrence of gun violence might have on residents’
already marginalised socioeconomic status through effects on the housing market, for
example, lowering the prices of apartments and thereby impacting residents’ wealth.
Additionally, apartment sales at diminished prices due to shootings can be reflective of
individuals’ willingness to pay to avoid gun violence and other crime, providing valuable
information for politicians and authorities that can influence resource allocation to crime
prevention measures. Investigating responses in housing liquidity and price concessions
in response to shootings further contributes to the literature on relationships between
housing liquidity, price concessions, sale prices, and characteristics of residents, along
with describing additional facets of households’ behaviour through their reactions to
local adverse events.
1.2 Research questions
I. How do incidences of gun violence with fatal, injurious or non-harmful outcomes
affect reservation prices of nearby apartments?

II. Do incidences of gun violence affect price concessions of surrounding apartments
concurrently on the market?

III. Do incidences of gun violence affect housing liquidity (defined as days-on-market) of
surrounding apartments concurrently on the market?

1.3 Methodology
We employ a hedonic pricing regression model for estimating the impact of shootings on
apartment sales prices. We construct a cross-sectional regression of the apartment sales
price gradient as a function of distance to shootings. Two separate graphs are plotted for
the 100 days before and 100 days after the occurrence of the shooting. The purpose of
this is to identify whether there is any specific distance where the graphs deviate from
each other, thereby signalling the radius that might be useful as a cut-off point between
the treatment and control group.
               Apartment sales within 300 metres and between 300-800 metres of
shooting are assigned to the treatment and control groups respectively. Both groups are
then cross-sectionally studied regarding sales price and apartment characteristics to
investigate the presence of pre-existing differences between observations in the treatment
group and control group.
               Similarly, to the method used in “Estimates of the impact of crime on
property values, we additionally use a difference-in-differences model using the previously
defined treatment and control groups but including only those apartment sales that take
place between 100 days before and after a shooting, as this study focuses on the short-
term effect of gun violence on the local housing market.

1.4 Main findings
Fatal shootings have a significant effect on property prices in Spånga-Kista, while no
significant effect of injurious or non-harmful shootings is found. In Hässelby-Vällingby,
a significant effect of non-harmful shootings is found, but no significant effects from
fatal or injurious shootings. Furthermore, we have negative correlations between the
occurrence of a shooting during the marketing period with both the time on the market
and price concessions for apartments. Apartments that were on market for sale during the
occurrence of a shooting took, on average, much longer time to sell and seller reservation
prices were lowered compared to apartments that were not subject to a shooting during
their marketing period.
1.5 Structure of this paper
The rest of the paper reviews specific conditions of the housing market as well as the
particularities of socially vulnerable areas and the situation of violent crime and gang-
related crime in Sweden with the help of documents from the Swedish Police Authority
and the National Council for Crime Prevention (BRÅ), as well as criminological
literature focused on Sweden. Extant literature of housing research concerning the
functioning of the housing market and households’ preferences for areas with different
social, economic, and demographic attributes is reviewed, as is the literature studying
specific relationships between the presence of crime and the housing market, specifically
property values. After that, our data sets are described in section 3, which we then use in
conjunction with the extant research in formulating our empirical research models
presented in section 4. In section 5 we present the empirical results.

2. Literature and Theoretical Framework
Our theoretical framework builds on extant literature from different areas. Research on
changes in property prices commonly uses hedonic analysis to model consumer
preferences and study the effects of different factors on property values. Hedonic pricing
is also extensively used in the body of literature exploring the societal costs of different
types of crime, which this study leans on. Finally, studies from the criminological field
together with different reports and documents from different Swedish authorities are
taken into consideration to further inform the appropriate choice of empirical methods
and aid in the interpretation of the results.

2.1 Hedonic pricing
Hedonic pricing assumes that goods are valued for their set of different utility-bearing
attributes and decomposes observed prices of a good into different implicit, “hedonic”
prices, for the various attributes of the good (Rosen 1974). Hedonic models are used in
the determination of how prices vary with the set of attributes in a good (Epple 1987) and
are commonly used in studies of changes in property values because of different
treatments, including crime risk.
              The assumption that attributes such as number of rooms, storeys, and
living areas are implicitly valued into the observed price, allows for fitting individual
attributes to a hedonic pricing regression model in which price is regressed against the
relevant attributed, and the coefficient for each variable can be interpreted as the marginal
willingness to pay for a one-unit increase. Additionally, applying the previous assumption
that the price of a specific house or apartment is a function of various observable,
quantifiable attributes, together with variables unobserved to the researcher, the obtained
residual of the hedonic price regression can be attributed to unobserved variables (Bajari,
Fruewirth, Kim & Timmins, 2012). In studying effects on property values, hedonic
analysis thus allows for the possibility to control for the contribution of variation in these
attributes across observations to the total price, enabling the effect of external events on
prices to be observed.
               Choice of living in a certain area represents not only the preferences of
physical house characteristics but also location-specific amenities, such as school quality,
crime and social group, which can be observed from property prices, as shown by Bayer,
Ferreira and MacMillian (2007), Boustan (2012), and Black (1999) who demonstrated
that one standard deviation in local school test scores increased residents’ marginal
willingness to pay for the property by 2.1 percent.
              In addition to local amenities such as high-quality schools, and the presence
of parks and greenery, disamenities such as vandalised property have been shown to play a
role in property prices, either directly or through interactions with other amenities. For
instance, proximity to amenities such as metro stations (Ihlanfeldt & Bowes 2001) and
parks (Troy & Grove 2008), have been found to increase property prices in areas of a low
crime risk, though the effect on property prices interacts with local crime risk and instead
decreases property prices after certain thresholds of crime prevalence.

2.2. Impact of crime on the housing market
The impact of crime on the housing market has been studied as far back as 1976, when
Thaler (1976), using hedonic pricing, found property values to be negatively correlated
with property crimes. Cullen and Levitt (1996) utilised instrumental variables to
demonstrate a causal relationship between crime and urban depopulation, with higher-
income households being more likely to move in response to increases in crime, thus
increasing the concentration of poor households and lowering property values due to
decreased demand. Lynch and Rasmussen (2001) estimated the cost of violent crime for a
three-person household to be 933USD per year, in Jacksonville, Florida. Gibbons (2004)
found that burglaries demonstrated no effect on prices, while incidences of criminal
damage such as graffiti and vandalism lowered property prices in Inner London. The
authors attribute the results to residents perceiving visible criminal damage as signalling
higher rates of other crimes. Bishop and Murphy (2011) calculated the willingness to pay
to avoid violent crime in California, finding that the average household is willing to pay
$471.86 per year to reduce the total amount of violent crime by 10%.
             Several studies have studied declines in property values regarding proximity
to sex offender residencies in the United States following the enactment of Megan’s Law
in 1996 which enforces public registries of convicted sex offenders. Sex offenders are
required to register their residency to local police and notify neighbours within a small
radius of 0.1 miles. In Montgomery County, Ohio, Larsen, Lowrey & Coleman (2003)
found that houses within 0.1 miles of a registered sex offender on average sold for 17.4%
less than comparable houses located further away, while houses between 0.1-0.2 miles and
0.2-0.3 miles sold for 10.2% and 9.3% less, respectively. Pope (2008) found that house
prices were reduced by 2.3% after a sex offender moves in within one-tenth of a mile (161
metres) in Hillsborough County, Florida. Additionally, Pope found that prices recovered
shortly following the departure of an offender from the area, supporting the notion of a
causal relationship. This negative effect is corroborated in a paper by Caudill, Affuso and
Yang (2015) that investigates the relationship between house prices and the concentration
of offender residencies in addition to their distance to sold properties. The results
demonstrate a value loss of 14% for houses within 0.1 miles of a registered sex offender
and 7% for houses within a one-mile radius. While the concentration of sex offenders is
likely to increase with decreased distance to an offender, the authors find that the
concentration effect is larger than the distance effect.
              The replicated paper by Linden and E. Rockoff (2008) exploits the above-
mentioned legislation combined with data regarding sex offender residencies and
surrounding property sales to study the impact of sex offender residencies on property
values in Mecklenburg County, North Carolina, USA. Using a difference-in-differences
approach to manage the endogeneity problem of crime (in this case presence of sex
offender residency) being correlated with other variables that lower property values (e.g.,
sex offenders tending to move into areas with lower quality, lower-priced housing). Using
house sales within 0.1 miles of a residency that a sex offender moves into comprising the
treatment group and house sales between 0.1-0.3 miles in the control group, the authors
found that homeowners within the treatment zone sell their houses for $5500 less relative
to what the amount they could have received had the offender not moved in. Likewise,
Wentland, Waller and Brastow (2013) study the same relationship in Virginia, USA, but
with the addition of studying the effects of proximity to sex offender residencies on
housing liquidity. The authors address the issue present in previous studies of sale prices
being observable only for houses that sell, while homes that are marketed but fail to sell
are omitted from the sample which causes selection bias (ibid). Research has been
conducted also in the Swedish setting, which investigates the effect of crime on the
housing market. Ceccato and Wilhelmsson (2011) find that apartment prices were
negatively affected by crime levels at the specific location but also by crime levels in the
surrounding areas. Of the studied crime types, residential burglaries were found to have
the largest negative impact on apartment prices using a data set of 9000 apartments in
Stockholm, Sweden. Additional studies by the same authors have demonstrated
vandalism and fear of crime in neighbourhoods affect house prices (Ceccato and
Wilhelmsson, 2012), as have crime hotspots (Ceccato and Wilhelmsson, 2020)
               Another potential variable of interest is the housing liquidity defined as
time on the market or days-on-market. Larsen et al. (2003) emphasise the need for
investigating liquidity when studying changes in sale prices, arguing that added time on
the market lowers the present value of the selling price. If a substantial proportion of
sellers wait long enough for an undiscounted offer, then no effect on selling prices will be
detected in response to crime risk, even though sellers face consequences in the form of a
long time on the market for the property.
               Wentland et. al., (2013) argue for the importance of studying the effect on
liquidity because of the possible consequences for seller holding costs and reservation
prices since crime risk might reduce the pool of potential offers and thus lengthen the
marketing period and eventually influence the final selling price. In addition, selling
prices and days-on-market are argued to be jointly determined, thus requiring a model
that encompasses this to not induce biased results (ibid).
              The relationship between the selling price and liquidity is not clear cut,
with various studies producing different, sometimes contradictory results. Asabere and
Huffman (1993) find evidence of a positive relationship between days-on-market and
sales price, attributing this to the increased probability of realising a higher selling price as
the property stays on the market longer. Though, properties that are priced too high but
fail to sell early face the risk of becoming stigmatised and lingering on the market unless
the price is lowered. Angling, Rutherford and Springer (2003) find that higher property
initial list prices increase days-on-market, with this effect being greater among those types
of property with little variation in list prices.
             Glower, Haurin and Henderschott (1998) explore the extent to which
seller motivation influences days-on-market and list prices using survival analysis, defining
the degree of seller motivation as supposed urgency to sell quickly, based on the seller’s
moving date and date of new employment elsewhere. They find evidence that motivated
sellers sell their houses more quickly than unmotivated sellers but fail to confirm whether
this is due to motivated sellers reducing days-on-market through setting lower initial list
prices.
             In addition to studying changes in price, we explore the relationship
between gun violence and housing liquidity defined as days-on-market for apartments
that are exposed to a nearby shooting during their marketing period, compared to
apartments that do not.

2.3 Crime perception and crime occurrence in Sweden
2.3.1 Socially vulnerable areas
“Socially vulnerable areas” is a term the Swedish police authority uses to classify areas with
low social and economic status that are also affected by criminality to the point that
residents feel unsafe and are less willing to collaborate in legal trials. Residents are directly
affected through threats or extortion, or indirectly by local criminals displaying violence
and openly selling drugs.
              The Swedish police have in total three categories of socially vulnerable
areas, ordered by the severity of problems “vulnerable areas “, “risk areas” and finally
“especially socially vulnerable areas”. Risk areas denote vulnerable areas that are at risk of
developing into Especially socially vulnerable, the latter of which denoting vulnerable
areas with more prominent problems of criminality, political or religious extremism and
elements of parallel societies. These areas have increased in number over the past years,
and as of 2021, the Swedish Police list 61 socially vulnerable areas of any category in
Sweden (Police authority, NOA 2021).
Table 1. Number of socially vulnerable areas in Sweden in the last 5 years, Police authority, NOA
(2021)

                In the districts Spånga-Tensta and Rinkeby-Kista located in the north-
western parts of Stockholm municipality, there have over the past four years (2018-2021)
been fourteen confirmed shootings with fatal outcomes and thirty-six non-fatal shootings
with one or more people being injured. (Sveriges television) These two districts contain
two of the areas classified as especially socially vulnerable, Rinkeby-Tensta and Husby
(Figure 1). Which neighbourhoods to include and the geographical boundaries of these
especially socially vulnerable areas are decided by the police authority. The especially
socially vulnerable area Rinkeby-Tensta includes not only the neighbourhoods Rinkeby
and Tensta but also Hjulsta.

Figure 1: Fatal and non-fatal Shootings in Rinkeby-Tensta and Husby 2018-2021

Note: Boundaries of some of the especially socially vulnerable areas drawn by the police authority (the left
map, (Swedish Police Authority 2021)) and the occurrence of shootings in these areas (the right map) in
2018 -2021.

Table 2. Number of shootings and its proportion in the country (Police Authority, NOA 2021)

Note: For instance, in 2018, there were 119 shootings in socially vulnerable areas. These shootings
accounted for 38.9% of total shootings in the country.
2.3.2 Crime occurrence and fear of crime
A report by the Swedish national council for crime prevention illustrates differences in
levels of lethal violence between Sweden and other European countries. In most West
European countries, lethal violence has been declining since the 1990s. However, this
declining trend has been followed by an increase in lethal violence in Sweden since 2013
which stands out from other European countries. While levels of most sources of lethal
violence have been declining, the increasing levels of lethal violence can be attributed to
the increases in gun violence since the early 2000s. Moreover, this increase is specifically
related to criminal settings, with lethal gun violence in Sweden being related to criminal
settings in eight out of ten cases as of 2021, as compared to three out of ten cases in the
early 2000s (National Council for Crime Prevention, 2021).
              The annual report of perceived safety by the national council for crime
prevention, using survey data, shows that eighty percent of the population between
sixteen to eighty-four years of age believe that crime has increased by any or by a large
margin over the past three years. This proportion has since 2015 remained constant,
however. Forty-five percent of the population worry about crime in society to a large
extent. Thirty-five percent of people often or very often worry about themselves or a
relative being victimised. However, the actual rates of victimisation do not show any
definite increase, ranging between 20.8%, 22.4%, 23.1%, 22.6%, and 20.2% over the years
2016 to 2020. (National Council for Crime Prevention, 2021:11). Additionally,
Stockholm municipality has its own dedicated survey on perceived unsafety and crime
victimisation. On the question of whether residents have been worried about being
subjected to crime of any kind during the last 12 months, 14% of respondents in
Hässelby-Vällingby, 13% in Spånga-Tensta and 11% in Rinkeby-Kista answered “yes”. 9%
of all respondents in Stockholm municipality answered “yes” to the same question
(Stockholm municipality, 2020). Evidently, fear of crime is not irrelevant in
contemporary Sweden, and this provides further motivation for the study of perceptions
and reactions to gun violence.

2.4 Contribution
The study contributes by expanding the knowledge of what preferences of households
and what matters for individuals’ choice of residency. We explore the impact of local
incidences of violent crime on the local housing market's behaviour in terms of prices and
liquidity, providing insight into how to study and model these variables when researching
housing markets in similarly disadvantaged areas in Sweden and elsewhere. With previous
research having explored the influence of seller motivation (Glower et.al., 1998) and
perceived crime risk due to nearby sex offender residencies (Wentland et.al., 2013) on
housing liquidity, there is an opportunity to examine the effects on housing liquidity
incidences of violent crime such as gun violence.
              Moreover, as in the replicated article by Linden and E. Rockoff (2008), the
results provide information useful in computing individuals' estimated willingness to pay
to avoid crime. While surveys show that inhabitants in Sweden and especially socially
vulnerable areas experience unsafety, this study functions to provide quantitative,
monetary estimates of how large sums of public spending on crime prevention
inhabitants might tolerate, in Sweden and elsewhere.
              Lastly, evidence of changes to property values and housing liquidity in
terms of days-on-market supports the picture provided by the criminological research of
Swedish cities regarding the impact of crime on surroundings. Any disruptions in the
local housing market that are evoked by incidences of gun violence place further distress
on residents. In addition to providing the previously mentioned indications of
appropriate public spending amounts, the study broadens the understanding of the
impacts of crime on socially vulnerable areas, which is very important in Sweden.

3. Data description
3.1 Apartment sales
We initially intended to retrieve data for apartment sales within Stockholm County,
which would include approximately 70 000 observations. The rationale for this was to be
able to study the effects within and between different socially vulnerable areas, of which
there are several in Stockholm, as well as compare the effects on socially vulnerable or in
other ways disadvantaged areas with effects in wealthier areas such as the inner city. Due
to the relative scarcity of gun violence incidence in such areas, a large dataset would be
important to accomplish a large enough treatment group. This was however impossible
in practice due to funding issues. Luckily, we were allowed free access to up to 5000
objects of apartment sales by Svensk Mäklarstatistik. We requested and were granted data
for the districts of Spånga-Kista and Hässelby-Vällingby, both of which contain socially
vulnerable areas of interest to our study and neighbourhoods built as part of the Swedish
Million programme, containing large amounts of housing with distinctively similar
characteristics between both apartments and neighbourhoods. The limited dataset
decreases the power of any observed effects. However, we still find it valuable to
contribute and build upon previous research in a new setting.
              Data on apartment transactions consists of 6085 sales between 2018 and
2021 in Hässelby-Vällingby (3040 observation) and Spånga-Kista (3045 observation)
with the following associated apartment characteristics: Initial ad asking price, contract
price, price per square metre, contract date, living area, number of rooms, monthly fee,
build year, latitude and longitude for all transactions. Approximately 95% of all housing
sales that go through real estate agents are reported to Svensk Mäklarstatistik
(Mäklarstatistik.se). The data on property sales cover the area within the red line (see
below) which is in the northern part of the Stockholm Municipality.

3.2 Shootings
Data on gun violence consist of 109 observations from the same area over the same years
with the following information: date, type of shooting, latitude and longitude for every
shooting. Request for exact coordinates from Polisen NJU was denied due to
confidentiality. Hence, we collected coordinates from the SVT map for 2019-2021. For
2018, we had to use maps from both SVT and DN to manually pinpoint the coordinates
in google-maps, which lessens the accuracy further. The greatest challenge here is
nevertheless the possibility that the news outlets have purposefully obscured the exact
locations to not reveal sensitive information. A full list of shootings can be found in the
appendices.

Table 3. Shootings, 2018-2021

Figure 2. The geographical location of this study within Stockholm municipality

Note: 109 shootings have been used to analyse the acute effect of gun violence on 6085 observations of
apartment sales in 2018-2021.

3.3 variables
Having the longitude and latitude of each apartment and each shooting, we can make a
pairwise combination of every sale with every shooting using STATA. We upload the
data on apartment sales and then use the cross command to upload data on shooting. To
find the distances between each of the paired-up data, we use the geodist command:
geodist aprmt_lat aprmt_lon shoot_lat shoot_lon, distance. This command generated the
distance between each paired combination in a new variable.
3.3.1 Dependent variables
The following variables are used as dependent variables: Log of sale price, each
characteristic of the apartment, days-on-market and the difference between the sale price
and asking price. The logarithmic form of sales price changes the case from a unit change
to percent changes. In the cross-sectional difference estimator, we use each characteristic
of the apartment to measure the difference in characteristics of apartments in the
treatment group compared to the control group. The variable days-on-market is obtained
simply by taking the difference between the contract date and the ad publication date.

3.3.2 Independent variables
We control for apartment characteristics which consist of the attributes mentioned
above. We have created dummies, post which takes the value of 1 if the apartment sale has
occurred after a shooting, treat which takes the value of 1 if the apartment is in the
treatment group and post_treat which takes the value of 1 if the apartment sale has
occurred after a shooting and is in the treatment group. Furthermore, we created three
other variables. One for apartments that were put on sale before the shooting but that
sold after the shooting, one for apartments that were put on sale before but sold after and
one for apartments that were put on sale after and sold after. For the placebo-controlled
study, the following dummy variables were created: false_post and treat_false_post.

4. Empirical Methodology
Mäklarstatistik.se states that approximately 95% of sales are reported to them, which
produces a selection effect if the tendency of realtor agents to report a sale depends on the
characteristics of the sold property. In addition, our data set provides data only for the
apartments that have been put up for sale, giving rise to a selection bias, with apartments
included in the sample potentially not being representative of the apartments within the
studied areas in general, as the treatment effect on houses that are marketed but fail to sell
cannot be estimated. Wentland et al. (2013) have approached this issue using data
containing information about both sold and unsold homes and additional statistical
methods. Moreover, households that sell their properties might have different properties
and be more risk-averse than the general population, as noted in the replicated paper by
Linden and Rockoff (2008). Applying analogous reasoning to our study setting, risk-
averse households might be overrepresented amongst households that move in
conjunction with a shooting. Such households might additionally be willing to pay more
to avoid crime and set lower reservation prices, leading to overestimations of the average
willingness. Conversely, households that are willing to buy the apartments after a
shooting might be less risk-averse and thus not demand as low discount prices, which
would increase observed sale prices.
             Control variables are necessary to reduce omitted variable bias. Potential
issues regarding omitted variables are the failure to control for other crimes and variables
that may affect property values, such as crime levels in the surrounding area as the
occurrence of other types of crime is common in socially vulnerable areas (Police
authority, NOA 2021). Additionally, apartment prices are likely to be influenced by
proximity and connection to (dis)amenities that we have not included in the regressions.

4.1 Method
We follow the methodology of the article Estimates of the impact of crime on property
values by Linden and E. Rockoff (2008) in which they used specific data consisting of
locations of sex offender residencies to compare the values of home sales within small
areas in which the housing stock was homogenous. In addition, we estimate the effects of
gun violence on housing liquidity defined as days-on-market or time on the market as well
as price concessions, within the studied areas.

4.1.1 Hedonic pricing model of apartment sales prices.
We employ a hedonic pricing model to estimate the impact of shootings on apartment
sales prices. The dependent variable in our study is the log of apartment sales price, which
is regressed against the set of apartment characteristics provided to us for each apartment
by Mäklarstatistik.se. We log transform the sales price in the hedonic pricing regression, as
done in the original paper by Linden and E. Rockoff (2008), and as is commonly done
when the relationship between the sales prices and the set of attributes is presumed to be
non-linear (Troy & Grove 2008). The coefficients for our control variables can thus be
interpreted as the approximate marginal percentual change in sale price following a one-
unit change in the quantity of the apartment attribute.
               A caveat to this approach lies in the difficulty of identifying a correct
hedonic function when amenities and disamenities may be correlated with unobservable
variables. (Epple 1987) Provided that no relevant variables are omitted, and the
characteristics included in the model accurately reflect the implicit, or hedonic prices, we
can thus separate the effect of the treatment from changes in sales pricing resulting merely
from differences in characteristics of sold apartments.
              An overview of the average characteristics of apartments in the studied
areas is presented further below in Table 4. Characteristics Apartments Sold, 2018 -2021,
for all the characteristics used in the hedonic price regression model.

4.1.2 Treatment and control group
We use coordinates of shootings retrieved from SVT and DN to compare the values of
home sales within small, relatively homogenous areas. Incidences of gun violence in the
form of fatal, injurious and non-harmful shootings between 2018-2021 serve as the
treatment.
              When studying the impact of crime on the housing market, there is always
the problem of endogeneity to be dealt with, in terms of higher rates of crime being
correlated with other variables that decrease house prices. Wilhelmson et al. (2021)
suggest that the exact time and location of shootings can be treated as random events
despite not comprising a completely random phenomenon. As research has found fatal
gun violence to be mainly related to criminal settings in socially vulnerable areas
(National Council for Crime Prevention 2021), incidences of gun violence cannot be said
to be evenly or randomly spread across different areas since they tend to concentrate in
socially vulnerable or disadvantaged neighbourhoods. These areas are more likely to
contain disamenities that other areas might not, which may negatively affect property
prices. The non-random distribution of shootings hence gives rise to an endogeneity
problem, as the treatment is correlated with attributes, some of which are unobservable,
that by themselves affect the dependent variable.
             If we were to simply compare areas with and without shootings it would
require separating the effects of shootings from other crimes, in addition to the added
difficulties of constructing a hedonic model that accurately reflects the implicit prices for
two heterogeneous areas. Gerell, Sturup, Magnusson, Nilvall, Khoshnoodet & Rostami,
(2021) also found that the probability of follow-up shootings is higher in socially
vulnerable areas, especially in conjunction with open-drug markets within those areas,
while open drug markets in wealthy areas are not correlated with follow-up shootings at
all.
                             A large proportion of shootings in the country occur in a
very small part of the country's geographical area. In 2020, 39.7% of all shootings
occurred within the 60 socially vulnerable areas, which constituted only 0.02% of the
country's total area. (Police authority, NOA 2021). Additionally, gun violence in Sweden
is linked to the criminal settings connected to socially vulnerable areas (National Council
for Crime Prevention, 2021:8) As for our data set alone, we see that 16 out of 44 fatal
shootings and 88 of the 213 (SVT) total shootings that have occurred since 2018 in
Stockholm municipality, took place in Spånga-Kista.
              With most shootings taking place in neighbourhoods classified as socially
vulnerable areas and their vicinity, there is a challenge in identifying the effect of
shootings on property values using traditional methods. Ideally, there would be a
treatment group and control group consisting of randomly assigned, comparable
observations. However, with shootings being concentrated in socially vulnerable areas, it
would be difficult to identify the effect of shootings on property values by comparing
socially vulnerable areas to other unaffected areas, as the two groups would differ in many
other ways than just being subjected to the treatment. Even when controlling for several
apartment characteristics, there could still be other factors that impact apartment sales
prices within the areas.
               The districts of Spånga-Kista and Hässelby-Vällingby are divided, and the
statistical analyses are conducted separately for both districts. As previously mentioned,
the validity of our results is dependent on the similarity between the control and
treatment groups but also the similarity of apartments within respective groups. Both the
districts Spånga-Kista and Hässelby-Vällingby are situated in the north-western parts of
Stockholm municipality, each containing socially vulnerable areas. However, as crime
levels have been shown to interact with local amenities (Troy & Grove, 2008), (Ihlanfeldt
& Bowes, 2001), the two districts are split up. We assume that amenities vary less within
the districts than between the districts, which if true, gives further accuracy to the
hedonic price estimations. Also, if amenities that interact with a crime are more different
between districts than within districts, then the treatment effects are more easily
discerned.
              Table 4 shows that apartments in areas in which shootings occur tend to
have lower sales prices, on average. For instance, an apartment closer to the shooting
location sold for 175855 SEK less, on average, compared to the whole area in Spånga-
Kista. This raises the question of whether shootings are more likely to occur within small
areas with radiuses lower than 800 metres, that are lower priced than the surroundings
even within socially vulnerable areas and districts, or if a higher incidence of shootings
might have discounted these small areas over time. No conclusions can be drawn simply
from these descriptive statistics, however.

Table 4. Characteristics of Apartments Sold, 2018 -2021

     1
Note:  Estimated for apartment sold within 800m of shooting by regression log(sale price) on listed
variables by year fixed effects. E.g., one extra square metre in living area increases the price by 1.09% in
Spånga-Kista. (Significance: *10 percent level, **5 percent level, ***1 percent level)
Figure 3A. The surrounding area within 300m and 800m of a shooting in Spånga-Kista (2020-12-
29, Fatal), (Mapsdirections.info)

Figure 3B. The surrounding area within 300m and 800m of a shooting in Hässelby-Vällingby
(2020-03-01, Injurious), (Mapsdirections.info)

              Using a long-time span for the statistical analysis entails several problems.
In the article by Linden and Rockoff, a time span of two years prior and post is used.
However, the nature of crimes studied in their article and our thesis differ. Individuals
cannot be expected to have the same perception of living near a sex offender as discrete
events of shootings. A singular incident or even a fatal shooting is not comparable to the
constant proximity to an individual that households perceive as prone to commit a crime.
The effects of the shooting are unlikely to stand out over a whole year. Because of this and
the concentration of shootings within certain areas, we set a time limit of 100 days prior
to the shooting and 100 days after the shooting, to prevent the treatment group from
being subjected to repeated treatments within the studied period. If we included the
whole four years of data, we have access to, there is a possibility that some observations
might be within 300 metres of several shootings but setting a time limit reduces the
probability of this. If observations within the treatment group are subjected to repeated
treatments within the studied period, this would overestimate the effect within our
model. The time limit of 100 days is set regarding the average days on market for
apartment sales. In addition, Wilhelmson, Ceccato & Gerell (2021) found that shootings
influenced the local prices of apartments over 100 to 200 days. The length of the limit of
100 days is thus also more likely to capture all the hypothesised effects.
              While we have already established that shootings are more frequent in
certain neighbourhoods, especially those in socially vulnerable areas, there is the
possibility that shootings occur frequently also in small areas of similar size to our
treatment group. This raises the question of whether the 100-day limits might not be
sufficient to exclude the possibility of repeated treatments. Researchers have studied
shootings in several large Swedish cities over the years 2011-2015 and identified the
presence of near-repeat patterns of shootings, in other words being clustered in time and
space. This entails that shooting in a location is likely to shortly thereafter be followed by
another shooting relatively in the proximity of the location of the previous shooting.
(Sturup, Rostami, Gerell & Sandholm, 2017). However, the researchers point out that
even though the risk of a new shooting increases in the aftermath of an actualized
shooting, the absolute risks remain low. For good measure, we have studied the data and
found that most fatal shootings in our sample are not followed by another fatal shooting
within 100 days and 600 metres, although injurious and non-harmful shootings are
commonly closely followed by shootings of any category. The 600 metres of distance is
set as the point to which the treatment groups of two spatially separate shootings begin to
intersect. For Spånga-Kista, only three fatal shootings are followed by another fatal
shooting within 100 days and 600 metres.

4.2 Graphical Indications
Prior to conducting our main analysis, we examine whether graphical evidence of
apartment sales regressed on distance provides support for our assignment of observations
to treatment and control groups. First, we explore if apartments close to a shooting are
sold less than apartments further away. Figure 4A shows the price gradient of distance to
shootings coordinates during the first 100 days after shooting. The prices in Hässelby-
Vällingby are lowest for apartments closest to the shootings, rise with distance until
reaching apartments about 300 metres away and then flatten out. In Spånga-Kista, the
prices decline with distance until reaching about 500 metres before it rises sharply.
Figure 4A. Price gradient of distance from shooting, first 100 days after shooting

Note: Local polynomial regression (bandwidth=100 metres) of the sale price on distance from shooting.
(The left graph refers to sales in Hässelby-Vällingby. The right graph refers to sales in Spånga-Kista)

               In figure 4B we include the price gradient of distance to shootings
coordinates 100 days before the shootings occurred. The price gradient in Hässelby-
Vällingby is largely similar in all distances before and after the occurrence of the shooting.
In Spånga-Kista apartments closest to the shooting had higher prices before than after but
otherwise followed the same trend.

Figure 4B. Price gradient of distance from shooting, 100 days before and 100 days after a shooting

Note: Local polynomial regression (bandwidth=100 metres) of the sale price on distance from shooting.
(The left graph refers to sales in Hässelby-Vällingby. The right graph refers to sales in Spånga-Kista)

              Figure 4C shows the price gradient with respect to days relative to shooting
for apartment prices within 300 metres and between 300 metres and 800 metres of the
shooting locations. Homes located in the near vicinity of the shooting are sold for less
than homes further away. However, there is no clear decline in prices for homes closest to
the shooting as compared to homes further away after the shooting has occurred. Judging
by eye, both graphs seem to follow similar trends, albeit at different total sales prices. If so,
then a sharp decline in the sales prices of homes in the near vicinity after the shooting that
broke the common price trend with homes further away could indicate the presence of
treatment effects on adjacent homes and the absence of an effect on homes beyond 300
metres.
Figure 4C. Price trends before and after shooting

Note: Price trends before and after the occurrence of shooting (bandwidth 12 days).
(The left graph refers to sales in Hässelby-Vällingby. The right graph refers to sales in Spånga-Kista)

4.3 Statistical Estimation framework
The empirical estimation models are based on a cross-sectional difference estimator and a
difference-in-difference estimator. Following the procedure of Linden and Rockoff, we
first plot apartment sales on the Y-axis and the distance to the coordinates of a shooting
on the X-axis in a diagram and use local polynomial regressions to construct two separate
graphs for the sales prices for the pre and post period of the shooting. The purpose of this
was to identify whether there were any clearly discernible cut-off points in distance to the
shooting where apartment sales prices noticeably decrease in the post-period compared to
the pre-period, as identifying such a cut-off point in the distance could suggest
appropriate radiuses to be used for defining the treatment and control groups. For
example, if we found that sales prices are noticeably lower after shootings within a certain
radius, that would motivate closer statistical inspection as to whether this difference is
significant and if it can be attributed to a causal effect of shootings.
              Using a bandwidth of 0.075 miles (120.7 metres) for the local polynomial
regression plot, Linden and Rockoff found that house sales prices drop in the years after
the arrival of a sex offender within 0.1 miles but display no noticeable change between 0.1
and 0.3 miles which then motivated their choice of treatment and control groups.
However, using a bandwidth of 100 metres and pre-and-post periods of 100 days before
and after the shooting, there are no discernible differences in apartment sales price in the
post-period compared to the pre-period for any distance in our data set.
              We thus decide in advance to define our treatment group as all apartment
sales taking place within 300 metres of shooting and the control group containing the
apartment sales taking place between 300-800 metres of a shooting. Again, following
Lindén and Rockoff, we use a cross-sectional difference estimator to check for pre-
existing differences in the characteristics of apartments located within 300 metres of
shooting and those located between 300 and 800 metres of a shooting, corresponding to
the apartments belonging to the treatment and control group, respectively. The distances
of 300 metres and 300-800 metres differ from the replicated article for several reasons, the
first being that we do not possess the exact coordinates of shooting, hence we increase the
radiuses of both the treatment and control group. Additionally, shootings are likely to be
heard over a large area and might impact properties further away (Wilhelmsson, Ceccato
& Gerell, 2021)

4.4.1 Cross-sectional difference estimator of apartment characteristics
The reliability of our study is dependent on the similarity between apartments in the
treatment and control groups. We, therefore, start by estimating the differences in
characteristics that might be present between homes within 300 metres and homes
between 300-800 metres by constructing a cross-sectional difference regression which
takes the form presented in equation (1)

(1) 𝐿𝑜𝑔(𝑃𝑖𝑗𝑡) = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 ∗ 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑗𝑡 + 𝛼𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑗𝑡

                                                      1
              The log of the apartment sale price is a function of a measure of distance
from the gun violence, a random error term (𝜀𝑖𝑗𝑡) and a year fixed effect (𝛼𝑡). The
dummy variable “Treat” is an indicator variable which takes the value of 1 if an apartment
sale occurs within 300 metres of shooting and allows for 𝛽1 to be interpreted as the
difference in sales prices between apartments in the treatment and control group. Again,
following Linden and Rockoff, we limit the sample to apartment sales that took place
before the occurrence of gun violence.

4.4.2 difference-in-differences estimator
The Difference in Difference (DiD) method is a quasi-experimental method that makes
use of data from a treatment group and a control group to obtain an appropriate
counterfactual to measure a causal effect (Jeffrey m. Wooldridge, 2018). A natural
experiment occurs when some exogenous event changes the environment. In our case,
that change is the occurrence of a shooting in an area. In this methodology, there is a
control group which is not affected by the change, and a treatment group which in
contrast is thought to be affected by the change. The Key assumption for DiD is that the
treatment and control groups have parallel (or common trends) in the absence of the
change (ibid). In this study, we estimate the effect of gun violence on property values.
Ideally, we would want to observe both the property values after exposure to local
incidents of gun violence and the counterfactual property values, comparing treated
property values with the same values had they not been treated, which is not possible.
Neither can we observe reversions of treatment to infer causality as Bishop (2008) did,
due to the nature of gun violence. Instead, we use a control group that is like the treated
group but is presumed to not experience the change.
              In this study, the treatment group consists of apartments located within
300 metres of the shooting and the control group are apartments located between 300-

1
   of observation i, in district j and year t. Districts: Spånga and Kista, Hässelby and Vällingby
800 metres of a shooting. Treat is a dummy variable denoting the treatment group,
assuming a value of 1 if the sold apartment is located within 300 metres of a shooting
location. Post is a dummy denoting the time after a shooting has occurred, assuming the
value 1 if the Treat_post dummy denotes the treated group after the shooting. X
represents all observable apartment characteristics and alpha is the year-fixed effect
The difference in differences model is specified as follows:

(2) 𝐿𝑜𝑔(𝑝𝑖𝑗𝑡) = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 ∗ 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑗𝑡 + 𝛽2 ∗ 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑗𝑡 + 𝛽3 ∗ 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡_𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑗𝑡 + 𝛽4 ∗ 𝑋𝑖 + 𝛼𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖𝑗𝑡

5. Estimation results
51. Pre-arrival differences in characteristics of sold apartments
We examine possible variations between groups for every apartment characteristic
included as control variables. This is accomplished by letting the characteristic of interest
take the place of the dependent variable in equation (1). For instance, to examine the
variation in build year characteristics we use the following regression:

                      𝐵𝑢𝑖𝑙𝑑_𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑗𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 ∗ 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑗𝑡 + 𝛼𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑗𝑡

              We find no evidence of any pre-existing difference in the sale price or other
characteristics in Spånga-Kista (Table 5). In Hässelby-Vällingby, however, the sale price
and building stories differ significantly at the 5% level. Apartments within 300 metres of a
future shooting sold for 7.64% less and the apartment building was 1.241 stories shorter
on average than apartments between 300-800 metres. The areas compared in Spånga-
Kista are very homogenous. In Hässelby-Vällingby it differs in some attributes.

Table 5. Pre-shooting differences in average characteristics of apartments sales sold close (<300m)
to shooting compared to the control group (300m<d<800)

Note: pre-shooting refers to 100 days before the occurrence of the shooting
5.2 Estimation Results
We start by presenting estimates of equation (1) in column 1 of table 6 and 7, including
sales of all apartments within 800 metres of a shooting of any category in Spånga-Kista
and Hässelby-Vällingby and a year fixed effects but without controlling for other
apartment characteristics. The estimate of 𝛽1from this specification is a measure of the
average price difference between apartments within 300 metres and apartments between
300-800 metres of distance to the location of a future shooting. This difference is 1.2% in
Spånga-Kista and 5.28% in Hässelby-Vällingby (Column 1 of Table 6 and 7). Apartments
in the near vicinity of future shooting locations are sold for less prior to the shootings but
this difference is not statistically significant. When apartment characteristics are included
as control variables in the equation, the differences in sales prices are reduced to 0.766%
and 1.79% respectively (Column 2 of Table 6 and 7) but still not statistically significant.
Thus, for the category “All shootings”, we find no statistically significant evidence of
differences between the treatment and control group in the pre-treatment period in terms
of the apartment sale price. Additionally, the reduction in estimated differences seen in
Column 2 compared to column 1 when including apartment characteristics indicates that
the control variables capture a large amount of the variation, further justifying the
inclusion in the regression model. The results of the cross-sectional difference estimation
thus support our previous predictions of similarity of sold apartments, upon which the
internal validity and explanatory value of our study hinges on.
               Column 3 of table 6 and 7 presents a pre-post comparison using equation
(2). In addition to including apartment characteristics and year fixed effects, we have also
included a time limitation of 100 days before and 100 days after a shooting. Due to this,
the pre-existing differences for All shootings are estimated to be -2.38% for the treatment
group compared to the control group (Column 3 of Table 6), in contrast to the estimate
of 0.766% in absence of the time limitation, although still not reaching statistical
significance. Thus, the introduction of the time limitation does not impose on the
assumptions of homogenous treatment and control groups.
Table 6. Impact of Shootings on apartment value in Spånga-Kista

Note: pre-shooting and post-shooting refer to 100 days before and 100 days after the date of occurrence of a
shooting. Equation (1) is for columns 1 and 2. Equation (2) is used for columns 3, 4, 5 and 6.

Table 7. Impact of Shootings on apartment value in Hässelby-Vällingby

Note: pre-shooting and post-shooting refer to 100 days before and 100 days after the date of occurrence of a
shooting. Equation (1) is for columns 1 and 2. Equation (2) is used for columns 3, 4, 5 and 6.
              Within our framework, the effects of gun violence are estimated by
comparing differences in sale prices before and after a shooting, between apartments
within 300 metres of a shooting and apartments between 300-800 metres of a shooting,
which are assumed to represent the counterfactual change in the treatment group had the
shooting not occurred.
              Within 100 days prior to shooting, apartments within 300 metres were sold
for 2.38% less, on average, than apartments between 300-800 metres in Spånga-Kista
(Column 3 of Table 6). The isolated effect of all types of shooting is 0.0106 which means
that on average, a nearby shooting contributes to prices of apartments being sold within
100 days after a shooting, increasing by 1.06% compared to if the shooting had not
occurred. This effect is not statistically different from zero at any reasonable confidence
level.
               The individual effects of the three categories of gun violence, fatal,
injurious and non-harmful, have been estimated using equation (2). Columns 5 and 6 in
table 6 show that injurious shootings and shootings leading to no harm have
demonstrated no statistically significant results in Spånga-Kista. Column 4 in table 6
estimates the effect of fatal shootings. First, we see that within 100 days prior to a
shooting, the apartments within 300 metres were sold for 8.83% more, on average, than
apartments between 300-800 metres in Spånga-Kista which is statistically significant at
the 10% level. Second, the isolated effect of fatal shootings is 0.0130 which means that on
average, a nearby fatal shooting contributes to a 1.3% increase in the prices of apartments
that are sold within 100 days after the event. This effect is statistically significant at the
10% level. However, the statistically significant pre-existing 8.83% difference in sales price
contradicts the assumption of homogenous treatment and control group when studying
the category of fatal shootings individually. If the control group is too different, then the
credibility of interpreting the coefficient Post*Treat as the marginal effect of the
treatment is diminished.
                In Hässelby-Vällingby, non-harmful shooting is the only type of gun
violence that has a statistically significant effect at a 5% level. Before the shooting, the
apartments within 300 metres were sold for 8.21% less, on average, than apartments
between 300-800 metres (Column 6 Table 7). The isolated effect of non-harmful
shootings is 0.109 which means that on average, a nearby non-harmful shooting
contributes to a 10.9 % increase in the prices of apartments that are sold within 300
metres and 100 days after the event. This effect is statistically significant at the 5% level.

5.3 Days on market
We have additionally included a measure of time on the market it takes for an apartment
to sell. Figure 5 shows the number of days it took for apartments to sell, on average, on
the Y-axis. The X-axis indicates when the sale was put on sale relative to the occurrence of
gun violence. In Hässelby-Vällingby, it took, on average, approximately 80 days for a sale
that was put for sale on the same as the occurrence of the shooting within 300 metres
while it only took circa 45 days between 300-800 metres. Wentland, Waller and Brastow
(2014) argue that failing to include liquidity in the modelling of statistical tests of crime
effects on property values results in simultaneity bias, as sales price and days-on-market
are jointly determined. In addition, changes in housing liquidity are relevant to the
housing market and sellers. Additional time on the market might be negative for sellers
who are in the process of buying somewhere else, affecting the holding costs and the
subsequent seller reservation prices (Wentland, Waller & Brastow, 2014). According to
the different proposed relationships in the literature, nearby gun violence can be thought
to affect local housing liquidity in different ways. The cause of nearby gun violence may
reduce the number and size of potential buyers and in turn lengthen the time on the
market. On the other hand, crime averse sellers eager to move after the shooting might
lower their reservation prices noticeably to close a faster sale, having a shortening effect on
the apartment's time on the market.

Figure 5. Days on market

Note: this figure shows the days it took for the apartment to be sold. For instance, it took, on average,
approximately 80 days for an apartment within 300 metres to be sold in Hässelby-Vällingby when it was
put on sale the same day as the occurrence of the shooting. (The left graph refers to sales in Hässelby-
Vällingby. The right graph refers to sales in Spånga-Kista)

               It is plausible that gun violence may affect housing liquidity, defined as the
number of days between the list date (in our data denoted as initidal_ad_date) and the
contract date. Glower, Laurin & Henderschott (1998) demonstrated that time on the
market is reduced for highly motivated sellers who have new employment and are already
buying elsewhere. Accordingly, crime averse sellers might be compelled to sell quickly
following a shooting.
              The occurrence of gun violence may affect the housing liquidity not only
in the near vicinity but in the whole neighbourhood because the potential buyers may
associate it with the area rather than where it exactly occurred. (Wilhelmsson et.al., 2021)
suggest that the effects of gun violence might be more far-reaching than other violent
crimes due to the discernible noise together with more extensive media coverage
compared to other types of crime. While the risk of bystanders being injured in a shooting
is small, shootings could negatively influence the local housing market mainly due to an
increased fear of crime in general rather than resulting from market participants
estimating their risk of being subject to gun violence specifically. Notably, studies have
found acts of criminal damage and vandalism to the property to contribute more to
feelings of unsafety than do actual increases in burglaries (Gibbons 2004), with vandalism
increasing fear of crime and this impact having synergistic effects in neighbourhoods
presenting with signs of decline (Ceccato & Wilhelmsson 2012), something that is
distinctive to socially vulnerable areas. Past occurrences of shootings of any category
might leave direct traces in the surroundings, which could then potentially induce
stronger reactions among residents in socially vulnerable areas. For instance, following a
shooting, bullet holes might be present in structures surrounding the location, while
locations of fatal shootings might indirectly provide evidence of a past shooting in the
form of memorial items intended to honour the victim. Such traces might not persist over
longer periods of time but are likely to persist within the studied period of approximately
three months after a shooting.
              To measure the effect of gun violence on liquidity and price concessions of
the local housing market, we create three different dummies. The first dummy denotes
the apartments that were put on sale and that were sold before the shooting. The second
dummy is for the apartments that were put on sale before the shooting but that were sold
after the shooting. Lastly, the third dummy is for the apartments that were put on sale
after the shooting (and sold after the shooting). The first and the third dummies do not
experience disturbance in terms of shooting, but the second dummy does and hence
could be affected.
              Filippova and Rehm (2014) find that in buoyant markets, properties that
have gone long without selling are attached a stigma due to being perceived as deficient,
which is relevant in our research setting, with housing prices having increased in Sweden
at a rate that stands out compared to the other Nordic countries (Bergman & Nyberg,
2021). Hence, we attempt to exclude those apartments already subject to stigma and to
avoid both negative and extreme values we set time constraints for days-on-market
between 0-365 days. The season in which the apartment is listed has been shown to affect
time on the market (McGreal et. al, 2009). Therefore, the time constraint encompasses a
whole year to average out the differences in time on the market for different observations
resulting from seasonality. The apartments that are put on sale before shooting and sell
after, stay, on average, much longer on the market (Table 8).

Table 8. Summary characteristics (Days on Market)

Note: We have limited days-on-market to be between 0 and 365 days to reduce outliers.
              We estimate the relationship between days on market with these three
explanatory variables using ordinary least square regression (Table 9). Days-on-market for
apartments that were on the market during the occurrence of the shooting increased
significantly. It took approximately 115 days, on average, in Spånga-Kista and 104 in
Hässelby-Vällingby for these apartments to be sold. Apartments that were both put on
sale before and sold before the shooting spent, on average, 41/39 days on the market
while apartments that were put on sale after spent on average 37/34 days on the market.

Table 9. The impact of the shooting on apartments that were on sale during the shooting

Note: Regression results with days-on-market as the dependent variable.

5.4 Price concessions
Asabere & Huffman (1993), defined price concessions as the list price minus the sales
price. We use equation (2) to instead estimate the difference between seller reservation
prices and the initial asking price. A negative value thus implies that the seller reservation
prices, or closing prices, were on average lower than the initial asking prices or list prices.
Here, the post indicates all apartments that were put on sale during the shooting.
              In the control group, apartments not on sale during the shooting sold, on
average, for 81503 SEK more than the initial asking prices and apartments on sale during
the shooting sold for only 33635 SEK more (in Spånga-Kista). In the treatment group,
apartments not on sale during the shooting sold, on average, for 77402 SEK more than
the initial asking prices while apartments that were put on sale during the shooting sold
for only 32107 SEK more. We see that the occurrence of a shooting in the marketing
period was correlated with price concessions both in the control group and treatment
group. Proximity (within 300 metres) to the shooting was associated with a smaller
average price concession in Spånga-Kista but not significantly. In Hässelby-Vällingby in
the control group, apartments not on sale during the shooting sold, on average, for
160386 SEK more than the initial asking price and apartments on sale during the
shooting sold for 124811 SEK. In the treatment group, apartments not on sale during the
shooting sold, on average, for 154112 SEK more while apartments that were put on sale
sold, on average, for only 87499 SEK more. Proximity to the shooting was associated with
a higher average price concession in Hässelby-Vällingby but not significantly.

Table 10. Differences between seller reservation price and initial asking price after a shooting

Note: The table shows the difference between end price and asking price for apartments that were in the sale
between 0 - 365 days of shooting (to reduce outliers)

5.5 Robustness
To assess the robustness of our study, we run placebo tests using equation (2) and the
exact same difference-in-differences specification while replacing the dates of each
occurrence of shootings of any category with dates 100 days prior to the actual date of the
incidence. Linden and Rockoff (2008) used falsification tests to confirm that they did not
estimate a false negative impact of the offender’s arrival. For instance, if areas near a future
offender's location demonstrated a slower growth in housing prices compared to other
houses, this could result in a false negative impact of the offender’s arrival. We find no
evidence of a false effect in Spånga-Kista. In Hässelby-Vällingby apartments close to fatal
shootings are selling for 7.97% less compared to 5.46% less from the main result. What is
contradictory, however, is that non-harmful shooting has a statistically significant large
negative impact. This is likely due to the usage of the false date in the placebo model, in
which the 100 days after a non-harmful shooting corresponds to the period of 100 days
before a non-harmful shooting in the regular model, in which we found significant pre-
existing differences.
Table 11. Manipulating the data to believe that the crime occurred 100 days before the actual day

Note: pre-shooting and post-shooting refer to 100 days before and 100 days after the date of occurrence of
the shooting

Table 12. Manipulating the data to believe that the crime occurred 100 days before the actual day

Note: pre-shooting and post-shooting refer to 100 days before and 100 days after the date of occurrence of
the shooting
6. Analysis
We find no conclusive evidence of gun violence negatively affecting local property prices,
although results in Hässelby-Vällingby indicate that non-harmful gun violence positively
impacts property prices. Additionally, results in Spånga-Kista indicate a positive effect of
fatal shootings on property prices, though these are only significant at the 10% level. If we
first assume that these results accurately represent reality, then one potential reason for
the positive effect of shootings on prices could be that there are unobserved disamenities,
such as crime occurrence, within the treated areas which already discount the apartment
prices. We reasoned in section 5.2 that socially vulnerable areas are likely to be particularly
sensitive to increases in fear of crime in response to gun violence. However, the converse
could also be true, with apartment prices within treated areas already being discounted
due to fear of crime, with the marginal effect of shooting being lower than for areas with
lower amounts of crime.
              Another reason could be the higher time on the market for apartments in
Hässelby-Vällingby that were being marketed when a shooting occurred. Since time on
the market is significantly higher for those apartments compared to apartments that are
both listed and sold before any shooting, it could be that the longer time on the market
enabled the appearance of a dedicated buyer. Suppose that in the counterfactual state,
residents who are already marketing their homes at the time of the shooting are already in
the process of buying and/or moving elsewhere. In that scenario, they might be more
willing to accept lower reservation prices to reduce the time on the market instead of
waiting for a dedicated buyer with a higher willingness to pay for the specific apartment.
However, if shootings reduce the pool of potential buyers, then the time on the market is
increased even for sellers who are concurrently buying elsewhere. The seller reservation
prices might then increase, due to increased time on the market, while altogether this is
not necessarily something positive for sellers.
              Nevertheless, there are limitations to our study, further discussed below,
which contradict the notion of our observed results being representative of the actual
relationships between gun violence and housing markets, invalidating the above
reasoning.

6.1 Limitations
The degree to which our difference in differences model accurately predicts a causal effect
depends among other things on how much the changes in the control groups represent
the contrafactual changes in the treatment group. In studies that employ hedonic models
to estimate the effect of a treatment on changes in property sales prices in a cross-sectional
sample, an omitted variable problem arises if all relevant property attributes fail to be
included as control variables. Local amenities and disamenities are likely to also influence
sale prices and can be included in the regression model to some extent, although it
remains difficult to include every relevant attribute. In the context of sex offender
registries Linden and Rockoff (2008) suggest the possibility that in addition to sex
offenders tending to move into areas with lower quality housing in terms of living area
and number of rooms, offenders might also move into residences that are discounted due
to some factors that are unobserved by the researcher, such as “moving in next to the local
‘eyesore’”. The discounted price might reflect not the quality of the property per se, but
rather a distaste due to factors unobservable to the researcher. For example, as shootings
have been demonstrated to be spatio-temporally tied to open drug markets (Gerell et al.,
2021), one would have to discern the individual effect of both phenomena on property
prices before drawing conclusions on the effect of shootings. Even within areas with
frequent shootings, property discounts in proximity to shooting locations could be better
explained by distaste for the presence of the drug market rather than a reaction to
occurred shootings.
              The difference-in-differences model employed in this study manages this
problem by comparing differences in sales before and after shootings between the
treatment and control groups. Thus, any observed effect is unlikely to be due to local
(dis)amenities, unless (dis)amenities tend to emerge in conjunction with the treatment.
Following the example above, if eyesore properties are not commonly emerging close by
following the arrival of an offender, the decline in prices can be attributed to the arrival
itself.
              While shootings are related to open drug markets, these can be considered
stable over several years (Gerell et al., 2021). It is thus unlikely that any observed
difference-in-differences is due to the emergence of open drug markets, although these
disamenities pose a problem in disrupting the assumed homogeneity between the
treatment and control group. If open drug markets are commonly present in adjacent
locations of future shootings and these are stable over time, it might be that apartment
prices near shootings are already discounted due to the presence of criminality. While
shootings might still affect these prices, it is also possible that the effect of higher crime
concentration is diminishing, that is, the apartments within the treatment group are not
as sensitive to gun violence as other apartments, which would underestimate the effect of
gun violence.
             Among the strengths of this study is both the treatment and control groups
belonging to the same neighbourhoods to a large extent. The results thus accurately
represent the effects within neighbourhoods. However, we have not considered that
homes that sell might have different attributes than homes in general (Linden, Rockoff
2008). The aversion towards living in the close vicinity of the location of a past shooting
is thus not necessarily reflected in the sales price drops, since it might just reflect the
preferences of the households that move. These might be different from other
households. Also, the households living in “bostadsrätter,” a type of owner-occupied
apartment, might have different attitudes towards the risk of crime than local tenants.
Residencies in socially vulnerable areas in general and the neighbourhoods included in the
areas of our study are typically rental apartments. Households that own their apartments
might not estimate the risk of being subjected to crime the same way that rental tenants
do.
7. Conclusion
Hedonic estimation methodology is fittingly used to estimate the short-term effects of
gun violence on property values in socially vulnerable areas in Stockholm municipality.
Using a dataset consisting of 6000 apartment sales and using a difference-in-differences
framework inspired by Linden and Rockoff (2008) to test the effects of incidences of gun
violence on the local property market for two separate areas, Spånga-Kista and Hässelby-
Vällingby in Stockholm, Sweden, yields unexpected results. We interweave the observed
impact on different housing market metrics from our study and the extant literature
explore possible explanations for these, but the implications regarding residents’s crime
aversion and the cost of crime remain inconclusive. The advantages of studying
treatment effects within small areas of specific socioeconomically disadvantaged
neighbourhoods have to be weighed against the difficulties in constructing a statistical
model that both includes enough observations and is internally valid by virtue of the
similarity between treatment and control groups.

8. Further research
Further research employing similar methods might seek to expand the radius of both the
treatment and control group in relation to the occurred shooting or crime. In Spånga-
Kista, the Post dummy was significant for the difference-in-differences estimation of the
effect of fatal shootings, meaning that prices of apartments within 800 metres
significantly declined after the occurrence of a shooting. While a causal effect of fatal
shootings on the whole area within 800 metres cannot be inferred, the observed
significant result suggests that future research using similar methods could expand the
radiuses of the treatment and control group. This should be possible with access to a
larger dataset that optimally contains information on sold apartments from socially
vulnerable areas in all of Sweden's larger cities, as well as provides data for all existing
residences in the studied areas to combat one of the sources of selection bias that arises
from only studying apartments that sell.
              Since several studies have demonstrated the influence of local levels of
different types of crime on property prices, such disamenities need to be included within
the hedonic pricing models for greater accuracy, both in terms of the marginal effects of
the levels of a different crime, but also their interaction with the treatment variable.
Finally, more robust tests for the effects on housing liquidity and price concessions are
needed, as our models do not allow any causal claims and the research on the relationship
between these aspects of the housing market and crime is scarce. If housing liquidity is
thought to decrease following an event and this is hypothesised to be partly the result of a
reduced pool of buyers, it would be interesting to explore whether this effect is
moderated by media articles or the number of google searches of the specific event.
Bibliography

Anglin, M. Paul., Rutherford, Ronald & Thomas M. Springer, (2003), The trade-off between the
Selling price of residential properties and time-on-the-market: The impact of price setting, Journal of
Real Estate Finance and Economics, 26(1): 95-111

Asabere, K. Paul & Forrest E. Huffman, (1993), Price concessions, time on the market, and the actual
sale price of homes, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 6:167-174

Bajari, Patrick., Fruehwirth Cooley, Jane., Il, Kyoo, Kim & Christopher Timmins, (2012), A rational
expectations approach to hedonic price regressions with time-varying unobserved product attributes:
The price of pollution, American Economic Review, 102(5): 1898–1926

Bayer, Patrick., Ferreira, Fernando & Robert McMIllan, (2007), A unified framework for measuring
preferences for schools and neighbourhoods, Journal of political economy, 2007, 115:4, 566-638.

Bergman, A. Mats & Sten Nyberg, (2021), Konkurrens och prisbildning på den svenska
bostadsmarknaden, SNS Analys, 81

Bishop, C. Kelly & Alvin, D. Murphy, (2011), Estimating the willingness to pay to avoid violent
crime: A dynamic approach, American Economic Review, 101(3): 625-629.

Black, E. Sandra, (1999), Do better schools’ matter? Parental valuation of elementary education, The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(2): 577-599.

Boustan, Platt Leah, (2012), School desegregation and Urban Change: Evidence from City
Boundaries, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(1): 85–108

Bowes, R. David & Ihlanfeldt, R. Keith, (2001), Identifying the Impacts of Rail Transit Stations on
Residential Property Values, Journal of Urban Economics, 50(1): 1-25.

Caudill, B. Steven., Affuso, Ermanno & Ming Yang (2015), Registered sex offenders and house prices:
A hedonic analysis, Urban studies, 52(13): 2425-2440.

Ceccato, Vânia & Mats Wilhelmsson, (2011), The impact of crime on apartment prices: Evidence
from Stockholm, Sweden, Geografiska Annaler: Series B, Human Geography, 93 (1): 1-23

Ceccato, Vânia & Mats Wilhelmsson, (2012), Chapter 8: Acts of vandalism and fear in
neighbourhoods: Do they affect housing prices? The Urban Fabric of Crime and Fear, (Department of
Urban Planning and Evirononment, Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden)

Ceccato, Vânia & Mats Wilhelmsson, (2020), Do crime hotspots affect housing prices? Nordic
Journal of Criminology, 21(1): 84-102

Cullen, Berry Julien & Steven D. Levitt (1996) Crime, Urban flight and the consequences for cities -
Review of economics and statistics (1999), 81(2): 159-169.
Dagens Nyheter (2021), Här är alla skjutningar i Stockholm de senaste fem åren.
https://www.dn.se/sthlm/har-ar-alla-skjutningar-i-stockholm-de-senaste-aren/

Epple, Dennis (1987) - Hedonic prices and Implicit markets: estimating demand and supply functions
for differentiated products, Journal of Political Economy, 95(1): 59-80.

Filippova, Olga & Michael Rehm, (2014), Market conditions, Marketing time, and House prices -
Journal of Housing Research, 23(1): 45-56.

Gerell, Manne., Sturup, Joakim., Magnusson, Mia-Maria., Nilvall, Kim., Khoshnood, Ardavan &
Amir Rostami, (2021), Open drug markets, vulnerable neighbourhoods and gun violence in two
Swedish cities, Journal of Policing, Intelligence and Counter Terrorism, 16(3):223-244.

Gibbons, Steve (2004), The costs of urban property crime , The Economic Journal, 114(499): 441-46.

Glower, Michael., Haurin, R. Donald., & Patric H. Hendershott (1998), Selling time and selling price:
the influence of seller motivation, Real Estate Economics 26(4): 719-740.

Larsen, E. James., Lowrey, J. Kenneth & Joseph W. Coleman, (2003), The effect of proximity to a
registered sex offender’s residence on single-family house selling price, Appraisal Journal, 71(3): 253-
265.

Linden, L. Leigh & Rockoff, E. Jonathan, (2008), Estimates of the impact of crime risk on property
values from Megan’s laws, American Economic Review, 98(3): 1103–1127.

Lynch, K. Allen and David W. Rasmussen (2001) - Measuring the impact of crime on house prices,
Applied economics, 33(15): 1981-1989.

Mapsdirections.info, (2022),
https://www.mapsdirections.info/en/measure-map-radius/

McGreal, Stanley., Adair, Alastair., Brown, Louise & James R. Webb, 2009, Pricing and Time on the
market for residential properties in a Major U.K. City, The Journal of Real Estate Research, 31(2): 209-
234.

National Council for Crime Prevention - BRÅ (2021), Rapport 2021:8 Dödligt skjutvapenvåld i
Sverige och andra europeiska länder: En jämförande studie av nivåer, trender och våldsmetoder - (Gun
homicide in Sweden and other european countries)

National Council for Crime Prevention - BRÅ (2021), Rapport 2021:11 - Nationella
trygghetsundersökningen 2021: Om utsatthet, otrygghet och förtroende

National Council for Crime Prevention - BRÅ (2021), Rapport 2021:12 - Nationella
trygghetsundersökningen 2021: Teknisk rapport

Pope, C. Jaren (2008), Fear of crime and housing prices: Household reactions to sex offender registries
Journal of Urban economics (2008), 64(3): 601-614
Swedish Police Authority - Polismyndigheten, Nationella Operativa Avdelningen (2021), Lägesbild
över utsatta områden: Regeringsuppdrag 2021

Swedish Police Authority – Polismyndigheten, (2021), Kartgränser utsatta områden i region
Stockholm

Sherwin Rosen (1974) - Hedonic prices and implicit markets: Product differentiation in pure
competition, Journal of Political Economy, 82(1): 34-55.

Stockholm municipality, (2020), Trygghetsmätningen 2020.

Sturup, Joakim., Rostami, Amir., Gerell, Manne and Anders Sandholm, (2018), Near-repeat shootings
in contemporary Sweden 2011 to 2015, Security journal, 31, 73-92.

Swedish Television, (2021), Skjutningar i Sverige, https://www.svt.se/datajournalistik/skjutningar-i-
sverige/?rid=0

Thaler, Richard., (1978), A note on the value of crime control: evidence from the property market -
Journal of Urban Economics, 5(1): 137-145

Troy, Austin and Morgan J. Grove, (2008), Property values, parks, and crime: A hedonic analysis in
Baltimore, MD, Landscape and Urban planning, 87(3): 233-245.

Wentland, Scott., Waller, Bennie., & Raymond Brastow, (2014), Estimating the effect of crime risk on
property values and time on market: Evidence from Meghan’s law in Virginia, Real Estate Economics,
42(1): 223-251

Wilhelmsson, Mats., Ceccato, Vânia., & Manne Gerell, (2021), What effect does gun-related violence
have on the attractiveness of a residential area? The case of Stockholm, Sweden

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M, (2018), ‘Properties of OLS under Measurement Error’, Introductory
Econometrics: A Modern Approach. 7th edition
Appendix
Table 13. The list of all gun violence including date of occurrence and coordination

Note: Dates, type of gun violence, latitude and longitude of each of the shootings gathered for the study.
Figure 6. Apartment sales the first 100 days after the occurrence of gun violence

Note: Local polynomial regression of sale price on distance from shooting
(The left graph refers to sales in Hässelby-Vällingby. The right graph refers to sales in Spånga-Kista)

Figure 6 shows the price gradient of distance to different types of shootings coordinates
during the first 100 days after shooting (without bandwidth). Prices for homes closest to
fatal shootings are higher, sink with distance until around 300 and then rise again in
Hässelby-Vällingby. Prices close to fatal shootings in Spånga-Kista are higher compared to
other types of shootings and rise even more till approximately 200 metres away, then sink
with distance until nearly 400 metres before flattening out.

Table 14. Spatio-temporally connected shootings in Hässelby-Vällingby

Note: The right-hand side of the table lists initial shootings and is sorted by shooting category. The left-hand
side lists follow up shootings.
Table 15 Spatio-temporally close shootings in Spånga-Kista
Note: The right-hand side of the table lists initial shootings and is sorted by shooting category. The left-hand
side lists follow up shootings.