SWEDEN’S GOT A BRAND NEW TAX RATE

AN EVENT STUDY ON THE SWEDISH STOCK MARKET
FOLLOWING A CORPORATE TAX RATE REDUCTION IN 2018

HANNA LINDÉ
REBECCA HESSLEVIK

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2022
Sweden’s Got A Brand New Tax Rate
Abstract:
   In this paper, we intend to investigate the Swedish stock market’s reaction upon the
   acceptance of the 2018 corporate tax rate reduction. The purpose is to examine if there
   was a significant stock market reaction and if it was heterogeneous across sub-samples
   based on market capitalization. We discover a potentially significant stock market reaction
   on the acceptance day and we find support that it was heterogeneous across sub-samples.
   This indicates the importance of examining different sub-samples of firms to better
   understand the implications of a reduction in the corporate tax rate. To further investigate
   the significance of the reaction, we perform a permutation test and several robustness
   checks. The results indicate that the initially observed reaction is likely due to noise or
   difficulties in distinguishing the reaction from other interfering events, given the small
   magnitude of the tax rate reduction. This suggests that future researchers should focus on
   larger tax changes to be better able to distinguish the reaction from noise to derive
   meaningful results.

Keywords:
   Stock Market, Tax Rate, Sweden, Denmark, Efficient Market Hypothesis

Authors:
   Hanna Lindé (24943)
   Rebecca Hesslevik (25115)

Tutors:
   Marieke Bos, Deputy Director, Swedish House of Finance Researcher, Swedish House of
   Finance

Examiner:
   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Acknowledgements:
We want to express our gratitude toward Marieke Bos for her valuable feedback and
continuous support throughout the writing process. We also want to thank Michael Klug for
his econometric sessions and insightful suggestions.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Hanna Lindé and Rebecca Hesslevik, 2022

                                                                          2
                                        I. Introduction
       In “The cost of capital, corporation finance and the theory of investment” (1958),
Modigliani and Miller introduced the idea that in a perfect capital market, the firm value is
independent of a firm's financing and payout decisions. Over the following decades, research
in corporate finance has advanced and examined the multitude of financial frictions that
affect, not only the firm's choice of capital structure, but also other corporate decisions. The
area of corporate taxes has been greatly studied and it is a financial friction that plays a
central role in firms’ capital structure, payout policy, and investment decisions. Firms are
subjected to pay various taxes and one tax that is particularly salient in political debates is the
corporate income tax, which is paid on the profits that remain after deducting all operating
and financial expenses from revenues. With the importance of taxes in mind, a meaningful
question arises, “How does the stock market react to a reduction of the corporate tax rate?”.
The aim of this study is to research this question and empirically investigate the Swedish
stock market’s reaction to a reduction in the corporate tax rate. We will revisit the efficient
market hypothesis by examining the stock market's ability to price in the implications of this
change. Using the difference-in-differences method we exploit a reduction in the Swedish
corporate tax rate, accepted in 2018, as an exogenous event and use Denmark as our control
group.
       The key contribution of this paper is that we focus on the Swedish stock market,
compared to previous literature that primarily focuses on the U.S. stock market. Moreover, in
addition to examining the aggregate stock market reaction, we refine our samples into
sub-samples based on market capitalization. Thus, we are able to examine the stock price
reaction of two groups that are relatively unexamined so far, the mid and small-capitalization
segments.
       Our approach and method provides three main benefits. Firstly, by segmenting the
aggregate sample based on the company’s market capitalization, we are able to uncover
potential heterogeneous reactions to tax news. This will contribute to our knowledge about
how firms might be impacted differently by various tax changes, and enable us to study the
reaction of market participants.
       Secondly, using the difference-in-difference method with Denmark as our control
group is advantageous for our event of study. In 2016, the EU passed a directive that was to
be implemented by 2019 and which would impact the tax deductibility of the net interest
expense. The Swedish government decided to lower the corporate tax rate in conjunction with
the implementation of this new directive. A benefit of our approach is that Denmark and
Sweden had the same corporate tax rate prior to the event (22%) and they are both members
of the EU. A comparison to previous years performance or with a non-EU country would
complicate the study as we would likely capture the combined effect of the EU initiative and
the reduction in the corporate tax rate. By using Denmark as our control group, we were
likely able to avoid the issues with the EU directive interfering with our results.
       Thirdly, by using firm fixed effects we are able to control for unobservable
differences across individuals that are constant over time meaning we are able to isolate the
effect of the tax reduction to a larger extent.
       We further examine the robustness and validity of our results through various
robustness tests. Firstly, in addition to examining the stock market’s reaction upon the
acceptance day, we investigate whether there was a significant reaction upon the suggestion
of the tax rate reduction, as well as its first implementation stage. This enables us to examine
whether a small reaction could be the result of the market already pricing in its implications
upon its suggestion, or if there was uncertainty remaining that was resolved upon its
implementation. Initially, we do not find a significant reaction upon the implementation date.
An issue with the implementation date is that it was in January, a month during which stock

                                                                          3
returns tend to exhibit seasonality. After including time fixed effects in our regressions to
attempt to control for the seasonality, we find a negative reaction in the aggregate sample, but
we do not find support for a significant reaction in the sub-samples. The reaction upon the
suggestion date indicates that there was a negative stock market reaction, meaning that
Swedish firms earned lower returns than Danish firms during this period. To investigate
whether the repeatedly negative results were due to the implications of the tax rate reduction
being successively priced in, or if it was due to noise, we conducted a permutation test. The
results from the permutation test suggest that we most likely have captured noise.
       Our analysis is motivated by empirical insights with regard to how tax news may lead
to heterogeneous stock price reactions across firms, as well as how efficiently financial
markets incorporate this information in the pricing of publicly traded securities.
       Similar to other papers that have examined the stock market reaction upon changes to
the corporate tax rate, our results are ambiguous, and although they indicate a heterogeneous
reaction across large, mid and small-capitalization stocks, we do not have enough support to
draw this conclusion.
        The structure of the paper is as follows. Section II and III covers related literature,
background, and motivation for our analysis. Section IV provides background information on
the tax reform, our research question, and our empirical predictions. Section V details how
the data was obtained, filtered, and sampled. Section VI explains the methodology used to
conduct the analysis. Section VII describes our empirical findings. Section VIII discusses the
results of robustness checks. Lastly, section IX concludes.

                                  II. Related Literature
       Our study relates to other studies that examine the stock market’s reaction to policy
announcements and thus naturally relates to the vast literature on the efficient markets
hypothesis (EHM). Some key differences are that our study examines a different geographical
setting, the Swedish stock market, and that we try to capture potential heterogeneous
reactions by examining three sub-samples.
       Many papers have examined the relationship between taxes and leverage using
cross-country comparisons. Faccio and Xu (2015) found a significant positive relationship
between the corporate tax rate and leverage. Heider and Ljungqvist (2015) performed a
single-country study and found support for firms changing their capital structure following
changes to the corporate income tax. The latter paper criticizes cross-country studies and
problematizes how firms from different countries may differ in unobserved ways, which may
impact the responses. Our study differs from previous cross-country studies in that we
attempt to mitigate these issues by comparing the two Nordic countries, Sweden and
Denmark, which share many historical, geographic, and economic similarities.
       Multiple papers discuss the difficulties in empirically examining the relationship
between corporate taxes, firm characteristics, and the stock market’s reaction. Wang, H. and
Macy, A. (2021) examine the stock market’s reactions to large corporate tax rate changes.
They document heterogeneous effects across countries and attribute this mixed reaction to
interfering variables, such as national news. Doidge and Dyck (2015) point out the
difficulties with conducting empirical studies and explain that to study its implications, the
tax change must be unambiguous, of large magnitude, and unanticipated. Their event study
exploits a largely unanticipated tax change that would imply substantially higher taxes for a
group of publicly traded Canadian firms. The authors document a large drop in the firm value
for the group affected by this tax change, and a strong negative stock price reaction in the
market upon the announcement day and the following days. We are aware of the multiple
difficulties and have attempted to address them by refining our samples to uncover potential
heterogeneous reactions. Moreover, we will conduct multiple robustness checks to ensure the

                                                                          4
robustness of our results and attempt to answer whether our results capture noise or an actual
stock market reaction.

       Corporate stock price reaction to policy announcements, changes to the corporate tax
rate or other areas of the tax system are well examined areas. One paper in this area is written
by David M. Cutler (1988). Cutler uses an asset pricing approach to investigate the U.S. stock
market reaction to the 1986 Tax Reform Act which would decrease the corporate tax rate by
12 percentage units and impose changes to the relative treatment of old and new capital. The
analysis finds little evidence for a large stock market reaction. A more recent paper is written
by Wagner, Zeckhauser et al. (2018). The authors examine the response of U.S. company
stock prices to the 2016 U.S. presidential election. The election results were considered a
shock due to Trump's relatively lower probability of winning and to the wide policy
differences in the expected corporate tax policy changes. The paper investigates how taxes
impact firm value and how efficiently stock prices respond to potentially large changes to the
corporate tax rate and other areas of the tax system. The authors find evidence that supports
that the cross-section of stock returns were substantially impacted by the expectations of a
major corporate tax cut (Wagner, Zeckhauser et al. 2018). Our study is closely related to the
two above-mentioned papers, since our overarching idea similar to both Cutler and Wagner,
Zeckhauser et al., as we intend to examine the stock market’s reaction to news about changes
to the corporate tax rate. However, we study how the Swedish stock market reacts to tax
news. Moreover, we study the reaction of sub-samples based on market capitalization to
uncover heterogeneous reactions due to inherent differences in the characteristics of firms
belonging to these groups.
       Similar to the findings by Cutler (1988) and Wang, H. and Macy, A. (2021) our results
are ambiguous. Our results suggest that there might have been a heterogeneous reaction in the
Swedish stock market, with a possible positive reaction in stock prices and returns of
large-capitalization companies, and a negative reaction in the mid and small-capitalization
segments. The results are to a large extent insignificant and we can therefore not draw any
clear conclusions. Although our findings support that it might be difficult to empirically
examine small changes to the corporate tax rate, they suggest that it might be useful to test
whether theories and conclusions hold for smaller and mid-sized firms.

                                     III. Motivation
        Capital markets are imperfect and there exists multiple financial frictions that impact
the firm's choice of financing, investment decisions, and payout policies (Berk & DeMarzo,
2019). A well-studied financial friction is the area of taxes, ranging from taxation of
dividends, capital gains taxes and deferred tax items to corporate taxes. This study will focus
on corporate taxes, which are paid on the remaining profit after subtracting all relevant
expenses from the revenues. Because interest is deducted before taxes are paid, it lowers the
firm’s taxable income and generates interest tax shields for the firm, which increases the
firm's market value and lowers its cost of debt. All else equal, the higher the corporate tax
rate the higher the tax shields. It is interesting to examine how a reduction in the corporate tax
rate impacts firms and their returns due to the effect corporate taxes have on corporate
decision-making and policies and the effect on their international competitiveness and
investment (OECD, 2011), (Nasdaq, 2021).
        There is limited literature that examines the reaction of different sub-groups, based on
market capitalization size, to tax reforms. One motivation behind this study is therefore to
examine the reactions of firms with different market capitalization. We will examine three
sub-groups: large, mid, and small-capitalization firms. Most literature generally focuses on
large-capitalization firms, meaning that these results might not be representative of those of

                                                                          5
mid and small market capitalization. For instance, data from CRSP and Compustat show that
there is a larger share of U.S small-capitalization firms that have negative earnings compared
to the share of U.S large-capitalization firms, meaning that changes to the corporate tax rate
might have different implications depending on the firm's market capitalization
(Dimensional, 2020). Hence, these groups might have different characteristics and face
conditions that may lead to heterogeneous stock price reactions.
       Additionally, few papers examine the stock price reaction of Swedish firms upon
changes to the corporate tax rate as most of the previous literature has studied the U.S stock
market. For instance, U.S firms are required to apply the U.S GAAP, while Swedish firms
follow IFRS and K-regelverket (Bokföringsnämnden, 2022). These different accounting
standards might imply that Swedish firms react differently upon a tax cut compared to U.S.
firms. Our study is therefore also motivated by the potential insights we can contribute
regarding the difference in the Swedish stock market reaction compared to the U.S.
       To conclude, our study is motivated by empirical insights with regard to whether there
are heterogeneous reactions across firms to tax news, and also how efficiently financial
markets incorporate this information. It should however be acknowledged that examining the
impact of changes in corporate taxes remains challenging given that the changes must be
significant enough to have an impact on corporate decisions and one must be able to
distinguish the tax effects from other changes. Additionally, changes to corporate taxes might
be widely anticipated given that countries want to stay competitive in relation to other
countries and attract investment. Hence, it might be difficult to claim that the decision to
make changes to the corporate tax rate is exogenous. Consequently, the results obtained from
such studies may be ambiguous and open to multiple interpretations, or simply not
statistically significant given the interference of events other than the tax policy.

                    IV. The Event Study and Empirical Predictions
    A. Restricted Interest Deductibility and Corporate Taxes
       In 2016, the EU commission released an anti-tax avoidance directive intended to
address the increasing engagement in tax-avoidance practices(Eur-Lex, 2016). On 20th of
June 2016, the council adopted the Directive, which would force all member states to impose
an interest limitation rule by restricting the taxpaying entities’ ability to deduct exceeding
borrowing costs. The measures were to be implemented by 1st of January 2019, and as
members of the EU, Sweden and Denmark were both subjected to follow the directive.
(European Commission, 2016). The two countries implemented the new directive on January
1st 2019, which limited entities subject to corporate income tax to deduct a maximum
negative net interest to an amount corresponding to 30% of the EBITDA. (Business Sweden,
2022;Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark, 2021). In conjunction with this directive, the
Swedish parliament proposed a reduction in the corporate tax rate from 22.0% to 20.6%. The
proposal was prepared and debated between May and June in 2018 and was later accepted on
the 14th of June the same year. The reduction would be implemented in two steps. The first
reduction would lower the corporate tax rate from 22.0% to 21.4% and be implemented on
1st January 2019. The tax rate of 21.4% would remain for one year until 1 January 2020 in
which the second reduction from 21.4% to 20.6% would be implemented. The reduction in
the corporate tax rate was motivated by primarily two reasons. Firstly, a reduction in the
nominal corporate tax rate was intended to entice investment and contribute to economic
growth. The law council referral that the Swedish government handed over to the law council
investigates the proposal and its implications. In the referral, it states that a lower corporate
tax rate impacts the investment activity through the cost of capital. A lower cost of capital
would make more investments profitable at the margin and increase the return on investment.
These factors would subsequently lead to an increase in companies' investment activity,

                                                                          6
which in turn could impact the aggregate production levels. Secondly, the reduction was
motivated by the impact the corporate tax rate has on domestic and foregin investment in
Sweden. A reduction in the corporate tax rate could entice both domestic and foregin
investors to invest in Sweden, and it could also attract multinational companies. To conclude,
the proposal was motivated by the positive impact on economic growth and to attract
multinational companies and foregin investors (Regeringen, 2018). In contrast to Sweden,
Denmark did not change their corporate tax rate during this period. They maintained a
corporate tax rate of 22%, which was the same tax rate as Sweden had prior to the proposal,
during the entire period. We expect the Swedish stock market to have a positive reaction in
response to this news, given the expectations about a higher future growth and return on
investment. Thus, Swedish firms should have higher returns than those of Danish firms upon
the acceptance of the tax rate reduction.
       Considering that both countries are members of the EU, we are better able to control
for any potential direct impact on firm characteristics stemming from this directive, but also
for other changes that might impact firm performance. Assuming that the directive will have
a roughly homogenous impact on both countries we are thus able to isolate the stock market’s
reaction to a reduction in the corporate tax rate.

    B. The Efficient Market Hypothesis: The Stock Market Reaction
       The EMH argues that markets are efficient and that the prices of publicly traded
securities reflects all available information to investors. This implies that when new
information emerges, for instance about the future performance of a stock, the market prices
will immediately react as savvy investors start to trade and adjust their portfolios to account
for this new information. Hence, security prices adjust upon the release of new information.
Assuming that markets are efficient, we can infer that the Swedish stock market will react
upon the acceptance of a reduction to the Swedish corporate tax rate as this will impact all
firms with operations in Sweden, although to varying degrees. Given that the motivation
behind the corporate tax reduction was to favor growth and investment, we expect a positive
stock price reaction motivated by the expected improved business conditions and growth
prospects. Furthermore, although the reduction was stated to be implemented in two steps, the
EMH implies that the full effect of the reduction should be priced in upon the announcement
of its acceptance as the market will price in all available information.

   C. Research Question and Hypothesis
       The overarching research question that we aim to examine in this paper is “How does
the stock market react to a reduction in the corporate tax rate?” To examine our question we
will use the event described above and we have deconstructed our research question into
three separate hypotheses as seen below.
       H1: The Swedish stock market will have a positive reaction to a reduction in the
corporate tax rate.
Previous literature has found that lower corporate tax rates encourage capital investments by
existing firms (Cummins, Hassett et al. 1996) and that one can observe strong positive effects
on average investments from tax incentives (Guceri, Albinowski 2021). Wang and Macy
(2021) find positive excess returns for countries around a tax-cut. These findings support that
reducing the tax rate will favor investment and growth. We therefore believe that the tax
reform will result in a positive effect for stocks traded on the Stockholm Stock Exchange in
comparison with stocks traded on the Copenhagen Stock Exchange.
       H2: The stock market reaction will be heterogeneous across different segments.
Previous literature has uncovered heterogeneous reactions across firms in response to a
corporate tax reduction. Wang and Macy (2021) documents heterogeneous reactions across

                                                                          7
countries in conjunction with a tax reform. In addition, F. Wagner et.al (2018) find different
reactions depending on the firm’s capital intensity and the deferred tax items they have. We
believe there will be heterogeneous effects across segments depending on the size of their
market capitalization as the firms in each segment may have different characteristics that
induce different responses to the tax cut.
       H3: The largest reaction will be seen upon the acceptance of the proposal.
Previous event studies that examine the stock market reaction to tax news (Doidge and Dyck,
2015; Wang and Macy, 2021) attribute the announcement day of the tax policy, meaning
when it is accepted, as the main event day and concentrate their event windows around this
date. In line with previous studies and in accordance with the EMH, we believe that the
positive effect should occur when the announcement of the acceptance of the reform becomes
public knowledge. When the reform is suggested there is still uncertainty regarding if it will
be accepted. On the implementation day, the implications will likely already be anticipated
and therefore, according to EMH, priced.

                         V. Data and Sample Construction
    A. The Ideal Data Set and Ideal Setting
       Ideally, our study would compare two economies facing identical macroeconomic
conditions and shocks, and they would have identical trade relations and economic
fundamentals. The firms would therefore operate under the same conditions in each
respective country. Moreover, preferably each individual firm would have concentrated its
operations in one country, meaning that it would not have tax obliged subsidiaries in other
jurisdictions. The treatment would be that one country is randomly and unexpectedly
assigned a tax rate reduction. Hence, all else would be equal between these two countries but
the tax rate. The group of firms operating in the country with the tax rate reduction would
constitute the treatment group, whilst the firms with operations in the other country would be
the control group. By investigating the difference-in-difference in stock market reaction for
these two groups, we would capture only the possible reaction to the tax rate reduction.
       The ideal dataset would preferably have a large sample size and it would be without
missing data points as the missing data can bias our sample and consequently our results.
Ideally, the control group and treatment group would have the same number of firms and
observations, the firms would be of the same size and operate in the same industry.
        Unfortunately we are unable to construct the ideal data set and obtain the ideal setting
in practice. For instance, note in Chart I. that there are multiple Swedish enterprise groups
with subsidiaries abroad and approximately 21% of these are located in Denmark
(Tillväxtanalys, 2020). This may interfere with the results because if a Swedish firm has a
subsidiary in Denmark that represents a large part of its operations, then the tax rate reduction
will have a smaller impact than it would if it had all operations in Sweden. This will likely
have a dilutive effect that will bias our coefficient intended to capture the difference in
returns between Danish and Swedish firms towards zero. Thus, it should be known that the
datasets and the setting used in this study are not ideal and may therefore contain biases or
unwanted effects which could affect the results and limit the possibilities of drawing accurate
conclusions.

                                                                          8
                                           Chart I.
                   Swedish Enterprise Groups with Subsidiaries Abroad
The pie chart shows the number of Swedish enterprise groups with subsidiaries abroad in 2018. Roughly 21% of
the Swedish enterprise groups had subsidiaries in Denmark in 2018. (Tillväxtanalys, 2020)

   B. Cross-Country Comparison: Choice of Control Group
      For this event study, we will compare the two Nordic economies Sweden and
Denmark. In our study, the sample of Swedish firms constitutes the treatment group as they
are subjected to the change in the corporate tax rate, whilst the sample of Danish firms
constitutes the control group. The Swedish and Danish economies share many similarities as
they both are Nordic countries, members of the EU, and share a long common history. To
compare the two economies, we have selected several variables that have been documented to
impact firm characteristics and country conditions. We will use macroeconomic variables that
are considered to be traditional determinants of leverage in firms, as expressed by Faccio and
Xu (2015). We, therefore, provide an overview of the development of both countries' gross
domestic product (GDP), inflation rate, and interest policy rates over a three year period.
Additionally, we include the country’s debt as a % of GDP given the theoretical and empirical
support on debt and its impact on economic growth and how it contributes to an enhanced
vulnerability of economies to macroeconomic shocks (European Central Bank, 2020). Lastly,
we include a globalization index given the important role globalization plays in economic
growth. Globalization has been positively linked to economic growth due to knowledge
spillovers, increased access to other markets, and enchanted production efficiency
(Grossman, Helpman 2015). In this study, we will use the KOF Globalization Index which
measures the degree a country’s economy is globalized. The results from the comparison are
presented further down in section IV in which we also test the parallel trend assumption.
       Additional factors to consider to decide if the two countries are similar enough are
governing party and culture. A country's governing party is of interest since its ideology often
includes an opinion on tax rates for corporations and individuals.. In 2018 Denmark was
ruled through a coalition of 3 parties, “Venstre”, “Liberal Alliance” and “Det Konservative
Folkeparti” which is a center-right government while Sweden had an election that was won
by the left side social-democratic party (SVT, 2020). During 2019 Denmark had an election
which resulted in their social-democratic party forming a government(Folketinget, 2019). The
social democratic parties in Denmark and Sweden share many values and they have been
called “systerpartier”, which directly translates to “sister parties”(SVT, 2020). Moreover,
Sweden and Denmark share a long history and have similar cultures. To evaluate similarities
and differences we will, as the majority of economic researchers, rely upon the dimensions
proposed by Geert Hofstede (Gibson, Kirkman et al. 2006). Culture can affect the optimal
level of tax revenue and taxation. Hofstede’s dimensions, individualism, and power distance
were found to have a significant relationship with the optimal taxation in a country. In
addition, masculinity was found to have a significant relationship as well when controlled for
individualism (Čábelková, Strielkowski 2013). Sweden and Denmark score similarly on both

                                                                          9
individualism, and power distance with Denmark slightly more individualistic and Sweden
slightly higher power distance. Both Sweden and Denmark score very low on masculinity
(Geert Hofstede). We, therefore, conclude that Sweden and Denmark, with their shared
history, share many similarities.

   C. Stock Data
       To construct the two samples, we collect daily stock prices for Swedish and Danish
publicly listed firms over a period starting on 1 June 2016 until 31 December 2021. We use
FinBas, a high-quality financial database containing stock price data for firms listed on the
Nordic Stock Exchanges between 1912 and 2021. We download the last price, which is the
last traded price of the stock at the end of the trading day. The price is adjusted for corporate
actions, which makes the prices in a time series comparable over time. FinBas offers stock
data on two stock exchanges for Sweden and Denmark respectively. The Swedish stock
exchanges are Stockholm Stock Exchange and Stockholm Stock Exchange First North, while
the Danish stock exchanges are Copenhagen Stock Exchange and Copenhagen Stock
Exchange First North. The stock exchanges differ slightly in the types of stocks listed and the
regulatory requirements to be listed. Stockholm Stock Exchange First North and Copenhagen
Stock Exchange First North generally target small and medium-sized companies with a focus
on high growth. In addition, they have lower listing requirements compared to the more
established exchanges, making them suitable platforms for companies preparing for a listing
on one of the larger exchanges. We will, however, not use the stock data available on the First
North stock exchanges due to the lack of balance sheet data on these firms and to avoid the
potential problems of cross-listings.
       It is important to ensure that we have separated the treatment and control group to
avoid spill-over and dilutive effects on the treatment effect. For the treatment group, we only
want to include firms that are headquartered in Sweden and thus subjected to the reduction in
the corporate tax rate, whilst we only want to include firms that are headquartered in
Denmark for our control group, where the tax rate has remained stable. The intention is to
isolate the impact the reduction in the corporate tax rate has on stock returns and firm
characteristics from other macroeconomic and country specific variables that may otherwise
interfere with the results. To find the country a firm is headquartered in, we sort on the two
first characters in the stocks’ ISIN code. A security issued by a firm headquartered in Sweden
will have “SE” as the first two characters in their ISIN code, while a Danish firm has “DE”.
In addition to separating the control and treatment groups, we exclude stocks issued by
companies headquartered in countries outside of Sweden and Denmark. It is important to note
that there is a possibility that firms that are headquartered have subsidiaries in other countries
which would be subject to the tax rate in the country they are established in. This can affect
the reliability of our results.
        In the sample construction, we consider that one firm can issue multiple securities e.g
series A and B, but also that a firm may engage in mergers or acquisitions, or simply a
change of name. This is important as we do not want to count the reaction from one firm
multiple times as this would bias our results. We treat a stock that has the same company
name but different ISIN as one entity with the rationale being that stocks of different series
may have different voting rights and payment priority, but ultimately they reflect the
fundamentals of the same firm and that changes to the firm performance should be reflected
similarly in these stocks. If a stock belongs to an entity that has had different company
names, but the same ISIN, it is also treated as the same entity. This could potentially
introduce a bias in our results as a name change could be the consequence of a merger or
acquisition. Consequently, the announcement of either a merger or acquisition, as well as the

                                                                         10
actual execution of it, may impact the equity returns of the stocks belonging to these entities,
thereby interfering with our obtained results.
       Next, we remove entities that do not fulfill our minimum return availability
requirements. The minimum return availability requirement is that the entity shall have at
least one return before and one after the tax change was accepted. This is an attempt to avoid
the survivorship bias and sample selection bias. The requirement is to ensure that the firms in
the samples have been impacted by the same macroeconomic variables and that the results
are not driven by other unobservable variables. Many of the entities do not have full
availability of stock price data spanning the entire period, but rather have missing stock
prices for multiple days. Missing observations are left without data as introducing new
numbers for the missing values risks introducing a bias in the data. We compute the daily
stock returns based on the available stock price data in each sample. We use equation 1 where
 𝑃  is the stock price at time t, 𝑃     is the stock price the day prior to t.
   𝑖,𝑡 𝑖,𝑡−1
                                                                               𝑃
                                                                                                                                                                                                 𝑖,𝑡
                               𝑅  = 𝑃    − 1 (Eq 1)
                                                              𝑖,𝑡        𝑖,𝑡−1
       Equation 1 can be interpreted as the day-on-day percentage change in the stock price.
The daily stock return can only be computed if the stock price is available for two
consecutive days. We then filter the data on an industry basis and follow Heider and
Ljungqvist (2015) filtering process, which is similar to that of many other papers. We exclude
firms operating within the financial services, utilities, and public sectors. The exclusion of
financial firms is due to their business model and balance sheet structure, which is highly
different from other companies (Fama, French 1992). We remove all entities with SIC codes
6000 (depository institutions e.g., banks), 6200 (security and commodity brokers), 6300
(insurance carrier) and 6700 (holdings and other investment offices). Real estate firms with
SIC 6500 are excluded due to lack of data availability on an item required to construct one of
the firm controls. The reason for excluding public utility firms is due to their possible
connection to the state. Public firms are not often profit-orientated and are highly affected by
governmental decisions which is inappropriate given the aim of the study. Their economic
role is to serve public tasks, and as a result their business model also differs from other
private companies. Lastly, we remove firms that do not have data available on all variables
and/or SIC codes. This is to ensure that control variables can be created for all firms included
and that they do not belong to the industries that we filtered out. The final sample of Swedish
firms comprises 277 entities, 394 unique ISIN codes, and 328,816 observations, whilst the
final sample of Danish firms consists of 85 entities, 98 unique ISIN codes, and 117,275
observations. This sample comprises all data from June 2016 until December 2021.
                                        Table I
                            Data Filtering Process: All firms
This table shows the number of observations and stocks with unique ISIN codes that remain after each step in
the filtering process. The most right column shows the number of observations and stocks that were dropped for
each step. The number of observations are presented in brackets.

                                                                            11
   D. Accounting Data and Control Variables
       In addition to downloading daily stock price data from FinBas, we also obtain the
market capitalization for each firm. FinBas provides two types of market capitalization, the
first is market value (MV) which is computed stock class by stock class, if applicable. The
second is total market capitalization (TMV) which is obtained by aggregating the market
capitalization from each stock class. We used the market capitalization provided by MV to
avoid double counting. For stocks traded on SSE, both MV and TMV are available on a
monthly basis. To compute the market capitalization day for day there are two possible
approaches, either we assume that the market capitalization for a given month remains static
until the next month when new data becomes available, or we back out the shares outstanding
and use it to compute the market capitalization for the remaining days of the month using the
daily stock price. Using the former approach assumes that the market capitalization remains
static throughout the month, thereby making the implicit assumption that the shares
outstanding change as the stock price changes. The latter approach assumes that shares
outstanding remain static throughout the month, but that the market capitalization is dynamic
because of changes in the stock price. We decided on the second approach in which we derive
shares outstanding to then compute the market capitalization as a function of the stock price.
This is more intuitive as shares outstanding usually are fairly stable. FinBas did not provide
monthly market capitalization on Danish firms traded on CSE. We therefore manually
collected data on shares outstanding and market capitalization from the stock’s fact sheet
provided by Nasdaq for each traded security. If the fact sheet was unavailable, we collected
the information from the annual report. We assume that the number of shares outstanding at
the end of the month represents the number of shares outstanding during the month, thus if a
company has X number of shares outstanding 31st December, we assume that they have had
X number of shares outstanding throughout the entire December.
       Data on firm fundamentals was retrieved from Compustat Capital IQ Global, a
database that provides fundamental and market information on non-U.S. and non-Canadian
active and inactive publicly held companies. We obtain accounting data on Swedish and
Danish firms on an annual basis, with some firms having more frequent updates, and retrieve
the following items: total assets (at), common equity (ceq), short-term debt (dlc), long-term
debt (dltt), operating income before depreciation (oibdp), property plant and equipment
(ppent). A more detailed explanation of each variable is provided in the appendix in Table
XXI. The accounting data is matched to the stock data on an entity basis, meaning that stocks
of series A and B that belong to the same firm will be matched to the same balance sheet
data. It is conventional to introduce a time lag when matching accounting data to stock
returns to account for the fact that accounting data usually becomes available later in time. A
conventional six-month lag was introduced when matching accounting data to stock returns
(Fama, French 1992). The accounting information is almost exclusively available on an
annual basis for both Swedish and Danish firms, with some exceptions for semi-annual
updates. When matching the annual accounting data to daily stock returns, we assume that the
accounting data will remain throughout the year until new information becomes available. We
use similar firm controls as Doige and Dyck (2015) and Heider and Ljungqvist (2015), these
are ROA, Tobin’s Q, leverage, and tangibility. The definition of the control variables and their
constituents can be found in the appendix. We identified a systematic loss of firms within the
real estate sector for both Sweden and Denmark due to unavailable data on items required to
create control variables. In general, the real estate sector usually operates with high financial
leverage, meaning that the loss of these firms will lead to lower aggregate leverage when we
later construct our summary statistics.

                                                                         12
   E. Sub-Samples
       This study intends to examine if there is a heterogenous or homogenous stock market
reaction across firms, specifically if firms with different sized market capitalization react
differently. Therefore, we created three sub-samples from each pooled country sample. The
firms are classified into three samples: large, mid, and small-capitalization. We defined
large-capitalization firms as firms with a market value greater than €1bn, which roughly
translates to a market capitalization of SEK 10.3 billion, mid-capitalization firms as firms
with a market value that is between €1 billion and €150 million and small-capitalization
firms as firms with a market value smaller than €150 million (See figure I). We also account
for two issues that arise when classifying stocks. The first issue is that a firm’s market
capitalization does not strictly determine the segment a firm belongs to as there is no
automatic segment transfer as soon as you hit a threshold for a given segment. Secondly,
given that we examine multiple stocks for an entity, the market capitalization of the stock
might indicate that they belong to one segment, whilst the total market capitalization for the
entity might say differently. Therefore, we manually collect data for the entity’s segment
belonging to classify it accordingly.
                                        Figure I
                              Sub-Sample Definitions
           The figure depicts the classification rules used to allocate firms into our three sub-samples.

       Some entities were excluded to avoid biasing the samples because they were
transferred to another segment in close conjunction to the event. In Table II and Table III we
provide an overview of the final sub-samples for each country.

                                        Table II
              Data Sampling and Sample Size for Sub-Samples: Sweden
This table shows the number of observations and number of unique ISIN in each sub-sample. The most right
column provides information about the number of observations and unique ISIN that were lost from the original
pooled sample. The number of observations is presented in brackets.

                                        Table III
             Data Sampling and Sample Size for Sub-Sample: Denmark
This table shows the number of observations and number of unique ISIN in each sub-sample. The most right
column provides information about the number of observations and unique ISIN that were lost from the original
pooled sample. The number of observations is presented in brackets.

                                                                         13
    F. Stock Indices
       To examine the parallel trend assumption, we downloaded daily historical data over a
1 year period prior to the acceptance day for Swedish and Danish stock indices from Nasdaq
(Nasdaq). For the pooled samples, we downloaded data for OMXSPI and OMXCPI, for
Sweden and Denmark respectively, which are value weighted price indices that consist of all
shares on each exchange. These two indices give an overall picture of the stock market
development. For the sub-samples, we downloaded data on OMXSSCPI and OMXCSCPI,
OMXSMCPI and OMXCMCPI, and OMXSLCPI and OMXCLCPI to illustrate the
development for the samples with small, mid and large-capitalization firms respectively.
       For our AR and CAR regressions, we downloaded daily data on the value weighted
stock index S&P Europe 350. This constitutes our proxy for the benchmark return which we
will compare the individual stock return against.

                                VI. Methodology
    A. Event Study
       To conduct our event study, we will, to a large extent, rely on our main reference
article, which is written by Doidge and Dyck (2015). However, given that our event differs in
some aspects compared to theirs, we will also resort to the methodology used in other event
studies that have been published in prominent journals. To study our event, we have divided
the tax rate reduction into 3 separate events, the suggestion day (t-1 = 2018-05-03), the
acceptance day (t0 = 2018-06-14), and lastly the implementation day ( t1 = 2019-01-01 & t2 =
2020-01-01) (Riksdagen). To examine the stock market reaction to the change in the tax rate,
we will primarily focus on the second event, t0 , which was when the tax reform was passed
and we believe the information regarding its implications should have been priced in by the
stock market.
                                        Figure II
                       Event Timeline and Interval Definitions
The figure illustrates the timeline of events related to the tax rate reduction we are investigating in our study. We
have also indicated the main time period (interval 1) which we will investigate in the empirical analysis below.

       Following the event study performed by Doige and Dyck (2015), we will examine
three different event windows. Doige and Dyck (2015) examine an event that was largely
unanticipated and therefore used asymmetrical event windows. There was likely less
uncertainty related to our event and it is possible that its acceptance was expected. Therefore
we will use symmetrical event windows to account for reactions that can have occurred
before the acceptance of the proposal. Similarly to the common event study practice and to
for example Wang and Macy (2021) we will use the event windows presented in Table IV in
which each day represents a trading day.

                                    Table IV
                           Event Window Specification
This table shows the three event windows and how many trading days, prior and post the event, that are included
in each window. Day 0 represents the event day.

                                                                         14
       The three event windows constitute interval 1 in figure II. In accordance with the
EHM we believe interval 1 to have the largest, if any, significance. Still, it’s possible that
there was an early or lagged reaction. Therefore, we will later examine when the reform was
suggested (interval 2) and the first implementation of the reduction (interval 3). The second
implementation date (2020-01-01) is not examined due to the possible impact the outbreak of
the COVID-19 pandemic might have had. This could lead to unobservable effects that could
interfere with the effects from the reduction in the tax rate. We also expect that the largest
price implications will be in conjunction with the announcement of the acceptance of the tax
change or the first implementation of it. Later in section VIII, we will focus on interval 2 and
3 to check the robustness of our results.

    B. Parallel Trend Assumption
       To examine whether the stock returns of Swedish publicly traded firms were higher
than Danish firms on the acceptance day, we will use the difference-in-difference method.
This method relies on the equal or “parallel” trends assumption, meaning that the two groups,
treatment and control, follow similar trends prior to the event. We will examine whether this
assumption holds by examining the stock market development, as well as some selected
macroeconomic variables. If a parallel trend is missing or cannot be confirmed, the
comparison of the stock returns before and after the new regulation would be misleading and
the results from the difference-in-difference estimation irrelevant. The macroeconomic
variables we have chosen are GDP in current US dollars, debt to GDP (in %), inflation rate
(in %), and a globalization index As seen in graph I the two groups have parallel trends in
three out of four of the selected variables over the selected period. Notable is that the
inflation rate in Sweden and Denmark has not been parallel from 2015 to 2019.

                                  Graph I
                 Development of selected country descriptive variables
The following graph shows how the GDP, debt-to-GDP, inflation rate in % and Globalization has developed
over the period 2015-2018 in Sweden and Denmark. The blue graph depicts the development in Sweden.

       We then examine firm characteristics of firms in each country to see whether the firms
are comparable in terms of for instance size and leverage. When calculating summary
statistics for the two groups, we start by summarizing the values for the different variables on
an entity basis. This is to ensure that firms with multiple stocks do not get a larger weight
when summarizing the data. After obtaining the summary statistics for each entity, we then
obtain the summary statistics for the aggregate sample. The results are presented in Table V
and Table VI for Sweden and Denmark respectively. To ensure that the absolute values, such
as market value and total assets are comparable, we use the average exchange rate DKK to

                                                                         15
SEK for the year to convert the Danish values that are provided in DKK to SEK. As seen in
Table V and Table VI the two samples share many similarities in terms of size, profitability,
and growth prospects. Notable differences are in the market value and tangibility. Swedish
firms seem to generally have a larger market cap, as seen from the median, however the size
distribution in the Danish sample is likely skewed by some large Danish firms that inflate the
mean. Although both the Swedish and Danish economies are characterized by large industrial
sectors, the Danish sample has a much higher PPE and tangibility ratio, suggesting that they
are more capital intensive compared to the Swedish sample.

                                    Table V
                           Summary Statistics: Sweden
The table presents the summary statistics of all accounting and control variables for the Swedish firms over the
period June 14, 2016 to June 1, 2018. The statistics are summarized on an entity basis and then on an aggregate
basis.

                                     Table VI
                          Summary Statistics: Denmark
The table presents the summary statistics of all accounting and control variables for the Danish firms over the
period June 14, 2016 to June 1, 2018. The statistics are summarized on an entity basis and then on an aggregate
basis.

       To examine whether these differences are significant or not, we perform Welch’s t-test
for unequal variances to examine the significance of the difference in the means reported in
Table V and Table VI. We calculate the t-statistics according to the formula below and then
calculate the corresponding P-value:

                                                                         16
       𝑥 and 𝑦 are the sample means. s is the sample variance and n the number of
observations in the sample. The results from the test are reported in Table XVIII in the
appendix. From the tests, we can only find a significant difference in the means for the
tangibility ratio. The P-value is below 0.1% meaning that the difference is highly significant.
For the remaining tests, we do not find that the difference in means is different from zero.
Overall, our results suggest that the difference in means is only significant for the tangibility
ratio, not for the other variables and ratios. This supports that the firm characteristics of the
firms in the two economies are similar.
       Finally, we examine if the stock market development in Sweden and Denmark one
year prior to the event is parallel. Given the aim of our study, we will examine the
development for the aggregate market, as well as for the sub-samples we will focus on in our
analysis. In Graph II we see that all indices share an overall positive long-term trend over the
selected period, which is in line with each country’s positive GDP development. The
development of Denmark and Sweden’s large-capitalization indices, OMXSLC and
OMXCLC, is nearly identical to the all share index. This is expected since both OMXS and
OMXC are value-weighted indices. Visually, the trends of OMXSLC and OMXCSM seem to
follow a similar development one year prior to the change in the Swedish corporate tax rate.
We note a few deviations in the movement, but overall that the trends move in parallel and
therefore provide support for the parallel trend assumption for this segment. The
mid-capitalization indices, OMXSMC and OMXCMC, exhibit a stronger parallel trend
compared to the all share and the large-capitalization indices. We do not observe any periods
in which the indices notably diverge or break the trend. Visually the trends of OMXSMC and
OMXCMC seem parallel, thereby providing support for the parallel trend assumption for this
segment too. Lastly, for the small-capitalization indices, OMXSSC and OMXCSC, there is
greater variation in the Swedish index compared to the Danish. Although the long-term trend
is the same, we must acknowledge that the two indices diverge at times and that we find
weaker support for the parallel trend assumption.
                                   Graph II
                            Parallel Trend Assumption
The graphs plots OMXSPI and OMXCPI, OMXSLC and OMXCLC, OMXCMC and OMXCMC, and
OMXSSC and OMXCSC over the period 30 June, 2017 to 14 June, 2018. The Danish indices are in red.

       Overall, despite some differences between Denmark and Sweden, such as in the
tangibility ratio and their historic inflation rates, we believe the similarities outweigh the
differences. Considering the parallel trends over the year prior to the reduction in the
corporate tax rate and the similarities in various firm characteristics, we conclude that

                                                                         17
Denmark is an appropriate control group to Sweden for the all share, large-capitalization and
mid-capitalization segments, but less for the small-capitalization segment. We will examine
all three segments, but we should be aware that the results we derive for the
small-capitalization segment might not be representative given that we do not find as strong a
support for the parallel trend assumption.

   C. Abnormal and Cumulative Abnormal Returns
       To see whether there was a significant stock market reaction, we will examine the
abnormal return (AR) and cumulative abnormal return (CAR). We follow the method used by
Doidge and Dyck (2015) and calculate AR and CAR for 3 different event windows. However,
due to the nature of the reform as discussed above, we will calculate CAR for a symmetric
window instead of an asymmetric one, resulting in the event windows: the acceptance day,
the acceptance day ± 1 trading days and acceptance day ± 3 trading days. The following
regression model was used to estimate the abnormal returns.

                     𝑅  = α + β * 𝑅   + γ * 𝐸𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡 + ε  (Reg I)
                                     𝑖,𝑡       𝑖       𝑖      𝑏,𝑡       𝑖                      𝑖,𝑡

         𝑅 is the daily return for stock i, 𝑅  is the value-weighted return of the benchmark, and
               𝑖 𝑏
Event is a dummy that equals 1 for the days specified in the event window. The estimate of γ
is the abnormal return of each firm over the event period. To calculate the CAR, each γ will
be multiplied by the number of days in the event period. There are different approaches to
estimate the expected return. One possible approach is to use a Swedish stock market index,
however since the tax rate reduction affects all companies in Sweden, the entire index would
be upward biased. Therefore, we will use a value-weighted European index, S&P Europe
350. The index contains both large, mid, and small-capitalization companies from a total of
16 countries. Both Sweden and Denmark are among those 16 countries. The benefit with
using an European index, instead of a Nordic, is that each Swedish and Danish individual
stock has a smaller impact on the index movement.

   D. Regressions
       To capture the Swedish stock market reaction we apply the difference-in-difference
method. The statistical method enables us to study the differential effect of a treatment
between a treatment group and a control group. (Angrist & Pischke, 2009). The
difference-in-difference approach rests upon the parallel trend assumption discussed above.
When performing our difference-in-difference regressions we perform a step-by-step
approach where we gradually increase controls to provide a clear view of the effects. The
regressions will be estimated for the pooled sample and then performed on each sub-sample.
The first regressions are Ordinary Least Square (OLS) regressions that do not include firm
fixed effects. For the OLS regressions, the following regression was estimated:

     𝑌   = β + β * 𝑍    + β * 𝐷1 + β * 𝐷2  + β * 𝐷1 * 𝐷2 + ε   (Reg II)
         𝑖,𝑡      0      𝑖     𝑖,𝑡−1      1       𝑖      2       𝑖     3       𝑖       𝑖     𝑖,𝑡

       Y is the stock return and our dependent variable, Z are the firm controls and ε is the
error term. D1 is a country dummy that equals one if it is a Swedish firm, 0 otherwise. D2 is
our event dummy that equals one if the time is within our event window, 0 otherwise. The
interaction effect is the product of these two dummy variables and intends to capture the
difference-in-difference.
       Following the OLS regression, we perform a firm fixed effects regression. The benefit
of fixed effects models is that it controls and reduces the endogeneity problem and accounts

                                                                         18
  for the unobservable differences across individuals that are constant over time. A fixed effect
  regression is common among papers examining changes to corporate taxes in which they
  examine entities that may have unobservable differences, such as firms or countries (Wang &
  Macy, 2021 and Doidge & Dyck, 2015).

     𝑌   = β + β * 𝐷1 + β * 𝐷2  + β * 𝐷1 * 𝐷2 + ν + ε   (Reg III)
          𝑖,𝑡      0      1       𝑖      2       𝑖     3       𝑖       𝑖       𝑖     𝑖,𝑡

         Y is the dependent variable which is the return of the stocks. The variable ε is the error
  term. The entity fixed effects regression will be performed on each sub-sample as well; large,
  mid, and small-capitalization. ν is the firm fixed effect that captures unobservable differences
  that are different across entities but constant across time. D1 is a country dummy that equals
  one if it is a Swedish firm, 0 otherwise. D2 is an Event Dummy that equals one if the time is
  within our event window, 0 otherwise.
          In the following step we add firm control variables to the regressions. The addition of
  control variables improves the validity of the regression results by eliminating the influence
  of other exogenous variables.

𝑌   = β + β * 𝑍    + β * 𝐷1 + β * 𝐷2  + β * 𝐷1 * 𝐷2 + ν + ε   (Reg IV)
  𝑖,𝑡       0      𝑖     𝑖,𝑡−1      1       𝑖      2       𝑖      3       𝑖       𝑖      𝑖      𝑖,𝑡

         Y is the dependent variable which is the return of the stocks. Z are the firm controls. ν
  is the firm fixed effects. We include the same dummy variables from the firm fixed effect
  model. The variable ε is the error term. The entity fixed effects with firm control variables
  regression will be performed on each sub-sample as well; large, mid, and
  small-capitalization. It is common for event studies to include control variables in their fixed
  effects regression when empirically examining the event in question. The use of firm fixed
  effects is in line with the methodology used in the study by Doidge and Dyck (2015) who
  similarly use firm fixed effects together with firm controls. Firm fixed effects control for
  individual-specific attributes that are constant across time but varies across entities. Our
  control variables, such as ROA, on the other hand vary both across time and entities. Other
  studies published in renowned journals such as the Journal of finance and the journal of
  financial economics also perform firm fixed effects together with firm controls (Getry,
  Kemsley et al. 2003; Heider, Ljungqvist 2015).
          In addition to the firm fixed effects regressions, we will also perform industry fixed
  effects regressions. Y is the dependent variable which is the return of the stocks. Z are the
  firm controls. We include the same dummy variables from the firm fixed effect model.

      𝑌   = β + β * 𝑍    + β * 𝐷1 + β * 𝐷2  + β * 𝐷1 * 𝐷2 + Ɣ + ε   (Reg V)
            𝑖,𝑡       0      𝑖     𝑖,𝑡−1      1       𝑖      2       𝑖      3       𝑖       𝑖      𝑖      𝑖,𝑡
         The variable ε is the error term. Ɣ is the industry fixed effect. We classify firms into
  industries using the two-digit SIC-code, which categorizes firms into one out of ten possible
  industries. The SIC-code industry name and SIC-codes are presented in Table XXIV.
  Although the firm fixed effects are more robust as they control for both unobservable
  differences across industries and for unobservable differences across firms within the same
  industry, it might be useful to see whether the results differ across the two different fixed
  effects regressions.

                                 VII. Empirical Analysis
     A. Abnormal Returns and Cumulative Abnormal Returns
         We begin with estimating abnormal returns (AR) and cumulative abnormal returns
  (CAR) around the acceptance date. We run regression I, which is the same regression model

                                                                           19
as Doidge and Dyck (2015), over the period June 14, 2017 to December 31, 2018. The event
window that solely includes the acceptance date, is the only regression that produces a
statistically significant AR. The return is 0.59% and statistically significant at the 1% level.
The other two event windows do not show any statistically significant CAR. This regression
suggests that Swedish firms earn AR only on the acceptance date.

                                     Table VII
                       AR and CAR Regressions: All Shares
The regression 𝑅  = α + β * 𝑅  + γ * 𝐸𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡 + ε   is estimated for each stock. The table shows the
                         𝑖,𝑡      𝑖      𝑖     𝑏,𝑡      𝑖                   𝑖,𝑡
estimated AR for Swedish firms on the acceptance day and the average AR for windows ( -1, 1) and (-3 , 3).
The CAR is obtained by multiplying γ with the number of days in the event window. The CAR for event
window (-1, 1) is 0.03% and the CAR for event window (-3, 3) is -0.7%.

The results for the sub-samples are presented in the Appendix (Table XXVII).

    A. Stock Market Reaction: OLS Regressions
       Using the OLS regression specified in regression II we examine whether we find a
statistically significant reaction in the Swedish stock market upon the acceptance of the tax
rate reduction. The results are presented in Table VIII. First, we use the pooled samples over
the period April 14, 2018 to August 14, 2018, a four month period. The dependent variable is
the daily stock return. Our primary variable of interest is the interaction effect, which
captures the potential return differential between Swedish and Danish publicly traded firms
for our event windows. SSE measures whether a stock was traded on the Swedish Stock
Exchange during this selected period. In our first regression, the coefficient is 0.0014 and
significant at 5%. The coefficient is 0.0017 in the second and third model and they are
significant at the 1% level. This implies that Swedish firms generally have slightly higher
returns over this period than Danish firms. The coefficient on the interaction effect is
insignificant for the event window that only includes the acceptance day, but it is -0.0069 and
-0.0043 and significant at the 5% level for an event window of (-1, 1) and (-3, 3) respectively.
Overall, the results from the OLS regressions suggest that a reduction in the corporate tax rate
had a small negative effect on the stock returns of Swedish publicly traded firms. We note
however that there is heteroscedasticity in the error terms for all regression, see results from
the test in the appendix Table XXII.

                                                                         20
                                     Table VIII
                            OLS Regressions: All Shares
The table presents the OLS regression with firm controls for the period April 14, 2018 to August 14, 2018. The
regression estimate for all stocks is: 𝑌   = β + β * 𝑍    + β * 𝐷1 + β * 𝐷2  + β * 𝐷1 * 𝐷2 + ε . The pooled
                                                   𝑖,𝑡     0     𝑖    𝑖,𝑡−1     1      𝑖     2      𝑖    3      𝑖      𝑖    𝑖,𝑡
sample includes daily stock returns on Swedish and Danish publicly traded firms and data on firm
characteristics. The dependent variable is daily stock returns. SSE equals one for firms that are traded on the
Stockholm Stock Exchange. A regression was run for each event window, the acceptance day June 14, 2018 (1),
the acceptance day ± 1 trading days (2) and the acceptance day ± 3 trading days (3).

       We run the same regressions but for our sub-samples to see whether there is a
statistically significant reaction, and if so, if it is heterogeneous or homogeneous across firms
with different sizes of their market capitalization. The regression results are presented in
Table IX. SSE measures whether a stock was traded on the Swedish Stock Exchange during
this selected period. For the small-capitalization sample, the coefficient is 0.0037 and
statistically significant at the 5% level in the model with the acceptance date as the event
window. The coefficient is 0.0042 and statistically significant at the 1% level for the models
with an event window of (-1, 1) and (-3, 3) respectively. This indicates that Swedish
small-capitalization firms generally earned higher returns than Danish firms during this
period. No clear conclusions can be drawn about the other two samples. The majority of the
interaction dummies are negative, indicating that Swedish firms in the sub-samples earned
negative returns during the event windows. However, most are insignificant. The interaction
effect for large-capitalization firms for the event window (-1, 1) is -0.0055 and statistically
significant at the 5% level. The results from these OLS regressions show that it likely was the
stock returns from the large-capitalization segment that contributed to the negative value on
the coefficient on the interaction effect in the pooled sample for the event window (-1, 1).
       Overall, there seems to be a mixed reaction given that some coefficients are positive
for the large and mid-capitalization firms, while the rest are negative. For both small and
mid-capitalization firms, the results are statistically insignificant, regardless of the event
window used. The results from the OLS regression suggest a possible heterogeneous reaction,
but overall little evidence that there was a large reaction. Like the regression for the all share
sample, the sub-sample regressions too have problems with heteroscedasticity, see results in
the appendix Table XXII.

                                                                         21
                                    Table IX
                         OLS Regressions: Sub-Samples
The table presents the OLS regressions with firm controls for the sub-samples over the period April 14, 2018 to
August 14, 2018. The regression estimated is: 𝑌   = β + β * 𝑍    + β * 𝐷1 + β * 𝐷2  + β * 𝐷1 * 𝐷2 + ε . The
                                                             𝑖,𝑡     0     𝑖    𝑖,𝑡−1     1      𝑖     2      𝑖    3      𝑖      𝑖    𝑖,𝑡
sample includes daily stock returns and data on firm characteristics. The dependent variable is daily stock
returns. SSE equals one for firms that are traded on the Stockholm Stock Exchange. The table provides an
overview of the regression results for each of the three samples on the acceptance day June 14, 2018 (1), on the
acceptance day ± 1 trading days (2) and on the acceptance day ± 3 trading days (3).

    B. Fixed Effects Model without Firm Controls
       Next, we run a fixed effects model without firm controls, as specified in regression
III. The results are presented in Table X. We begin with the pooled sample and use the same
time period as above. The dependent variable is the daily stock return. Our primary variable
of interest is the interaction effect, which captures the potential return differential between
Swedish and Danish firms for our event windows when the reduction in the corporate tax rate
was accepted. As seen in Table X, the coefficient on the interaction effect is significant for
the second and third event window (-1, 1) and (-3, 3) respectively. This is similar to the OLS
model, but we can note that the magnitude has decreased on both coefficients. Overall, the
results from the fixed effects regressions without firm controls suggest that the reduction in
the corporate tax rate resulted in a negative stock market reaction.

                                                                         22
                                    Table X
                    Fixed Effects without Firm Controls: All Shares
The regression estimated for all stocks is: 𝑌𝑖,𝑡 = β0 + β1 * 𝐷1𝑖 + β2 * 𝐷2𝑖 + β3 * 𝐷1𝑖 * 𝐷2𝑖 + ν𝑖 + ε𝑖,𝑡 . The table
provides an overview of the regression results on the acceptance day (1), on the acceptance day ± 1 trading days
(2) and on the acceptance day ± 3 trading days (3).

       We run regression III on our sub-samples to see whether there is a statistically
significant reaction and whether it is heterogeneous across the samples. The results are
presented in Table XI. The majority of the coefficients for the interaction effect are negative,
however, there are some with a positive direction which suggests that there was a
heterogenous stock market reaction. We note that the interaction coefficient is significant at
the 5% level for the second event window (-1, 1) for the mid-capitalization segment, and the
second and third event window for the small-capitalization segment, (-1, 1) and (-3, 3) at the
5% and 1% level respectively. This is different from the OLS regressions where there was
only one significant interaction coefficient, which was on the second event window for the
large-capitalization segment. Taken together, there seem to be mixed results given that some
coefficients are positive, however as the majority of the interaction coefficients were negative
and the only statistically significant interaction effects were negative, the results indicate that
there was a negative stock market reaction for the Swedish firms in the sub-samples.
                                    Table XI
                 Fixed Effects without Firm Controls: Sub-Samples
The regression estimated for all stocks in each sample is: 𝑌   = β + β * 𝐷1 + β * 𝐷2  + β * 𝐷1 * 𝐷2 + ν + ε   .
                                                                      𝑖,𝑡     0     1     𝑖     2     𝑖    3     𝑖     𝑖    𝑖    𝑖,𝑡
The table provides an overview of the regression results on the acceptance day (1), on the acceptance day ± 1
trading days (2) and on the acceptance day ± 3 trading days (3).

    C. Fixed Effects Model with Firm Controls
       As previously stated we increasingly add variables to our regressions. Therefore, we
run regression IV, which is the fixed effects model that includes firm controls. The results are
presented in Table XII. Again, we begin with the pooled samples for Sweden and Denmark
over the period April 2018 to August 2018. The dependent variable is the daily stock return.
Our primary variable of interest is the interaction effect, which captures the potential return
differential between Swedish and Danish publicly traded firms for our three event windows.
The coefficient on the interaction effect is still significant for the second and third event
window, however, the magnitude and significance have decreased. The firm control of MTB
and Tobin’s Q are statistically significant at the 0.1% level, indicating that they have

                                                                         23
explanatory value. This is however likely because these firm controls depend on the stock
price, whilst the other firm controls depend on variables with relatively infrequent changes.
Overall, the coefficients on the interaction effect are all negative and although the magnitude
has decreased, the coefficients on the second and third window are still significant. This
suggests that there was a negative stock market reaction. The F-statistic is significant at the
5% level which suggests that our firm controls should be included as they are jointly
significant in explaining the dependent variable. Given the issues with heteroscedasticity, we
have used robust standard errors when reporting the regression results. For the industry fixed
effects regressions reported in the appendix Table XXV, we see that the interaction effect on
the second and third event windows, (-1, 1) and (-3, 3) are significant at the 5% and 0.1%
level respectively. In the firm fixed effects regression, we see similar results but the
interaction effect on the third event window has a lower significance. One difference is that in
the firm fixed effects regression we note that both MTB and Tobin’s Q are statistically
significant control variables, whereas in the industry fixed effects regression only MTB is
significant.
                                     Table XII
                     Fixed Effects with Firm Controls: All Shares
The regression estimated for all stocks is: 𝑌𝑖,𝑡 = β0 + β𝑖 * 𝑍𝑖,𝑡−1 + β1 * 𝐷1𝑖 + β2 * 𝐷2𝑖 + β3 * 𝐷1𝑖 * 𝐷2𝑖 + ν𝑖 + ε𝑖,𝑡 . The
table provides an overview of the regression results on the acceptance day (1), the acceptance day ± 1 trading
days (2) and on the acceptance day ± 3 trading days (3). The results are reported with robust standard errors.

       We run the same fixed effects regression but for our sub-samples. The results are
presented in Table XIII. The firm controls contribute to differences in the coefficient
estimates and the significance of the interaction effect. We note that the magnitude of all
coefficients for the interaction effects decreases and the coefficient of the interaction effect
for the second event window in the small-capitalization segment becomes insignificant.
Moreover, given the mixed directions on the coefficient estimates, the results from the
regression suggest that there were heterogeneous reactions across sub-samples. Still, the only
statistically significant coefficients have negative directions, which suggests that there was a
negative stock market reaction that subsequently led Swedish firms to earn lower returns
compared to the Danish firms during these event windows. We note that only the F-statistic
for the large-capitalization segment is significant. Although the F-statistic still is insignificant
for the other models, it has increased. Overall, this suggests that the firm controls should be
included for the large-capitalization regressions, but that they do not add much value to the
regressions. Again, given the issues with heteroscedasticity, we have used robust standard
errors when reporting the regression results for the sub-samples as well. For the industry
fixed effects regressions, we note that the interaction effect is significant for all windows in
the large-capitalization segment. The first window is significant at the 5% level and is 0.003,
and the two other coefficients are significant at the 0.1% level and are 0.005 and 0.003
respectively. In the firm fixed effects regressions they are insignificant and have a lower

                                                                         24
magnitude at 0.0006, -0.0024, and 0.0014. We also note that there is no significant interaction
coefficient for the small and mid-capitalization segments in the industry fixed effects. In the
industry fixed effects regressions, we see that the control variables are highly significant for
the large-capitalization segment and some for the mid-capitalization segment, but they are
insignificant when we introduce firm fixed effects. Overall, we attribute these results to firm
fixed effects being more robust, meaning that they control for more. The results are presented
in appendix Table XXVI.
                                     Table XIII
                    Fixed Effects with Firm Controls: Sub-samples
The regression estimated for all stocks in each respective sub-sample (large, mid and small-capitalization) is:
𝑌𝑖,𝑡 = β0 + β𝑖 * 𝑍𝑖,𝑡−1 + β1 * 𝐷1𝑖 + β2 * 𝐷2𝑖 + β3 * 𝐷1𝑖 * 𝐷2𝑖 + ν𝑖 + ε𝑖,𝑡 . The table provides an overview of the regression
results on the acceptance day (1), on the acceptance day ± 1 trading days (2) and on the acceptance day ± 3
trading days (3).The results are reported with robust standard errors.

       From the regression output for the all shares fixed effects regression with firm
controls, we note that the MTB and Tobin's Q are highly significant. Both have a positive
direction, but a magnitude that is close to zero. It is worth noting that they are the only firm
controls that directly depend on the share price, which might explain their significance as
they will have the most variability. The low significance of the other control variables might
be due to three reasons. Firstly, there might be too little variability in the firm controls.
Secondly, they might simply not be appropriate controls for explaining the variation in
returns. Thirdly, the variability in the sub-samples might work against each other such that
they become insignificant on an aggregate level.
       Moving on to the sub-samples, we note that MTB is significant for both the large and
small-capitalization segments. The estimates have a positive direction, but similar to the all
shares sample, the estimates have a magnitude near zero. Upon examining the sub-samples,
we do note some cross-sample differences. Tobin's Q is significant for the
small-capitalization segment only and it has a positive direction. Moreover, for the
mid-capitalization segment, tangibility is statistically significant and has a negative direction,
which differs from the large-capitalization segment which has a positive direction on the
same firm control. Moreover, ROA has a small positive impact on returns in the
mid-capitalization segment, while the sign is negative for large-cap firms, though
insignificant. This may in turn give rise to heterogeneous stock market reactions.
        Overall, our results suggest that there might be differences in the firm characteristics
for the different sub-samples such that it leads to different reactions to a reduction in the
corporate tax rate. The results suggest that the acceptance of the tax rate reduction might have
had a heterogeneous impact across firms given the mixed direction of the coefficients for the
interaction effect. Moreover, the market seemingly reacted either the days prior to the
acceptance or it had a sluggish reaction given that the coefficient on the interaction effect was
insignificant on the actual acceptance date, but significant for our broader event windows.
Still, the results from the pooled sample and the sub-samples ‘suggests that there generally

                                                                         25
was a negative stock market reaction given that the few statistically significant coefficients
for the interaction effect were negative. The other coefficients were insignificant to a large
extent. Besides controlling for firm fixed effects, we also investigated the reaction using
industry fixed effects. The industry fixed effects regressions suggest that there was a
significant reaction on the acceptance day for the large capitalization, but not for the other
two segments.
       As previously mentioned, Doidge and Dyck (2015) present three main challenges
when empirically studying tax effects: the change should be dramatic, largely unanticipated,
and not contaminated by other events. A reason behind our statistically insignificant results
might be that the reduction is too small. The event studied is a reduction amounting to 1.4
percentage points, compared to for instance Doidge and Dyck who studied a change of 31.5
percentage points and Cutler (1988) who studied a change of 12 percentage points. The small
magnitude of the reduction may be difficult to distinguish from noise, such as news and other
changes occurring concurrently. To control for this, we will run a series of permutation tests.
Moreover, the acceptance of the tax change might have been anticipated by the market,
meaning that it might have already been priced in during the time it was debated and that
only little uncertainty was resolved upon the acceptance of the proposal. Alternatively, if a lot
of uncertainty remained, it might have ultimately been resolved upon the actual
implementation day. This may have caused us to observe only a small market reaction on the
acceptance day, but not one significant enough to create statistically significant results. In the
following section, we will conduct a series of robustness checks to examine if there was a
reaction in the Swedish stock market upon the suggestion date and the implementation date.
For these regressions, we will use firm fixed effects and include firm controls given the
statistically significant F-statistic.
                             VIII. Robustness Checks
In this section, we test the validity and reliability of our results. We use an alternative
approach to estimating CAR to see whether Swedish firms indeed earned positive AR on the
announcement day, or if the results are unreliable. Moreover, we examine if the small market
reaction upon the acceptance day is the result of the implication of the corporate tax rate
reduction already being incorporated upon its suggestion, and/or if the market reacted upon
the implementation day due to the remaining uncertainty being resolved. Lastly, we will
conduct a permutation test in which we examine whether the coefficient estimates simply
capture noise, or whether they indeed are significant.

   A. Abnormal and Cumulative Abnormal Returns
       Another approach to calculating AR and CAR is used to test the robustness of our
results. The reason we study the CAR is to capture the effect of information that may have
been acquired prior to the official acceptance as well as the market reactions the days after
the acceptance. The AR and CAR are defined as:

                          𝐴𝑅   = 𝑅  − 𝐸(𝑅  |𝑋 )   (Reg V)
                                                       𝑖,𝑡         𝑖,𝑡             𝑖,𝑡    𝑡

                                                                                                                                        𝑡
                                                                                                                                          𝑦
                          𝐶𝐴𝑅 (𝑡  , 𝑡 ) =  ∑ 𝐴𝑅   (Reg VI)
                                                                    𝑖    −𝑦    𝑦                               𝑖,𝑡
                                                                                     𝑡=𝑡
                                                                                          −𝑦
𝐴𝑅  is the AR for stock i at time t, 𝑅  is the actual return of stock i at time t and 𝐸(𝑅  |𝑋 ) is
      𝑖,𝑡 𝑖,𝑡 𝑖,𝑡    𝑡
the expected return of stock i at time t. See equation 1 for the equation for the actual return.
𝐶𝐴𝑅 (𝑡   , 𝑡 ) is the CAR for stock i between time period 𝑡   and 𝑡 . After calculating the AR
       𝑖   −𝑦   𝑦                                                                        −𝑦 𝑦
we will aggregate them into CAR. Since the event affects all firms simultaneously we do not

                                                                         26
need to worry about clustering, i.e., that the event windows do not overlap. Graph III
provides a graphical illustration of the CAR. Notable from the graph is that the AR and CAR
in Sweden and Denmark seem to follow a similar development in the pre-period, but we see
that they diverge from July onwards. We see no apparent difference in AR on the acceptance
day, however, Swedish firms seem to earn relatively higher AR than Danish firms in the
post-period. Considering that the returns start to diverge from July, it is unlikely that this is a
lagged reaction to the tax rate reduction as it would strongly contradict the efficient market’s
hypothesis. It is most likely a reaction to other external events.
                                   Graph III
                         Cumulative Abnormal Returns
This graph shows the cumulative abnormal returns for Swedish and Danish firms over the period March 1, 2018
to September 1, 2018. The blue line is the CAR for the Swedish sample. The black line intersects the graphs on
the announcement day, the 14th of June, 2018.

    B. Fixed effects with firm controls: Suggestion Date
       Next, we examine the stock market upon the suggestion date and the implementation
date to see whether there was a significant reaction. We run Equation IV which is the fixed
effects regression with firm controls. Our primary variable of interest is the interaction effect
on our event windows. The coefficient is -0.0046 and insignificant on the event day.
However, we find a strong negative market reaction on the event windows (-1, 1) and (-3, 3)
trading days surrounding the suggestion day. The coefficients are -0.0063 and -0.0072 and are
significant at the 1% and 0.1% level respectively. These results imply that Swedish firms
earned lower returns than Danish firms on the days surrounding the suggestion date.
                                  Table XIV
                     Fixed Effects with Firm Controls: All Shares
The table presents the results from the fixed effect regression with firm controls for the pooled sample over the
period March 2018 to July 2018. The regression estimated for all stocks is:
𝑌  = β + β * 𝑍    + β * 𝐷1 + β * 𝐷2  + β * 𝐷1 * 𝐷2 + ν + ε   Three regressions were run were each event
 𝑖,𝑡     0     𝑖    𝑖,𝑡−1     1      𝑖     2      𝑖    3      𝑖      𝑖    𝑖    𝑖,𝑡
window respectively: the proposal day May 3, 2018 (1), the proposal day ± 1 trading days (2), and the proposal
day ± 3 trading days (3). The results are reported with robust standard errors.

                                                                         27
       We then run the same regressions for the same time period for our sub-samples. The
coefficients on the interaction effect for the three event windows are all negative, which
differs slightly from the results from previous regressions in which some were positive.
Moreover, the coefficients have a larger magnitude and the majority of them are significant.
For the large-capitalization segment, the coefficient estimates are -0.0094 and -0.0077 and
significant at the 1% and 0.1% level for event windows (-1, 1) and (-3, 3) respectively. For
the mid-capitalization segment, the second and third event windows are significant and are
-0.0067 and -0.0076 and significant at the 5% and 0.1% level respectively. For small caps, all
coefficients share a negative direction, but all are insignificant. Our results suggest a
homogeneous negative reaction across segments with all coefficients being negative.
Additionally, the negative market reaction surrounding the suggestion date is seemingly
stronger than it was for the acceptance date given the larger magnitude of the coefficients and
higher significance. Different from the previous regressions, we find that the F-statistic is
significant for all sub-samples and the P-value is always below 5%. It is the most significant
for the large-capitalization segment where the P-value is below 1% for the first model and
below 0.1% for models two and three.
                                 Table XV
                   Fixed Effects with Firm Controls: Sub-Samples
The table presents the results from the fixed effect regression with firm controls for the sub-samples over the
period March 2018 to July 2018. The regression estimated for all stocks is:
𝑌𝑖,𝑡 = β0 + β𝑖 * 𝑍𝑖,𝑡−1 + β1 * 𝐷1𝑖 + β2 * 𝐷2𝑖 + β3 * 𝐷1𝑖 * 𝐷2𝑖 + ν𝑖 + ε𝑖,𝑡  . Three regressions were run were each include
one of the following event window respectively: the proposal day May 3, 2018 (1), the proposal day ± 1 trading
days (2), and on the proposal day ± 3 trading days (3). The results are reported with robust standard errors.

       The results indicate that there was a stronger negative market reaction to the
suggestion of the reduction in the corporate tax rate than there was to the acceptance of it.
This is supported by the larger negative magnitude and higher significance of the coefficient
estimates for the interaction effect. This suggests that the market might have suspected that
the proposal would likely pass and thus instantly priced in its implications. It is however
surprising that the market reaction seems to be negative given that the motives behind a
reduction in the corporate tax rate are to attract investment and positively impact economic
growth, which suggests that there should be a positive impact on the stock returns. Thus, our
results are contradicting the expected effects of the policy.

    C. Fixed effects with firm controls: Implementation Date
       Next, we examine if we find a significant stock market reaction on the actual
implementation date of the reduction in the corporate tax rate. One challenge is that the stock
market was closed on January 1, 2019, which was when the first reduction was implemented.
(Nasdaq, 2018) Therefore, we used the following day January 2, 2019. We are aware that this
might impact the results we derive from this robustness test. Again, the coefficient estimates
for the interaction effect for all three event windows have a negative direction, suggesting

                                                                         28
that Swedish firms earned lower returns. However, the coefficient for the interaction effect
for the implementation day and the two other event windows are insignificant. Moreover, we
observe that the coefficient for the Event variable for all windows is much higher in
magnitude compared to our previous regressions and it is significant at the 0.1% level for all
event windows. These results may be due to seasonality in stock returns. A difficulty with
examining an event window in January is that stock returns are known to exhibit seasonality.
One commonly known seasonality is the “January effect” which has demonstrated that
returns generally are higher during this month (Jones, Pearce et al. 1987; Haug, Hirschey
2006). If this effect is present and the seasonality is stronger in one of the countries, it could
interfere with our results.
                                  Table XVI
                     Fixed Effects with Firm Controls: All Shares
The table presents the results from the fixed effect regression with firm controls for the pooled sample over the
period November 1, 2018 to March 1, 2019. The regression estimated for all stocks is:
𝑌𝑖,𝑡 = β0 + β𝑖 * 𝑍𝑖,𝑡−1 + β1 * 𝐷1𝑖 + β2 * 𝐷2𝑖 + β3 * 𝐷1𝑖 * 𝐷2𝑖 + ν𝑖 + ε   .Three regressions were run were each include
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             𝑖,𝑡
one of the following event window respectively: the implementation day January 1, 2019 (1), the
implementation day ± 1 trading days (2), and on the implementation day ± 3 trading days (3). Since we had no
stock data for January 1, 2019 we used the following day January 2, 2019.

       We run the same regressions but for the sub-samples. We obtain similar results as for
the acceptance date with the majority of the coefficient estimates for the interaction effect
having a negative direction, with an exception for the positive coefficient for the event
window (-3, 3) for the small-capitalization segment. Different from the acceptance date, we
note that there are no statistically significant coefficients on the interaction effect for any
window in any sample. Again, we note that the coefficient for the Event variable is highly
significant and of large magnitude, but that it is primarily for the small-capitalization
segment. It is noteworthy that the small-capitalization segments seemingly earn the highest
returns during these event windows. The seasonality in returns may interfere with our results.
To examine the previous January performance and investigate any potential seasonality, we
have plotted the Swedish and Danish all shares indices OMXPI, and the indices for the large,
mid, and small-capitalization segments OMXLCPI, OMXMCPI, and OMXSCPI over
December 1st to March 1st for the years 2017, 2018 and 2019. For the all share and
large-capitalization indices, the Danish indices seem to show a better performance than the
Swedish equivalent. This points to that it is possible that seasonality may interfere with our
results. For the small and mid-capitalization segments, it is ambiguous if any of the countries
perform better. The results are presented in the appendix in Table XXVIII and Table XXIX.
Considering these results, we run a final fixed effects regression that includes time-fixed
effects on a monthly basis to attempt to control for any monthly seasonality. For the all shares
sample we notice that the coefficient on the interaction effects for the first and second event

                                                                         29
windows are significant. Both the magnitude and the significance increases for the
coefficients. For the sub-samples, we do not see significant differences besides a smaller
magnitude on the coefficients. We note that the F-statistic increases for the all share, large-
and mid-capitalization models, but declines for the small-capitalization regressions. The
adjusted R-square increases for the all share samples and all regressions in all sub-samples,
which signifies that it is meaningful to include the time-fixed effects. The results are reported
in the appendix in Tables XXX. and Tables XXXI.
       Overall, our results suggest that the market might have reacted slightly upon the
implementation of the reduction in the corporate tax rate due to additional uncertainty being
resolved. However, as the direction is still contrary to what would be expected and Swedish
firms systematically earn lower returns during all three event windows for all our three
events, it might be that we simply capture noise or some unobservable difference. Our
findings from investigating previous January returns and from that of the time-fixed effects
suggests that seasonality might have impacted our results. Hence, the results from the
regressions that investigate the implementation date might have been impacted by seasonality
as we find a negative reaction in the aggregate sample when we control for time-fixed effects.
Although we do not find a reaction in the sub-samples, we note changes to the coefficients.

                                  Table XVII
                   Fixed Effects with Firm Controls: Sub-Samples
The table presents the results from the fixed effect regression with firm controls for the sub-samples over the
period November 1, 2018 to March 1, 2019. The regression estimated for all stocks is:
𝑌𝑖,𝑡 = β0 + β𝑖 * 𝑍𝑖,𝑡−1 + β1 * 𝐷1𝑖 + β2 * 𝐷2𝑖 + β3 * 𝐷1𝑖 * 𝐷2𝑖 + ν𝑖 + ε𝑖,𝑡.  Three regressions were run for each of the three
sub-samples and were each include one of the following event window respectively: the implementation day
January 1, 2019 (1), the implementation day ± 1 trading days (2), and on the implementation day ± 3 trading
days (3). Since we had no stock data for January 1, 2019 we used the following day January 2, 2019.

       From the regression output for the suggestion date for the aggregate sample ROA,
Tobin’s Q and MTB are statistically significant and have a positive direction. When
examining the sub-samples we can see that the MTB ratio is significant for the large and
small-capitalization segments and that it has a positive direction. ROA is significant for the
mid and small-capitalization segments and has a positive direction. Leverage is significant for
the large-capitalization segment and has a positive direction. Tangibility is significant for the
mid-capitalization segment and has a negative magnitude. Tobin’s Q is significant and
positive for the small-capitalization segment.
       When examining the regression results for the implementation date, there is no
significant control variable for the regressions with the aggregate sample. This is different
from both the acceptance and suggestion date. For the sub-samples, the MTB ratio is
significant for the large and small-capitalization samples and has a positive direction. Tobin’s
Q is significant for all sub-samples, with a negative direction for large and mid-capitalization
segments but a positive direction for the small-capitalization segment. Tobin’s Q has a higher

                                                                         30
magnitude than during the two previously studied event dates. From all our regressions we
see differences in the coefficient estimates direction, magnitude, and significance across
segments. This indicates that the segments have different firm characteristics which could
give rise to heterogeneous reactions. This suggests that it is important to examine the
sub-samples separately to capture the different reactions which might cancel out when we
examine the aggregate sample.
       Overall, we identify stronger negative returns on the suggestion date compared to the
implementation date. We find significant interaction coefficients on both the suggestion and
acceptance dates. Thus, it is difficult to determine whether the effect of the reduction in the
corporate tax rate was successively incorporated, on both the suggestion date and acceptance
date, or whether the systematically lower returns for the Swedish firms could be attributed to
something else. Despite our efforts to try to confirm the parallel trend assumption, it is
possible that we have failed to control whether the assumption holds across other important
variables. Hence, our ambiguous results may be due to the parallel trend assumption not
holding. This would interfere with our results as the observed differences cannot be attributed
to the change in the corporate tax rate as the effect may stem from differences in other
variables. Alternatively, the significant coefficients may be the result of capturing noise. To
better assess whether we have captured noise on the acceptance day, or not, we will carry out
a permutation test to examine if we are likely to obtain our observed values on the interaction
coefficient under ordinary circumstances without any exogenous shocks occurring.

   D. Permutation Test
       As a last robustness check, we will conduct a permutation test for each of our three
event windows to investigate whether our regressions have captured a market reaction to the
tax rate reduction or noise. The distribution of our test statistic is obtained by shifting the
event window multiple times and then computing the obtained value until we have obtained
all possible values for it. This is done by running the same fixed effects regressions with the
same firm controls as presented in reg IV, with the only difference being that we shift the
dates for the event windows. Essentially, the dates of the exogenous shock are shifted to
random dates. For this test, the null hypothesis is that all samples come from the same
distribution. The distribution obtained from the permutation test approximates the possible
observed values of our test statistic under the null hypothesis. By observing where our
originally obtained test statistic falls within this distribution, we are able to calculate a
P-value, which represents the probability of obtaining our initially observed value under the
null hypothesis. The P-value is calculated as the proportion of sampled permutations that are
more extreme that our initially obtained value and with this value we can either reject or
accept the null hypothesis. In our tests, we will use a two-sided P-value as we want to see if
there was a significant stock market reaction at all, either positive or negative. Although it
was stated in our first hypothesis that we believed the Swedish stock market reaction to be
positive, we have presented support for that the reaction can be heterogeneous and other
articles have reported both positive and negative reactions, indicating that the direction of the
reaction could be either positive or negative. Moreover, our overarching research question
and our interest is to examine if there was a significant stock market reaction in any direction.
Together, this motivates the use of a two-sided P-value.
       The results from the all share sample are presented in Histogram I. One can observe
that for the (0, 0) and (-3, 3) day window, it is highly likely that our initially observed values
belong to the distribution under the null hypothesis. The three-day window (-1, 1) is however
more extreme compared to the other two windows. Still, all two-sided P-values are higher
than 5%, meaning that we cannot reject the null hypothesis. Hence, we cannot rule out that
we have simply captured noise in our regressions. See the reported P-values in Table XVIII.

                                                                         31
                                  Histogram I
                         Permutation Event Date: All Shares
The graphs show the distribution of the interaction coefficient for the event windows (0), (-1, 1) and (-3 , 3) for
the all share sample. The blue line represents the obtained coefficient value on the actual acceptance day for
each of the three event windows.

       Histogram II. presents the results from the permutation test for the sub-samples. The
results are similar to the all share sample results considering that it is primarily the three-day
event window (-1, 1) that presents the most extreme results. The P-value is significant at the
5% level for the second event window for the small-capitalization segment, but the remaining
P-values are all above 5%. For all other event windows for the other two segments, the
P-values are all higher than 5%, meaning that we cannot reject the null hypothesis. See Table
XXVIII. for the two sided P-values. Based on these results, it is likely that the observed
values belong to the distribution under the null hypothesis and we can therefore not reject that
we have captured noise in our regressions.
                                  Histogram II
                       Permutation Event Date: Sub-samples
The graphs show the distribution of the interaction coefficient for the event windows (0), (-1, 1) and (-3 , 3) for
the large, mid and small-capitalization samples. The blue line represents the obtained coefficient value on the
actual acceptance day for each of the three event windows.

                                                                         32
                                   Table XVIII.
                               Two-Sided P-Value
The table reports the two-sided p-values obtained from the permutation tests above.

                                  IX. Conclusion
       In this study, we examined the Swedish stock market’s reaction to the announcement
of a reduction in the Swedish corporate tax rate. Using the difference-in-difference method,
with a set of Danish publicly traded firms as our control group, this reduction provided us
with an opportunity to examine whether the market was efficient in pricing in the
implications of the reduction, as well as determine whether the stock market reaction was
homogenous or heterogenous across different segments. The results obtained from our event
study suggest that the tax change might have had a heterogenous impact across the three
groups of firms on its acceptance day, as seen from the mixed directions on the coefficient
estimates on the interaction effect. This is in line with our second hypothesis. This suggests
that it might be meaningful to examine different segments of firms to better understand the
implications of a reduction in the corporate tax rate. However, the results are ambiguous
given that the coefficients were insignificant to a large extent. We are thus unable to confirm
with certainty if there was a significant stock market reaction. We can therefore not confirm
our first hypothesis as we cannot find evidence that supports that there was a positive stock
market reaction. Our results are not in line with our third hypothesis as we find that the
largest stock reaction is on the suggestion day. Overall, we do not find support for a strong
stock market reaction to the reduction in the corporate tax rate on its acceptance day. This
was further indicated by our permutation tests as the results showed that we most likely
captured noise on the acceptance day for the majority of the sub-samples and event windows.
Although the P-value was below 5% for the second window for the small-capitalization
segment, we concluded in the country comparison that we did not find strong support for the
parallel trend assumption holding for this group. In other words, our regressions likely
captured noise, or the reaction was difficult to distinguish from other events.
       Other papers, such as Cutler (1998), Doige and Dyck (2015) and Wang and Macy
(2021), have expressed difficulties with studying the impact of tax-related changes due to the
challenges posed by other interfering events, as well as the importance of the change being
unanticipated and having a large magnitude. Given our thorough data cleaning process aimed
at eliminating sources that could distort or in any way interfere with our results, our large
dataset with at least as many firms and observations as other papers that have shown results,
and a comprehensive methodology that examined the parallel trend assumption for both for
the pooled sample and our sub-samples, we argue that if there had been a significant impact
on the Swedish stock market, we would have been able to detect it. However, our study did
face limitations that might have impacted our results. The main limitations constitute the
nature of the tax rate reduction, as it was small in magnitude compared to what previously
have been studied and because it might have been anticipated. Moreover, we must
acknowledge that a possible limitation of our study is that the sample of Danish publicly
traded firms might have been an inappropriate choice of control group as is it possible that
they differed across other variables that we did not examine. One last limitation is that we
cannot remove the impact of noise, such as news, on the financial market. We investigated
what news articles that were published on the event day, and articles relating to inflation and
rates might have impacted our results, see the appendix Table XXI. The above mentioned
reasons may have impacted our ability to obtain relevant results.

                                                                         33
       Finally, our study contributes to the literature that examines how tax policies and
changes to the tax system impact the stock market by suggesting that it may be meaningful to
examine refined samples based on market capitalization to better understand the effect of the
policies. Given the different characteristics of firms in these different sub-samples, it may
enable researchers to uncover potential heterogeneous reactions and effects in responses to
these policies. Moreover, the results from our study indicate that it might not be fruitful to
examine smaller corporate tax changes as it might be difficult to isolate the stock market
reaction to the tax news from other noise. Hence, future researchers should concentrate on
larger tax changes to be able to derive more meaningful results.
       Further extensions to this study would be to examine the long-term effects of the
change to the corporate tax rate and how it may impact corporate decision making differently
in the different sub-samples. This would further contribute to our understanding of how
various policies and tax-related changes impact firms and how it might impact them
differently depending on their segment belonging.

                                                                         34
                                   References
Literature
Angrist, J. D., & Pischke, J.-S. (2009). Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist
Companion. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Berk, J. B., & DeMarzo, P. M. (2019). Corporate finance (Fifth edition, Global ed.). Boston,
Mass. ; London: Pearson.

Bokföringsnämnden (2022), K-regelverk, Available at:
https://www.bfn.se/redovisningsregler/vagledningar/k-regelverk/, (Accessed: 2022-10-23)

Business Sweden (2022), Corporate Tax In Sweden, Available at:
https://www.business-sweden.com/globalassets/services/learning-center/establishment-guides
/corporate-tax-in-sweden.pdf (Accessed: 2022-10-01)

Čábelková, I., & Strielkowski, W. (2013). Is the level of taxation a product of culture? A
cultural economics approach. Society and Economy, 35(4), 513-529.
doi:10.1556/SocEc.2013.0007

Cummins, J. G., Hassett, K. A., & Hubbard, R. G. (1996). Tax reforms and investment: A
cross-country comparison. Journal of Public Economics, 62(1), 237-273.
doi:10.1016/0047-2727(96)01580-0

Cutler, D. M. (1988). Tax reform and the stock market: An asset price approach. American
Economic Review, 78(5), 1107. Retrieved from
http://ez.hhs.se/login?url=https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&AuthType=ip
&db=bsu&AN=4507585&site=ehost-live

Dimensional (2020), Can Small Cap Stocks Weather the Storm?, Available at:
https://www.dimensional.com/us-en/insights/can-small-cap-stocks-weather-the-storm,
(Accessed: 2022-10-27)

Doidge, C., & Dyck A. (2015). Taxes and corporate policies: Evidence from a quasi natural
experiment. The Journal of Finance, 70(1), 45-89. doi:https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12101
European Central Bank (2020), Economic consequences of high public debt: evidence from
three large scale DSGE models, Available at:
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecb.wp2450~e008f3b9ae.en.pdf (Accessed:
2022-10-03)

European Commission (2016), The Anti Tax Avoidance Directive, Available at:
https://taxation-customs.ec.europa.eu/anti-tax-avoidance-directive_en, (Accessed:
2022-09-30)

Eur-Lex (2016), Council Directive: laying down rules against tax avoidance practices that
directly affect the functioning of the internal market, Available at:
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX%3A32016L1164&fro
m=NL (Accessed: 2022-09-30)

                                                                         35
Faccio, M., & Xu, J. (2015). Taxes and capital structure. Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis, 50(3), 277-300. doi:10.1017/S0022109015000174

Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (1992). The cross-section of expected stock returns. The Journal
of Finance, 47(2), 427-465. doi:10.2307/2329112

Folketinget (2019), Regeringer siden 1953, Available at:
https://www.ft.dk/da/folkestyret/regeringen/regeringer-siden-1953, (Accessed: 2022-10-05)

Geert Hofstede, Country comparison graphs, Available at:
https://geerthofstede.com/country-comparison-graphs/ (Accessed: 2022-10-06)

Gibson, C. B., Kirkman, B. L., & Lowe, K. B. (2006). A quarter century of "culture's
consequences": A review of empirical research incorporating hofstede's cultural values
framework. Journal of International Business Studies, 37(3), 285-320.
doi:10.1057/palgrave.jibs.8400202

Grossman, G. M., & Helpman, E. (2015). Globalization and growth. The American Economic
Review, 105(5), 100-104. Retrieved from https://www.jstor.org/stable/43821859

Guceri, I., & Albinowski, M. (2021a). Investment responses to tax policy under uncertainty.
Journal of Financial Economics, 141(3), 1147-1170. doi:10.1016/j.jfineco.2021.04.032

Guceri, I., & Albinowski, M. (2021b). Investment responses to tax policy under uncertainty.
Journal of Financial Economics, 141(3), 1147-1170.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2021.04.032

Haug, M., & Hirschey, M. (2006). The january effect. Financial Analysts Journal, 62(5),
78-88. doi:10.2469/faj.v62.n5.4284

Heider, F., & Ljungqvist, A. (2015). As certain as debt and taxes: Estimating the tax
sensitivity of leverage from state tax changes.Journal of Financial Economics, 118(3),
684-712. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2015.01.004

Jones, C. P., Pearce, D. K., & Wilson, J. W. (1987). Can tax-loss selling explain the january
effect? A note. The Journal of Finance, 42(2), 453-461. doi:10.2307/2328262

Karpavičius, S., & Yu, F. (2017). The impact of interest rates on firms' financing policies.
Journal of Corporate Finance, 45, 262-293.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcorpfin.2017.05.007

Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark (2021), Facts about taxation in Denmark, Available
at:
https://ticaret.gov.tr/data/5b8a43355c7495406a22759f/Invest-in-Denmark-fact-sheet-Taxatio
n-in-Denmark-2021.pdf, (Accessed: 2022-10-01)

Nasdaq, Historical Prices OMXSPI, OMX STOCKHOLM_PI, Available at:
https://www.nasdaqomxnordic.com/indexes/historical_prices?Instrument=SE0000744195
(Accessed 2022-10-15)

                                                                         36
Nasdaq (2018), Trading Calendar 2019-2021, Available at:
https://www.nasdaq.com/docs/fixed-income-trading-calendar_2019-2021.pdf (Accessed:
2022-11-09)

Nasdaq (2021), The Impact of Corporate Tax Rates on Global Competitiveness and Economic
Growth, Available at:
https://www.nasdaq.com/articles/the-impact-of-corporate-tax-rates-on-global-competitiveness
-and-economic-growth-2021-02-05 (Accessed: 2022-11-07)

OECD (2011), What is a Competitive Tax System?, Available at:
https://www.oecd.org/ctp/48193714.pdf (Accessed: 2022-11-07)

Regeringen (2018), Nya skatteregler för företagssektorn, Available at:
https://www.regeringen.se/49550b/contentassets/e2c0b5d85e4c4efe80ecfb66268f580c/nya-sk
atteregler-for-foretagssektorn.pdf (Accessed: 2022-10-02)

SVT (2020), Socialdemokraterna i Danmark splittrar S i Sverige, Available at:
https://www.svt.se/nyheter/inrikes/s-i-danmark-splittrar-s-i-sverige (Accessed: 2022-10-05)

Tillväxtanalys (2020), Svenska koncerner med dotterbolag i utlandet 2018, Available at:
https://www.tillvaxtanalys.se/publikationer/statistik/statistikserien/2020-08-27-svenska-konce
rner-med-dotterbolag-i-utlandet-2018.html (Accessed: 2022-11-25)

Wagner, A. F., Zeckhauser, R. J., & Ziegler, A. (2018). Company stock price reactions to the
2016 election shock: Trump, taxes, and trade. Journal of Financial Economics, 130(2),
428-451. doi:10.1016/j.jfineco.2018.06.013

Wang, H., & Macy, A. (2022). Thanks, neighbor! stock market experience around significant
European tax cuts. EuroMed Journal of Business, 17(1), 117-132.
doi:10.1108/EMJB-05-2020-0045

                                                                         37
Appendix
                                   Table XVIII.
   The table reports the t-statistics and P-values obtained from Welch’s t-test that investigated the difference in
                      means for the variables and ratios for the Swedish and Danish firms.

                                   Table XIX.
The table provides the definition of the accounting variables downloaded from Compustat that were used to
create the firm specific control variables.

                                   Table XX.
   The table provides the definition of the firm control variables used in the OLS and fixed effects regressions.

                                                                         38
                                   Table XXI.
The table shows some of the major headlines on 14 June 2018, which was the acceptance date of the corporate
tax rate reduction. The second column provides an english translation of the headlines provided in Swedish.

                                            Table XXII.
                   Breush-Pagan Test: OLS With Firm Controls
The table shows the results from the BP-test performed on the OLS models with firm controls. The null
hypothesis is that the error variances are all equal.

                                   Table XXIII.
                Breush-Pagan Test: Fixed Effects With Firm Controls
The table shows the results from the BP-test performed on the fixed effects models with firm controls. The null
hypothesis is that the error variances are all equal.

                                  Table XXIV.
The table shows the industry definitions used to classify firms into an industry. Each firm’s 2-digit SIC-code
was used as a basis for classification for industry belonging.

                                                                         39
                                 Table XXV.
                           Industry Fixed Effects: All Shares
The regression estimated for all stocks is: 𝑌𝑖,𝑡 = β0 + β1 * 𝐷1𝑖 + β2 * 𝐷2𝑖 + β3 * 𝐷1𝑖 * 𝐷2𝑖 + ɣ𝑖 + ε𝑖,𝑡 . The table
provides an overview of the regression results on the acceptance day (1), on the acceptance day ± 1 trading days
(2), and on the acceptance day ± 3 trading days (3). ɣ is the industry fixed effect.

                                 Table XXVI.
                        Industry Fixed Effects: Sub-Samples
The regression estimated for all stocks is: 𝑌𝑖,𝑡 = β0 + β1 * 𝐷1𝑖 + β2 * 𝐷2𝑖 + β3 * 𝐷1𝑖 * 𝐷2𝑖 + ɣ𝑖 + ε𝑖,𝑡 . The table
provides an overview of the regression results on the acceptance day (1), on the acceptance day ± 1 trading days
(2), and on the acceptance day ± 3 trading days (3). ɣ is the industry fixed effect.

                                 Table XXVII.
                            AR and CAR
          The table shows the results from the AR and CAR regressions for the Swedish sub-samples.

                                                                         40
                                 Table XXVIII.
                    January effect: OMXCPI and OMXSPI
The graphs show the stock indices development over the period December 1st to March 1st for the years 2017,
2018 and 2019. The Danish index OMXCPI is in red and Swedish index OMXSPI is in blue. The grey area
marks the month of January.

                                 Table XXIX.
                            January effect: Sub-samples
The graphs show the stock indices development over the period December 1st to March 1st for the years 2017,
2018 and 2019. The Danish indices OMXCLCPI, OMXCMCPI and OMXCSCPI are the red graphs. The
Swedish indices OMXSLCPI, OMXMCPI and OMXSSCPI are the blue graphs. The grey area marks the month
of January.

                                                                         41
                                Table XXX.
                       Firm and Time Fixed Effects: All Shares
The table shows the output for the fixed effects regressions with both firm and time fixed effects over the period
November 1, 2018 to March 1 2019. A dummy was estimated for December, January and February. Three
regressions were run where each include one of the following event window respectively: the implementation
day January 1, 2019 (1), the implementation day ± 1 trading days (2), and on the implementation day ± 3
trading days (3). Since we had no stock data for January 1, 2019 we used the following day January 2, 2019.

                                 Table XXXI.
                     Firm and Time Fixed Effects: Sub-Samples
The table presents the results from the fixed effects regressions with both firm and time fixed effects over the
period November 1, 2018 to March 1 2019. A dummy was estimated for December, January and February.
Three regressions were run for each of the three sub-samples and were each include one of the following event
window respectively: the implementation day January 1, 2019 (1), the implementation day ± 1 trading days (2),
and on the implementation day ± 3 trading days (3). Since we had no stock data for January 1, 2019 we used the
following day January 2, 2019.

                                                                         42