WHEN RUSSIA TURNED OFF
THE TAP TO EUROPE

AN EVENT STUDY OF THE EUROPEAN STOCK MARKET
REACTION DURING NORD STREAM PIPELINE
ANNOUNCEMENTS

SOFIA LUNDQUIST

KARIN ÖSTERBERG

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2022
When Russia Turned Off the Tap to Europe : An Event Study of the European Stock
Market Reaction During Nord Stream Pipeline Announcements
Abstract:
   We use three events related to the Russian gas supply to Europe from Nord Stream
   pipelines as potential exogenous shocks to test political uncertainty and its effect on asset
   pricing. Investigating stock returns of firms in the STOXX Europe 600 index, we do not
   find consistent evidence of firms more exposed to Nord Stream or Russia experiencing
   more negative stock returns following the events. We cannot be certain what explanation
   drives our results; thus, we cannot add insight to other studies in terms of priced political
   risk. For future event studies, we highlight the notion of considering earlier related events
   as well as difficulties to capture the exogenous shocks during periods of economic and
   political turbulence.
Keywords:
   Political Uncertainty, Nord Stream, Exogenous Shock, Stock Returns, STOXX Europe 600
Authors:
   Sofia Lundquist (24828)
   Karin Österberg (24621)
Tutors:
   Marieke Bos, Deputy Director, Swedish House of Finance Researcher, Swedish House of
   Finance
Examiner:
   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance
Acknowledgements:
   We direct our gratitude toward Marieke Bos for her guidance, valuable feedback, and
   insightful advice.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Sofia Lundquist and Karin Österberg, 2022

                                     1
1. Introduction

In February 2022 Russia invaded Ukraine which significantly impacted international trade in
Europe. One crucial import from Russia to Europe is the supply of natural gas through the Nord
Stream pipelines. Before the Russia-Ukraine war, Europe imported around 40% of its gas
supply from Russia. Thus, shortages in supply from Russia would essentially have economic
and political implications (Di Bella, Flanagan, Foda, Maslova, Pienkowski, Stuermer and
Toscani, 2022). We examine three different events related to Nord Stream and their effect on
the European stock market by examining firms in the STOXX Europe 600 index. The three
events assumably increase political uncertainty and create exogenous shocks with implications
on asset pricing. We consider the impacts of three potential exogenous shocks by applying
methodologies used in the article The impacts of political uncertainty on asset prices: Evidence
from the Bo scandal in China (2017) written by Liu, Shu, and Wei.
             The energy dependency between Europe and Russia strengthened in 2011 with
the opening of the Nord Stream 1 pipeline. The pipeline was constructed to connect natural gas
supply from Russia to Europe. The owner of Nord Stream, Gazprom, is a Russian energy
company with the Russian state as the majority owner. In 2015, the outlining of another pipeline
project, Nord Stream 2, was initiated with the aim to increase the natural gas supply to Europe
(Financial Times, 2022). Nord Stream’s political consequences have been debated. For
example, before Germany signed Nord Stream 2, NATO warned Germany of the security
implications of a new Nord Stream pipeline (The Guardian, 2022). The certification process of
                                            nd
Nord Stream 2 was suspended on the 22  of February 2022, one day after Putin had ordered
                                                                               th
“peacekeeping” units to Ukraine (Reuters, 2022). Later, on the 19  of August 2022, Russian
Gazprom made an announcement that they would, during a three-day period, do maintenance
                                                                                   st
of the Nord Stream gas pipeline. The start date would be on the 31  of August (Reuters, 2022).
The announcement came as a surprise as they had already undergone annual maintenance of
their operations one month earlier (Politico, 2022). Leaders in Europe suspected that the
maintenance was an attempt by Russia to intentionally try to create a crisis in Europe by cutting
                                                                     st
its energy supplies (Financial Times, 2022). On the 31  of August 2022, Russia shut down the
                                                          nd
Nord Stream 1 pipeline scheduled to reopen on the 2  of September 2022 (Financial Times,
                                                   nd
2022). However, on the evening of Friday, the 2  of September 2022, Gazprom announced that
they would keep the pipeline closed until further notice. Earlier that day, a limit on the price of
Russian oil had been suggested by countries in ‘The Group of Seven’ (Financial Times, 2022).
Due to the ongoing war and increased inflation climate, the reduction of gas would create
                                                                                              th
additional pressure on a recession in Europe (Financial Times, 2022). On the 26  of September
at 02:03, there was a leakage in Nord Stream 2 and later that day the same phenomenon was
                                                                th
found in Nord Stream 1 (Aftonbladet, 2022). On the 27  of September, Swedish Prime Minister
Magdalena Andersson confirmed that detonations were the cause of the leaks and that it is most
likely sabotage (Dagens Industri, 2022). Since the reason behind the explosions is unclear,
several theories exist about their occurrence. The speculations about the gas leaks have further
threatened the political balance since they potentially increased the uncertainty of if the
                                                                                                                                              th
pipelines would ever be operating again. The events considered in this study are August 19 ,
                th                        th
September 5 , and September 27  in 2022, when there were different announcements about the
Nord Stream that possibly led to political uncertainty witnessed in the stock market.
             Due to the political tension between Russia and Europe since the beginning of the
war, the Nord Stream announcement are appealing events to examine. In this study, we define
political uncertainty to include the impact of political uncertainty, economic uncertainty and
geopolitical risk based on arguments from Baker, Bloom and Davis (2016) and Caldara and
Iacoviello (2022). We test if the three unanticipated events cause exogenous shocks that affect
political uncertainty and thus stock prices. Exogenous shocks are “unexpected or unpredictable

                                     2
events that occur outside an industry or country but can have a dramatic effect on the
performance or markets within an industry or country” (UN, 2022). The significance of the
events lies in the fact that the suspension of energy supply from Nord Stream increases political
uncertainty, potentially having implications for the trade relationship between Russia and
Europe.
             This study investigates priced political risk by examining the effect on firms in
the STOXX Europe 600 index, from three exogenous shocks to political stability. We use four
proxies to determine each firm’s policy sensitivity. The first is Energy Sensitivity which is each
firm’s reaction to policy announcements from European leaders on energy supply and prices.
The second is Russian Gas, each European country’s dependency on Russian gas, which is a
measure of the natural gas import from Russia divided by final energy consumption. The third
is Bordering which is countries whose economic and geographical zones the Nord Stream
crosses. The fourth is Trade, a country’s trade dependency on Russia, that measures total
imports and exports from Russia normalized by the country’s GDP. The last three measures are
based on countries where firms are assigned a value depending on their headquarter location.
Therefore, the research questions are:

 I. Do the events on the 19th of August, the 5th of September, and the 27th of September 2022
create exogenous shocks that have implications for political uncertainty on asset pricing?

II. Do firms that are more sensitive to energy policy announcements, are headquartered in
countries more dependent on Russian gas, bordering to the Nord Stream pipelines, and more
dependent on trade with Russia experience more negative returns for our events?

Similar to Liu et al. (2017), we use four policy sensitivity proxies to assess the implications of
political uncertainty on firms in the STOXX Europe 600 index. To examine the relationship
between asset pricing and political uncertainty, we use a univariate test and cross-section
regressions. The cross-section regressions, as well as a panel data regression, are used to
determine if firms that are more sensitive to our policy sensitivity proxies have more negative
returns following the events. To robustness check the variables, we conduct extended event
windows and fixed-effect regressions. A significance test is conducted to investigate if there
are some countries and industries more affected by the events. In addition, insights from this
study will be justified using a permutation test.
             Looking at the empirical results, the findings show large disparity. For the first
event, we find evidence of firms more sensitive to energy policy announcements having more
negative stock returns. For the second event, firms that are headquartered in countries more
dependent on Russian gas have more negative stock returns. For the third event, we find no
policy sensitivity proxy to be significant. We do not find evidence of firms bordering the Nord
Stream pipelines or depending more on trade with Russia experiencing more negative stock
returns for our events. Since our results are very different between events and variables, as
witnessed in the permutation tests, we argue that our study presumably captures noise. Thus,
we cannot provide answers to whether firms with higher policy sensitivity proxies have more
negative returns for our events. The empirical results show weak evidence for the events
creating exogenous shocks impacting the political uncertainty on asset pricing. Therefore, it is
not possible to draw conclusions about whether there is a risk premium associated with political
uncertainty, as argued by Liu et al. (2017). The reason for our results could be due to a lack of
exogenous shocks for our events or measurement errors. Potentially, investors already reacted
to speculations about the political and economic effects of Russia shutting down the gas supply,
which results in a lack of exogenous shocks in the event windows. The reason for this could be
that, compared to other studies, our event setting differs since we have many prior events related

                                     3
to our shocks. On the other hand, it might be hard to capture the exogenous shocks since we
cannot eliminate all measurement errors during a period with high economic and political
turbulence. With the results from this study, we are not certain what the explanations for the
results might be. However, the insights from this study add to the literature since we highlight
potential sources of flaws in event studies investigating political uncertainty during turbulent
periods.

2. Literature Review

We replicate the article The impacts of political uncertainty on asset prices: Evidence from the
Bo scandal in China by Liu et al. (2017), with some extensions to suit the Nord Stream events.
Liu et al. (2017) assess the unpredicted event of an exogenous shock to the political balance in
China in 2012 to establish a causal connection between political uncertainty and financial
markets. Using the methodology by Brown and Warner (1985) and daily stock returns on large
Chinese firms, the results in Liu et al. (2017) show significant decreases in stock prices around
the event window, especially for firms that are responsive to government policy adjustments.
Their findings show that there is a risk premium for political risk, created during political
uncertainty. Our Nord Stream events differ from the Bo scandal since our events have
implications for international political relationships and international trade. In this study, we
extend the article by Liu et al. (2017) by investigating other events using other political
uncertainty proxies during a turbulent period in Europe. For this study, we investigate two types
of articles closely related to our topic. First, we look at articles related to political uncertainty
on asset prices since this is the phenomenon we intend to capture with our study. Second, we
use event study articles on the Russia-Ukraine war since the Nord Stream events that we
examine are closely related to the war.
             The effect of political uncertainty on asset prices is well-examined in the
academic literature. Multiple studies investigate the impact of political uncertainty on the stock
market using historical events. Brogaard, Dai, Ngo and Zhang (2020) examine political
uncertainty on a global level by looking at elections in the US as exogenous shocks and find
that stock markets outside the US are negatively impacted by these events, indicating that
political events in one country can create an exogenous shock in another. Boutchkova, Doshi,
Durnev and Molchanov (2012) find that a firm’s sensitivity to political events varies depending
on the industry and that increased political risk results in more stock return volatility. Pástor
and Veronesi (2012) examine government policy announcements and find a negative
correlation between stock returns and policy uncertainty and in their other study, they illustrate
that political risk premiums exist (Pástor and Veronesi, 2013). Evidence from the articles will
aid in this study since the Nord Stream events arguably increase the political uncertainty among
European firms.
             Due to the essence of our events, we include articles investigating the Russia-
Ukraine war's impact on stock markets. Several papers study the period at the beginning of the
Russia-Ukraine war and its global impact on financial markets. Ahmed, Hassan and Kamal
(2022) investigate stock returns when the war emerged and find heterogeneity in how countries
and industries responded to the war event. These findings are interesting for us since we intend
to do use country-specific variables in our regressions on Nord Stream events, that are closely
related to the war. Yousaf, Patel and Yarovaya (2022) find that stock markets related to Russia
are more impacted by the economic sanctions following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, which
is valuable for this study since we examine firms’ economic dependency on Russia during the
war. Abbassi, Kumari and Pandey (2022) and Boubaker, Goodell, Pandey and Kumari (2022)
use country-specific variables in their regressions to examine if these factors impacted
abnormal returns, an inspiration for our policy sensitivity proxies. Abbassi et al. (2022) find

                                     4
their variables relating to trade dependence, as well as geopolitical risk to have negative effects
on stock returns during the events that they investigated. Similarly, Boubaker et al. (2022) find
countries with more international trade have a more negative impact on stock returns. This
indicates that using country-specific variables for these types of events can provide insightful
results and, thus, is important for our study.
             This study contributes to the literature on risk premiums associated with political
uncertainty and the literature on stock market reactions during politically turbulent periods.
First, to the best of our knowledge, there are no prior event studies examining the exogenous
impact of Nord Stream's recent events on the European stock market. The contribution is crucial
due to the high potential for future Nord Stream related events. Second, we apply new
methodologies to investigate an event related to the Russia-Ukraine war. We do this by applying
methodology from Liu et al. (2017) and other articles about political uncertainty. We contribute
to the research on the Russia-Ukraine war and stock prices by adding the dimension of risk
premiums associated with political uncertainty, an approach none of these studies have taken
before. Lastly, we contribute to the literature by testing an exogenous shock to political stability
in Europe during a turbulent period. We deviate from Liu et al. (2017) by investigating
international political events while they only looked at one domestic political event. During our
event periods, there are a lot of other things happening in Europe, thus, potentially having
effects on our results. By investing the effects of the events during a turbulent period, we
provide evidence and implications for policymakers, investors, and academia.

3. Hypothesis

According to the Efficient Market Hypothesis, the announcements of new information
impacting firm’s valuation should result in an immediate price change (MacKinlay, 1997;
Bodie, Kane, Marcus, 2021). Liu et al. (2017) test if there is causality between political
uncertainty and stock prices by using an unexpected political event, that acts as an exogenous
shock. Their study shows that increasing political uncertainty affects stock prices negatively by
requiring a risk premium. Following our Nord Stream events, we expect the stock returns to
decrease as a result of increased political uncertainty. The evidence of political uncertainty and
stock prices suggested by Pástor and Veronesi (2012) and Pástor and Veronesi (2013) also
support our hypothesis that the Nord Stream event increase political uncertainty and should
lead to a decrease in stock returns due to a risk premium associated with political uncertainty.
Therefore, our hypothesis is:

H1: The exogenous shocks of each of the three events will decrease stock returns following
the events.

As Liu et al. (2017), we argue that firms with higher policy sensitivity proxies are more
negatively affected following each announcement. We expect this if political uncertainty is
priced, as claimed by Pástor and Veronesi (2013). We use four proxies for policy sensitivity,
inspired by the ones used by Liu et al. (2017) and others.
             The first proxy is Energy Sensitivity to energy policy announcements,
corresponding to “Policy announcement” in Liu et al. (2017). It is a measure of firms’ reaction
to previous policy announcements from European leaders on energy supply and prices during
2022 (European Council, 2022). We expect firms that respond negatively to these energy
announcements to be more exposed to political uncertainty during Nord Stream events. We
measure this proxy by calculating the absolute cumulative abnormal returns for each stock on
the energy news days.

                                     5
            The second proxy relates to dependency on Russian Gas for each European
country in the sample. Prior studies (Ahmed et al., 2022) find a negative stock return effect on
countries relying on Russian gas during the Russia-Ukraine conflict. Similarly, the Russian Gas
proxy is crucial for this event since the Nord Stream events had direct impact on natural gas
supply from Russia (Di Bella et al., 2022). Each firm obtains a value based on the country of
headquarters. We argue that countries that import more Russian gas out of their total final
energy consumption will be more Russian gas dependent and thus more sensitive to Nord
Stream announcements.
             The third proxy is Bordering to Nord Stream. We believe that countries bordering
the Nord Stream pipelines are more exposed to political uncertainty. This is supported by
Brogaard et al. (2020) who state that countries physically closer to geopolitical events have a
more effect on stock returns. It is also evident for the Russia-Ukraine war, as Boungou and
Yatié (2022) argue for. Furthermore, this is emphasized in Appendix A, where we can see that
the countries that search the most on Google for the word “Nord Stream” during Q3 2022 were
those bordering Nord Stream.
             The last proxy is Trade dependency on Russia, which measures each country’s
imports and exports from Russia, normalized by their GDP. We believe that a country more
dependent on trade with Russia will be more exposed to political uncertainty stemming from
the Nord Stream events. Abbassi et al. (2022) and Boubaker et al. (2022), using a trade-to-GDP
ratio in their regression, find that trade dependence negatively affects abnormal returns during
the Russia-Ukraine war. Boutchkova et al. (2012) also find that countries more exposed to
international trade with Russia are likely to be more responsive to an increase in political
uncertainty following the essence of the events. The hypothesis is, therefore:

H2: Firms more sensitive to energy policy announcements, more dependent on Russian gas,
border either economically or geographically to the Nord Stream pipeline, and are highly
dependent on trade with Russia experience more negative stock returns following each event.

                                                          th
We hypothesize that the third event on the 27  of September 2022 results in less market
reactions since it does not have the same magnitude of effect on the European economy as the
first and second events. Russia had already shut off the pipelines, and the event should not
severely impact the economy. Following the insights from Boutchkova et al. (2012), we
hypothesize that political events with more economic implications considerably affect stock
market reactions more. Similarly, based on the argument from Pástor and Veronesi (2013), we
expect the political risk premium to be more substantial for the first and second events as these
events assumably result in higher political uncertainty. However, despite this, the third event
potentially has consequences for the political uncertainty perception related to national security,
which is a subcategory of policy uncertainty (Baker et al., 2016). Thus, we expect the event to
have some impact but not to the same extent as the first and second events. The hypothesis is,
therefore:

H3: The exogenous shock from the third event has a less negative effect on the stock returns
                                                                  nd
since the gas supply had already been shut off on September 2  2022.

                                     6
4. Data

4.1 Nord Stream Events

Liu et al. (2017) examine the relationship between asset pricing and political uncertainty on one
event date. In contrast, we investigate the effect of three events related to Nord Stream gas
pipelines. Since our three Nord Stream events differ in essence, our analysis is mainly
conducted by seeing each event separately. Doing different analyses per event is something that
other multiple-event studies have done, such as Cornett and Tehranian (1990). This study’s
                                  th                             th                                        th
main event days are the 19  of August 2022, the 5  of September 2022, and the 27  of
September 2022. In Figure 1, we provide a timeline of the three different events related to Nord
Stream. The first event we consider is when the maintenance was announced, the second is
when the gas was shut down, and the last is when there were explosions in the pipelines.
            We and Liu and al. (2017) take inspiration from Baker et al. (2016) by using
newspaper articles to investigate the events’ effects. As Liu et al. (2017), we measure the
significant impact on the political stability in the country by noting the magnitude of Internet
searches and subjectively inspecting several media article discussions. We strongly believe that
our three events dramatically increase the political uncertainty due to their effect on European
countries and the trade relationship between Russia and Europe during the Russia-Ukraine war
(Bloom, 2009).

 Figure 1. Timeline for the three events
                                                                                                         th
 The figure shows a timeline for the three events investigated in this study. The first event is on August 19  2022, the
                          th                                       th
 second is on September 5  2022, and the third is on September 27  2022. The estimation window is also included, a six-
 month period one week before the first event.

                  th
Event 1. The 19  of August 2022
                                                                        th
The first event we consider is the announcement on the 19  of August, 2022. On this date,
                                                     st
Russia announced that starting on the 31  of August, they would pause their gas supply to
                                                                      nd
Europe for the duration of three days, ending on September 2  (Financial Times, 2022).
Germany confirmed that there were no technical reasons behind the shutdown (The Guardian,
2022). The maintenance announcement created concern in the political environment since this
was the first irrational shutdown of the Nord Stream pipelines, indicating a potential political
                                                                                th
motive. Many newspaper articles highlight how the event on 19  of August increase the
uncertainty about the future supply of Russian gas and create fear for the future European
energy supply (Financial Times, 2022; CBS, 2022). Akin to the study by Cornett and Tehranian
(1990), we choose the event since it includes essential information to investors about Nord
Stream. Even more important, the event was not anticipated by the market. In the announcement
          th                                                                             nd
on the 19  of August, it was predicted that the work would be finished on the 2  of September
and that the gas supply would continue after that date (Financial Times, 2022).

                                     7
                 th
Event 2. The 5  of September 2022
                             nd
In the late evening of the 2  of September, Gazprom stated that they would indefinitely stop
the pipeline from operating (The Guardian, 2022). Since Europe is crucially dependent on gas
from Russia for their energy supply, it arguably increased the political uncertainty in Europe
                                                                      nd
(Di Bella et al., 2022). Furthermore, the announcement on the 2   of September was widely
captured in the media, which is likely to have a systematic effect on the stock market. The stock
                                                                                                               th            nd
market presumably reacted to this news on the following trading day, September 5 , as the 2
of September was a Friday, and the stock market was closed at the time of the announcement.
To examine the stock price reaction to the announcement of the Nord Stream suspension, we
                                            th
need to analyze stock returns on the 5  of September. Following the reasoning conducted in the
study by Cornett and Theranian (1990), this event also contains new information for the market.
We argue that the event was unanticipated since the announcement from Gazprom was
unexpected.

                  th
Event 3. The 27  of September 2022
                     th
On the night of 26  of September, a gas leak was reported in the Nord Stream 2 pipeline. Later,
                                                  th
on the evening of September 26 , announcements came about two additional leakages in the
Nord Stream 1 pipeline (Aftonbladet, 2022). Since the second and third gas leakages occurred
                                                   th
on the evening of September 26 , the most significant market reaction reasonably came on
                     th                                                                                                                        th
September 27 . This is also supported by the magnitude of Google searches on September 27
                                 th
(Figure 2). On September 27  it was also announced that the leakages were most likely sabotage
which greatly affected the security policy aspect (Dagens Industry, 2022). The uncertainty of
who did the sabotage have an impact on national security since it challenges the political
relationship between Russia and Europe. Like the other events, the third event was not
anticipated as the explosions came as a surprise to the world. This results in national security
policy uncertainty, a subcategory of policy uncertainty argued by Baker et al. (2016). The
events were unanticipated since no one had predicted the explosions.

 Figure 2. Graph of Google searches for “Nord Stream”
 The graph shows the amount of Google searches for the word “Nord Stream” from Google Trends for the period the 15th
  of August 2022 to the 21st of October 2022. The line is an index with the highest value of 100, indicating the time with
                                                                                th
 the highest interest for the search word. We can see a peak in searches for the 27  of September 2022.

4.2 Other Macroeconomic Events

Other macroeconomic and political announcements impact the financial markets during the
event periods. Factors influencing the economic climate in 2022 are inflation, monetary policy,
and the war in Ukraine (International Monetary Fund, 2022). These economic conditions can
impact movements in the financial markets. Therefore, we include control variables for these

                                     8
to minimize the effects of other macroeconomic factors that can create a bias for our
explanatory variables. A list of other Nord Stream events is seen in Appendix B and is included
to be sure that there are no overlapping events for the extended event windows. We look at the
macroeconomic events of monetary policy announcements, inflation levels announcements and
Putin announcements (Appendix C and D). We can see a monthly inflation announcement
                         th
happening on the 18  of August potentially impacting the first event. In the cross-section
regression, we control for the inflation event like earlier studies (Egger and Zhu, 2020; Smales,
2017), by inserting discrete values for each country to capture which country was most affected
by the announcement. The inflation data for each country is obtained from Eurostat (2022), and
the control variable is a percentage change of inflation from the previous month. Since there
are several macroeconomic events and war events during the turbulent period, it may be
challenging to separate the surprising effects of the Nord Stream shocks. However, by including
these control variables, we remove the effect of some of the other events mentioned in Appendix
C and D.

4.3 Variables

4.3.1 Dependent Variables

We obtain daily data for stock prices since these present few obstacles for the methodology
used in this study, as generalized by Brown and Warner (1985), and thus suitable to capture the
effects of the exogenous shocks. Since we investigate stock market returns in Europe, an
adequate representation of various countries and industries are the STOXX Europe 600, as
Ahmed et al. (2022). Financial information for individual firms in the STOXX Europe 600
index is collected from the S&P Capital IQ database. STOXX Europe 600 index prices are
collected from the Eikon database. Firms for which stock price data were unavailable during
the event period are excluded from the dataset. In total, the dataset consists of 576 firms for all
regressions except for the extended event windows, where there is a difference in available
stock price data. We use the same firms for all regressions to stay consistent. Throughout this
study, we ignore individual stock prices that have no data. In the estimation window, we exclude
non-trading days such as weekends. We use abnormal returns as the dependent variables to
measure the effect of the events on the financial market, following the regressions from the
article by Liu et al. (2017).

4.3.2 Independent Variables

4.3.2.1 Policy Sensitivity Proxies

Liu et al. (2017) use three proxies to measure the policy sensitivity of each firm. Similarly, we
use four proxies of policy sensitivity for each firm from STOXX Europe 600 index. The proxies
are not identical due to the disparity between the Nord Stream events and the Bo scandal in Liu
et al. (2017). Furthermore, we include an extra proxy since we believe it can have additional
explanatory value in our study. Additional motivation for the proxies comes from studies on
stock market effects during the Russia-Ukraine war and other studies (Ahmed et al., 2022;
Abbassi et al., 2022; Boubaker et al., 2022; Boungou and Yatié, 2022; Yousaf et al., 2022).
             The first proxy that we use is firms' reactions to policy announcements from
European leaders on “Energy prices and security of supply” collected from the European
Council (European Council, 2022). This relates to the “Policy announcement” measure in the
study by Liu et al. (2017). For this study, we argue that Energy Sensitivity to energy policy
announcements is a proxy for policy sensitivity. The European Union has implemented several

                                     9
policies and made announcements about the “Energy prices and security of supply” (European
Council, 2022). We find fourteen policy announcements from February to September 2022
                                                                                  th         th
(Appendix E). Furthermore, we exclude the announcements on the 10  and 11  of March since
there are monetary policy announcements and Putin announcements during those days, seen in
                                                                                                                                               th
Appendix C and D. In addition, we exclude the energy policy announcement on February 24
as we believe other factors could impact the financial market movement on this day since it
marks the start of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. We construct the variable by replicating how
Liu et al. (2017) create their “Policy announcement” variable. We do this by sorting firms based
on their absolute cumulative abnormal returns on the energy announcement day. Each firm is
then given a ranking number, with the highest ranking for firms most affected by the
announcements. The ranking number is then normalized to conversion by dividing it by the
total number of firms plus one, as Liu et al. (2017).
             The second proxy is the dependency on Russian gas for each European country.
The Russian gas dependency is measured as Russian natural gas import divided by final energy
consumption in a country. The data is collected from Eurostat (2020). A limitation of this data
is that some countries may have biased import data due to re-exports of gas from Russia (Di
Bella et al., 2022). Eurostat has data on Russian imports for all European countries in 2020
except for Austria, Denmark and the UK. For Denmark, we use gas imports from Germany to
Denmark as a proxy since they re-export all their natural gas from Russia. For Austria, we use
the share of gas supply from Russia from Statista (2021) multiplied by total gas imports from
Eurostat (2020). For the UK, we use the energy dependency data from 2019 since data from
Eurostat for 2020 is not available. Each firm is assigned to a country based on the location of
its headquarters, obtained from the Capital IQ database. Because of the broad differences
between imports of Russian gas, we standardize the variables to get a mean of zero and a
standard deviation of one.

                                                                Natual gas importedi
                   Russian gas dependencyi=
                                                            Final energy consumptioni

where Russian gas dependencyi is the dependency on Russian gas for each country 𝑖,
Natural gas imported i is the amount of natural gas imported by each country 𝑖 in 2020,
Final energy consumptioni is the final energy consumption for each country 𝑖 in 2020.
             The third proxy is Bordering to the Nord Stream pipelines. This variable is a
dummy, meaning that a country has a value of one if it is bordering to Nord Stream and a value
of zero otherwise. First, we consider countries whose exclusive economic zones the Nord
Stream crosses. These countries are Finland, Sweden, Denmark, and Germany. Furthermore,
since we want to obtain a measure for geographical bordering Nord Stream, we include
countries that border the territorial waters where pipelines are located. These are Estonia,
Latvia, Lithuania and Poland (BBC, 2022).
             The last proxy, Trade, is a measure of the trade relationship with Russia. There
are several measures for trade, and in this study, we use a variable inspired by the trade-to-GDP
ratio from the study by Abbassi et al. (2022) and Boubaker et al. (2022). This proxy is calculated
using the export and import from Russia for each country, normalized by each country’s GDP
as follows:

                                                    Importi+ Exporti
                           Trade dependencyi =
                                                  GDPi

                                     10
where Trade dependencyi is the trade dependency for each country 𝑖, Importi is the value of
imports to Russia per country 𝑖 during 2021, Exporti is the value of exports to Russia per
country 𝑖 during 2021 and GDPi is the GDP for each country 𝑖 during 2021. The variable is
standardized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. We measure trade
dependency in relative terms to avoid size-effect and to obtain a more comparable measure
between countries. All data is obtained from the TradeMap website.

 Table 1. Variables used in regressions
  The table shows and describes the variables used in the regressions and the data sources used to calculate the values of the
  variables.
 Variable Abbreviation Description Data Sources
 Cumulative   CAR1, CAR2 Cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) in percentage over     S&P Capital
 abnormal                       the three-day event window summarized. CARs are          IQ and Eikon
 return                          calculated through the market model (CAR1) and the
                              market-adjusted return model (CAR2).
 Energy       SENS Measures firm’s sensitivity to energy announcements based  European
 Sensitivity                      on firm’s cumulative abnormal returns to policy              Council, 2022
                                announcements from European leaders on “Energy prices
                                 and security of supply”. Rank firms between zero and one
                              where the highest values indicate most negative CARs.
 Russian Gas GAS Measures dependency on Russian gas for each country by    Eurostat, 2020
                                   taking total natural gas imported by Russia divided by final
                                 energy consumption per country scaled to mean of zero and
                               standard deviation of one.
 Bordering BORD Measures if a firm has HQ in a country bordering Nord      BBC, 2022
                                  Stream pipelines. A dummy variable that is one for
                                 countries whose economic zones or geographical zone are
                                     crossed by Nord Stream and zero for the others.
 Trade TRAD Measures dependency of trade with Russia for each         TradeMap,
                             country by imports and exports from Russia for each        2021
                                 country normalized by each country’s GDP and scaled to
                                          mean of zero and standard deviation of one.

 All          ALL Measures the combined policy sensitivity proxies by        NA
 Variables                       summarizing Energy Sensitivity, Russian Gas, Bordering,
                             and Trade and scaled to mean of zero and standard
                                   deviation of one.

4.3.2.2 Countries and Industries

The country that we assign to each firm is based on their primary office location or
headquarters, extracted from the S&P Capital IQ database. Countries that have fewer firms than
sixteen will be categorized as “Other countries” because they will not provide robust empirical
results stand alone, like Ahmed et al. (2022). The countries under “Other countries” are Malta,
Portugal, Poland, Luxembourg, and Austria.
             We categorize industries for all firms based on the Eikon database, similar to
Ahmed et al. (2022). From the Eikon database, we obtain eleven different industries.

4.3.2.3 Firm-Specific Control Variables

Exactly as Liu et al. (2017) we control for the firm specific characteristics: firm size (lnSZ),
book-to-market equity (B/M), leverage, return over the past week (BHR) and daily
idiosyncratic risk (IVol). All data is obtained from the S&P Capital IQ database. LnSZ is the
                                                                                          th
logarithm of firms’ market cap on the day before the first event on the 18  of August 2022.

                                     11
                                                                       th
B/M is the book-to-market value of firms based on the 18  of August 2022 market cap and
latest fully year reported book value of total common equity. Leverage is the ratio between the
latest full year reported total amount of debt and total amount of assets. BHR is the percentage
                                                                                        th
return of holding the stock from two weeks prior to the first event on the 4  of August 2022 to
                                                 th
one week before the first event on the 11  of August 2022. IVol is calculated as the standard
deviation of CAR1 daily returns of the estimation period.

5. Methodology

The methodology in the article by Liu et al. (2017) forms the fundamental pillars for this study.
To provide insights into whether the events resulted in exogenous shocks that potentially had
implications for political uncertainty on asset pricing, a univariate test and cross-section
regressions are used. To test if firms with higher policy sensitivity proxies have more negative
stock market returns on the events, the univariate test, cross-section regressions and a panel
data regression are used. To robustness check our assumptions and results, we substantiate the
findings with extended event window regressions and fixed-effect regressions. We also conduct
significance tests for countries and industries. In addition, to provide strong evidence for the
results, a permutation test is crucial.

5.1 Abnormal Returns

To measure the effect that the event has on market reactions, we begin by using the same
method as Liu et al. (2017). Calculating abnormal returns is sufficient in event studies to study
the short-term effects that news announcement has on stock returns (MacKinlay, 1997). As Liu
et al. (2017), we use an event window of three trading days around the event day [-1, 1]. The
estimation window is used to calculate the expected returns for each firm and is used in the
abnormal return calculations. Liu et al. (2017) use a six-month estimation period with the end
of the estimation period being before another scandal. The reason for this is that the other
scandal is linked to the event that they are investigating and thus, the authors want to avoid any
biases that are caused by this other event. Using the same methodology, we use an estimation
                                                   th                                th
window of six months, starting from the 11  of February 2022 to the 10  of August 2022. This
leaves a short period between the estimation and the first event window to remove anticipation
(Brooks, 2014). The estimation window is the same for each of the three events to avoid
potential biases of the contamination of the other event windows.
             Abnormal returns in Liu et al. (2017) are derived using two methods, to provide
robustness for the results. These methods are the market model and the market adjusted returns,
based on Brown and Warner (1985). In the market model, we extract coefficients of 𝛼𝑖 and 𝛽𝑖
for all firms in the dataset by using an OLS regression:

                                        𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽𝑖𝑅𝑀,𝑡 +∈𝑖,𝑡

where 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑖,𝑡 is the return for a stock 𝑖 on a trading day 𝑡 and 𝑅𝑀,𝑡 is the market index on trading
day 𝑡. The OLS regression is based on returns in the estimation window. The STOXX Europe
600 index is used as a proxy for the market return in the regression (Ahmed et al., 2022). The
coefficients from the OLS regression together with the market return from the STOXX Europe
600 index are used to calculate the expected return. Lastly, the abnormal returns in the event
window are derived by subtracting the expected returns from the realized returns. We derive
the abnormal returns for all firms in the STOXX Europe 600 index using the following method:

                                     12
                                    𝐴𝑅𝑒𝑡1𝑖,𝜏 = 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑖,𝜏 − (𝛼̂  𝑖 + 𝛽̂ 𝑖𝑅𝑀,𝜏)

where 𝐴𝑅𝑒𝑡1𝑖,𝜏 is the abnormal returns using the market model for a stock 𝑖 on trading day 𝜏.
CAR1 is derived for the event window according to:

                                            1
                                   𝐶𝐴𝑅1 = Σ𝜏=−1𝐴𝑅𝑒𝑡1𝑖,𝜏

where 𝐶𝐴𝑅1 is cumulative abnormal returns for event window [-1, 1]. Liu et al. (2017) also
uses the market-adjusted returns for calculating abnormal returns for robustness purposes. In
the market-adjusted return model, abnormal returns are derived by deducting the market return
from the individual stock’s return. We use the STOXX Europe 600 index as a proxy for the
market return (Ahmed et al., 2022). Abnormal returns are calculated as:

                                          𝐴𝑅𝑒𝑡2𝑖,𝜏 = 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑖,𝜏 − 𝑅𝑀,𝜏

where 𝐴𝑅𝑒𝑡2𝑖,𝜏 is the abnormal returns using the market-adjusted return model for a stock 𝑖 on
trading day 𝑡. CAR2 is derived for the event window according to:

                                            1
                                   𝐶𝐴𝑅2 = Σ𝜏=−1𝐴𝑅𝑒𝑡2𝑖,𝜏

where 𝐶𝐴𝑅2 is cumulative abnormal returns for event window [-1, 1].

5.2 Regressions

5.2.1 Univariate Tests

As Liu et al. (2017), we begin by doing a univariate test to measure how the market response
to the three Nord Stream events. The test will provide evidence for the magnitude and
significance of CARs around the event days, as well as if CARs depend on how policy sensitive
firms are. Firms are grouped according to their value of policy sensitivity based on the three
proxies' percentiles. The “highest” extreme group is the upper quantile, the “lowest” is the lower
quantile and the middle is the remaining quantiles. Then, we calculate CARs for each group
based on dummies for each quantile of each sensitivity proxy. The variable Bordering is not
included in the test due to its characteristic of being a dummy variable and thus not being able
to divide into extreme groups. The three proxies Energy Sensitivity, Russian Gas, and Trade
are used to group firms. The variable All Three is calculated in the same way as Liu et al. (2017)
and is a summary of all variables in the test, standardized to have a mean of zero and a standard
deviation of one and is also used to group firms. Similar to Liu et al. (2017), since there is event-
day clustering for all firms, this study could suffer from a cross-sectional correlation problem
(Kolari and Pynnönen, 2010). Hence, as Lui et al. (2017), we control for fixed effects for
industry and country as well as using two-way clustering for standard errors for country and
industry to avoid cross-sectional correlation and heteroskedasticity (Boutchkova et al., 2012;
Brogaard et al., 2020). This methodology is more suitable for this event setting since it reduces
the event-day clustering problem by creating a more restrictive t-statistic, as argued by Liu et
al. (2017). For the fixed effects we exclude one country dummy, Ireland, and one industry
dummy, telecommunication, to avoid multicollinearity. The fixed effects and two-way standard
error clustering used in this test are also applied to the following regressions throughout this
study.

                                     13
5.2.2 Cross-Section Regression

Following the next step in the methodology by Liu et al. (2017), we perform cross-sectional
regression analysis on CARs for each policy sensitivity proxies as independent variables. The
regression will add further insight into the effects of exogenous shocks on political uncertainty
and its consequences for stock pricing, following each of the events. We add control variables
for firm-specific characteristics, as in Lui et al. (2017), that are firm size (lnSZ), book-to-market
equity (B/M), leverage (leverage), return over one week (BHR) and daily idiosyncratic risk
(IVol). These variables can have an impact on stock returns and are included to aim to reduce
the omitted variable bias (Fama and French, 1992). These control variables are included in all
the following regressions in this study. Additionally, we control for some exogenous
macroeconomic factors that are happening around the same time as the event, which allows us
to potentially reduce the omitted variable bias. Following the methodology by Liu et al. (2017),
we begin by doing regressions of each proxy by itself and then on the All Variables that includes
all four proxies. All Variables is calculated the same way as in the univariate test, but now we
add all four proxies and then standardize it to mean zero and standard deviation one. Further
explanations of the proxies can be found in Table 1. We control for fixed effects for country
and industry as well as two-way clustering for standard errors are included, as in the univariate
test.

 𝐶𝐴𝑅𝑖,𝑒 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑆𝐸𝑁𝑆𝑖,𝑒 + 𝛽2𝑙𝑛𝑆𝑍𝑖,𝑒 + 𝛽3𝐵/𝑀𝑖,𝑒 + 𝛽4𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑖,𝑒 + 𝛽5𝐵𝐻𝑅𝑖,𝑒 + 𝛽6𝐼𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑖,𝑒
                 + 𝐹𝐸𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 + 𝐹𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑦 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑒
 𝐶𝐴𝑅𝑖,𝑒 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽2𝐺𝐴𝑆𝑖,𝑒 + 𝛽2𝑙𝑛𝑆𝑍𝑖,𝑒 + 𝛽3𝐵/𝑀𝑖,𝑒 + 𝛽4𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑖,𝑒 + 𝛽5𝐵𝐻𝑅𝑖,𝑒 + 𝛽6𝐼𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑖,𝑒
                 + 𝐹𝐸𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 + 𝐹𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑦 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑒
 𝐶𝐴𝑅𝑖,𝑒 = 𝛽0 +𝛽3𝐵𝑂𝑅𝐷𝑖,𝑒 + 𝛽2𝑙𝑛𝑆𝑍𝑖,𝑒 + 𝛽3𝐵/𝑀𝑖,𝑒 + 𝛽4𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑖,𝑒 + 𝛽5𝐵𝐻𝑅𝑖,𝑒
                  + 𝛽6𝐼𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑖,𝑒 + 𝐹𝐸𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 + 𝐹𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑦 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑒
 𝐶𝐴𝑅𝑖,𝑒 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽4𝑇𝑅𝐴𝐷𝑖,𝑒 + 𝛽2𝑙𝑛𝑆𝑍𝑖,𝑒 + 𝛽3𝐵/𝑀𝑖,𝑒 + 𝛽4𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑖,𝑒 + 𝛽5𝐵𝐻𝑅𝑖,𝑒 + 𝛽6𝐼𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑖,𝑒
                 + 𝐹𝐸𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 + 𝐹𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑦 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑒
 𝐶𝐴𝑅𝑖,𝑒 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽5𝐴𝐿𝐿𝑖,𝑒 + 𝛽2𝑙𝑛𝑆𝑍𝑖,𝑒 + 𝛽3𝐵/𝑀𝑖,𝑒 + 𝛽4𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑖,𝑒 + 𝛽5𝐵𝐻𝑅𝑖,𝑒 + 𝛽6𝐼𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑖,𝑒
                 + 𝐹𝐸𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 + 𝐹𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑦 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑒

5.2.3 Panel Data with Aggregate Event Windows

To further test if the events are exogenous shocks to political uncertainty, we investigate the
effect of the Nord Stream events as one phenomenon by conducting a panel data regression,
using inspiration from the article by Egger and Zhu (2020). This is an extension from Liu et al.
(2017) since they only have one event date. We believe investigating aggregated event days
will provide evidence of the effect of political uncertainty by looking at the proxies’ impact
during the Nord Stream phenomena. Using a regression with panel data allows us to increase
the power of the test through increased degrees of freedom since we can combine time series
and cross-sectional data. We do the same regression as for the cross-section regression, with
country, industry, and firm characteristics fixed effects, clustered standard errors, as well as
adding calendar time fixed effects using time dummies. We drop one event dummy variable to
avoid multicollinearity. As other articles, to capture unobserved heterogeneity and to potentially
reduce the omitted variable bias, we incorporate time fixed effects (Boutchkova et al., 2012;
Brogaard et al., 2020).

                                     14
5.3 Robustness Tests

5.3.1 Cross-section Regression with Extended Event Window

For robustness we extend the event window to investigate if the chosen event period ([1, -1])
impacts the results. This allows further insight into the effect of political uncertainty proxies on
stock returns following the events, as well as the timing effects of the potential exogenous
shocks. Following the methodology from prior event studies on the Russia-Ukraine war
(Abbassi et al., 2022; Ahmed et al., 2022), we conduct the regression by extending the main
event windows around the event days. Similar to earlier studies (Ahmed et al., 2022; Boubaker
et al., 2022), this study examines a maximum of five days around the event days ([-5, +5]). We
extend the event window to analyze the pre- and post-period around the main event. As argued
by MacKinlay (1997), the period before and after the events can be of interest since it provides
information about the expectations from investors and reaction to the announcement. Compared
to earlier regressions, all independent variables are regressed simultaneously following the
methodology by Abbassi et al. (2022), Boubaker et al. (2022) and Boutchkova et al. (2012).
We control for fixed effects for country, industry and firm characteristics as well as two-way
clustering for standard errors as in the cross-section regressions.
             Extending the event windows, we must take into consideration macroeconomic
exogenous effects happening in the same period. We control for one inflation event when they
occur during the extended event window that we are investigating. However, for European
Central Bank (ECB) announcements, there is less disparity between countries since it affects
the whole Eurozone. As there is no time dimension in each regression, we consider the ECB
announcements happening in the same period by examining the results. The ECB
announcement happens on day [+3] for the second event, meaning that the event windows [-3,
3], [-5, 5], [1, 3] and [1, 5], will be affected. Therefore, it is important to identify if there is a
large difference in these windows and the pre-event and [-1, +1], which is not affected by the
ECB announcement.

5.3.2 Fixed Effect Regression

To provide robustness for our tests of sensitivity proxies, we investigate if the variables are
sensitive to changes to the fixed effect method. The results from these regressions give us
insight into how our results would differ if we had chosen another method for fixed effects. As
in the previous regression, all variables are regressed simultaneously. Egger and Zhu (2020)
argue that in an event window, fixed effects seize all influencing factors for countries and
industries that are similar. We show the result of fixed effects by seeing how our results change
when we first only control for industries, then for countries, then for countries and industries
and lastly for industries per countries. The results from the regressions are included in Appendix
F. The results in Appendix F illustrate that our control for fixed effect in earlier regressions are
satisfactory, providing robustness for the fixed effect methodology used in this study.

5.3.3 Significance of Abnormal Returns Based on Country and Industry

Extending the methodology by Liu et al. (2017), we investigate if the abnormal returns are
statistically significant, sorting for both country and industry. Prior event studies have
conducted empirical analysis for firms in different countries and industries (Abbassi et al.,
2022; Ahmed et al., 2022). We use this as a robustness check to check for exogenous shocks in
the countries. We remove the fixed effect of country and industry and group firms in different
industries and countries to show disparities in those dimensions. The results in Appendix G and

                                     15
H shows no strong evidence of some countries or industries being more affected by the Nord
Stream events. However, to be noted, some sub-groups have very few firms and thus it might
be hard to draw significant results from it.

5.4 Permutation Test

To determine if the three events are exogenous shocks that impact political uncertainty, several
permutation tests are conducted. The permutation tests are crucial in this study since the results
will tell us if it is the noise that we are picking up in the regressions or if our event dates give
extreme coefficients for the policy sensitivity proxies. Permutation tests for three different
periods will bring insights into whether the results depend on which period we are investigating.
The permutation tests sample random event days during an estimation period and plot the
coefficients per sample. This should result in a close-to-normal distribution of values of the
coefficient on the x-axis and the number of observations on the y-axis. The permutation test
will show us whether the coefficients we use are significant by plotting each coefficient per
event; navy line for the first event, green line for the second, and red line for the third. If the
coefficients from our events are in the tails of the normal distribution, we can conclude that it
is extraordinary and that it does not appear regularly. If the coefficient is close to the mean of
the distribution, it is just random noise that we are picking up.
             For the permutation test, we use the same regression as for the cross-section
regression, thus fixed effects for country, industry, and firm characteristics as well as two-way
clustering for standard errors. We do not control for other macroeconomic events in these tests
since we use a large sample of observations. The first permutation test for each independent
                                               th                            th
variable is in the estimation window (11  of February 2022 to 10  of August 2022), the during-
war period, picking a random sample of 100 days. Since the estimation period is taking place
at the same time as the Russia-Ukraine war, we construct a permutation test for a pre-war
period. The pre-war period is the same calendar dates as the estimation window but for the
                th                         th
year 2021 (11  February 2021 to 10  August 2021), also picking in 100 random sample dates.
We use the same calendar dates for the during-war and pre-war period to control potential
seasonality, a problem Liu et al. (2017) brings up. The third test is constructed by looking at a
                                                   th                       th
three-year period before the first event (20  August 2019 to 17  August 2022) and choosing
700 random sample dates. The last test will provide additional information about how the
coefficient values have been for a longer time, including both the pre-war and the during-war
period, and give us insight into if our results show more significance if it is benchmarked to
another period. By conducting this analysis, we will be able to get a sense of whether the events
are exogenous shocks and if the regression allows us to draw conclusions about the events.

6. Empirical Results

6.1 Summary Statistics

In Table 2, the summary statistics show each variable used in the tests and regressions below.
The CARs for each event have a negative mean and are in the same size dimension as Liu et al.
(2017), implying that the political uncertainty increased after each event. The statistics indicate
that our chosen events are relevant to investigate and to make a replication of the Liu et al.
(2017) article. The summary statistics of CARs are similar, however slightly less negative
compared to the descriptive statistics in the article by Abbassi et al. (2022), examining when
the Russia-Ukraine war emerged. For the first event, the mean of CAR1 and CAR2 are -1.110
percent and -1.193, respectively, suggesting that the events result in political uncertainty as

                                     16
argued by Liu et al. (2017). In addition, the variable Energy Sensitivity is inspired by “Policy
announcements” by Liu et al. (2017) and has similar results with a mean of 0.500 and standard
deviation of 0.288, and “Policy announcement” mean of 0.431 and standard deviation of 0.280.

 Table 2. Summary statistics
 The table shows summary statistics for the different variables. Energy Sensitivity is each firms’ absolute stock price reaction to
 policy announcements about energy price and supply. Bordering is measuring bordering to Nord Stream. Trade is dependency
 on trade with Russia. Russian Gas is dependency on Russian gas. All Variables is sum of all variables. CAR1 is derived from
 the market model. CAR2 is derived from market-adjusted return model. Firm-specific control variables are firm size (lnSZ),
 book-to-market equity (B/M), leverage, return over the past week (BHR) and daily idiosyncratic risk (IVol).
       Variable Mean S.D. P25 P50 P75
   Energy Sensitivity 0.500 0.288 0.251 0.500 0.749
      Bordering 0.303 0.460 0 0 1
        Trade 0.000 1.000 -0.416 -0.344 0.0812
     Russian Gas 0.000 1.000 -0.625 -0.468 0.836
     All Variables 0.000 1.000 -0.717 -0.483 0.838
   CAR1 event 1 (%) -1.110 2.788 -2.780 -1.105 0.571
   CAR1 event 2 (%) -0.259 2.716 -1.539 -0.276 1.036
   CAR1 event 3 (%) -0.638 4.309 -2.754 -0.057 1.783
   CAR2 event 1 (%) -1.193 3.160 -3.151 -1.184 0.842
   CAR2 event 2 (%) -0.170 2.730 -1.546 -0.196 1.186
   CAR2 event 3 (%) -0.657 4.299 -2.794 0.000 1.804
        LnSZ 9.660 1.329 8.571 9.494 10.501
        B/M 0.659 0.661 0.218 0.436 0.942
       Leverage 0.243 0.151 0.128 0.229 0.342
       BHR (%) 0.880 3.555 -0.959 0.792 2.549
         Ivol 2.006 1.217 1.504 1.810 2.279

6.2 Baseline Results

6.2.1 Univariate Tests for Policy Sensitivity Proxies

Table 3 presents the results from the test with different CARs when grouping firms based on
three of the policy sensitivity proxies’ values. We look for evidence of the “highest” extreme
group being most negative and significant, as the univariate tests showed in Liu et al. (2017).
For the first event, the “highest” groups for the proxies Energy Sensitivity and All Three are
most negative and significant, with CAR1 of 1.213% (t-stat=0.261) at 1% significance and -
1.979% (t-stat=0.793) at 5% significance, respectively. Both CAR1 and CAR2 give similar
results, showing robustness for the results. The variables Energy Sensitivity and All Three in
the first event are also similar in effect size and significance as Liu et al (2017). For the second
event, the proxy Russian Gas show most negative returns for the extreme group “highest”, at
CAR1 -3.348% (t-stat=1.196) at 5% significance. The Russian gas proxy for the second event
is in line with the univariate test in Liu et al (2017). For the third event, we do not see any proxy
that is more negative for the “highest” group. This is in line with our Hypothesis 3, stating that
the last event should have less impact on political uncertainty. Liu et al. (2017) find that all
“highest” groups of policy sensitive firms had significantly negative CARs. Our results show
inconsistency of negative returns around the three events and lack of evidence for firms with
“higher” policy sensitivity proxies being more negative. This is inconsistent with Hypothesis 1
and 2 and the findings of Liu et al. (2017).

                                     17
 Table 3. Univariate tests for the three policy sensitivity proxies
  The table shows a univariate test for three policy sensitivity proxies for the three events. CARs are based on the market model
  (CAR1) and market-adjusted return model (CAR2). Firms are group based on each policy sensitivity proxy. Panel A shows
 Energy Sensitivity is each firms’ absolute stock price reaction to policy announcements about energy price and supply. Bordering
 is measuring bordering to Nord Stream. Trade is dependency on trade with Russia. Russian Gas is dependency on Russian gas. All
 Variables is sum of all variables. All Three, being the three variables summarised together. For each event, “highest” is the top
  quantile of the firms who ranks the highest corresponding policy sensitivity proxy and “lowest” is the lower quantile ranking of
  firms for each proxy. ***, **, and * indicates a statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.
                     Event 1 Event 2 Event 3
              1         2 3         1         2 3         1        2 3 (Lowest)
             (Highest)              (Lowest)   (Highest)              (Lowest)   (Highest)
 Panel A: Energy Sensitivity
 CAR1
           - 1.213*** 0.060 1.135*** -0.426 0.114 0.275 0.792* 0.696* 0.131
 (%)
            (0.261) (0.231) (0.262) (0.262) (0.228) (0.263) (0.411) (0.357) (0.413)
 CAR2
           -1.554*** 0.016 1.533*** -0.042 0.013 0.024 0.712* -0.759* 0.294
 (%)
            (0.295) (0.262) (0.295) (0.265) (0.230) (0.265) (0.411) (0.357) (0.412)
 Panel B: Russian Gas
 CAR1
             0.560 -0.432 -0.581 -3.348** 2.631** 3.210 -1.530 3.056* -9.242**
 (%)
            (1.217) (1.188) (2.855) (1.196) (1.170) (2.820) (1.889) (1.839) (4.415)
 CAR2
             0.518 -0.199 -2.162 -3.596** 2.755** 3.858 -1.662 3.313* -10.005**
 (%)
            (1.384) (1.351) (3.141) (1.204) (1.178) (2.840) (1.888) (1.838) (4.411)
 Panel C: Trade
 CAR1
             -1.105 -0.432 0.544 2.068* 2.631** 1.029 0.286 3.056* 1.101
 (%)
            (1.179) (1.188) (1.153) (1.164) (1.170) (1.140) (1.832) (1.839) (1.790)
 CAR2
             -0.715 -0.119 0.218 2.069* 2.755** 1.252 0.543 3.313* 0.973
 (%)
            (1.341) (1.351) (1.312) (1.173) (1.178) (1.148) (1.831) (1.838) (1.790)
 Panel D: All Three
 CAR1
            -1.979** -0.259 2.637** -0.901 1.271 0.365 0.814 -4.072** 1.430
 (%)
            (0.793) (1.151) (0.886) (0.787) (1.137) (0.882) (1.237) (1.778) (1.384)
 CAR2
            -1.881** -0.567 2.699*** -0.598 0.666 0.349 0.985 -4.490 1.467
 (%)
            (0.903) (1.308) (1.008) (0.794) (1.146) (0.889) (1.236) (1.776) (1.384)

6.2.2 Cross-Section Regression

Table 4 shows the results from the cross-section regression which examines the causal
connection between the policy sensitivity proxies and cumulative abnormal returns for the first
event. CAR1 for the first event shows that the only variables that have a negative impact are
Energy Sensitivity at -1.179 (t-stat = 0.459) and All Variables at -0.584 (t-stat = 0.334), at a 1%
and 10% significance level respectively. CAR2 showed similar results, illustrating the
robustness of the results.

                                     18
Table 4. Cross-sectional regression results for the first event
The table shows a cross-sectional regression for the first event. Panel A shows CARs based on the market model (CAR1).
Panel B shows CARs based on the market-adjusted return model (CAR2). Energy Sensitivity is each firms’ absolute stock
price reaction to policy announcements about energy price and supply. Bordering is measuring bordering to Nord Stream.
Trade is dependency on trade with Russia. Russian Gas is dependency on Russian gas. All Variables is sum of all four
variables. The four policy sensitivity proxies are regressed independently in separate regressions. Firm-specific control
variables are firm size (lnSZ), book-to-market equity (B/M), leverage, return over the past week (BHR) and daily
idiosyncratic risk (IVol). N are total observations in the sample. ***, **, and * indicates a statistical significance at 1%, 5%
and 10%, respectively.
Panel A: CAR from the market model (CAR1)
                       (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Energy                    ***
                     -1.791
Sensitivity
                    (0.459)
Bordering -1.055
                                     (1.216)
Trade -0.090
                                                       (0.244)
Russian Gas 0.121
                                                                      (0.313)
                                                                                                                          *
All Variables -0.584
                                                                                        (0.344)
LnSZ -0.124 -0.111 -0.117 -0.116 -0.118
                    (0.096) (0.098) (0.098) (0.098) (0.097)
B/M -0.020 -0.046 -0.042 -0.039 -0.049
                    (0.207) (0.210) (0.211) (0.210) (0.210)
Leverage 0.586 0.531 0.500 0.528 0.445
                    (0.813) (0.824) (0.826) (0.825) (0.823)
BHR 0.009 0.016 0.016 0.016 0.015
                      (0.035) (0.036) (0.036) (0.036) (0.036)
                            ***        ***        ***        ***        ***
IVol -0.306           -0.503           -0.501           -0.503           -0.463
                    (0.105) (0.094) (0.094) (0.094) (0.096)
Intercept 1.931 1.543 1.357 1.862 -0.093
                    (2.860) (2.896) (2.940) (3.014) (3.046)
N 576 576 576 576 576
          2
Adjusted 𝑅          0.087 0.063 0.062 0.062 0.066
Panel B: CAR from the market-adjusted returns (CAR2)
                       (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Energy                    ***
                     -3.259
Sensitivity
                    (0.521)
Bordering -0.286
                                     (1.412)
Trade -0.149
                                                        (0.283)
Russian Gas 0.138
                                                                      (0.363)
                                                                                                                         ***
All Variables -1.031
                                                                                           (0.398)
LnSZ -0.133 -0.120 -0.119 -0.119 -0.122
                    (0.109) (0.114) (0.113) (0.114) (0.113)
B/M 0.048 0.017 0.010 0.016 -0.003
                    (0.235) (0.244) (0.245) (0.244) (0.242)
                                                                          (continued on next page)

                                    19
Table 4. (continued)
 Panel B: CAR from the market-adjusted returns (CAR2)
                       (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
 Leverage 0.956 0.834 0.802 0.843 0.704
                     (0.925) (0.957) (0.958) (0.957) (0.952)
 BHR 0.009 0.022 0.023 0.023 0.020
                     (0.040) (0.042) (0.042) (0.042) (0.041)
                                                ***        ***        ***        **
 IVol 0.030 -0.327           -0.326           -0.328           -0.259
                     (0.119) (0.109) (0.109) (0.109) (0.111)
 Intercept 1.762 1.052 0.746 1.418 -1.834
                     (3.251) (3.363) (3.412) (3.498) (3.523)
 N 576 576 576 576 576
           2
 Adjusted 𝑅          0.088 0.023 0.023 0.023 0.034

In Table 4, the results are also confirmed by the findings from Table 3. These findings are
similar to Liu et al. (2017) in terms of effect size and significance. For the other policy
sensitivity proxies, there is no evidence of these having negative explanatory value on CARs
for the first event. Liu et al. (2017) find that all their policy sensitivity proxies were negative
and significant for both CAR1 and CAR2. Thus, the results are inconsistent with Liu et al.
(2017) since we only find a negative impact on CARs for Energy Sensitivity and All Variables.
Hence, we do not find enough evidence for the results to be consistent with Hypothesis 2. In
addition, we show disparity from Liu et al. (2017) since they find significant negative
coefficients for all their firm-characteristic control variables.
             To provide evidence for the implication on CARs for the four policy sensitivity
proxies, we in Table 5 conduct the same regressions as in Table 4 but for the second event. In
Panel A for CAR1, the coefficients that are negative and statistically significant are Energy
Sensitivity, -0.810 (t-stat = 0.472) at 10% significance, and Russian Gas, -0.869 (t-stat = 0.307)
at a 1% significance level. In Panel B for CAR2, the coefficient that is statistically significant
and negative is the one for Russian Gas. From Panel A and B, we can conclude that the
coefficient that has the most explanatory value for the second event is Russian Gas, which is in
line with the results in Table 3. The results showing that Russian Gas affect CARs negatively
is consistent with the arguments in previous articles (Ahmed et al., 2022; Di Bella et al., 2022),
arguing that the suspension of natural gas supply should have an adverse negative outcome on
firms in Europe. Since the results only show a robust negative implication from Russian Gas,
the results show low support for Hypothesis 2 and weak evidence for the other policy sensitivity
proxies negatively impacting CARs as argued by Liu et al. (2017).
             In Table 6, we conduct the same regressions as in Table 4 for the third event to
provide evidence for the implications on CARs for the four policy sensitivity proxies. In Panel
A, Trade is negatively significant having a value of -0.650 (t-stat=0.385) at a 10% significance
level. These results are supported by CAR2 in Panel B. However, since the significance level
is high at 10%, we cannot draw any robust conclusions. This is also supported in Table 3 where
we cannot see any negative pattern for Trade for the third event. The results are inconsistent
with previous articles (Abbassi et al., 2022; Boubaker et al., 2022; Boutchkova et al., 2012)
arguing that trade dependency strongly negatively affects abnormal returns during a period of
war. The results show low support for Hypothesis 2 and weak evidence for the other policy
sensitivity proxies negatively impacting CARs as argued in Liu et al. (2017).
                                                                       2
              For all three events, seen in Tables 4, 5, and 6, the adjusted 𝑅  are lower compared
                 2
to the adjusted 𝑅  for the policy sensitivity proxies in Liu et al. (2017). This could show
evidence for the low explanatory value of the policy sensitivity proxies. However, the
complicated events are not expected to be fully explained by our variables.

                                     20
Table 5. Cross-sectional regression results for the second event
The table shows a cross-sectional regression for the second event. Panel A shows CARs based on the market model
(CAR1). Panel B shows CARs based on the market-adjusted return model (CAR2). Energy Sensitivity is each firms’
absolute stock price reaction to policy announcements about energy price and supply. Bordering is measuring bordering to
Nord Stream. Trade is dependency on trade with Russia. Russian Gas is dependency on Russian gas. All Variables is sum
of all four variables. The four policy sensitivity proxies are regressed independently in separate regressions. Firm-specific
control variables are firm size (lnSZ), book-to-market equity (B/M), leverage, return over the past week (BHR) and daily
idiosyncratic risk (IVol). N are total observations in the sample. ***, **, and * indicates a statistical significance at 1%, 5%
and 10%, respectively.
Panel A: CAR from the market model (CAR1)
                      (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Energy                    *
                      -0.810
Sensitivity
                    (0.472)
Bordering 1.675
                                     (1.235)
Trade 0.303
                                                      (0.246)
                                                                                                   ***
Russian Gas -0.869
                                                                      (0.307)
All Variables -0.407
                                                                                       (0.341)
LnSZ 0.138 0.128 0.134 0.124 0.142
                    (0.099) (0.099) (0.099) (0.099) (0.099)
B/M 0.256 0.266 0.272 0.270 0.237
                    (0.213) (0.213) (0.214) (0.212) (0.213)
Leverage -1.104 -1.158 -1.083 -1.205 -1.181
                    (0.837) (0.837) (0.839) (0.833) (0.838)
BHR 0.024 0.027 0.027 0.026 0.027
                    (0.036) (0.036) (0.036) (0.036) (0.036)
IVol 0.016 -0.071 -0.075 -0.065 -0.046
                    (0.108) (0.095) (0.095) (0.095) (0.098)
Intercept -0.831 -1.015 -0.905 -1.769 -1.589
                    (1.533) (1.526) (1.536) (1.530) (1.566)
N 576 576 576 576 576
          2
Adjusted 𝑅          -0.008 -0.010 -0.010 0.001 -0.011
Panel B: CAR from the market-adjusted returns (CAR2)
                      (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Energy
                      -0.007
Sensitivity
                    (0.477)
Bordering 1.502
                                     (1.245)
Trade 0.321
                                                      (0.248)
                                                                                                   ***
Russian Gas -0.938
                                                                      (0.309)
All Variables -0.219
                                                                                       (0.344)
LnSZ 0.146 0.135 0.139 0.128 0.147
                    (0.100) (0.100) (0.100) (0.099) (0.100)
B/M 0.135 0.150 0.160 0.158 0.129
                    (0.215) (0.215) (0.216) (0.213) (0.215)
                                                                          (continued on next page)

                                    21
Table 5. (continued)
 Panel B: CAR from the market-adjusted returns (CAR2)
                       (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
 Leverage -1.299 -1.318 -1.241 -1.372 -1.323
                     (0.845) (0.844) (0.845) (0.838) (0.846)
 BHR 0.015 0.015 0.015 0.014 0.015
                     (0.037) (0.037) (0.037) (0.037) (0.037)
 IVol -0.039 -0.038 -0.043 -0.032 -0.025
                     (0.109) (0.096) (0.096) (0.095) (0.099)
 Intercept -0.664 -0.543 -0.403 -1.331 -0.900
                     (1.549) (1.538) (1.548) (1.540) (1.580)
 N 576 576 576 576 576
           2
 Adjusted 𝑅          -0.018 -0.016 -0.016 -0.002 -0.018

 Table 6. Cross-sectional regression results for the third event
  The table shows a cross-sectional regression for the third event. Panel A shows CARs based on the market model (CAR1).
 Panel B shows CARs based on the market-adjusted return model (CAR2). Energy Sensitivity is each firms’ absolute stock
 price reaction to policy announcements about energy price and supply. Bordering is measuring bordering to Nord Stream.
 Trade is dependency on trade with Russia. Russian Gas is dependency on Russian gas. All Variables is sum of all four
 variables. The four policy sensitivity proxies are regressed independently in separate regressions. Firm-specific control
 variables are firm size (lnSZ), book-to-market equity (B/M), leverage, return over the past week (BHR) and daily
 idiosyncratic risk (IVol). N are total observations in the sample. ***, **, and * indicates a statistical significance at 1%, 5%
 and 10%, respectively.
 Panel A: CAR from the market model (CAR1)
                       (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
 Energy
                     1.005
 Sensitivity
                      (0.741)
 Bordering 1.886
                                      (1.939)
 Trade -0.650*
                                                       (0.385)
 Russian Gas -0.193
                                                                       (0.486)
 All Variables -0.433
                                                                                        (0.535)
 LnSZ 0.026 0.009 0.036 0.019 0.024
                     (0.155) (0.156) (0.155) (0.156) (0.156)
 B/M -0.389 -0.363 -0.431 -0.377 -0.394
                     (0.335) (0.335) (0.335) (0.335) (0.335)
 Leverage -0.245 -0.229 -0.322 -0.220 -0.252
                     (1.314) (1.315) (1.315) (1.317) (1.317)
 BHR 0.015 0.011 0.012 0.010 0.010
                     (0.057) (0.057) (0.057) (0.057) (0.057)
 IVol 0.062 0.174 0.177 0.173 0.200
                     (0.170) (0.149) (0.149) (0.150) (0.154)
 Intercept -2.005 -1.450 -2.139 -1.742 -2.068
                     (2.408) (2.397) (2.408) (2.418) (2.460)
 N 576 576 576 576 576
           2
 Adjusted 𝑅          0.013 0.010 0.014 0.009 0.010
                                                                        (continued on next page)

                                     22
Table 6. (continued)
 Panel B: CAR from the market-adjusted returns (CAR2)
                       (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
 Energy
                     0.357 2.320
 Sensitivity
                     (0.740)
 Bordering 2.320
                                      (1.933)
 Trade -0.680*
                                                       (0.384)
 Russian Gas -0.211
                                                                       (0.484)
 All Variables -0.636
                                                                                        (0.533)
 LnSZ 0.023 0.005 0.036 0.018 0.024
                     (0.155) (0.156) (0.155) (0.155) (0.155)
 B/M -0.391 -0.366 -0.440 -0.383 -0.407
                     (0.334) (0.334) (0.334) (0.334) (0.334)
 Leverage -0.062 -0.078 -0.170 -0.064 -0.117
                     (1.312) (1.311) (1.310) (1.313) (1.312)
 BHR 0.011 0.010 0.011 0.010 0.009
                     (0.057) (0.057) (0.057) (0.057) (0.057)
                                                **       **       **       **
 IVol 0.256 0.298          0.301          0.297          0.337
                     (0.170) (0.149) (0.149) (0.149) (0.153)
 Intercept -1.872 -1.539 -2.288 -1.879 -2.410
                     (2.404) (2.389) (2.401) (2.411) (2.451)
 N 576 576 576 576 576
           2
 Adjusted 𝑅          0.012 0.012 0.015 0.010 0.012

6.2.3 Panel Data with Aggregate Event Windows

Table 7 illustrates the panel data regression that aggregates the three events to examine the
effects of the Nord Stream as one phenomenon. The only coefficient negative and significant
for CAR1 is All Variables, with value -0.474 (t-stat=0.240) at a 10% significance level. This is
supported by CAR2 in Panel B. For CAR2 in Panel B, Energy Sensitivity is negative and
significant at a 1%, however, not supported using CAR1 in Panel A. The lack of significant
negative results for the other variable is inconsistent with the findings in Liu et al. (2017), where
all the policy sensitivity proxies as well as the sum of all proxies had a negative explanatory
value on CARs. Furthermore, in the article by Egger and Zhu (2020), they find stock markets
to react negatively to events hindering trade, when aggregating all the events into one panel
dataset. Our results from the panel data regression are, thus, also inconsistent with Egger and
Zhu (2020). Even when we increase the degrees of freedom, the policy sensitivity proxies seem
to have a small impact on CARs. The lack of significant results provides low support for
Hypothesis 2 and is inconsistent with Liu et al. (2017). When examining the three Nord Stream
events as one phenomenon, we cannot identify negative effects on CARs from the policy
sensitivity proxies.

                                     23
Table 7. Panel data with aggregate event widow for the first, second and third event
In the table, we use a regression with panel data where all events days are aggregated into one event window. Panel A
shows CARs based on the market model (CAR1). Panel B shows CARs based on the market-adjusted return model
(CAR2). Energy Sensitivity is each firms’ absolute stock price reaction to policy announcements about energy price and
supply. Bordering is measuring bordering to Nord Stream. Trade is dependency on trade with Russia. Russian Gas is
dependency on Russian gas. All Variables is sum of all four variables. The four policy sensitivity proxies are regressed
independently in separate regressions. Firm-specific control variables are firm size (lnSZ), book-to-market equity (B/M),
leverage, return over the past week (BHR) and daily idiosyncratic risk (IVol). N are total observations in the sample. ***,
**, and * indicates a statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.
Panel A: CAR from the market model (CAR1)
                      (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Energy
                      -0.532
Sensitivity
                    (0.333)
Bordering 0.839
                                     (0.872)
Trade -0.147
                                                      (0.174)
Russian Gas -0.321
                                                                      (0.218)
                                                                                                                          *
All Variables -0.474
                                                                                       (0.240)
LnSZ 0.013 0.009 0.018 0.009 0.016
                    (0.070) (0.070) (0.070) (0.070) (0.070)
B/M -0.051 -0.047 -0.067 -0.048 -0.069
                    (0.150) (0.151) (0.151) (0.151) (0.151)
Leverage -0.255 -0.287 -0.303 -0.301 -0.327
                    (0.591) (0.591) (0.592) (0.591) (0.591)
BHR 0.016 0.018 0.018 0.018 0.017
                    (0.026) (0.026) (0.026) (0.026) (0.026)
                                              **        **        *
IVol -0.076 -0.133           -0.133           -0.131           -0.103
                    (0.076) (0.067) (0.067) (0.067) (0.069)
Intercept -0.796 -0.938 -1.128 -1.235 -1.510
                    (1.089) (1.084) (1.091) (1.092) (1.111)
N 1,728 1,728 1,728 1,728 1,728
          2
Adjusted 𝑅          0.016 0.015 0.015 0.016 0.017
Panel B: CAR from the market-adjusted returns (CAR2)
                      (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Energy                    ***
                     -0.970
Sensitivity
                    (0.345)
Bordering 1.182
                                     (0.903)
Trade -0.171
                                                      (0.180)
Russian Gas -0.345
                                                                      (0.226)
                                                                                                                          **
All Variables -0.615
                                                                                       (0.249)
LnSZ 0.012 0.007 0.019 0.009 0.017
                    (0.072) (0.073) (0.073) (0.073) (0.072)
B/M -0.069 -0.065 -0.090 -0.069 -0.095
                    (0.156) (0.156) (0.157) (0.156) (0.156)
                                                                    (continued on next page)

                                    24
Table 7. (continued)
 Panel B: CAR from the market-adjusted returns (CAR2)
                       (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
 Leverage -0.135 -0.189 -0.204 -0.201 -0.241
                     (0.612) (0.613) (0.614) (0.613) (0.612)
 BHR 0.012 0.016 0.016 0.015 0.015
                     (0.027) (0.027) (0.027) (0.027) (0.027)
 IVol 0.082 -0.023 -0.022 -0.021 0.017
                     (0.079) (0.070) (0.070) (0.070) (0.071)
 Intercept -0.745 -1.033 -1.027 -1.375 -1.758
                     (1.127) (1.123) (1.130) (1.131) (1.150)
 N 1,728 1,728 1,728 1,728 1,728
           2
 Adjusted 𝑅          0.017 0.013 0.012 0.013 0.015

6.3 Robustness Checks and Additional Tests

6.3.1 Cross-section Regression with Extended Event Window

 Table 8. Cross-section regressions results with extended event window
  The table shows results for the policy sensitivity proxies for an extended event window. The event window is extended
  to a maximum of [-5, 5]. Panel A show extended event windows for the first event, Panel B for the second event, and
 Panel C for the third event. Energy Sensitivity is each firms’ absolute stock price reaction to announcements about
 energy price and supply. Bordering is measuring bordering to Nord Stream. Trade is dependency on trade with Russia.
 Russian Gas is dependency on Russian gas. All Variables is the four variables summarised together. The four policy
 sensitivity proxies are regressed together in one regression. CAR2, measured based on the market-adjusted return model
 is used as the dependent variables in the regressions. ***, **, and * indicates a statistical significance at 1%, 5% and
 10%, respectively.
 Panel A: Cross-section regression with extended event window for event 1 (CAR2)
   Event        Energy      Bordering Trade Russian      N Adjusted
  Windows     Sensitivity                                 Gas                    2
                                                                                                                     𝑅
  Around
    event
                          ***
      0 -1.982          1.299 -0.080 0.057 576 0.054
                  (0.345) (0.969) (0.190) (0.233)
                          ***
    [-1, 1] -3.269           0.074 0.003 0.203 576 0.083
                  (0.525) (1.472) (0.292) (0.366)
                          ***
    [-3, 3] -3.930           1.527 0.340 0.409 539 0.017
                  (0.945) (2.621) (0.518) (0.667)
                          ***
    [-5, 5] -5.455           4.195 -0.305 1.255 539 0.019
                  (1.326) (3.680) (0.728) (0.936)
  Pre-event
                          ***
   [-3, -1] -1.709           0.504 0.378 0.147 539 0.001
                  (0.596) (1.651) (0.323) (0.410)
                          ***
   [-5, -1] -1.875           1.869 -0.317 0.297 539 -0.005
                  (0.675) (1.872) (0.366) (0.465)
  Post-event
    [1, 3] -0.258 -0.642 -0.001 0.174 576 -0.001
                  (0.503) (1.410) (0.280) (0.350)
    [1, 5] -0.527 0.398 -0.076 0.528 576 0.015
                  (0.699) (1.960) (0.389) (0.487)
                                                                            (continued on next page)

                                     25
Table 8. (continued)
 Panel B: Cross-section regression with extended event window for event 2 (CAR2)
    Event        Energy       Bordering Trade Russian       N Adjusted
  Windows     Sensitivity                                  Gas                    2
                                                                                                                      𝑅
  Around
    event
                           **
      0 -0.653           0.360 -0.053 -0.020 562 0.001
                   (0.309) (0.862) (0.169) (0.216)
                                                                            **
    [-1, 1] 0.036 0.261 0.198 -0.810        562 -0.010
                   (0.480) (1.338) (0.262) (0.335)
                                                            **        **
    [-3, 3] -0.863 0.180 0.886        -1.286        562 0.010
                   (0.787) (2.191) (0.429) (0.548)
                                                            **
    [-5, 5] -0.619 -1.796 1.123         0.566 561 -0.002
                   (1.038) (2.888) (0.565) (0.722)
  Pre-event
                            *                                     ***
    [-3, -1] -0.775           0.647 0.328 -1.033         576 0.028
                   (0.443) (1.243) (0.244) (0.299)
                                                             *        **
    [-5, -1] -0.985 -1.495 0.660        -1.064        575 0.014
                   (0.659) (1.847) (0.362) (0.445)
  Post-event
                                                             *
    [1, 3] 0.468 -0.643 0.593        -0.407 562 -0.0001
                   (0.600) (1.671) (0.327) (0.418)
                          ***
    [1, 5] 2.093           -0.277 0.663* -0.371 562 0.012
                   (0.726) (2.023) (0.396) (0.506)
 Panel C: Cross-section regression with extended event window for event 3 (CAR2)
    Event        Energy       Bordering Trade Russian       N Adjusted
  Windows     Sensitivity                                  Gas                    2
                                                                                                                      𝑅
  Around
    event
      0 0.459 -0.397 -0.009 -0.161 576 0.001
                   (0.413) (1.159) (0.227) (0.279)
                                             *        *
    [-1, 1] 0.482 3.611         -0.949        -0.189 576 0.017
                   (0.740) (2.077) (0.407) (0.500)
                           ***                      **
    [-3, 3] -3.470           4.268 -1.258         0.014 575 0.039
                   (1.000) (2.801) (0.549) (0.674)
                                                             **
    [-5, 5] -2.164 5.275 -1.738         -0.181 435 0.028
                   (1.559) (4.390) (0.754) (1.051)
  Pre-event
                           ***
    [-3, -1] -2.206           -0.525 -0.177 -0.074 575 0.029
                   (0.587) (1.646) (0.323) (0.396)
    [-5, -1] -0.949 -1.553 -0.364 -0.265 435 -0.021
                   (0.900) (2.533) (0.435) (0.607)
  Post-event
                           **       **        ***
    [1, 3] -1.704          5.186        -1.087         0.248 576 0.026
                   (0.718) (2.015) (0.395) (0.485)
    [1, 5] 0.878 3.470 -0.492 -0.214 576 0.006
                   (0.798) (2.238) (0.439) (0.539)

In the extended event window regression, seen in Table 8, we investigate the exogenous shocks
by looking at different event windows. Consistent with the results from Table 4, the results
from Panel A in Table 8, indicate that Energy Sensitivity is negative and has a significant impact
on CAR for the first event. This coefficient has the most economic impact in the largest event
window [-5, 5] where the value is -5.455 (t-stat = 1.326) at 1% significance level. The economic

                                     26
significance of CARs for the coefficient is larger in the pre-event window, which might indicate
that there was anticipation in the market before the event.
             The results from the second event are shown in Panel B and demonstrate that
Russian Gas is negative and significant, consistent with the results from Table 5. The
coefficients for Russian Gas in the period around the event and the pre-event period are negative
and significant, at least at a 5% level. The results in the pre-event window could indicate
anticipation of the second event. There was an ECB announcement on the day [+3], however,
since we see no evidence of lower returns on the post-event windows, we conclude that the
macroeconomic shock does not impact our results. The variable for Trade is significantly
positive for the second event, contradicting Hypothesis 2. Additionally, the variable for Energy
Sensitivity is negative and significant for the second event day [0] at a 5% significance level,
however, due to the lack of robustness, we consider the results as weak.
             Empirical findings from the third event, in Panel C, show mixed results for the
policy sensitives proxies. Trade is negative and significant in the periods around the event and
the post-event period but not the pre-event period. These results are consistent with the results
from Table 6. The fact that Trade does not show similar results in all extended event windows
is in line with previous articles. Abbassi et al. (2022) find significant and negative results for
their corresponding variable, with some disparity between windows around the event. Boubaker
et al. (2022) find that their corresponding variable, used to examine the Russia-Ukraine war
event, had negative coefficients in the pre-event period but not for the post-event period.
However, in contrast to the articles mentioned, we did not find support for all sensitivity policy
proxies. In addition, Energy Sensitivity seems to have a negative impact on CARs in the around-
event, pre-event, and post-event period, inconsistent with results in Table 6. The coefficient for
Bordering is positive and significant in the period around the event, and the post-event period,
inconsistent with Hypothesis 2. The disparity in results for the significance of coefficients
depending on the event window indicates that our results are to some extent sensitive to our
chosen event window [-1,1].
             We find differences in the pre-event windows of the events which could show
anticipation for the events, according to MacKinlay et al. (1997). However, there are not always
more negative stock returns in the pre-event window and thus we cannot draw conclusions
about the anticipation of our events. When extending the event window, we find some
additional variables having a negative and significant impact on CARs, consistent with
Hypothesis 2. Nevertheless, we only find a few coefficients significantly negative per event,
inconsistent with the findings in prior studies (Abbassi et al., 2022; Boubaker et al., 2022) and
indicating a lack of evidence for Hypothesis 2. Thus, changing the event window will not
provide further evidence for the hypotheses and we are potentially only picking up noise in the
regression.

6.3.2 Permutation Test

In prior regressions, we find that there is a disparity in results as our coefficients are not
consistently significantly negative for the events. This is inconsistent with the findings of Liu
et al. (2017) who find that all their independent variables had a negative effect on CARs in the
event window. The disparity in significances of policy sensitivity proxies in prior regressions
could demonstrate that our tests are only picking up noise. To be certain about whether our
three events were exogenous shocks impacting political uncertainty, we conduct permutation
tests for different periods. To be certain that our variables have a negative effect on CARs the
coefficients from our events should be on the far left of the graphs.
            Figure 3 illustrates the results from the permutation test using 100 random
sampled days for the during-war period. The permutation tests show evidence of our

                                     27
coefficients only capturing noise with lack of significance. The results indicate that the during-
war period have many days in which the variables take extreme values. The only coefficient
that shows some significance is Russian Gas for the second event, where the green line is far
out to the left. The variables Energy Sensitivity for the first event, Russian Gas for the second
event and Trade for the third event seem to be less part of the noise, however, the values are
very scattered in the figures. Therefore, for these variables, it is challenging to draw conclusions
using normal distribution analysis, and thus, inconsistent with Hypothesis 2.

 Figure 3. Permutation tests for the during-war period (100 samples)
  In the figures, the y-axis is the number of times the coefficients take a value (frequency), and the x-axis is the value of the
 coefficient. The coefficients from our results per event are illustrated using different colours. The first event has a navy
  line, the second event has a green line, and the third event has a red line. The permutation tests for the during-war period
 are 11th of February 2022 until 10th of August 2022. The coefficients are derived based on CAR2, estimated with the
  market-adjusted return model.

Figure 4, results for the permutation test using a random sample from the pre-war period,
illustrates that there are more coefficients that end up in the tail of the distributions. Therefore,
during this period, the coefficients show more significance. For the pre-war period, the
coefficients for Energy Sensitivity and All Variables show significance for the first event,
Russian Gas show significance for the second event, and Trade show significance for the third
event. These results strengthen our findings from Figure 3. The coefficient for Bordering shows
significance for the second and third event, however, this coefficient has a positive value, which
is inconsistent with the hypotheses.

                                     28
 Figure 4. Permutation tests for the pre-war period (100 samples)
  In the figures, the y-axis is the number of times the coefficients take a value (frequency), and the x-axis is the value of the
 coefficient. The coefficients from our results per events are illustrated using different colours. The first event has a navy
 line, the second event has a green line, and the third event has a red line. The permutation tests for the pre-war period are
  11th of February 2021 until 10th of August 2021. The coefficients are derived based on CAR2, estimated with the market-
 adjusted return model.

Figure 5 shows the results for the permutation test with a longer estimation period of three-
years (700 samples), including both the pre-war and the during-war period. In this test we can
see that most of the coefficients are part of the noise and, thus, not significant. Figure 5 shows
similar results to the permutation test in the pre-war period. For the individual coefficients,
Russian Gas for the second event show significance in this permutation test. The coefficient for
Energy Sensitivity for the first event is somewhat in the tails, indicating significance. All
Variables for the first event are in the tail of the normal distribution, which speaks for the
significance of this coefficient and is consistent with Hypothesis 2. Additionally, the coefficient
for Trade for the third event is to some extent in the tails of the distribution, however, it could
still be part of the noise.

                                     29
 Figure 5. Permutation tests based on a three-year period (700 samples)
  In the figures, the y-axis is the number of times the coefficients take a value (frequency), and the x-axis is the value of the
 coefficient. The coefficients from our results per events are illustrated using different colours. The first event has a navy
 line, the second has a green line, and the third has a red line. The permutation tests for the more extended period are 20th of
 August 2019 until the 17th of August 2022. The coefficients are derived based on CAR2, estimated with the market-adjusted
 return model.

The results from the permutation tests show that we see the most significance for the three-year
period and the pre-war period. From those periods’ permutation tests, we can clearly see that
the variables Energy Sensitivity and Russian Gas are negatively significant for the first event
and second event, respectively. However, from the during-war period, the results are less clear
and there are multiple days in the period in which our variables have more extreme coefficients.
This indicates that in the context of during the Russian-Ukraine war, our events are more part
of the noise.

                                     30
7. Discussion

From the empirical results, our findings show a large disparity between events and variables
indicating that we cannot be certain of the existence of priced political risk. Prior studies find
large market movements for political uncertainty events, arguing that the event they investigate
entails substantial negative economic consequences (Abbassi et al., 2022; Ahmed et al., 2022;
Boubaker et al., 2022; Brogaard et al., 2020; Egger and Zhu, 2020; Liu et al., 2017; Pástor and
Veronesi, 2012; Pástor and Veronesi, 2013).
             The evidence is weak for the proxies for policy sensitivity. For the first event, the
results show that a higher level of Energy Sensitivity has an impact on CARs. This is
emphasized in several of the tables and figures (Tables 3, 4, and 8 and Figures 4 and 5). The
results for Energy Sensitivity are similar in significance and effect size to Liu et al. (2017) for
their corresponding variable “Policy Announcements”. The country-specific variable Russian
Gas show significant and robust results in all regressions for the second event (Tables 3, 5, and
8 and Figures 4 and 5). Results from prior studies support these findings since they argue that
a suspension of natural gas supply would have a negative impact on European firms (Ahmed et
al., 2022; Di Bella et al., 2022). For the third event, the coefficients for the different regressions
do not show consistency in the results, which provides proof that none of the proxies has
explanatory value for CARs for that event. This is consistent with Hypothesis 3, stating that the
market reaction to the third event should be smaller since the gas supply was already shut off
and the economic implications would therefore be less severe. Our results are not in line with
the findings in Liu et al. (2017) and prior studies (Abbassi et al., 2022; Berkman, Jacobsen and
Lee, 2011; Boubaker et al., 2022; Boutchkova et al., 2012; Brogaard et al., 2020; Liu et al.,
2017), who showed negative coefficients for all their policy variables. However, the setting for
our events differs from earlier articles since we have previous, closely related events which
might reduce the economic effects of our exogenous shocks and thus we might not expect the
same results for our variables.
             Different policy sensitivity proxies are significant for various event dates,
indicating that our results are part of the noise. These findings are further emphasized in the
permutation tests where we get similar results for other days, especially for the period during
the Ukraine-Russia war. Because of the empirical results’ weak support for the hypothesises
and disparity in results, we conclude that either (i) priced political risk does not exist, (ii) our
events were not exogenous shocks, or (iii) our events might be exogenous shocks but due to
measurement errors we are not able to capture them.

7.1 Implications of Priced Political Risk

In Liu et al. (2017), all results indicate the existence of priced political risk for their exogenous
shock. Therefore, there is a risk that the economic implications of our events did not have
enough substantial effect to generate political uncertainty that affected the stock market.
Following the insights from Boutchkova et al. (2012), political events with larger economic
consequences have more effect on stock market reactions. The fact that political uncertainty
has implications for the economy is further emphasized by Smales (2017), who investigate the
connection between political and economic uncertainty by examining an event that had negative
implications for trade. This is also argued by Egger and Zhu (2020), who show that the event
they investigate resulted in negative stock market reactions due to protectionist policy actions
on international trade. Since earlier studies find priced political risk, the results in this study
could indicate that the economic implications of the Nord Stream event were not enough to
generate a political uncertainty risk premium.

                                     31
              If a priced political risk is not present in this study, we would be inconsistent with
findings in prior studies (Broogard, 2020; Liu et al. 2017; Pástor and Veronesi, 2012; Pástor
and Veronesi, 2013). However, since we are uncertain about the empirical results, we are not
able to draw any conclusions about findings in prior studies. From the results, it is not possible
to justify if there is a risk premium associated with political uncertainty, as argued in Liu et al.
(2017). We think there are two possible explanations of why we cannot draw any conclusions,
(i) either our events did not generate exogenous shocks, or (ii) they were exogenous shocks, but
due to measurement errors we cannot capture them.

7.2 Are the Events Exogenous Shocks?

We initially argued that our events create exogenous shocks to political stability since they are
unanticipated shocks that impact markets. Further support for our chosen events being
exogenous shocks originates from the study by Berkman et al. (2011), who argued that
exogenous shocks often stem from global political events. However, after investigating the
empirical results, we are sceptical about whether our events generate exogenous shocks. The
permutation tests show that if we move the event days randomly, we get similar results for most
of the variables. This is especially true for the permutation test from the during-war period,
where our variables show less significance of having effects on cumulative abnormal returns.
The results could be explained by the fact that the war is ongoing, resulting in a continuous
stream of war-related news announcements. Thus, our results might be part of the noise during
the war period since news that potentially impact trade and policy uncertainty reoccurs often.
However, even in the pre-war period, when we do not experience war-related news, we
experience the same problem. Thus, the lack of results in all three permutation tests indicated
that our variables are part of the noise, which suggests that our events might not be exogenous
shocks.
            MacKinlay et al. (1997) argue that there is a problem with some events that make
it challenging to measure the impact on the actual event days. They bring up the example of
how political regulations are often debated in the media ahead of time and thus gradually
integrated into the firm’s market value when the probability of the occurrence of the event
changes. One could argue that this might also be the case for the Nord Streams events. Since
the war commenced, there have been a lot of political uncertainty and tensions between Russia
and Europe reported in the media, as well as speculations about the future natural gas supply to
Europe (Di Bella et al., 2022). During the Russia-Ukraine conflict, the risk of Nord Stream's
supply reduction has gradually increased. Despite initially arguing for the political and
economic implications of the events, our results indicate that investors may have speculated
about the implications of the events before they happened. Prior studies investigated the stock
market reaction when the Russia-Ukraine war started (Abbassi et al., 2022; Ahmed et al., 2022;
Boubaker et al., 2022; Yousaf, 2022). They find a large negative shock to the stock market
which could indicate that the financial implications of the war, including Nord Stream, were
priced in. Therefore, there is a risk that the political uncertainty of Nord Stream events was
already priced at the beginning of the war. Berkman et al. (2011) argue that it is not the actual
event that creates an international political crisis but instead it stems from the perceived shift in
the risk of threat. In conjunction with insights from Berkman et al. (2011), it can be argued that
the economic and political effects from the Nord Stream events occurred before the actual
events. Thus, there is a possibility that investors had already reacted to these speculations about
the political and economic effects of shutting down the gas supply before the events happened,
which means our events did not create exogenous shocks.
              Prior studies, such as Liu et al (2017) have been able to capture exogenous shocks
during political uncertainty. However, we can argue that our event setting is different from

                                     32
theirs as we investigate a period during war that has many related events happening. Earlier
related events might have reduced the economic and political implications of our events and
thus mitigated the exogenous shock for our events. Even in earlier studies looking at the Russia-
Ukraine war, we differ in the setting since they investigate the period when the war emerged.
We examine a turbulent period that have been present for a long time, in comparison with some
of the other event studies looking at the beginning of a turbulent period. Thus, they have less
anticipation and, to our knowledge, no prior events that would reduce the effect of their events
as we have. Therefore, our setting differs from prior studies that we compare with which might
be a reason for the lack of exogenous shocks.

7.3 The Problem of Measurement Errors

Since the events were unanticipated, we argue that it might still be that the events are exogenous
shocks but due to measurement errors we cannot capture the timing of the shocks. We have
thoughtful tried to reduce measurement errors by altering data for a cleaner test and evaluated
multiple methodologies to capture the exogenous effects of our events. We have utilised the
methodology from previous articles which have inspired us to include country, industry, and
firm fixed effects, two-way clustering of standard errors, and controlling for other
macroeconomic events. However, despite our extensive methodology, we cannot capture any
evidence of exogenous shocks. These results could be a consequence of measurement errors
still existing in our tests. In the turbulent setting of 2022 that we are investigating, there are
numerous events on monetary policy, inflation, war, and political uncertainty impacting
movements in the financial markets. These events can create exogenous shocks that are
interfering with the Nord Stream shocks we intend to capture. Thus, it is very hard to draw
causal conclusions from this period. Econometrically, the techniques available to derive the
results are not sufficient for this period when the data is not ideal. This suggests that we cannot
measure the effect due to there being so many other events going on.
             Discussions on exogenous shocks and measurement errors bring us to other
insights. Earlier studies argue that the events should ideally be exogenous shocks to investigate
political uncertainty and political crisis risk (Berkman et al., 2011; Liu et al., 2017). However,
with insights from our results, we are questioning if the ideal setting to test the causality
between political uncertainty on asset pricing from an exogenous shock even exists. There are
very few shocks to the stock market that are completely unexpected and unrelated. To test the
exogenous shocks from Nord Stream events on the European stock market, we would have to
create an ideal setting. In this hypothetical setting, there would be no other events during the
period and no anticipation of political and economic shocks, so we could completely isolate the
surprising effect of the shocks. However, since this ideal setting is not present in our case, we
cannot draw conclusions about the relationship between asset pricing and political uncertainty.
Nevertheless, prior studies’ results indicate that they have had more success in capturing the
effect. This could be due to the difference in settings since they investigate a less turbulent
period. Nevertheless, in event studies, as you look at the stock market, you can never be certain
that you are only isolating the effect you intend to capture. Measurement errors are always
present and limit the empirical research for event studies for similar settings. For future event
studies intended to test exogenous shocks and political uncertainty, the insight from this study
could indicate that the traditional econometric methods may not capture the market reaction
during periods of turbulence.

                                     33
8. Conclusion

In our study, we investigate if the Nord Stream events are exogenous shocks to test whether
priced political risk exists in the market. We do this by replicating an article that find evidence
of priced political risk, Liu et al. (2017), and applying their methodology to three Nord Stream
events we believed would yield higher political risk. We look at how daily returns for the firms
in STOXX Europe 600 are influenced by the four policy sensitivity proxies: (i) firm price
sensitivity to energy announcements, (ii) country dependency on Russian gas, (iii) country
dependency on trade with Russia, and (iv) country bordering to Nord Stream. We find evidence
that firms sensitive to energy announcements had a more reduction in stock price when
                                                                        th
Gazprom announced unexpected maintenance work on the 19  of August 2022. In addition, we
find evidence of firms in countries more dependent on Russian gas to have a drop in share prices
                                                                                      th
for when Gazprom announced an infinitive stop of gas supply on the 5  of September 2022.
We find no evidence that firms in countries bordering to the Nord Stream pipeline or dependent
on trade with Russia experience more negative returns for any of the events. To be noted, our
variables are significant on different dates and for the other proxies and events, we do not find
any true relationship. This adds to the idea that we capture noise.
              Since we cannot see strong results or significant negative results for our events,
we conclude that either (i) priced political risk does not exist, (ii) our events were not exogenous
shocks, or (iii) due to measurement errors we are not able to capture the exogenous shocks.
First, looking at our empirical evidence, it is not possible to draw conclusions about whether
there is a risk premium associated with political uncertainty, as argued by Liu et al. (2017). Our
results could indicate that the economic consequences and implications of the Nord Stream
event were not enough to generate a political uncertainty risk premium. Second, there is a
possibility that our events were not exogenous shocks due to our setting. The reason is that
investors already reacted to speculations about the political and economic implications of
shutting down Nord Stream before it happened, which could have a dampening effect on the
stock returns at our event days. Lastly, the events might be exogenous shocks, but we are not
able to capture their effects. There is a lack of econometric techniques that allows us to capture
results from our events during a period when there are a lot of things happening. These insights
add to the literature that in some periods it is very hard to draw conclusions when there is an
unstable economic and political environment, as Europe in the year 2022. We cannot be certain
what explanation drives our results and thus we cannot add insight to other studies in terms of
priced political risk. However, for future event studies, we highlight the notion of considering
earlier related events as well as difficulties to capture the exogenous shocks during periods of
economic and political turbulence.
             Future event studies could compare the stock market reaction to political
announcements that are closely related to earlier political events with stand-alone events. By
looking at other articles and our results, we can see evidence of the first announcements of the
Russia-Ukraine war gave more market reaction than the during-war events of the Nord Stream
pipelines. This could be investigated further by comparing announcements at the beginning of
a politically turbulent period compared with following news during the period.

                                     34
 9. References

(2022, October) Retrieved from Google Trends:
              https://trends.google.com/trends/explore?date=today%203-
          m&q=nord%20stream
Abbassi, Wajih, Vineeta Kumari, and Dharen Kumar Pandey, 2022, What makes firms
               vulnerable to the Russia-Ukraine crisis?, The Journal of Risk Finance.
Ahmed, Shaker, Mostafa M. Hasan, and Md Rajib Kamal, 2022, Russia-Ukraine crisis: The
              effects on the European stock market, European Financial Management, 1-41.
Aftonbladet, 2022, Tyska teorin: Medveten attack mot Nord Stream 1 och 2, September 27.
              https://www.aftonbladet.se/nyheter/a/7652L8/lacka-i-nord-stream-1-och-2-
              tyska-teorin-medveten-attack
Aftonbladet, 2022, Två explosioner intill Nord Stream, September 27.
               https://www.aftonbladet.se/nyheter/a/KnpwQe/osannolikt-att-nord-stream-
              lackage-ar-en-olycka
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis, 2016, Measuring Economic Policy
             Uncertainty, Quarterly Journal of Economics 131, 1593-1636.
BBC, 2022, Nord Stream 1: How Russia is cutting gas supplies to Europe, September 29.
             https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-60131520
Berkman, Henk, Ben Jacobsen, and John B. Lee, 2011, Time-varying rare disaster risk and
              stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 101, 313-332.
Bloom, Nicholas, 2009, The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks, Econometrica 77, 623-685.
Bodie, By Zvi, Alex Kane, and Alan Marcus, 2021, Investments, Twelfth Edition (McGraw
              Hill Education, New York).
Boubaker, Sabri, John W. Goodell, Dharen Kumar Pandey, and Vineeta Kumari, 2022,
             Heterogeneous impacts of wars on global equity markets: Evidence from the
                invasion of Ukraine, Finance Research Letters 48.
Boungou, Whelsy, and Alhonita Yatié, 2022, The impact of the Ukraine-Russia war on world
             stock market returns, Economics Letters 215.
Boutchkova, Maria, Hitesh Doshi, Art Durnev, Alexander Molchanov, 2012, Precarious
              Politics and Return Volatility, The Review of Financial Studies 25, 1111-1154.
Brogaard, Jonathan, Lili Dai, Phong T. H. Ngo, and Bohui Zhang, 2020, Global Political
              Uncertainty and Asset Prices, Review of Financial Studies 33, 1737-1780.
Brooks, Chris, 2014, Introductory Econometrics for Finance, Third Edition (Cambridge
               University Press, New York).
Brown, Stephen J., and Jerold B. Warner, 1985, Using daily stock returns: The case of event
               studies, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 3-31.
Caldara, Dario, and Matteo Iacoviello, 2022, Measuring Geopolitical Risk, American
             Economic Review 112, 1194-1225.
CBS News, 2022, ”Unprecedented” mystery leaks detected in Nord Stream gas pipelines
             from Russia to Europe, September 27. https://www.cbsnews.com/news/nord-
              stream-pipeline-leaks-russia-euorpe-gas-possible-sabotage/
Cornett, Marci Millon, and Hassan Tehranian, 1990, An Examination of the Impact of the
             Garn-St. Germain Depository Institutions Act of 1982 on Commercial Banks
             and Savings and Loans, The Journal of Finance 45, 95-111.
Dagens Industri, 2022, “Magdalena Andersson: Troligen sabotage bakom Nord Stream-
              läcka”, September 27. https://www.di.se/nyheter/magdalena-andersson-troligen-
              sabotage-bakom-nord-stream-lacka/

                                     35
Di Bella, Gabriel, Mark J. Flanagan, Karim Foda, Svitlana Maslova, Alex Pienkowski, Martin
             Stuermer, Frederik G. Toscani, 2022, Natural Gas in Europe: The Potential
             Impact of Disruptions to Supply, IMF Working Papers 22/145.
Egger, Peter H., and Jiaqing Zhu, 2020, The US-Chinese trade war: an event study of stock-
             market responses, Economic Policy 35, 519-559.
Euronews, 2022, Gas flows through Nord Stream to resume after 10-day maintenance, July
              20. https://www.euronews.com/my-europe/2022/07/19/gas-flows-through-nord-
              stream-will-resume-after-10-day-maintenance
Euronews, 2022, Nord Stream 1 restarts with fears of reduced capacity, 21 July.
              https://www.euronews.com/my-europe/2022/07/21/nord-stream-1-restarts-with-
              fears-of-reduced-capacity
Euronews, 2022, Russia to make drastic cuts to EU gas supply via Nord Stream pipeline, 26
              July. https://www.euronews.com/2022/07/26/russia-to-make-drastic-cuts-to-eu-
              gas-supply-via-nord-stream-pipeline
European Central Bank, 2022, Natural gas dependence and risks to euro activity,
              https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-
            bulletin/focus/2022/html/ecb.ebbox202201_04~63d8786255.en.html
European Central Bank, 2022, Monetary policy decisions,
                https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/govcdec/mopo/html/index.en.html.
European Council, 2022, Timeline - Energy prices and security of supply,
              https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/energy-prices-and-
              security-of-supply/timeline-energy-prices-and-security-of-supply/
Eurostat database, 2022, Imports of natural gas by partner country,
            https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/NRG_TI_GAS__custom_37237
             84/default/table?lang=en
Eurostat, 2022, Annual inflation up to 8.9% in the euro area, August 18,
             https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/2995521/14675415/2-18082022-AP-
             EN.pdf/03725c05-b76b-8faa-b9b9-2d867781e735
Eurostat, 2022, Release calendar, https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/news/release-
               calendar?start=1664575200000&type=listMonth&theme=2.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The Cross-Section of Expected Stock
              Returns, The Journal of Finance 47, 427-465.
Financial Times, 2018, How Russian gas became Europe’s most divisive commodity, July
             17 https://www.ft.com/content/e9a49e8c-852c-11e8-a29d-73e3d454535d
Financial Times, 2022, Gazprom declares three-day Nord Stream 1 closure at end of August,
             August 19. https://www.ft.com/content/b8ab0e5b-18e0-414b-924b-
           9a20aea87707
Financial Times, 2022, Russia shuts down Nord Stream gas pipeline to Europe, August 31.
             https://www.ft.com/content/2ea4ecf5-6f85-463c-a9d2-026492656588
Financial Times, 2022, Russia indefinitely suspends Nord Stream gas pipeline to Europe,
             September 3. https://www.ft.com/content/5867c175-df16-4c8b-9b7a-
           a868a19d0138
International Monetary Fund, 2022, World Economic Outlook Report October 2022.
Kolari, James W., and Seppo Pynnönen, 2010, Event Study Testing with Cross-sectional
             Correlation of Abnormal Returns, The Review of Financial Studies 23, 3996-
               4025.
Liu, Laura Xiaolei, Haining Shu, and K.C. John Wei, 2017, The impacts of political
              uncertainty on asset prices: Evidence from the Bo scandal in China, Journal of
              Financial Economics 125, 286-310.
MacKinlay, Craig A., 1997, Event Studies in Economics and Finance, Journal of Economic

                                     36
              Literature 35, 13-39.
Pástor, L̆ubos̆, and Pietro Veronesi, 2013, Political uncertainty and risk premia, Journal of
              Financial Economics 110, 520-454.
Pástor, L̆ubos̆, and Pietro Veronesi, 2012, Uncertainty about Government Policy and Stock
              Prices, The Journal of Finance 67, 1219-1264.
Politico, 2022, Gazprom to halt Nord Stream gas for 3-day maintenance, August 20.
              https://www.politico.eu/article/gazprom-russia-schedules-three-day-
              maintenance-at-nord-stream-europe/
Reuters, 2022, Germany freezes Nord Stream 2 gas project as Ukraine crisis deepens,
              February 22. https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/germanys-scholz-halts-
              nord-stream-2-certification-2022-02-22/
Reuters, 2022, Nord Stream 1 pipeline to shut for three days in latest fuel blow to Europe,
              August 19. https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/gazprom-says-nord-
              stream-1-pipeline-shut-three-days-end-aug-2022-08-19/
Reuters, 2022, Nord Stream 1 gas flows stop as maintenance begins, 11 July.
              https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/nord-stream-1-gas-flows-dwindle-
             maintenance-begins-2022-07-11/
Reuters, 2022, Timeline: The events leading up to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, March 1.
              https://www.reuters.com/world/europe/events-leading-up-russias-invasion-
             ukraine-2022-02-28/
Smales, Lee A., 2017, “Brexit”: A Case Study in the Relationship Between Political and
              Financial Market Uncertainty, International Review of Finance 17, 451-459.
Statista, 2022, Share of gas supply from Russia in Europe in 2021, by selected country,
              October 7, https://www.statista.com/statistics/1201743/russian-gas-dependence-
              in-europe-by-
          country/?fbclid=IwAR3_kpmAz7KqAviga_yFLkBnegX4BLTkuNOCgKFglQx
           2da32R7E3My1t0d4Total
The Guardian, 2022, Nord Stream 1: Gazprom announces indefinite shutdown of pipeline,
              September 2. https://www.theguardian.com/business/2022/sep/02/nord-stream-
              1-gazprom-announces-indefinite-shutdown-of-pipeline
The Guardian, 2022, ‘We were all wrong’: how Germany got hooked in Russian energy, June
              2. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jun/02/germany-dependence-
              russian-energy-gas-oil-nord-stream
The Guardian, 2022, Nord Stream 1: Russia switches off gas pipeline citing maintenance,
             August 31. https://www.theguardian.com/business/2022/aug/31/nord-stream-1-
              russia-switches-off-gas-pipeline-citing-maintenance
The Guardian, 2022, Vladmir Putin. https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin
United Nations, 2022, Exogenous shocks, https://archive.unescwa.org/exogenous-shocks
Yousaf, Imran, Ritesh Patel, and Larisa Yarovaya, 2022, The reaction of G20+ stock markets
              to the Russia-Ukraine conflict “black-swan” event: Evidence from event study
             approach, Journal of Behavioural and Experimental Finance 35.

                                     37
Appendix

Appendix A. Figure of countries searching on Google for “Nord Stream”

 Appendix A. The figure shows which countries have searched for “Nord Stream”
 This graph shows where the search term “Nord Stream” was most popular during Q3 2022. The numbers are an index
 between 1 to 100 where 100 is the country where the search term was most popular compared to the total amount of
 searches in that country. For the period the 15th of August 2022 to the 21st of October 2022.

   120
   100
    80
    60
    40
    20
     0

Appendix B. Nord Stream announcements in the estimation window

Appendix B. Nord Stream Events in the Estimation Window
This table shows announcements and events relating to the Nord Stream pipelines since January to October 2022.
 Announcement
                Announcements
 date
                       “Germany freezes Nord Stream 2 gas project as Ukraine crisis deepens” (Reuters,
 February 22, 2022
                     2022)
 July 11, 2022 “Nord Stream 1 gas flows stop as maintenance begins” (Reuters, 2022)
                        “Gas flows through Nord Stream to resume after 10-day maintenance” (Euronews,
 July 20, 2022
                     2022)
 July 21, 2022 “Nord Stream 1 restarts with fears of reduced capacity” (Euronews, 2022)
                      “Russia to make drastic cuts to EU gas supply via Nord Stream pipeline” (Euronews,
 July 26, 2022
                     2022)
                         “Gazprom declares three-day Nord Stream 1 closure at end of August” (Financial
 August 19, 2022
                      Times, 2022)
 August 31, 2022 Gazprom starts it three-days maintenance (Financial Times, 2022)
                       “Nord Stream 1: Gazprom announces indefinite shutdown of pipeline” (The Guardian,
 September 2, 2022
                     2022)
 September 26, 2022 Three explosions on Nord Stream 1 and 2 (Dagens Industri, 2022)
 September 27, 2022 A lot of media attention around explosions (Dagens Industri, 2022)

                                     38
                                                                            st
Appendix C. Macroeconomic news announcements since 1 January 2022

Appendix C. Macroeconomic announcements in the estimation window
This table shows inflation announcements and monetary policy announcements between January to October 2022. The
inflation data is extracted from Eurostat release calendar. The monetary policy decision data from ECB is extracted from the
European Central Bank website for a period of February to September 2022.
 Announcement Date Macroeconomic Event Source
 January 20, 2022 Inflation (HICP) Eurostat (2022)
 February 3, 2022 Monetary policy decisions (ECB) European Central Bank (2022)
 February 23, 2022 Inflation (HICP) Eurostat (2022)
 March 10, 2022 Monetary policy decisions (ECB) European Central Bank (2022)
 March 17, 2022 Inflation (HICP) Eurostat (2022)
 April 14, 2022 Monetary policy decisions (ECB) European Central Bank (2022)
 April 21, 2022 Inflation (HICP) Eurostat
 May 18, 2022 Inflation (HICP) Eurostat (2022)
 June 9, 2022 Monetary policy decisions (ECB) European Central Bank (2022)
 June 17, 2022 Inflation (HICP) Eurostat (2022)
 July 19, 2022 Inflation (HICP) Eurostat (2022)
 July 21, 2022 Monetary policy decisions (ECB) European Central Bank (2022)
 August 18, 2022 Inflation (HICP) Eurostat (2022)
 September 8, 2022 Monetary policy decisions (ECB) European Central Bank (2022)
 September 16, 2022 Inflation (HICP) Eurostat (2022)
 October 19, 2022 Inflation (HICP) Eurostat (2022)

Appendix D. Vladmir Putin Announcements about Wars and Politics

Appendix D. Putin announcements in the estimation window
The announcements about Vladmir Putin are obtained from The Guardian after searching for “Vladmir Putin”.
We have focused on events when Putin announced new information about the war.
 Announcement Date Description
 February 21, 2022 “Putin orders troops into eastern Ukraine on ‘peacekeeping duties’”
 February 24, 2022 “Russia has invaded Ukraine: what we know so far”
 February 25, 2022 “Putin references neo-Nazis and drug addicts bizarre in speech”
 March 11, 2022 “Putin plays down western sanctions on Russia after US bans oil imports”
 March 22, 2022 “Putin weighting use of chemical weapons in Ukraine, says Biden”
 March 31, 2022 “Putin demands Russian gas to be paid for in roubles”
 April 12, 2022 “Putin insists Russia will achieve its ‘noble’ goals in Ukraine”
 April 27, 2022 “Putin warns of ‘lightning fast’ retaliation against inference in Ukraine”
 May 9, 2022 “Putin ties Ukraine invasion to second world war in Victory Day speech”
 May 14, 2022 “Putin warns Finland that joining Nato would harm Russia relations”
 June 5, 2022 “Russia will strike harder if Ukriane is supplied with longer-range missiles, says Putin”
 June 17, 2022 “Putin calls Ukraine war sanctions ‘insane’ in combative speech”
 July 8, 2022 “Putin warns Russia is just getting started in Ukraine”
 September 7, 2022 “Putin threatens to ‘freeze’ west by cutting gas and oil supplies if price caps imposed”
 September 15, 2022 “Putin thanks Xi for Chinas ‘balanced’ stance on Ukraine invasion”
 September 21, “Putin announces partial mobilisation and threatens nuclear retaliation in escalation or
                             Ukraine war”
 October 7, 2022 “Biden warns world would face ‘Armageddon’ if Putin uses a tactical nuclear weapon in
                            Ukraine”
 October 9, 2022 “Putin calls Crimea bridge attack an “act of terrorism””
 October 12, 2022 “Vladmir Putin blames the west for energy market disruptions”

                                     39
Appendix E. European announcements about energy supply and prices

Appendix E. Announcements from the European Council about energy supply and prices
Announcements are obtained from the European Council’s website. The information is related to energy supply and prices in
the European union. The announcements are used for deriving values for the “Sensitivity” variable used as a policy
sensitivity proxy.
 Announcement Date Description Included
 February 24, 2022 “EU leaders call for emergency measures on energy” No
 February 28, 2022 “Energy ministers discuss energy market situation following Ukraine       Yes
                             crisis”
 March 10-11, 2022 “EU leaders consider measures to mitigate energy price impacts and secure  No
                        energy supply”
 March 24-25, 2022 “EU leaders consider measures to mitigate energy price impacts and secure  Yes
                        energy supply”
 May 2, 2022 “Energy ministers hold extraordinary meeting to discuss gas supply         Yes
                        following Gazprom’s delivery suspension”
 May 11, 2022 “Member states agree on negotiating” Yes
 May 19, 2022 “Gas storage: Council and Parliament reach a provisional agreement” Yes
 May 30-31, 2022 “EU leaders agree on oil ban and priorities to strengthen the EU’s energy    Yes
                       independence”
 June 3, 2022 “EU adopts sixth package of sanctions against Russia” Yes
 June 23-24, 2022 “European Council urges efforts to secure energy supply at affordable       Yes
                          prices”
 June 27, 2022 “Energy ministers welcome REPowerEU plan”. “Council adopts           Yes
                          regulation on gas storage”
 June 26-28, 2022 “G7 leaders commit to immediate action to secure energy supply and        No
                         reduce prices”
 July 26, 2022 “Member states commit to reducing gas demand by 15% next winter” Yes
 August 5, 2022 “Council adopts regulation on reducing gas demand by 15%” Yes
 September 9, 2022 “Ministers discuss options to mitigate energy prices and review progress     Yes
                         on winter preparedness”
 September 30, 2022 “Council agrees on emergency measures to reduce energy prices” Yes
 October 6, 2022 “Council formally adopts emergency measures to reduce energy prices” Yes
 October 7, 2022 “EU leaders discuss measures to reduce energy demand, ensure security of   No
                          supply and guarantee affordable prices”

                                     40
Appendix F. Fixed Effect Regressions

Appendix F. Fixed effect regressions for the policy sensitivity proxies
The table shows results for the policy sensitivity proxies for an extended event window based on CARs. Panel A and D show
the regression for the first event, Panel B and E for the second event, and Panel C and F for the third event. Energy Sensitivity
is a ranking of firms based on each firm’s absolute cumulative abnormal returns from reactions about policy announcements
about European energy prices and supply. Bordering is countries whose economic or geographical zones crosses the Nord
Stream. Trade is each country’s imports and exports from Russia, as a percentage of its total GDP. Russian Gas is each
country’s natural gas imported as a percentage of its final energy consumption. The four policy sensitivity proxies are
regressed together in one regression. Each column have different fixed effects with; (1) No fixed effects, (2) Industry, (3)
Country, (4) Country and Industry, and (5) Country*Industry. N is the observations. ***, **, and * indicates a statistical
significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.
 Panel A: Fixed effect regression for event 1 (CAR2)
                   (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
 Energy
              -1.866*** -1.802*** -1.838*** -1.796*** -1.893***
 Sensitivity
               (0.453) (0.457) (0.459) (0.461) (0.492)
 Bordering 0.037 0.050 -0.718 -0.949 -1.762
               (0.265) (0.267) (1.291) (1.294) (1.521)
 Trade -0.005 0.014 0.021 0.057 -0.205
               (0.128) (0.128) (0.256) (0.257) (0.361)
 Russian
               0.129 0.087 0.191 0.109 0.057
 Gas
               (0.140) (0.142) (0.320) (0.322) (0.581)
 N 576 576 576 576 576
 Adjusted 0.071 0.077 0.075 0.083 0.103
 Panel B: Fixed effect regression for event 2 (CAR2)
                   (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
 Energy
               -0.968** -0.891* -0.878* -0.804* -0.768
 Sensitivity
               (0.458) (0.464) (0.465) (0.471) (0.508)
 Bordering 0.323 0.313 0.577 0.649 1.088
               (0.262) (0.266) (1.308) (1.321) (1.567)
 Trade 0.124 0.135 0.177 0.198 0.241
               (0.129) (0.130) (0.256) (0.259) (0.276)
 Russian
               -0.262* -0.299** -0.746** -0.772** -0.597
 Gas
               (0.134) (0.137) (0.314) (0.318) (0.423)
 N 576 576 576 576 576
 Adjusted 0.025 0.037 0.047 0.058 0.229
 Panel C: Fixed effect regression for event 3 (CAR2)
                   (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
 Energy
               1.077 0.923 1.260* 1.130 1.172
 Sensitivity
               (0.731) (0.739) (0.735) (0.742) (0.783)
 Bordering 0.069 0.120 3.168 3.069 1.545
               (0.418) (0.423) (2.068) (2.081) (2.414)
 Trade -0.190 -0.199 -0.938** -0.914** -0.914**
               (0.206) (0.207) (0.405) (0.408) (0.424)
 Russian
                0.038 0.073 -0.251 -0.211 -0.600
 Gas
               (0.214) (0.218) (0.497) (0.501) (0.651)
 N 576 576 576 576 576
 Adjusted 0.012 0.031 0.053 0.072 0.273

                                     41
Panel D: Fixed effect regression for event 1 (CAR2)
                  (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
Energy              ***        ***        ***        ***        ***
               -3.283          -3.214             -3.320             -3.269                  -3.346
Sensitivity
              (0.514) (0.519) (0.521) (0.525) (0.568)
Bordering 0.134 0.151 0.300 0.074 -0.751
              (0.301) (0.304) (1.466) (1.472) (1.754)
Trade 0.002 0.024 -0.035 0.003 -0.270
              (0.145) (0.146) (0.291) (0.292) (0.416)
Russian
              0.123 0.075 0.285 0.203 0.051
Gas
              (0.159) (0.161) (0.363) (0.366) (0.670)
N 576 576 576 576 576
Adjusted
 2 0.075 0.079 0.078 0.083 0.078
𝑅
Panel E: Fixed effect regression for event 2 (CAR2)
                  (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
Energy
               -0.138 -0.073 -0.048 0.008 0.013
Sensitivity
              (0.463) (0.470) (0.469) (0.476) (0.510)
Bordering 0.156 0.150 0.276 0.345 0.919
              (0.264) (0.269) (1.319) (1.334) (1.572)
Trade 0.111 0.124 0.162 0.189 0.239
              (0.130) (0.132) (0.259) (0.261) (0.276)
Russian
              -0.266* -0.304** -0.857*** -0.880*** -0.725*
Gas
              (0.136) (0.139) (0.317) (0.321) (0.424)
N 576 576 576 576 576
Adjusted
  2 -0.001 -0.008 0.002 -0.006 0.007
𝑅
Panel F: Fixed effect regression for event 3 (CAR2)
                  (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
Energy
              0.476 0.317 0.616 0.482 0.525
Sensitivity
              (0.729) (0.736) (0.734) (0.740) (0.780)
Bordering 0.067 0.121 3.710* 3.611* 2.131
              (0.417) (0.422) (2.064) (2.077) (2.405)
Trade -0.192 -0.199 -0.976** -0.949** -0.951**
              (0.205) (0.206) (0.405) (0.407) (0.423)
Russian
               0.026 0.057 -0.229 -0.189 -0.648
Gas
              (0.214) (0.217) (0.496) (0.500) (0.648)
N 576 576 576 576 576
Adjusted
 2 -0.001 0.001 0.015 0.017 0.063
𝑅

                                    42
Appendix G. Significance Test for Countries

 Appendix G. Significance test results for countries
 The table shows results from the significance tests of CARs for different European countries in the STOXX Europe 600 derived
  using both the market model (CAR1) and market-adjusted returns (CAR2). The event window is between [-1, 1]. N are total
 observations in the sample. ***, **, and * indicates a statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.
                     N Event 1 Event 2 Event 3
                          CAR (1)   CAR (2)   CAR (1)   CAR (2)   CAR (1)   CAR (2)
                            (%)       (%)       (%)       (%)       (%)       (%)
 Belgium 16 -0.246 -0.500 0.650 0.489 0.118 -0.102
                               (0.955) (1.085) (0.935) (0.940) (1.472) (1.471)
 Denmark 27 0.491 0.224 -0.042 -0.270 0.451 0.203
                               (0.857) (0.974) (0.828) (0.833) (1.304) (1.303)
                                         *
 Finland 17 1.763       1.632 0.276 -0.252 -1.374 -1.650
                               (0.940) (1.069) (0.921) (0.926) (1.449) (1.448)
 France 73 0.887 0.583 0.149 -0.184 -0.226 -0.540
                               (0.741) (0.842) (0.716) (0.720) (1.128) (1.127)
 Germany 69 0.830 0.703 0.641 0.213 -0.887 -1.113
                               (0.742) (0.842) (0.720) (0.724) (1.134) (1.133)
                                        **
 Italy 27 1.756       1.251 0.333 -0.067 0.908 0.441
                               (0.846) (0.961) (0.828) (0.833) (1.304) (1.303)
 Netherlands 34 0.630 0.305 -0.305 -0.621 0.209 -0.110
                               (0.922) (1.047) (0.793) (0.798) (1.249) (1.248)
 Norway 16 -0.583 -0.725 0.163 0.131 0.201 0.100
                               (0.961) (1.092) (0.935) (0.940) (1.472) (1.471)
 Other 53 0.018 -0.628 -0.555 -0.663 -1.790 -2.248
                               (0.915) (1.039) (0.895) (0.900) (1.409) (1.408)
                                                                                                     *        *
 Spain 26 1.120 1.222 -0.389 -0.695 -2.449      -2.486
                               (0.871) (0.989) (0.835) (0.839) (1.314) (1.313)
 Sweden 62 0.376 0.095 0.485 -0.046 0.713 0.341
                               (0.764) (0.868) (0.729) (0.733) (1.147) (1.146)
 Switzerland 54 0.418 -0.022 0.888 0.711 -0.153 -0.498
                               (0.757) (0.860) (0.741) (0.745) (1.166) (1.165)
 United Kingdom 142 -1.116 -1.274 0.152 -0.160 0.168 -0.075
                               (2.653) (3.014) (0.681) (0.685) (1.072) (1.071)

                                     43
Appendix H. Significance Test for Industries

 Table 10. Significance test results for industries
 The table shows results from the significance tests of CARs for different industries in the STOXX Europe 600 derived using
 both the market model (CAR1) and market adjusted returns (CAR2). The event window is a between [-1, 1]. N are total
 observations in the sample. ***, **, and * indicates a statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.
                     N Event 1 Event 2 Event 3
                          CAR (1)   CAR (2)   CAR (1)   CAR (2)   CAR (1)   CAR (2)
                            (%)       (%)       (%)       (%)       (%)       (%)
 Basic Materials 42 1.067 1.242 -0.534 -0.457 1.610 1.738
                               (0.781) (0.887) (0.767) (0.772) (1.214) (1.211)
 Consumer Goods 70 0.266 0.355 -0.653 -0.504 1.308 1.410
                               (0.734) (0.833) (0.719) (0.724) (1.138) (1.136)
 Consumer Services 55 -0.350 -0.221 -1.137 -1.002 0.881 1.002
                               (0.756) (0.858) (0.739) (0.744) (1.170) (1.167)
 Financials 131 0.265 0.298 -0.709 -0.621 1.412 1.458
                               (0.699) (0.793) (0.684) (0.689) (1.083) (1.081)
 Healthcare 54 0.043 0.067 -0.818 -0.575 0.845 0.937
                               (0.755) (0.857) (0.741) (0.746) (1.172) (1.170)
                                                                    *
 Industrials 126 -0.085 0.029 -1.142      -0.987 0.811 0.930
                               (0.699) (0.794) (0.686) (0.691) (1.085) (1.083)
                                                                                                                                   *
 Oil and Gas 18 0.357 0.451 -1.213 -0.830 2.298 2.488
                               (0.925) (1.049) (0.907) (0.914) (1.436) (1.433)
                                                                                                    *       *
 Other 41 -0.621 -0.871 -1.400 -1.004 2.460       2.471
                               (0.875) (0.993) (0.857) (0.863) (1.356) (1.353)
 Technology 33 0.732 0.932 -0.442 -0.424 -0.161 -0.040
                               (0.813) (0.922) (0.798) (0.803) (1.262) (1.260)
 Utilities 30 1.350 1.496 -0.529 -0.412 1.491 1.619
                               (0.828) (0.939) (0.812) (0.817) (1.284) (1.282)

                                     44