Swedish Corporate Ownership and Choice of Debt:
The Effect of Dual Class Shares

Edvin Sveder
Gustav Ossmark

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2022
Swedish corporate ownership and choice of debt: The effect of  dual class shares
Abstract:
Using yearly ownership and capital structure data, we estimate control-ownership divergence,  due
to dual class shares, in the Swedish stock market 2011-2020. We investigate its effect on the firm's
choice of debt and debt-to-equity ratio through multivariate regression analysis. Our results
indicate a negative correlation between the firms' control-ownership wedge and the proportion of
bank debt. The results support the hypothesis of bank monitoring avoidance for firms with a higher
separation of control rights and cash-flow rights for the largest owner.  However, our results do not
indicate that the firm's debt-to-equity ratio increased with the separation of ownership and control,
contrary to our hypothesis. The results in this paper provide insight into the ongoing debate of dual
class  shares and the potentially hazardous incentives they create for shareholders.

Keywords: Dual class shares; Bank Debt; Public Debt; Excess control rights

Authors:

Edvin Sveder (25220)
Gustav Ossmark (24998)

Tutor:

Olga Obizhaeva, Assistant  Professor, Department of Finance, SSE

Examiner:

Adrien d'Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance, SSE

Acknowledgements:

We want to direct our gratitude to Olga  Obizhaeva for her guidance and to Adrian Skarnes and
Modular Finance for providing us with assistance in collecting data.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Edvin Sveder and Gustav Ossmark, 2022

                                                                             2
                               1.  Introduction

       The choice of debt source is an essential decision for firms and their shareholders as
different types of debt, i.e., public and bank debt,  have  considerable implications on the firm and
its capital structure.  The question is, why do some firms borrow from arm's-length public
bondholders and banks with more effective monitoring and information capacity? Existing theories
explain the benefits and costs of arm's-length public bonds compared to debt via banks with more
effective monitoring (Fama, 1985;  Diamond,  1984;  Diamond, 1991).  For example,  Denis and
Mihov (2003)  explained that firms with medium credit ratings tend to use bank debt, and firms
with high credit ratings tend to use public debt,  however less so during times of low future
profitability and higher interest rates.
       These theories explain how information asymmetries are alleviated with bank  debt, which
is more monitoring-intensive than directly issuing public debt. Banks have access to  private
information as insiders, making  the  monitoring more effective (James, 1987). This would be an
appropriate motivation for firms to use bank debt to alleviate information asymmetries and lower
the cost of debt. Due to banks' concentrated holdings, credible  threats,  and access to information,
they are much more effective in  evaluating  firms to understand and investigate potential self-
dealing activities of shareholders (Hoshi et al., 1993). In comparison, the diffuse ownership of
bondholders in public  debt creates free-rider problems.  The bondholders would be required to
duplicate monitoring efforts,  effectively  incentivising  them to avoid  performing costly monitoring
(Houston and James, 1996). This would imply that a choice of public debt involves a lower degree
of monitoring. It follows that the reasonable choice would be that firms which require less
monitoring turn towards public debt funding, and more complex and  risky firms which require
more intense monitoring to limit the potential downside of the loan would turn to bank debt
(Houston and James, 1996;  Denis and Mihov, 2003).
       The notion that agency conflicts affect a firm's capital structure decisions is widely
accepted by existing literature (Yang et al., 2021). However, looking further past the standard
agency problem between managers and dispersed shareholders, there are substantial agency
problems between minority and majority shareholders (Lefort and Walker,  2007). Observing the
role of capital structure, firms whose capital structure involves dual  class shares, the largest
shareholder with more control than cash-flow rights, may have incentives to engage in self-dealing
activities. This is at the expense of the other shareholders with less control but proportionally more
cash-flow rights (La Porta et al., 1999;  Claessens et al., 2000;  Laeven and Levine, 2008). The
largest shareholder with more control rights than cash-flow rights is a  controlling minority
shareholder  (CMS), as we will refer to in this paper (Cronqvist and Nilsson, 2003). The use of
control rights can enable and incentivise the CMS to engage in tunnelling and other hazardous
activities for personal benefits. This is explained intuitively as the  CMS receives only a fraction
of the corporate distribution of  dividends,  but the full personal benefit of the assets left in the firm
(Bebchuk et al., 2000). This controlling position is hypothesised to affect the firm's choice of debt,
as the CMS would want to avoid bank monitoring of the firm, which involves scrutiny of the firm
and its corporate decisions. This monitoring comes from the debt source and the issuers'
surveillance of the firm (Lin et al., 2013).
       As supported by previous research by  Jensen and Meckling (1976), when firms are in
financial distress, moral hazard issues such as asset transfers and movement between companies
are a large risk to creditors. According to Campello et al. (2011),  this leads to the bank increasing
the  intensity of their firm monitoring. Simultaneously, the incentives, especially the possibilities

                                                                             3
of pursuing personal benefits and tunnelling assets, appear during financial distress (Johnson et
al., 2000), (Shleifer and Vishny, 1997). Financial distress increases the effect of CMS turning away
from bank debt and monitoring in times of financial distress due to an increased desire not to be
monitored and scrutinised for their corporate decisions and incentives.
       Earlier research on the effect of control-ownership divergence and the choice of debt  such
as  Lin et al.  (2013)  and  Boubaker and Labégorre  (2008), concerns large samples of multinational
firms where they assess the interaction between these variables in a larger context. However, these
studies disregard the role of institutions and the financial system of a specific country, which are
likely to affect how much a company affected by moral hazards can evade monitoring through
public debt issuance. The research has thus mainly been silent on the effect of  control-ownership
divergence and debt choice for specific countries, where legislation and corporate culture may
have a sizable effect on the frequency of differences between cash-flow rights and ownership and
its meaningfulness.
       Previous literature regarding agency problems  such as  Jensen and Meckling  (1976) and
debt structure (Rajan, 1992)  is limited to research on whether the discrepancy between cash-flow
rights and control rights of the ultimate owner in a firm affects the choice of debt. In addition, there
is a lack of research assessing the potential implications of the dual  class shares and providing
possible explanatory value for the debt size and how the debt degree can further be affected by the
potential agency problems.
        Existing research regarding CMS and the debt-to-equity ratio explains how firms CMS can
use debt to facilitate the expropriation of the other shareholders by allowing them to control more
resources without diluting their control stake (Faccio et al., 2001). Furthermore, the research
discusses how CMS may use higher debt-to-equity ratios to inflate the voting power of their shares
and reduce the discipline of the market for corporate control (Harris and Raviv, 1988), (Stulz,
1988). This research is furthermore supported by the more  recent study of Du and Dai (2005).
However, research and data supporting these theories of CMS incentives to increase leverage are
limited, and there is a gap in empirical evidence of these theories.
        This paper investigates control-ownership divergence and  the choice of debt to determine
if the CMS drives firms away from bank debt as they want to avoid the banks' effective monitoring
and scrutiny of the firm. Furthermore, this paper aims to investigate if the CMS affects the firm's
balance sheet by increasing the debt-to-equity ratio.
       Based on what is said above, this paper aims to answer the following questions:

          Do firms where the CMS  has  a  control-ownership wedge avoid bank debt due to its
                                    monitoring and scrutiny?

         Do  firms where the CMS  has  a  control-ownership wedge have a larger debt-to-equity
                                                 ratio?

        This paper's extension on the subject is thus threefold. Primarily, we will replicate the study
of Lin et al. (2013) and modify it through a novel dataset of 2011-2020 to observe if these firms
still have the same bank monitoring avoidance tendencies.
       Secondly, we will use a sample of Swedish firms. The Swedish corporate governance
landscape is significantly differentiated (Holmén and Knopf, 2004). When La Porta et al. (1999)
investigated 27 countries worldwide and their corporate governance measures, Sweden performed
poorly. Sweden ranked first in the usage of dual class shares, second after Belgium in the frequency

                                                                             4
of pyramid ownership, and finally third after Germany and Belgium in the frequency of cross-
shareholdings. We seek to investigate if the weak shareholder minority is still prevalent in Sweden
and how it might affect financing and debt structure. This paper will use a panel data sample of
Swedish firms to focus on a single economic climate with unique legislation and culture regarding
capital structure and  pay-out  policy (Stenfors, 2014).
       Thirdly, in addition to debt source, we will investigate the effect of control-ownership
divergence on the debt-to-equity ratio among the firms in the sample to understand the incentives
and potential effects of CMS and their effect on the firm's leverage.
       Our empirical results indicate  a negative and significant correlation between the CMS's
control-ownership wedge and bank debt level. The results support existing theories regarding the
bank monitoring avoidance hypothesis, where firms with robust CMS avoid monitoring and
scrutinising banks issued debt. Hence, we argue that agency problems are shown due to the
separation of control and ownership among shareholders. However, the results of our extension do
not suggest any significant correlation between CMS and control-ownership wedge and  an
increased debt-to-equity ratio for the firms under their control.
        The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In the second section, we discuss the
theoretical frameworks of corporate governance, debt and moral hazards which are used. Then, we
define their limits and origins. Section  three  describes the methodology of our measurement of
control-ownership divergence. In addition, we outline the hypotheses used in this paper. The fourth
section describes the dataset, the variables, and their definitions. The results are then presented in
section  five, and our conclusion is in section  six.

                                                                             5
                         2.  Theoretical framework

Control-ownership divergence

       In a 1932 classic, Adolph Berle and Gardiner explained their research regarding a
prevalence of widely held corporations in the U.S., where ownership of capital is dispersed among
small shareholders and control is concentrated in the hands of a few managers and shareholders.
However, many studies since have questioned the empirical validity of Berle and Gardiner, such
as Shleifer and Vishny (1986) and shown that there is a modest concentration of ownership among
American firms.
       However, as the eyes are drawn towards Europe, several studies showed a significant
concentration of ownership in Germany (Edwards and Fischer, 1996;  Franks and Mayer, 2009)
and Italy  (Barca, 1995), and several other OECD countries (Becht, 1999).
        The control-ownership divergence results from the discrepancy between the cash-flow
rights and the control rights of a shareholder. This discrepancy can originate from the classification
of A and B shares of a company, where A shares tend to imply more voting strength than B shares.
This discrepancy creates what is referred to as the control-ownership wedge and a controlling
minority shareholder. The paper of La Porta et al. (1999) is the first  article to research the issue of
ultimate control, where they trace the chain of ownership to find who has the most control rights.
The findings were that ownership and control could be separated to the benefit of the larger
shareholder, and further research implied a concentration of ownership over time (Claessens et al.,
2000).
        Control-ownership divergence is hypothesised to create a distance to the negative financial
implications that tunnelling incentives could entail for a firm  shareholder, effectively facilitating
a situation where the CMS can exert personal benefits (Shleifer and Vishny, 1997; Lin et al., 2013).
For example, there are examples of tunnelling where assets are transferred out of a company,
profits are moved off to  escape creditors, and financially troubled firms are propped up using loan
guarantees from other companies with which the CMS was associated (Johnson et al., 2000).
Another example of such tunnelling incentives, where personal benefits are the priority, is when
deals are made between parent firms and subsidiaries that do not benefit the non-controlling
shareholders of that firm but the CMS.
       The CMS can recognise that the possible financial impact will be less prominent on their
stake than the possible personal benefits which can be exerted (Yang et al., 2021). As laid out by
Holmén and Knopf (2004), markets such as Sweden and Belgium have a history of strong
shareholders who possess great control over companies, as opposed to, for instance, the U.S.,
where  power often is more fragmented.

Public vs Private debt

       The issuing of public debt has long been influenced by research regarding its diffuse
ownership and free-rider problems regarding the individual bondholders' incentives to engage in
monitoring which cost them time and resources individually (Diamond, 1994; Diamond, 1991).
The research argues that even if the bondholders were keen on monitoring the forms, the efforts
would be inefficient as it would involve unnecessary duplication of monitoring efforts and
resources for  all  the individual bondholders (Houston and James, 1996). This is mainly unsecured
public bonds without valuable and tradable assets as securities.

                                                                             6
       Theorists have argued that borrowing from a bank reduces the information asymmetry
issues and, consequently, allows the firms to issue debt with less financial friction as the bank can
more effectively understand the company and determine its credit risk. This decrease in financial
friction thus would, according to theory, lead to a lower cost of debt (Stiglitz and Weiss, 1983).
Further advantages of relying on bank debt come from having possibilities of renegotiation and
re-contracting in case of financial distress, as well as that they possess the ability to price claims
in case of a large extent of information asymmetry, given the fact that they have special access to
inside information (Ramakrishnan and Thakor, 1984).
       Diamond (1984) and Fama (1985) suggested  that private debt,  i.e.,  bank debt, in this case,
is superior in providing monitoring as opposed to arm's length investors. This will, in turn, entail
that firms with high degrees of information asymmetry should exploit the use of bank debt to
mitigate the implications to the degree possible. In contrast, the opposite goes for firms with low
degrees of information asymmetry. The theory is that with higher information asymmetry, the firm
will get more favourable terms of loans from banks, as they are superior in their monitoring and
credit risk analysis compared to public issuers. However, as outlined by Diamond (1984) and
Rajan (1992), low-quality firms will assess the extent of monitoring provided by banks as a
substantial cost and thus issue public debt instead. This monitoring advantage stems partly from
having access to private information as insiders (Lin et al., 2013). The advantages give banks
greater insight into the borrowing firm's operation. Through the effective use of targeted measures,
partly through the threat of liquidation, they can control them superior to the public lenders. (Park
2000) argues that the tools of the private lenders,  i.e.,  in this case, the banks, such as the threat of
liquidation and a renegotiation, effectively allow them to exert great power to align incentives with
their borrowers. These tools are substantially less applicable for public lenders due to the
dispersion of power  and influence.

Principal-Agent theory

        The theory of the principal-agent problem stems from research conducted by Jensen and
Meckling (1976), where the concept is defined as an agency relationship within a firm. The
relationship is further defined with a  contract where a person (the principal) hires a person (the
agent) to perform a service on their behalf. If the respective parties are utility maximising, there is
good reason to believe that the agent will not always act in the principal's best interest but pursue
its own interests. This is defined as the principal-agent problem or, in this paper, agency problem
or agency cost. These costs can, however, be mitigated by aligning incentives with the agent and
the principal.
       Firm-controlling agents without economic interest in the firm can pursue benefits that are
not necessarily value-creating for the firm. Through misaligned incentives, there is a risk that the
agent acts differently than the principal would want. This can be through excessive risk-taking,
pursuing personal benefits, or hazardous deal activity which favours an external company the agent
is afflicted with.
        Given the context of this research paper, agency costs become relevant through the control-
ownership wedge as incentives could be altered  through this discrepancy. Through the control-
ownership  divergence,  there  exists  a,  per  definition,  agency  problem  between  the  firm's
shareholders. The more significant the discrepancy, the more distant the CMS comes from the
possible negative implications that tunnelling incentives could entail, which could affect the risk
aversion of the CMS (Boubaker and Labégorre 2008).

                                                                             7
The debt-to-equity ratio in the context of agency problems

       According to Kim and Sorensen (1986), it is evident that agency problems and, thus,
potential costs seem to arise as the degree of debt claims undertaken by a firm rises. Through
issuing debt, the managers, through their controlling shareholders, have incentives to redistribute
capital from the bondholders to the equity holders. Studies such as Bertrand et al. (2002) and
Johnson et al. (2000) show how the CMS can have incentives to pursue potential personal benefits
and tunnelling activities, using the redistributed capital from the bondholders to transfer resources
out of the firms, moving off capital to escape creditors, and exploiting corporate opportunities for
the firm.
       Recent research supports this theory, such as Faccio et al. (2001) explains how debt can
facilitate the expropriation of the affiliate by allowing the CMS  to control more resources without
diluting their control stake. The study further refers to research by Harris and Raviv (1988) and
Stulz (1988), who argue that CMS may have incentives to increase leverage to inflate the voting
power of their shares and reduce the discipline of the market for corporate control. Finally, this
research is consistent with recent studies from Du and Dai (2005), who explain how CMS can
increase leverage out of a protective motive to prevent the dilution of their dominant control.

                                                                             8
                              3.  Methodology

       This chapter aims to provide a foundation for the method used in the processing and the
interpretation of our data. First, we examine whether a control-ownership wedge of the CMS
affects debt choice. We use Swedish data  compiled from Nasdaq Main Market and employ a
methodology similar to the one used in the original research paper produced by Lin et al. (2013).
The method concerns employing a multivariate regression model from which we conclude the
marginal effects and power of the tests. We conduct regressions on different models, effectively
facilitating an analysis enhanced by re-framing and viewing the data from different angles.

Hypotheses
        The hypotheses this paper aims to investigate are:

         Control-ownership divergence in Swedish firms leads the CMS to influence and choose
             public debt to  avoid  bank monitoring of their firm and its corporate decisions.

         The CMS will influence and choose to increase the debt-to-equity ratio to gain control of
          the increased amounts of capital  while  preventing  dilution of their dominant control.

Theoretical motivation

        The first hypothesis is based on the theories outlined by this paper's benchmark article (Lin
et al., 2013) and their bank avoidance hypothesis.  We argue that this effect should also be seen in
Sweden, driven by Sweden's weak shareholder protection and frequent use of dual  class shares.
Furthermore, as opposed to Shleifer and Vishny (1997) and Lin et al. (2013), we recognise that
national legislation exists within the subject of dual  class shares and the expropriation of power
within companies. The country-specific effect is significant to the degree that a multinational
analysis would become too affected by the differing characteristics of different legislative
environments. The second hypothesis follows Bertrand et al. (2002) and Johnson et al. (2000)
theories regarding agency problems and leverage, which show incentives of CMS to increase debt,
allowing the CMS to control more resources to potentially engage in further hazardous activities
with the funds. Furthermore, theories from Faccio et al. (2001) explain how CMS have incentives
to increase debt to control more resources without diluting their dominant control. Our hypothesis
thus follows these theories in the context of our research in the Swedish corporate governance
climate.

Research design
        We compile a dataset containing Swedish companies listed on Nasdaq in 2011-2020 to test
the above listed hypotheses. As previously mentioned, we employ a methodology like the one used
by Lin et al. (2013) and Boubaker and Labégorre (2008)  by  using  the  control-ownership wedge as
a  dependent variable,  and thus seek  to  treat is  a proxy for  a  possible  underlying  agency problem.
The agency problem is determined  is determined to stem from  the  difference in control rights and
cash-flow rights,  i.e.,  ideally, to the extent to which control rights exceed the CMS's cash-flow
rights in a firm. We argue that the larger the wedge, the more significant the agency problem could

                                                                             9
become, as  CMS  are increasingly distant from the financial implications of  corporate  decisions.
Furthermore,  to extend  the reasoning we  use  public debt to visualise an existing agency problem
where we treat  it as  being evident choice which distinguishes the CMS’s misaligned incentives.
Thus, the link  which we  seek  to  display  is  how an existing control-ownership wedge could allow
the CMS to influence the organisation so that they choose to issue public debt instead of bank debt,
implying fewer restrictions on the CMS.
        We construct the dependent variable, the debt choice measure, as a fraction of total debt.
The variable is constructed so that the inverse relation exists for public debt. For example, suppose
a strong positive impact is witnessed using bank debt-to-total debt. In that case, the inverse relation
exists for the degree of public debt,  i.e.,  a strong negative relationship exists between the same
variable and public debt. As substantiated by the literature review, public debt is regarded as an
indication of a potential agency problem. However, we recognise the presence of omitted variables
in this case and that other factors influence  the choice of debt but choose to remain consistent with
previous literature, such as Lin et al.  (2013)  who comprises a relevant and focused model which
is not subject to any evident multivariable bias.
       A key aspect of our research is that we employ a single-market analysis, meaning that we
are only researching the Swedish market. Swedish publicly listed companies are the scope of our
analysis, so the  legislation  is the same for all firms within the sample, with caution because it
concerns a ten-year period.  As  there  have been minor revisions made over the given period  which
effectively alters the framework in which possible agency conflicts could appear.  By directing our
research to a single market, we aim to effectively research the concept within a given legal
framework that is  the same  for  all  firms. By doing this, we seek to observe real effects  opposed to
mechanical  effects which  are  primarily  driven  by the  differences in different market’s  legislations.
The argument is strengthened by Boubaker and Labégorre (2008), who states that many of the
variables used in research that concern the global dataset are likely to become influenced by other
country specifications, which damages the original research by omitting correlated factors.
       For the study, we chose a more extended period, from 2011-2020  to  ensure  that the results
are robust  to  evident time-dependent omitted variables affecting our data  which could occur if the
data only  concerns a narrow timeframe.  Our sample size per year varied with the total number of
companies listed on the main market list but summarised, the sample size was 2183 after the
adjustments and exclusions explained above. The total number of  different  companies in our data
amounts to 333.
        The data concerns a panel dataset that looks at a broad set of firms over a given period.
Our dependent variable is the Bank  debt as a fraction of Total debt. We perform  Ordinary Least
Squared  regressions to observe a possible correlation between the variables while accounting for
relevant control variables.
      To answer the mentioned research questions, we construct a set of different OLS
regressions for our two dependent variables: bank debt as a fraction of total debt and debt-to-equity
ratio.  The empirical method employed in this research paper is a multivariate regression analysis
in which we observe the effect of a set of different variables on two dependent variables.  Since
both dependent variables are fractions, we strengthen our empirical method, as Lin et al. (2013)
conducted by estimating Tobit regression, to effectively account for that, making the results more
robust.  We report the  marginal effects  of each variable. We report standard errors  given the
possible implications of  a  fixed effect. We look  at power  of the test for each variable  and view the
model’s accuracy in the R-squared.

                                                                            10
        The effect of  control-ownership divergence on the choice of debt is estimated with the
following multivariable linear regression model:

   Debt choice measure = f(Control  -  Ownership wedge, control variables, Firm fixed effects)

       Further, we choose to examine a subset  of our data, composed of the most relevant
observations,  i.e.,  those firms in which the CMS have a  positive  control-ownership wedge. Where
their control rights exceed their cash-flow rights. In firms with a difference, we theorise that there
will be a propensity to  entrench themselves and expropriate other shareholders.  Thus, it becomes
highly relevant in our additional tests to conduct multivariate analysis on the subsample in which
a concrete foundation exists for the suggested agency problems. However, we included all wedges
in our original sample to avoid attributing biases to our empirical results.
Furthermore, we draw a threshold to the control rights for the CMS at 5%, i.e. exclude all the firms
whose CMS have fewer control rights than 5%. This is because we deem, similar to Lin et al.
(2013), CMS excess of 5% control rights to have sufficient influence to be eligible to exert their
power in their respective firm. All firms with CMS under 5% of control rights are thus excluded
using the inverse reasoning. Thus, we aim to remain close to a realistic picture, as well as previous
literature, to recognise that a shareholder of below 5% would likely not be able to exert significant
influence.
       To further improve the explanatory value of our model, we will investigate various
empirical challenges that provide causal inference.  We include fixed effect estimators, which
allows us to get closer to causal claims when commenting on our results. Our fixed effect model
includes accounting for firm-specific as opposed to industry-fixed effects. Both tests were
originally included due to significant results from conducting the Breusch-Pagan test. However,
including both neglects their effects, and thus we only include the firm. We view firm fixed effects
as playing a more significant role in the question at hand over industry fixed effects. To avoid an
inaccurate interaction between dependent and independent variables, we recognise the existence
of groups in our sample and their effect on the result. By accounting for it, we have robust standard
errors in our  model.  In addition, we perform multiple VIF (variance inflation factor) tests
throughout the paper on our respective models. The results of these tests are presented in the
appendix.  Thus, we assess each OLS  regression by viewing the variable’s VIF results, to deem
whether it is feasible to include. By assuring this, we effectively mitigate the degree to which there
is a correlation among the predictor variables. To mitigate the issue of correlation amongst
predictors, we exclude Z-score from the model in which the debt-to-equity ratio is the dependent
variable, as debt is used in the construction of that variable.
       The control variables included in the regression are many, which we deem essential, and
we stem from previous literature to decide on which to include. In order to mitigate that, we might
exclude any important determinants of Y which otherwise could distort the model. Compared to
Lin et al. (2013), we exclude certain control variables that he deems relevant. Such variables are
propping potential and distance to default. The simple explanation is that we have limited space
and focus more thoroughly on other aspects of the research. It is further a matter of unavailable
data.
       We test for different factors that we hypothesise will affect or even strengthen the
monitoring avoidance. We use Z-score as a proxy for financial distress, similar to Lin et al. (2013),
to understand if they are significant in our model and perhaps could provide further clarity on  the
forces of information asymmetry and moral hazards in firms. The variable is included in the

                                                                            11
additional tests of Lin et al. (2013) and is deemed relevant and included to control for its presence
in explaining why firms avoid bank monitoring.

                            4.  Data Description

        In constructing our data set, we collect a sample of all Swedish firms publicly listed on the
Nasdaq main market, including small, mid and large cap. We collect data from the S&P Compustat
and Holdings database. The ownership data of control rights and cash-flow rights are gathered
from the Holdings database, which provides extensive ownership information on all publicly listed
firms in Sweden. Modular finance and its service Holdings extract information on ownership
structures from Nordics companies, stemming from data from the financial infrastructure company
Euroclear. Holdings is used by over 90% of the largest banks and institutions in Sweden and are
well-known as a reliable source of ownership data. The capital structure data and all other financial
information we use to construct control variables are gathered from S&P Compustat (Capital I.Q.).
The Compustat database provides financial data on over 50,000 public and private companies.
S&P Compustat collects its information from the company's annual reports.

Sample selection
        We collect a comprehensive data set on Swedish publicly listed firms' corporate ownership,
control,  and debt structures. We obtain detailed information on companies which are or have been
listed on Nasdaq's main market within the time frame 2011-2020. We obtain fiscal year-end data
from 2011-2020 from the two databases, S&P Compustat for the financials and Holdings for the
ownership data. The data contains 2104 firm-year observations across the ten-year time frame. The
data concerns an unbalanced panel dataset, within which we have 10-year data on certain
companies while other companies only are present during a single year,  i.e.,  unbalanced panel
dataset.
       We choose the Swedish market specifically as we recognise it is unique by a history of
concentrated ownership, with many companies which are run by strong shareholders in Sweden
specifically (Claessens et al., 2000). Furthermore, Sweden is a market where control-ownership
divergence is significant. It thus becomes increasingly relevant in the lens of potential agency
problems arising from this discrepancy between ownership and control (La Porta et al., 1999).
        Choosing to look at public firms is a result of ensuring data availability. However, it is
mainly public firms that also have public debt as a feasible option as outlined by Houston & James
(1996). However, we recognise an increasing degree of factors mitigating potential visible agency
problems in public firms due to the high degree of transparency and other factors at  play in well-
functioning capital markets.
       We obtain ownership information of the largest ultimate owner for each company and each
year selectively. When collecting the complementary information on financials from S&P's
Compustat, we exclude all data points with missing values on any of the primary or control
variables used in the regression analysis. We exclude financial institutions from our sample as it
will skew our data set since our dependent variable is a debt offered as a product from banks, and
their structure is ultimately very different.
       To avoid potential survival bias where our data only contain the firms which have
"survived" as a firm over the period which we have chosen. Those firms that might have been

                                                                            12
delisted or gone bankrupt are also included in the research, effectively mitigating any survival bias.
In addition, through hand-collecting old financial as well as ownership information, we include
those in our sample as well. The method creates a deviation in the number of companies  we have
information on for each year, which is why our data set ranges from 270 firms to 333 firms per
year.
        We limit the data set by excluding all firms where the largest ultimate owner has below 5%
of the firm's control rights. The limitation is done to  mitigate the extent of firms where the largest
ultimate owner does not hold a sufficiently powerful position to exert any significant influence.
Lin et al. (2013)  defines  fragmented ownership  as when the largest ultimate owner has less than
5% control right, and no significant personal benefits could reasonably be pursued. Furthermore,
we effectively exclude all companies with no debt registered in the Compustat database, as those
companies will not be able to show their debt choice.
       As previously mentioned, we employ a set of thresholds through which we slim down our
data to establish its relevance to the model employed in this research paper. However, due to the
already slim dataset, we limit the extent of limiting data further. We presume an approach where
we perform tests on selected subsamples of our data to complement the  tests,  we perform on our
full dataset instead of entirely excluding a significant fraction of the data directly in the sample
selection. The steps in which we delimited our dataset are  listed below.

Table 1:  Sample size

Data Variables
The control-ownership divergence of the largest ultimate owner

       The Modular Finance database allows us to map the complete ownership chain and identify
the firm's largest ultimate owner and  their control rights and cash-flow rights. Indirect control is
also accounted for, which would be control or cash-flow rights through a different entity that the
same ultimate owner controls. Finally, direct ownership is directly linked and defined according
to existing literature such as Claessens et al. (2000).
       The largest ultimate owner is defined as the ultimate owner with the most outstanding
cumulative control rights.

                                                                            13
        To capture the degree of control-ownership divergence in a firm's ownership structure, we
define our crucial measure, the control-ownership wedge, as the difference between control rights
and the cash-flow rights of the largest ultimate owner of the firm.
       Consequently, we theorise on the background of previous literature that the larger  the
deviation between ownership and control, the greater the incentives of the controlling shareholders
to engage in tunnelling and other moral hazard activities (Shleifer and Vishny, 1997), (Johnson et
al., 2000).

                      Rcontrol-  Rcashflow = Control-Ownership  Wedge

Debt structure

       The total debt reported on Compustat is the total of all debts, including term loans,
revolving credit, senior bonds and notes, subordinated bonds and notes, commercial paper, capital
leases, and other debts.
       To study the  choice between bank debt and public debt, we use the debt structure
information from Compustat to construct two measures: The ratio of bank debt-to-total debt and
the ratio of public debt to total debt.
       Bank debt  is defined as the sum of term loans and revolving credit, and  public  debt  is
defined as the sum of senior bonds and notes, subordinated bonds and notes, and commercial paper.
        According to Lin et al. (2013), excluding capital leases and other debt has proved robust.
Moreover, the exclusion is increasingly important due to recent changes within IFRS-16 and the
characterisation of long-term lease liabilities as an interest-bearing liability on the balance sheet.
However, the article also discussed the potential importance of within-country factors, such as firm
ownership structure, in determining debt choice. The importance of country-specific factors argues
for our case of focusing on a Swedish data sample.

                     (𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑚 𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑛𝑠  +  𝑟𝑒𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑣𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑐𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡)
                                                  =  % 𝑜𝑓 𝑏𝑎𝑛𝑘 𝑑𝑒𝑏𝑡
                         (𝑃𝑢𝑏𝑙𝑖𝑐 𝑑𝑒𝑏𝑡  +  𝐵𝑎𝑛𝑘 𝑑𝑒𝑏𝑡)

Data variables (with  control variables)

       In examining the relationship between corporate ownership structure and debt structure,
we  control  for  differences  in  various  firm  characteristics,  including  firm  size,  leverage,
profitability, Q, asset tangibility, and default risk.

                                                                            14
Table 2:  Variable definition

                                                                            15
Sample Distribution

Table 3:  Summary statistics
The sample comprises 333 companies

        As shown by table 3 presented above, we have compiled a collection of key  statistics for
each variable employed in the model. The median of the control-ownership wedge is 0.00, and the
mean is 0.051, meaning that only a fraction of the observations in the sample constitutes firms
whose owners' control rights exceed their cash-flow rights. However, the mean of approximately
5% implies there still exists a large degree of firms in our sample with a substantial control-
ownership wedge.
       Public debt is not common within the sample, as observed by a 0.01 median of public debt
to total  debt. Important to note, however, is that public debt is not a viable tool for many
corporations to choose and thus has evident implications on the sample median.
        In addition, Z-score has a median of 2.53, and given that Z-score below two is regarded as
financially distressed firms, most of our sample firms do not generally consist of firms with poor
financial health.
        Our second dependent variable, the subject of our extension, the debt-to-equity ratio,
provides a median of 0.57, effectively visualising  the prevalence of debt as a source of finance in
this context. Again, we witness quite large variations, as with the Z-score, that the variable has a
significant standard deviation.
       Compared to what Lin et al. (2013) presents, our data show many similarities when
examining the various variables' summary statistics. As we apply the research on a single
geographical market, explanations to various deviations in some variables could have multiple
explanations. Our sample differs significantly from that of Lin et al. (2013). However, it is a
reassurance that there are still evident similarities concerning the average and standard deviation
of all vital explanatory variables. The mean and the standard deviation of the control-ownership
wedge variable are 0.05 higher, and the standard deviation is only 0.03 higher than Lin et al.
(2013). Bank and public debt show similar results as a fraction of total debt. The share of bank
debt is substantially higher than the share of the public, both in our case and in the case of Lin  et
al. (2013). This works as a feasible reassurance that the Swedish market provides similar
implications for the critical variable as their multinational sample of over 8000 firms.

                                                                            16
       We display the statistics of our key variables in the graphs below. The control-ownership
wedge, bank debt as a fraction of total debt, public debt as a fraction of total debt and ultimately,
the spread of debt-to-equity ratio among the firms.
       The two graphs concerning the share of public contra bank debt present us with somewhat
expected visuals where bank debt is the prevailing debt choice amongst Swedish firms. However,
some of the Swedish market's unique characteristics are that banks hold a high status. Thus, an
underlying cultural factor provides an understanding  of the seemingly large gap.
        The graph displaying the distribution of the control-ownership wedge across our sample
provides an understanding of the extent of CMS within Swedish publicly listed firms. As expected,
many data points are around 0,  i.e.,  there  is no separation between ownership and control in many
of the firms in our dataset. The bar representing values of zero wedge also represents the very few
occasions where firms have a negative wedge.

Graph 1: Distribution of key variables

Data limitation
       The Compustat database by S&P is a sizable global database subject to legislation and is
operated by one of the largest credit rating companies in the world. Therefore, this is one of the
most trusted sources of financial and company-specific information.  However, their coverage is
gathered on the "scrapping" of quarterly and annual reports and other company announcements.
The data-gathering method of Compustat  opens  for lack of information, especially amongst

                                                                            17
smaller firms which may communicate this information more ambiguously. The reason we analyse
publicly listed firms is evident; there is extensive information because publicly listed firms have
regulatory requirements for reporting their financials. The companies are also more heavily
monitored and sometimes covered by research analysts from different financial and broker firms.
However, we recognise the limitations of this choice as this alters this proposed effect given that
there are elements of supervision from the public equity holders to another extent than privately
held firms. Privately held firms could arguably have more extensive issues of agency costs,
whereas public firms are monitored in the public eye and by potential banks.
        In addition, Compustat provides us with the primary industry classification for each of the
firms in the sample. Therefore, the industry could be relevant as one could recognise that industry
characteristics could affect the degree to which firms use debt as a source of financing.
Furthermore, there  are possibly extensive  regulatory factors affecting the feasibility of issuing
public debt which varies amongst different industries, which further could argue for the inclusion
of industry as an independent variable. However, as the industry classifications are deemed to be
defined too narrowly and followingly, the total number of different industries within our sample
would be too extensive to be of empirical relevance, we choose to exclude it as an independent
variable in our sample. Further, as a substantial part of our sample are companies which are related
to various conglomerates and subsidiaries, this contributes to the issues of including industry
specifications and thus accounting for industry effects.

                             5.  Empirical results

       We conduct a series of tests, where the results are reported in different tables. Table 4
displays the results from our primary empirical model, the effect of the control-ownership wedge
on the choice of debt, bank debt as a fraction of total debt being our dependent variable. We display
three different regressions.  The table includes two OLS  regressions  where the second opposed to
the first one includes the  relevant  control variables. In addition, we account for the possible
implications of our dependent variable being a fraction by adding the results of a Tobit regression,
making our results more robust.
       The findings of our main empirical results gathered from our dataset and regression are
reported in table 4. The variables are to the left, and their values of correlation and significance are
to the right. The table includes an OLS regression using only the control-ownership wedge and
cash-flow rights variables without any firm fixed effect. Furthermore, we present the regression
with all control variables, such as tangibility, profitability, Tobin's Q and Z-score. Displayed in the
tables are the correlation and its significance on the dependent variable, which is  bank debt-to-
total debt. The significance is displayed with three levels of statistical significance, with its levels
explained at the bottom of the table.
        Furthermore, we provide statistical results for a subset of our data, investigating the effect
of  control-ownership divergence on firms  solely  with a wedge  over zero. Having a positive wedge
is what we theorise can create the agency problem, effectively supporting us in constructing this
subsample.
       In addition, we perform robustness tests where firm  fixed effects are analysed  because of
the highly significant Breusch-Pagan test. Finally, we control for firm fixed effect in table 6, where
our results are of slightly less significance and strength.

                                                                            18
       To  make the results more robust, we can conclude that the inverse relationship exists for
public debt/total debt and control-ownership wedge. This is done by setting the public debt-to-
total debt as the dependent variable.
       The  multivariate analysis is employed using the following model:

           debt choice = f (control  -  ownership wedge, firm controls, year, firm effects)

       Table 5 presents the results of the first regressions. We estimate OLS regressions in
columns 1 and 2 and Tobit regression in column 3. Significance with a p-value at less than 10%,
5% and 1% level  is reported through *, ** and  ***  respectively.
        Ultimately, we provide material for our second hypothesis in table 7, where the debt-to-
equity ratio is the dependent variable, and the degree of debt is investigated.

Results
The effect of  corporate ownership divergence on the choice of debt

       Table 4 displays the results of regressions which are conducted using our main empirical
model, in which all firms of our sample are included, and bank debt as a fraction of total debt is
the dependent  variable. When performing the initial test, we exclude firm-fixed effects. However,
we do account for firm fixed effects later in the section concerning robustness testing.
       Firstly, by observing the central independent variable, the control-ownership wedge, we
witness a significant negative correlation between the two variables.  The significance is at the 1%
level.  The result implies that the degree of bank debt of the firm's total debt decreases when the
wedge increases. Furthermore, the correlation remains negative  and significant  when including all
relevant firm control variables and when conducting the Tobit regression, which effectively
accounts for the fact that the dependent variable is a fraction. Based on the estimates from column
2,  a one-standard-deviation increase in the control-ownership wedge reduces the ratio of bank
debt-to-total  debt  by  6  percentage points. The effect is also economically significant given the
sample average bank  debt-to-total debt ratio of 72%.
        Focusing on the various control variables highlights strong significance levels for multiple
of them. Primarily we witness significance at the 1% level across the variables concerning financial
distress, effectively serving as an implication that, since the inverse relation exists for public
debt/total debt, that firm's Z-score and Tobin's Q decreases with larger fractions of public debt. In
addition, cash-flow rights show strong significance at a less than 1% level with bank debt-to-total
debt, implying that firms where the CMS degree of cash-flow rights is larger, tend to have more
immense proportions of bank debt. Regarding the other control variables, we do not find
significance for either profitability or tangibility.
        The  aforementioned  negative relationship of  the  control-ownership wedge  and  the
proportion of bank debt  effectively  supports our hypothesis of bank monitoring avoidance among
firms where the largest shareholder has a large divergence between its' cash-flow rights and control
rights. As the  divergence  increases, firms rely more on public debt and have decreasing bank debt
levels. The results are consistent with the hypothesis that the largest shareholders are using their
voting strength to steer the firm towards public debt rather than bank debt to avoid the more
effective bank monitoring, as per Lin et al. (2013).

                                                                            19
Table 4:  Control-ownership wedge on bank debt
The table presents three separate regressions. The first is an OLS regression containing only two independent variables in the control-ownership
wedge and cash-flow rights. The second also concerns an OLS regression but includes all relevant control variables as outlined above  (marginal
effects reported). Finally, the third regression is a Tobit regression to account for the fact that the dependent variable is a fraction and not an absolute
value.

                                                                            20
        Further observing the values of the original model, including the control variables, there
are findings which go against the surrounding literature theories regarding the effect of firms with
higher asset tangibility and firms which are more profitable. Inconsistent with Lin et al. (2013) and
Houston and James (1996),  many of  these variables are positively correlated, although with low
significance. The positive correlation between asset tangibility and bank debt has multiple
potential explanations, such as  better terms due to increased collateral which the bank can monitor
effectively. The negative correlation between  Tobin’s Q  and bank debt has high significance
levels, indicating that bank debt tends to decrease along with the firm value. The correlation  is not
surprising as public debt tends to be easier for larger firms to issue. Finally, the positive and
significant correlation between profitability and bank has explanations such as a lower credit risk
for the bank due to a lower risk of default.
       The  model's explanatory value is relatively low  as displayed by  the R-Squared value. The
R-squared reflects that debt choice is a complicated question with multiple potentially omitted
variables affecting the firms. We are thus careful to analyse the model's results with too much
confidence. However, the significant negative correlation still supports our hypothesis of bank
monitoring avoidance of CMS in the Swedish market.
       Furthermore, as previously touched upon and as outlined by Lin et al. (2013), the effect  of
control-ownership divergence is stated to increase amongst firms with poor financial health.
Following the methodology of Lin et al. (2013), this research paper uses Z-score as a proxy for the
financial health of a firm.  i.e.,  firms below the most commonly used threshold of 2.0 are deemed
financially distressed. We include this in our main model as a control variable to recognise the
implications of financially distressed firms. However, we choose not to include a whole model in
which the interactive effect of the Z-score and the control-ownership wedge is the main subject of
interest. Instead, those results are presented in table  10  in the appendix.

Additional tests

        As presumed priorly, the higher the excess control, as captured by the control-ownership
wedge, the larger the incentives to pursue private benefits for the CMS. Thus, to further investigate
the issue, we perform additional tests on  a  subsample  of the data. The primary test is sampling the
data into all the firm-year observations with a control-ownership wedge above 0. The limitation is
to single out the firms we theorise to have the structures that can imply an agency problem with
the CMS's controlling position.

                                                                            21
Table 5:  Subsample: Control-ownership wedge on bank debt
The table presents four separate regressions. The data concerns a subsample containing the firm-year observations, which present a positive control-
ownership wedge. The first is OLS regression containing only two independent variables in the control-ownership wedge and cash-flow rights. The
second also concerns an OLS regression but includes all relevant control variables (marginal effects reported). The third includes fixed effects and
is an OLS regression with robust standard errors. The fourth is a Tobit regression to account for the dependent variable being a fraction and not an
absolute value.

                                                                            22
        When observing the subsample results, an evident difference is the presence of a different
R-squared than the  one which was  original sample. Other than differences in reported marginal
effects as well as the level of significance, more importantly, the subsample offers a lower R-
squared than the original sample. Indicating that the model  has a better empirical fit  on  the larger
dataset, which lowers the practical use of our model  in the real world. It implies  that when
specifying the model for a focused sample, our model does not increase its explanatory value.
However, this should be regarded with caution, as possible explanations for this could lie in the
size of the subsample, comprising only 129 firms, and that it is not little to provide any sufficient
explanatory value regarding the issue at hand.
       Table 5 shows a significantly smaller sample size, 737 observations, compared to 2104 in
the original dataset. After forming a subsample of all firms with a positive control-ownership
wedge, the dataset is slimmed down by approximately 65% to effectively form a sample
representing the observations in which we theorise an effect, only including the firms where the
supposed prerequisites for an agency problem exist for the CMS.
       Looking at our primary independent  variable in table 5, the control-ownership wedge
presents a negative and significant relation to the proportion of bank debt at the 1% level. However,
concerning the original sample, we witness a smaller marginal effect,  i.e.,  a less apparent relation
among the variables.  Based  on the  estimates  from column 2,  a one-standard-deviation increase in
the control-ownership wedge reduces the ratio of bank debt-to-total  debt  by  5  percentage points.
The effect is also economically significant given the sample average bank  debt-to-total debt ratio
of  65%.  The effect indicates that our subsample has low explanatory value for the results,  as
touched upon  regarding the  difference amongst the R-squared of the two  models,  despite  it being
focused on the sample of firms where we theorise an effect.
       In respect to  other variables, we find that  profitable  firms have a tendency to rely on bank
debt  as displayed by a positive and significant relationship amongst the two variables.  With a 0.24
higher marginal effect as well  as significance  at the 5% level, it  implies  that the relation among
profitability and bank debt  exists  exclusively within our  focused sample.
        We witness a significant difference when controlling for firm fixed effects in column 3 as
opposed to columns 1 and 3. This  is  because of  the small sample, where it only represents
observations from 129 firms. With a smaller number of firms, there is a higher likelihood of the
effect stemming from each firm. Thus, much of the variation in this model stems from the fact that
it is the same small set of firms showing the effect across different years.

Robustness test

       With the aim of effectively ensuring robustness of the results in table 4, we include OLS
regression which includes fixed effect estimators  to avoid there being sole mechanical effects
displayed in the initial regressions. More specifically, we want to investigate whether and how the
results presented in table 4 are present when accounting  for firm-specific differences. A limitation
when performing regressions on samples including firm-year observations concerns the internal
policies in respect to capital structure. In which, firm’s strategic focus largely will influence the
degree to which a firm can rely on debt, and further the degree to which they are eligible to choose
public debt as a source of financing.  We choose to include firm fixed effects, not industry, since it
would negatively affect the effect of firm fixed estimators. When weighing the two against each
other, we deem firm characteristics more important than industry. However, we recognise that

                                                                            23
specific industry standards may affect what degree of public debt is reasonable, for instance. We
perform  the below outlined  robustness test, following the result of the  Breusch-Pagan  test, which
implies that there are fixed effects at play in our model, effectively explaining a large extent of the
variation in the model. Below in table 6, we witness the results of our fixed effect model and a
significantly lower marginal effect, providing a 0.15 difference for the control-ownership wedge.
The model still provides significance  and thus  explanatory value at the 1% level  for  the primary
independent variable, the control-ownership wedge.

                                                                            24
Table 6:  Control-Ownership divergence on bank debt including fixed effect estimators

The table presents two separate regressions—the first being OLS regression containing only two independent variables, control-ownership wedge
and cash-flow rights. The second also  concerns an OLS regression but includes all relevant control variables as outlined above. The regressions
presented in the table concern a robustness test to account for possible firm fixed effects.

                                                                            25
        In accordance with the initial results of the main empirical model, including the fixed effect
estimators strengthen the negative and significant relationship between the dependent variable, the
proportion of bank debt, and the main independent  variable being control-ownership wedge.
However, the relationship among the two variables  is  weaker here, a  consequence  of an extensive
degree of the variation stemming from the  fact that firm-year observations do in fact belong to a
specific entity.  The  variation thus largely stems from firm specific characteristics.
       However, table 6 showcases a low marginal effect throughout the variables with low
significance levels, implying that much of the observed effect in our original model stems from
firm  identity. Given that table 1 ("Summary statistics"") showed that less than half of our original
sample had a positive wedge, and further, the fact that firms are likely consistent in their data
across the years, it is reasonable to view a large extent of firm fixed effect. The firms where this
problem occurs may have a disproportionate effect on the model.

Hypothesis 2

       Table 7 concerns the results of the second hypothesis in which we theorise regarding the
mentioned control-ownership wedge and its impact  on the extent of debt,  i.e.,  that a higher wedge
could imply a higher debt-to-equity ratio.  As outlined by Kim and Sorensen (1986), it is evident
that agency problems and, thus, potential costs seem to arise as the degree of debt claims
undertaken by a firm rises. Through issuing debt, the managers, through their controlling
shareholders, have incentives to redistribute capital from the bondholders to the equity holders.
We employ an OLS regression similar to the one employed in the initial hypothesis. Again, we
chose to control for the variables included in our primary hypothesis while also including fixed
effect estimators, also this time a result of the Breusch-Pagan test, which identified the presence
of heteroskedasticity. Including fixed effect estimators allow us to construct robust standard errors.

                                                                            26
Table 7: Control-ownership on debt-to-equity ratio
The table presents three separate regressions, which all concern the control-ownership wedge as the primary independent variable but with the debt-
to-equity ratio as the dependent variable. The first is OLS regression containing only two independent variables in the control-ownership wedge
and cash-flow rights. The second also concerns an OLS regression but includes all relevant control variables as outlined above  (marginal effects
reported). Finally, the third regression is a Tobit regression to account for the fact that the dependent variable is a fraction and not an absolute value.

                                                                            27
        In addition to previous research, we theorised that the debt-to-equity ratio would increase
along with the control-ownership wedge. We expected leverage to increase with the incentives
explained by Kim and Sorensen (1986), Bertrand et al. (2002) and Johnson et al. (2000). The
papers suggest an effect where CMS increase leverage to increase the free cash flow in their
control, to further pursue potential private benefits and tunnelling activities using the bondholder’s
capital. Our paper's hypothesis was further supported by the study by Du and Dai (2005),  which
suggested that CMS increases leverage in their firm to prevent the dilution of their dominant
control.
        Our results do not support our hypothesis, as the effect of the control-ownership wedge has
little significance and, nevertheless, has a negative correlation with the firm's debt-to-equity ratio.
Based on the estimates from column 2, a one-standard-deviation increase in the control-ownership
wedge reduces the  debt-to-equity ratio  by  15  percentage points. The effect is also economically
significant given the sample average  debt-to-equity ratio  of  82%.  There are several explanations
for the negative correlation. One could be the effect of the CMS lowering leverage to minimise
the risk of bankruptcy, similar to Fama's (1980) theory of management protecting themselves with
lower debt rates in firms with misaligned incentives, which similarly could be applied to CMS.
The results could also be explained by the fact that many CMS are family shareholders who avoid
risk for their company. Theories such as González et al. (2013) suggest that family ownership on
the boards lowers the firm's debt levels.
        Further observing the model, there is little significance and explanatory power to the rest
of the variables. The Z-score variable is highly significant. However, this is hardly surprising given
that the Z-score formula is partly based on the firm's equity market value divided by total liabilities.
Its negative correlation and significance are thus not surprising, as  if the firm's debt-to-equity ratio
increases, its Z-score decreases. It is unsurprising as the purpose of the formula is to show
increased leverage and financial distress in firms.
        Furthermore, as observed, we perform robustness tests in terms of fixed effect estimators
on the debt-to-equity regression, as done with the primary hypothesis. These results imply a
significant difference.

Summary of results
       In general, our results imply a significant negative correlation between  control-ownership
divergence and bank debt, effectively supporting our primary hypothesis of CMS relying more on
public debt to avoid the monitoring and scrutiny of bank debt monitoring. As a firm's control-
ownership wedge increases, the proportion of bank debt-to-total debt lowers significantly, whereas
the firm's reliance on public debt increases.
        The other results determine a significant correlation between the firm's Q-score and Z-
score and the control-ownership wedge. The correlation is in line with previous literature, where
the Z-score increases with the wedge, meaning that firms with a higher risk of financial distress
tend to rely more on bank debt since there are possibilities of refinancing and better terms if the
debt is risking default.
       However, our second hypothesis is not supported by our data, with little evidence that there
exists a relation between the wedge and a firm's degree of debt financing. There are several
explanations for this, e.g., risk avoidance from management and CMS, which could decrease
leverage for the firms.
        Furthermore, we recognise what the low level of R-squared implies for our empirical
model. The R-squared shows a low explanatory value for the variance of our model and its usage

                                                                            28
as empirical evidence for the bank avoidance hypothesis. However, these results are expected
when it concerns a niche research segment. Adding multiple variables would mitigate the omitted
variable bias but form a multivariable bias. The seemingly low R-squared could thus be regarded
as evidence  of limited explanatory value.

Table 8:  The results’  implication for hypotheses

                                                                            29
                               6.  Conclusion

        With the background of our results, we conclude that a significant and negative relationship
exists between the  control-ownership wedge and bank debt as a fraction of total debt. The
relationship suggests that the control-wedge ownership creates incentives for CMS to pursue
private benefits, tunnelling and other hazardous actions which disfavour the minority shareholders,
as they are avoiding bank debt monitoring. However, there still needs to be more knowledge of
whether these incentives are sufficient to argue that the CMS is hazardous to the rest of the
shareholders in their companies.
        The results of our additional model concerning the debt-to-equity ratio implied that a strong
CMS does not necessarily lead to higher leverage and bankruptcy risk. The results are positive
because it supports that leverage is not a way that CMS engages in hazardous actions due to its
corporate control.
       Our research becomes relevant concerning the ongoing debate in Sweden and other
countries regarding protecting weaker minority shareholders. The evidence from this paper
supports the fact that the use of dual  class shares with different  voting strengths increases the
avoidance of bank monitoring and supports the theory of agency problems arising from a control-
ownership divergence. However, we view all our results with caution, given their low R-squared
and potential explanatory power.
    We recommend that further research focuses on determining and searching for tangible
empirical evidence of the agency costs which arise from the use of dual  class shares. There is still
a research gap regarding where the related agency costs appear in firms. There are also possibilities
to extend the research through the subject of debt covenants as they might serve as a solution for
the free-rider problem of the public, especially unsecured,  debt. According to our analysis, debt
covenants could mitigate situations where hazardous incentive problems influence firms  which
might choose public debt due to the lower monitoring. Different solutions of negative and positive
covenants for the public  debt issuing could help mitigate the monitoring problem, which serves as
a basis for our agency problem  in relation to the choice of debt. The firms where the most
prominent owner has a significant control-ownership wedge and incentives of pursuing personal
benefits would then be unable to profit  and avoid monitoring  from seeking public financing.
       The separation between ownership and control will remain an ongoing debate in the global
and Swedish markets. In the debate, it is necessary to remember the importance of protecting weak
shareholders, despite the potential advantages of dual  class shares, such as their increased liquidity
and  favourability  with foreign investors.

                                                                            30
                               7.  Appendix

Tables

Table 9:  VIF-test for the variables of main regressions.
VIF test on the variables included in the respective models

                                                                            31
Table 10: Model with a Z-score interaction term
OLS regression with financial distress

                                                                            32
Distribution of control variables
Graph 2:  Distribution of the independent variable cash-flow rights.

                                                                            33
Graph 3:  Distribution of the independent variable Z-score.

                                                                            34
Graph 4:  Distribution of the independent variable Tobin’s Q.

                                                                            35
Graph 5:  Distribution of the independent variable Profit.

                                                                            36
Graph 6:  Distribution of the independent variable Tangibility.

                                                                            37
Sources
Altman, Edward I. "Financial ratios, discriminant analysis and the prediction of corporate
bankruptcy." The journal of finance 23.4 (1968): 589-609.

BARCA, F., 1995. On corporate governance in Italy: issues,  facts and agenda. Facts and Agenda
(September 1995), .

BEBCHUK, L.A., KRAAKMAN, R. and TRIANTIS, G., 2000. Stock pyramids, cross-ownership,
and dual class equity: the mechanisms and agency costs of separating control from cash-flow
rights. Concentrated corporate ownership. University of Chicago Press, pp. 295-318.

BECHT, M., 1999. European corporate governance: Trading off liquidity against control.
European Economic Review, 43(4-6), pp. 1071-1083.

BERTRAND, M., MEHTA, P. and MULLAINATHAN, S., 2002. Ferreting out tunnelling: An
application to Indian business groups. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(1), pp. 121-148.

BOUBAKER, S. and LABÉGORRE, F., 2008. Ownership structure, corporate governance and
analyst following: A study of French listed firms.  Journal of Banking & Finance, 32(6), pp. 961-
976.

CAMPELLO, M., LIN, C., MA, Y. and ZOU, H., 2011. The real and financial implications of
corporate hedging. The journal of finance, 66(5), pp. 1615-1647.

CLAESSENS, S., DJANKOV, S. and LANG, L.H., 2000. The separation of ownership and control
in East Asian corporations. Journal of Financial Economics, 58(1-2), pp. 81-112.

CRONQVIST, H. and NILSSON, M., 2003. Agency costs of controlling minority shareholders.
Journal of Financial and Quantitative analysis,  38(4), pp. 695-719.

DIAMOND, D.W., 1991. Monitoring and reputation: The choice between bank loans and directly
placed debt. Journal of political Economy, 99(4), pp. 689-721.

DIAMOND, D.W., 1984. Financial intermediation and delegated  monitoring. The review of
economic studies, 51(3), pp. 393-414.

DENIS, D.J. and MIHOV, V.T., 2003. The choice among bank debt, non-bank private debt, and
public debt: evidence from new corporate borrowings. Journal of Financial Economics, 70(1), pp.
3-28.

DU, J. and DAI, Y., 2005. Ultimate corporate ownership structures and capital structures:
Evidence from East Asian economies. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 13(1), pp.
60-71.

EDWARDS, J. and FISCHER, K., 1996. Banks, finance and investment in Germany. Cambridge
University Press.

                                                                            38
FACCIO, M., LANG, L.H. and YOUNG, L., 2001. Dividends and expropriation. American
economic review, 91(1), pp. 54-78.

FAMA, E.F., 1985. What's different about banks? Journal of Monetary Economics, 15(1), pp. 29-
39.

FRANKS, J. and  MAYER, C., 2009. 12. Corporate Ownership and Control in the UK, Germany,
and France. Global Corporate Governance. Columbia University Press, pp. 239-262.

GONZÁLEZ, M., GUZMÁN, A., POMBO, C. and TRUJILLO, M., 2013. Family firms and debt:
Risk aversion versus risk of losing control. Journal of Business Research, 66(11), pp. 2308-2320.

HARRIS, M. and RAVIV, A., 1988. Corporate governance: Voting rights and majority rules.
Journal of Financial Economics, 20, pp. 203-235.

HOLMÉN, M. and KNOPF, J.D., 2004. Minority Shareholder Protections and the Private Benefits
of Control for Swedish Mergers. The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 39(1), pp.
167-191.

HOSHI, T., KASHYAP, A.K. and SCHARFSTEIN, D.S., 1993. No title. The  choice between
public and private debt: An analysis of post-deregulation corporate financing in Japan

HOUSTON, J. and JAMES, C., 1996. Bank information monopolies and the mix of private and
public debt claims. The Journal of Finance, 51(5), pp. 1863-1889.

JAMES, C., 1987. Some evidence on the uniqueness of bank loans. Journal of Financial
Economics, 19(2), pp. 217-235.

JENSEN, M.C. and  MECKLING, W.H., 2019. Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency
costs and ownership structure. Corporate  Governance. Gower, pp. 77-132.

JENSEN, M.C. and RUBACK, R.S., 1983. The market for corporate control: The scientific
evidence. Journal of Financial Economics, 11(1-4), pp. 5-50.

JOHNSON, S., BOONE, P., BREACH, A. and FRIEDMAN, E., 2000. Corporate governance in
the Asian financial crisis. Journal of Financial Economics, 58(1-2), pp. 141-186.

JOHNSON, S., LA PORTA, R., LOPEZ-DE-SILANES, F. and SHLEIFER, A., 2000. Tunneling.
American economic review, 90(2), pp. 22-27.

KIM, W.S. and SORENSEN, E.H., 1986. Evidence on the Impact of the Agency Costs of Debt on
Corporate Debt Policy. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 21(2), pp. 131-144.

LA PORTA, R., LOPEZ‐DE‐SILANES, F. and SHLEIFER, A., 1999. Corporate ownership
around the world. The journal of  finance, 54(2), pp. 471-517.

                                                                            39
LAEVEN, L. and LEVINE, R., 2008. Complex ownership structures and corporate valuations.
The Review of Financial Studies, 21(2), pp. 579-604.

LEFORT, F. and WALKER, E., 2007. Do markets penalize agency conflicts between controlling
and minority shareholders? Evidence from Chile. The Developing Economies, 45(3), pp. 283-314.

LIN, C., MA, Y., MALATESTA, P. and XUAN, Y., 2013a. Corporate ownership structure and
the choice between bank debt and public debt. Journal of Financial Economics, 109(2), pp. 517-
534.

LIN, C., MA, Y., MALATESTA, P. and XUAN, Y., 2013b. Corporate ownership structure and
the choice between bank debt and public debt. Journal of Financial Economics, 109(2), pp. 517-
534.

PARK, C., 2000. Monitoring and structure of debt contracts. The Journal of finance, 55(5), pp.
2157-2195.

RAJAN, R.G., 1992. Insiders and outsiders: The choice between informed and arm's‐length debt.
The Journal of finance, 47(4), pp. 1367-1400.

Ramakrishnan, Ram TS, and Anjan V. Thakor. "Information reliability and a theory of financial
intermediation." The Review of Economic Studies 51.3 (1984): 415-432.

SHLEIFER, A. and VISHNY, R.W., 1997a. A survey of corporate governance. The journal of
finance, 52(2), pp. 737-783.

STENFORS, A.,  2014. Financialisation and the financial and economic crises: the case of
Sweden.

STULZ, R., 1988. Managerial control of voting rights: Financing policies and the market for
corporate control. Journal of Financial Economics, 20, pp. 25-54.

YANG, B., GAN, L. and WEN, C., 2021. Moral hazard, debt overhang and capital structure. The
North American Journal of Economics and Finance, 58, pp. 101538.

                                                                            40