WEB3 USAGE AND ITS VALUE
FOR CRYPTO

A NOVEL APPROACH TO CRYPTOCURRENCY ASSET PRICING

OLIVER BRANDTVIG

AUGUST WIKING

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2022
Web3 Usage and its Value for Crypto: A Novel Approach to Cryptocurrency Asset
Pricing
Abstract:
Cryptocurrencies have grown significantly in recent years, and their role in society
remains a highly debated subject. In "Common Risk Factors in Cryptocurrency," Liu,
Tsyvinski, and Wu explore whether models from traditional finance can be applied to
the cryptocurrency market to create successful trading strategies. This thesis replicates
their work and extends it by exploring whether web3 usage can help explain market
behavior. The experiment includes all cryptocurrencies with a market capitalization of
over $1 million between January 1, 2014, and May 5, 2022, and 24 characteristics of the
cryptocurrencies are considered. The results show that what strategies deliver
significant excess returns have changed for the extended time frame. Furthermore, the
web3 usage factor is shown to improve the three-factor model created in Liu et al
(2022).
Keywords:
   Cryptocurrency, Web3, Factor model, Decentralized finance, Asset pricing
Authors:
   Oliver Brandtvig (25094)
   August Wiking (24910)
Tutor:
   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance
Examiner:
   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Retail Management
Stockholm School of Economics
© Oliver Brandtvig and August Wiking, 2022

                                   1
  CRYPTOCURRENCIES AND THE IMPORTANCE OF their role in society is
regularly a highly debated subject. Another highly debated subject is what that
role actually is. In such a novel market, it is impossible to say what specific purpose
cryptocurrencies will have in the future. The cryptocurrency debate is a polarized
one, with popular opinions ranging from the entire concept being a bubble and a
scam to it being the solution to all problems related to our financial and economic
systems. Only time will tell what the future holds with regard to cryptocurrencies,
but one thing is for sure: There is money to be made trading them.
  The first half of the 2010s saw the emergence of the cryptocurrency market,
which at the time consisted of only a few well-known coins such as Bitcoin,
Litecoin, Ripple, and Ethereum. During most of that period, Bitcoin dominated the
market, accounting for an overwhelming majority of the total cryptocurrency
market capitalization. Today, however, the market has grown significantly and
now consists of tens of thousands of different cryptocurrencies, though most of
them are relatively insignificant in terms of market capitalization. While Bitcoin's
share of the total cryptocurrency market capitalization has dropped below 40%,
the top one percent of cryptocurrencies by market capitalization represent over
90% of the total market. This growth in the market has also led to increased
volatility and risk, requiring frequent testing of risk factors and trading strategies
to stay ahead. In order to stay competitive, investors and traders must constantly
monitor and adapt to the changing market conditions.
  Liu, Tsyvinski, and Wu wrote Common Risk Factors in Cryptocurrency,
published in 2022, exploring if models from the traditional finance world, with
some tweaking, could be applied to the cryptocurrency market to act as the base
for significant strategies delivering meaningful excess returns. Under the
assumption that cryptocurrency will play some sort of important role in the future
of technology, it is engrossing to explore what similarities cryptocurrencies might
share with publicly traded securities and if models that are significant to these
securities can help us explain and understand more of cryptocurrency markets'
behaviors. Seeing as a replication of the Liu et al (2022) models today would extend
the timeframe by about two years, equating to an extension of over 25%, the
replication itself would provide information on potential changes in the behavior
of the cryptocurrency market. However, since the publication of the paper, the
fundamentals of the cryptocurrency market have changed, with some blockchains
and protocols facilitating accounting metrics such as revenue. Therefore, an
extension of the strategies, exploring whether or not web3 usage can help explain
market behavior, should be added.
  Included in this thesis experiment are all cryptocurrencies with a market
capitalization of over $1 million between January 1st 2014, and May 5th 2022.
Seeing as the factors used in this thesis are built upon factors including price,
volume, and market capitalization, we have also chosen to exclude stablecoins.
Stablecoins are intended to remain stable in price, as the name suggests, and are
commonly used as substitutes for the U.S. Dollar, the Euro, or other currencies
(Hampl, Gyönyörová 2021). They rarely display any meaningful fluctuation in
price, though their market capitalizations and volumes do as a result of issuance,
trading of other cryptocurrencies, or the moving of funds. In addition to this,
stablecoins have also grown significantly, both in terms of the number of them and

                                     2
in terms of their total market capitalization. The number of cryptocurrencies
within our limitations was 23 at the beginning of 2014, peaked at 2,291 in April
2022, and subsequently dropped to 2,207 at the end of our examined period on the
5th of May 2022. Replicating Liu, Tsyvinsky, and Wu's paper, we consider 24
characteristics of cryptocurrencies. Eight of these characteristics are shown to
create long-short trading strategies that successfully deliver significant excess
returns. Two factors stick out, capturing most of the returns: Size and Momentum.
The total of 3,742 cryptocurrencies considered is also used to create a market
return index.
   The 22 characteristics are analyzed by creating quintile portfolios that are
constructed and evaluated weekly. Each week, the cryptocurrencies are sorted
after their values for each characteristic. The quintile portfolios consist of the
lowest-performing fifth and the highest-performing fifth, for each characteristic.
The returns of the quintile portfolios are the sum of the market capitalization-
weighted returns of the cryptocurrencies that the quintile portfolios consist of,
minus the risk-free rate. The quintile portfolio excess returns are then used to
create a long-short zero-investment strategy: long the fifth quintile, and short the
first quintile. The strategies are evaluated on their excess return for the week
following the portfolio construction. This means the excess return of the fifth
quintile minus the excess return of the first quintile equals the strategy's return
for the given week. The analysis of the 22 strategies, one for each of the
characteristics, shows that eight of them produce statistically significant returns.
Following are the details of the significant strategies and their returns.
  The significant strategies within the momentum group generate excess weekly
returns spread between -2.4% and 19.5%. Three of the strategies generate excess
weekly returns of around 3.5%. A zero-investment long-short strategy that longs
the best-performing coins and shorts the worst-performing coins, in terms of
returns, generates around 5% excess weekly returns.1 The individual strategies’
excess returns are shown in Table I.

   The significant strategies within the size group generate excess weekly returns
of between -2.6% and -9%. A zero-investment long-short strategy that longs the
smallest coins and shorts the largest coins, therefore, generates between 2.6% and
9% in excess weekly returns. The individual strategies’ returns are shown in Table
II.

1
  Note outlier cumret4. Excluding outlier, strategy returns around 2% excess weekly returns.

                                     3
   Our next step is analyzing which, if any, factors can represent these statistically
significant characteristics. To do this, we begin by creating a one-factor model
consisting of the coin market factor, a cryptocurrency adaptation of the Capital
Asset Pricing Model. The model is not a good fit, and cannot explain the returns of
the cryptocurrency assets in the model. Next, we create a three-factor model
consisting of a cryptocurrency market factor CMKT, a cryptocurrency size factor
CSIZE, and a cryptocurrency momentum factor CMOM. It captures the returns of
five significant strategies’ excess returns, leaving those the strategies’ alphas non-
significant when the three-factor model is accounted for. The alphas that are no
longer significant correspond to the past one-, two-, three-, four-, and 100-week
return strategies.
  After this, we add a web3 usage factor DFUSG. It is a market capitalization
weighted index of revenue through leading decentralized finance protocols. These
decentralized finance protocols’ revenues are similar to the revenue of equities,
and thus quantify the actual customer usage of decentralized products such as
decentralized exchanges, decentralized liquidity protocols, and other decentralized
applications. These protocols' revenues are public by nature since they are
technically fees paid to use the service, and these fees are included in each
transaction hash that corresponds to a use of the protocol. For some decentralized
finance protocols, fees are shared with protocol token holders (Gogel 2021).

                            I. Data
   We collected cryptocurrency market data from all cryptocurrencies available on
CoinGecko.com. CoinGecko collects cryptocurrency data from 600 cryptocurrency
exchanges worldwide, and tracks over 13,000 cryptocurrencies. On their website,
CoinGecko provides daily data on cryptocurrencies' closing price, market
capitalization, and volume. In our data collected from CoinGecko, the price is the
volume-weighted average price across all exchanges. The market capitalization is
calculated by multiplying price by the circulating supply. Volume is the total
trading volume of all trading pairs with the cryptocurrency. There are certain
criteria a cryptocurrency must fulfill to be listed on CoinGecko, such as a project
team owned and functional website with sufficient information on the listed
cryptocurrency which has to be listed on an active exchange that CoinGecko is
integrated with. In turn, for an exchange to be integrated it must fulfill
CoinGecko’s Crypto Exchange API Standards and have a working website with
trading data that matches the information in the API.
   Our sample consists of all cryptocurrencies, existing and defunct, with a market
capitalization of over $1 million between January 2nd 2014, and May 5th 2022. By

                                     4
including observations with over $1 million in market capitalization in our sample
data, rather than including cryptocurrencies that have over $1 million in market
capitalization today, we minimize the risk of eventual sampling errors, such as
survivorship bias. The number of cryptocurrencies has varied between the low of
15 in late 2014, peaked at 2,291 in early 2022, and has since then dropped to 2,207
at the end of our examined period in May 2022. In Figure I we present a more
detailed description of how the number of cryptocurrencies with a market
capitalization of over $1 million has fluctuated in our examined period.

   To construct our weighted market portfolio, we first analyzed the entire dataset
of cryptocurrency assets, calculating the weights based on each asset's market
capitalization. This allowed us to construct a representative market portfolio that
accurately reflects the overall market. We then periodically rebalanced this
portfolio to maintain the desired weights of the assets, ensuring that it remained
a true representation of the market.
  Using this weighted market portfolio, we were able to compare the returns of
various strategies, allowing us to evaluate their performance relative to the
market. To create our weekly data, we used the closing price of each asset on the
last day of each week. To calculate the cryptocurrency market excess return
(CMKT), a cryptocurrency market version of the CAPM, we subtracted the risk-
free rate, measured as the yield of the one-month U.S. treasury bill, from the value-
weighted aggregate cryptocurrency market return.

                                     5
6
7
  A. Web3 Usage Data
  The web3 usage factor DFUSG data was gathered from Token Terminal. Token
Terminal is a platform that aggregates over 100 000 daily transactions from more
than ten blockchains. On their website, Token Terminal provides financial data
from blockchains and decentralized applications, including revenues, earnings,
fees, P/F ratios, P/S ratios, treasuries, and total value locked from the listed
projects. For projects to be listed on Token Terminal, they need to fulfill a list of
requirements. There must be an actual usage of the project and an active team or
community with a long-term mindset. The project must have a secure development
process in place, a sensible token model with sufficient documentation, and provide
a reliable end-point for extracting data.
  We construct the DFUSG factor by collecting daily data on revenue and market
capitalization from 27 different DeFi protocols between 2021-09-13 and 2022-09-
13. Since the time frame of the replication data ends 2022-05-05, the time frame
analyzed in our four-factor model is between 2021-09-13 and 2022-05-05. This
gives us data covering 33 weeks.2 The revenue data refers to the cryptocurrency
denominated monetary value that fees have generated for the token holders.
   The DFUSG factor is constructed by weighting the weekly change in revenue
for decentralized finance protocols by market capitalization. The top 30% of the
protocols in terms of revenue growth each week, as well as the bottom 30% of the
protocols in terms of revenue growth each week, are subsetted. The sum of the
weighted revenue growth of the bottom subset is subtracted from the sum of the
weighted revenue growth of the top subset.

2
  Non-applicable data for two observations.

                                     8
               II. Literature Review

   Asset pricing has been a crucial area of research in finance since the emergence
of the capital asset pricing model (CAPM) in the 1960s by William Sharpe (1964),
Jack Treynor (1962), John Litner (1965), and Jan Mossin (1966) (Perold, 2004).
Since then, various researchers have published work dedicated to different aspects
of asset pricing theory and expanded on the CAPM. For example, Eugene Fama
has published a series of articles and research with valuable findings that we will
make use of in our theoretical framework. In particular, we will incorporate the
size and value premium factors from the three-factor model (Fama and French,
1993) and the CAPM anomalies analysis (Fama and French, 1996) into our
analysis.
  With the advent of cryptocurrencies, researchers have started to apply the
traditional methods of pricing financial assets to this new asset class. Among them
are Liu, Tsyvinski, and Wu (2022), who discuss the implications, results, and
significance of adopting the methods used by Fama and French (1993) in a
cryptocurrency market setting compared to the traditional stock market. In
accordance with Liu et al. (2022), we will in this study analyze the significance of
established market-based cross-sectional stock return predictors reported by Chen
and Zimmermann (2020) in a cryptocurrency market setting. The list of
established market-based cross-sectional stock return predictors includes the last-
day market capitalization predictor defined by Banz (1981), the last-day price
predictor as in Miller and Scholes (1982), and the maximum predictor (George and
Hwang, 2004). The past one-, two-, three-, four-, one-to-four-, eight-, and 16-week
returns are constructed following Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), and the past 50-

                                     9
and 100-week returns as in De Bondt and Thaler (1985). The average daily volume,
average daily volume times price, and average daily volume times price scaled by
market capitalization predictors are all from the findings of Chordia,
Subrahmanyam, and Anshuman (2001). The beta and beta squared return
predictors as defined in Fama and MacBeth (1973), the standard deviation of daily
returns discussed in Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006), maximum daily return
from Bali, Cakici, and Whitelaw (2011), delay as in Hou and Moskowitz (2005), the
standard deviation of price volume from Chordia et al. (2011), and average absolute
daily return divided by price volume, Amihud (2002), will also be included in our
analysis.
  Asset pricing research and models analyzing the cryptocurrency market are
constantly in need of re-fitting due to the immaturity and ever-changing nature of
the market. Liu et al. (2022) focus solely on market-based data for the cross-section
of cryptocurrencies because financial and accounting data were not readily
available or not applicable at the time. Only 24 strictly market-based significant
strategies out of the total 158 significant financial, accounting, and market-based
strategies with t-stats above 1.96 from Chen and Zimmermann (2020) were
analyzed. However, with the changes in the cryptocurrency market over the past
years and the emergence of decentralized finance (DeFi) protocols and data source
aggregators of financial data, we aim to fill the research gaps and contribute to the
existing literature by creating a web3 usage factor built on financial data that
would add a dimension to the cryptocurrency factor model in Liu et al. (2022).
Similar to how Fama and French (2015) expanded upon the three-factor model by
introducing the additional profitability and investment factors, thus creating the
five-factor model, we aim to expand upon the three-factor cryptocurrency model
discussed in Liu et al. (2022) and analyze whether a four-factor model including
the DFUSG factor could further improve the model’s precision of predicting
movements in the cryptocurrency market. By incorporating this new factor, we
hope to provide a more comprehensive and accurate representation of the
cryptocurrency market and improve the ability of our model to predict future
movements and trends.
   Furthermore, we plan to conduct a robustness analysis to test the stability and
reliability of our model. We will compare the performance of our four-factor model
with the three-factor model discussed in Liu et al (2022).
   Overall, our goal is to contribute to the existing literature on asset pricing and
expand upon the existing models for predicting movements in the cryptocurrency
market. By incorporating the DFUSG factor into our analysis, we aim to provide a
more comprehensive and accurate representation of the market and improve the
ability of our model to predict future movements and trends.

                    III. Methodology
   Apart from the web3 usage factor and the four-factor cryptocurrency model, we
try to follow the methodology from Liu et al (2022) as closely as possible without
reassessing its validity. We have focused our study on replicating their
cryptocurrency factor model. The analysis consists of six steps where traditional
asset pricing models are applied to our cryptocurrency dataset.

                                                        Table VIII

                                     10
                                                  Method Steps
     The steps taken from the original market data, through quintile portfolio strategies and different factor models.
                            Additionally, the creation of the fourth factor for the four-factor model.
Steps Explanation

Plotting dollar value of investment in We plot the dollar value of investment in
individual cryptocurrencies             Bitcoin, Ethereum and BNB respectively.
                                            The values are plotted against the dollar
                                             value of investment in the market
                                            capitalization weighted market return
                                             index.

Generating quintile portfolios for size The wret, cumret2, cumret3, cumret4,
and momentum characteristics         cumret8, cumret16, cumret50, cumret100,
                                               logvol, logprcvol, logvolscaled, logmcap,
                                             logprc, logstdprcvol, idovol, avg_damihud,
                                          std_dret, max_dprc, max_dret, lag24, and
                                              age characteristics are analyzed. The coins
                                          are divided into quintiles based on the
                                            value for each characteristic, and a
                                              portfolio is constructed for each by
                                            subtracting the weighted excess return of
                                              the first quintile from the weighted excess
                                               return of the fifth quintile.

Generating quintile portfolio for The beta and beta squared factors,
volatility factors                           belonging to the volatility factor group, are
                                             analyzed. Again, quintile portfolios are
                                            used to make a long-short strategy, by
                                            subtracting the weighted excess return of
                                              the first quintile from the weighted excess
                                                  return of the fifth quintile.

Generating quintile portfolio for delay Lagged market returns are analyzed and
factor                                       the results create long-short strategies
                                            from quintile portfolios. The strategy
                                            returns are calculated as the weighted
                                            excess return of the fifth quintile minus
                                              the weighted excess return of the first
                                                 quintile.

Applying pricing models to the A one-factor pricing model is used to
strategies showcasing significant analyze whether it, a cryptocurrency-
excess returns                          compatible version of the Capital Asset
                                            Pricing Model, can capture the returns of
                                             the significant characteristics. A three-
                                             factor model is used to analyze whether it
                                                can capture the significant characteristics’
                                                strategies’ returns.

                                    11
 Generating web3 usage factor Decentralized finance protocols’ historical
                                           revenues and market capitalizations are
                                             used to create a market capitalization
                                               weighted revenue growth factor. It is
                                           added to the previous model to create a
                                                   four-factor model.

                       IV. Results
   In the following section, we present the results of the analysis outlined in Table
VIII of our study. We have performed a series of steps to evaluate the performance
of the different models, and we now present the results of these steps. We also
provide a comparison of the results between some of the different models. These
results provide valuable insights into the effectiveness of different financial models
in predicting cryptocurrency market movements, and they will be discussed in
further detail throughout the remainder of this section as well as throughout the
thesis.

   A. Plotting Dollar Values
   We start by plotting the aggregate cryptocurrency market against the three
biggest cryptocurrencies in terms of market capitalization: Bitcoin, Ethereum, and
Binance Coin.

                                     12
13
B. Generating Quintile Portfolios
   As we want to replicate the conditions, factors, and portfolios used in Liu et al
(2022), we use the same list of established return predictors for the cross-section
of stock returns from Chen and Zimmermann (2020) that can be directly
constructed from price, volume and market capitalization. Except for idovol and
age.3 Each return predictor is then given a group based on its characteristics. The
groups in which the strategies are allocated are Size, Momentum, Volume, and
Volatility. See the full list of all strategies and their respective groups in (hänvisa
till table). The returns of the strategies are thereafter divided into quintile
portfolios, and a long-short strategy portfolio is constructed for each strategy. The
long-short strategy portfolio consists of the excess return of having a long position
in the fifth quintile portfolio and a short position in the first quintile. For each
statistically significant long-short strategy we apply a pricing quintile model and
showcase them in Table IX and Table X. The results of the statistically
insignificant strategies are shown in Table XVII.

C. Portfolios
Size
Out of the three return predictors in the Size group, last day market capitalization
in the portfolio formation week, last daily price in the portfolio formation week,
and maximum daily price in the portfolio formation week, we found all three long-
short strategy returns to be statistically significant at a less than 5% level. The
mean excess return from the highest to lowest quintile for market capitalization is
-8.99%, the mean excess return for the last daily price in the portfolio formation
week is -2.64% and the mean excess return for the maximum daily price in the
portfolio formation week is -2.75%. That is, a strategy that longs the smallest and
shorts the largest cryptocurrencies generates a weekly return of at least 2.64%.
Excluding the costs that are removed as we assume an efficient market, such as
transaction costs, and feasibility of short selling.4

3
  The idiosyncratic volatility and age factor were deemed unnecessary in our analysis and were
therefore removed from the code.
4
  We assume access to liquidity for short-selling as well as no interest or other added costs associated
with short selling.

                                     14
Momentum
  Among the nine different return predictors within the momentum group, the
past one-, two-, three-, four-, one-to-four-, eight-, 16-, 50- and 100-week returns, we
found the past one-, two-, three-, four-, and 100-week long-short strategy returns
to be statistically significant at a 5% level. The difference in average weekly
returns between the highest and lowest quintiles for the past one-, two-, three-,
four-, and 100-week long-short strategy returns are 1.88%, 4.35%, 3.75%, 19.45%,
and -2.39% respectively. In other words, a strategy that longs the cryptocurrencies
with large returns and shorts cryptocurrencies with small returns over the past
one-, two-, three-, and four-week generates a weekly return of at least 1.88%. And
a strategy that longs the cryptocurrencies with small increases and shorts the
cryptocurrencies with large increases over the past 100-week returns generates a
weekly return of 2.39%.

Volume
   Out of the three volume-related long-short strategy returns, we found all
strategies to be statistically insignificant. See results for all statistically
insignificant quintiles and long-short strategies in Table XVII.

Volatility
   Analyzing the performance of the long-short portfolio strategy returns within
the volatility group, we found that out of the seven long-short strategies, none were
statistically significant. Table XVII.

D. Cryptocurrency Factors
Market Excess Return
  The CMKT factor consists of two components. A value-weighted weekly
aggregate cryptocurrency market return, and the risk-free rate, measured as the
weekly yield of the one-month U.S Treasury Bill.
  The market portfolio is constructed by taking the weekly returns of each of the
cryptocurrencies within our dataset. The weekly return is calculated using the
closing prices of each of the cryptocurrencies. The return for each week and

                                     15
cryptocurrency is then multiplied by the cryptocurrency’s share of the total market
capitalization at the start of the portfolio formation week. The market portfolio is
rebalanced weekly.

Size Effect
  We start by constructing a size factor by dividing the cryptocurrency dataset
into three groups based on market capitalization, in accordance with Liu et al
(2022). One group containing the bottom 30% (Small), a second group containing
the middle 40% (Medium), and a third group containing the top 30% (Big)
currencies. Value-weighted portfolios are then created for each of the size groups
S, M, and B. The size factor is calculated as the return difference between the small
and big size portfolios.

Momentum Effect
   The momentum factor is constructed based on the intersection of 2 x 3 portfolios.
The first two portfolios are based on market capitalization size, where each
portfolio consists of the bottom and top 50% respectively. Three portfolios are then
formed within each of the two size-related portfolios. One portfolio containing the
bottom 30%, a second portfolio containing the middle 40%, and a third portfolio
containing the top 30% in terms of past three-week returns.

          CMOM = ½(Small High + Big High) – ½(Small Low + Big Low)

Web3 Usage Effect
  The DFUSG factor is constructed by weighting the weekly change in revenue
for decentralized finance protocols by market capitalization. The weighted revenue
growths are summed. The top 30% of the protocols in terms of revenue growth each
week, as well as the bottom 30% of the protocols in terms of revenue growth each
week, are subsetted. The sum of the weighted revenue growth of the bottom subset
is subtracted from the sum of the weighted revenue growth of the top subset. The
choice to subset and subtract growth values was made in order for the factor to
focus on the relative performance rather than the macro perspective of the
cryptocurrency market.

E. Factor Models
One-Factor Model
   We start by applying a one-factor model to the eight successful Size,
Momentum, Volume, and Volatility strategies. The one-factor model consists of
an alpha, the CMKT, and an error term. See the full list of all error terms in
Table IXX.
                                                              𝑖       𝑖
                              𝑅𝑖 − 𝑅𝑓 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝐶𝑀𝐾𝑇𝐶𝑀𝐾𝑇 + 𝜖𝑖

                                     16
   The results show that the one-factor model does not capture the returns of the
significant strategies. Three of the strategies can be significantly predicted by the
one-factor model at a significance level equal to or less than 5%, but for each of
those strategies, the alphas are significant, meaning that the one-factor model does
not fully explain the returns of the strategies. The mean quintile R-squared, or the
average coefficient of determination for all five quintiles in each of the eight long-
short strategies, ranges between 0.444 and 0.511. For the long-short strategies, the
R-squared ranges between 0.001 and 0.028.

Two-Factor Model
   Next, we add the size factor to the one-factor model to construct the two-factor
model.

                                                     𝑖       𝑖                  𝑖
                       𝑅𝑖 − 𝑅𝑓 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝐶𝑀𝐾𝑇𝐶𝑀𝐾𝑇 + 𝛽𝐶𝑆𝐼𝑍𝐸𝐶𝑆𝐼𝑍𝐸 + 𝜖𝑖

   The results show that the excess cryptocurrency market return is significant at
a less than 1% level for the last daily price in the portfolio formation week and the
maximum daily price in the portfolio formation week. The significance and the

                                     17
negative coefficients implies that the logprc and the max_dprc long-short
strategies have a negative exposure to the cryptocurrency market. All long-short
strategies in the Size group in addition to the past 100-week return have a
significant and negative exposure to the size factor. All the alphas remain
statistically significant, to an even higher degree than in the one-factor model. This
suggests that the two-factor model including the size factor fails to explain the
returns of all eight long-short strategies, to an even lower degree than the one-
factor model. The mean quintile R-squared and the R-squared for each of the eight
long-short strategies except the past-100 week return increased with the addition
of the size factor. The mean quintile R-squared ranges from 0.462 to 0.541, and the
long-short strategy R-squared now ranges from 0.003 to 0.186.
   Since the two-factor model containing the cryptocurrency market excess return
and the size factor does not address the long-short strategies’ exposure to the
momentum factor, we also consider an alternative two-factor model consisting of
the cryptocurrency market excess return and the momentum factor.

                                                    𝑖       𝑖                  𝑖
                      𝑅𝑖 − 𝑅𝑓 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝐶𝑀𝐾𝑇𝐶𝑀𝐾𝑇 + 𝛽𝐶𝑀𝑂𝑀𝐶𝑀𝑂𝑀 + 𝜖𝑖

   In this model, the last daily market capitalization in the portfolio formation
week and the past 100-week return have a positive and significant exposure to the
cryptocurrency market excess return, at a significance level of less than 1%. All
long-short strategies have a significant exposure to the momentum factor,
logmcap, logprc, and max_dprc have a negative exposure and all the past week
returns have a positive exposure to the cryptocurrency market excess return. The
alphas are notably less significant compared to the two-factor size model. Only the
alphas for the logprc and max_dprc long-short strategies remain statistically
significant. This suggests that the two-factor momentum model performs better at
capturing the returns of the long-short strategies compared to the two-factor size
model. There have only been incremental changes to the R-squared values
compared to the two-factor size model. The mean R-squared for the quintile

                                     18
portfolios ranges from 0.477 to 0.520 and the R-squared for the long-short
strategies ranges from 0.014 to 0.185. The most significant change is an increase
in the coefficient of determination for the long-short strategies that have
significant exposure to the momentum factor.

Three-Factor Model
   We construct a three-factor model including the CMKT or cryptocurrency
CAPM, as well as the size factor and the momentum factor.

                                        𝑖       𝑖                  𝑖                  𝑖
              𝑅𝑖 − 𝑅𝑓 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝐶𝑀𝐾𝑇𝐶𝑀𝐾𝑇 + 𝛽𝐶𝑆𝐼𝑍𝐸𝐶𝑆𝐼𝑍𝐸 + 𝛽𝐶𝑀𝑂𝑀𝐶𝑀𝑂𝑀 + 𝜖𝑖

The three-factor model combines the alternative two-factor models. In the longer
time period, it captures the return variation and exposure to the size and
momentum factor of four of the successful long-short portfolio strategies. In the
shorter time period, used to compare the three-factor model to the four-factor
model, it captures the returns of all eight successful strategies.

   In the longer time period three-factor model, three long-short strategies have
significant exposure to the cryptocurrency market excess return. The last daily
price in the portfolio formation week, the maximum price in the portfolio formation
week, and the past 100-week return. Four long-short strategies have significant
and negative exposure to the size factor, while the other strategies remain
statistically insignificant. All long-short strategies apart from the past 100-week
return have exposure to the momentum factor at a significance level of less than
5%. The strategies within the Size group have a negative exposure and all the
significant strategies of the momentum group have a positive exposure to the
momentum factor, apart from the past 100-week return which has a negative
exposure. All the long-short strategies in the Size group have significant alphas.
Hence, the factors in the three-factor model can only fully explain the returns of

                                     19
the past one-, two-, three-, four-, and 100-week long-short strategy returns. The R-
squared has increased for both the quintile portfolios and the long-short strategies
compared to the one-, and two-factor models. The lowest to highest mean quintile
R-squared ranges from 0.488 to 0.555, and the R-squared for the long-short
strategies ranges between 0.015 and 0.291.

   For the shorter time period, none of the long-short strategies have significant
exposure to any of the three factors at a significance level equal to or less than 1%.
However, the last daily price in the portfolio formation week, the maximum daily
price in the portfolio formation week and the past four-week return long-short
strategies have significant and negative exposure to the cryptocurrency market
excess return at a 5% significance level. The last daily market capitalization is the
only long-short strategy with exposure at a significance level of 5% or less. The last
daily price in the portfolio week, the maximum daily price in the portfolio
formation week, and the past-100 week returns are also statistically significant
but only at a 10% level. The smaller data sample for the shorter time period
produces a three-factor model in which no alpha is statistically significant.
Indicating that the three factors significantly explain the long-short strategy
returns. The shorter time frame three-factor model produces high R-squared for
both quintile portfolios and long-short strategies. The mean quintile R-squared
from 0.826 to 0.880, and the long-short strategy R-squared from 0.040 to 0.316.

Four-Factor Model
   We construct a four-factor model including the market factor, size factor, and
momentum factor from the three-factor model, as well as the web3 usage factor.
The four-factor model is an extension of the three-factor model created by Liu et al
(2022), adding a factor of real-world cryptocurrency utility usage. The four-factor
model captures the returns of all eight successful long-short strategies and does so
with similar coefficients of determination, and with alpha values closer to zero.

                                     20
                           𝑖       𝑖                  𝑖                  𝑖                   𝑖
     𝑅𝑖 − 𝑅𝑓 = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝐶𝑀𝐾𝑇𝐶𝑀𝐾𝑇 + 𝛽𝐶𝑆𝐼𝑍𝐸𝐶𝑆𝐼𝑍𝐸 + 𝛽𝐶𝑀𝑂𝑀𝐶𝑀𝑂𝑀 + 𝛽𝐷𝐹𝑈𝑆𝐺𝐷𝐹𝑈𝑆𝐺 + 𝜖𝑖

   The four-factor model shows somewhat similar results to the three-factor model
for the same time period with regards to the coefficient of determination as well as
the alphas, but there are differences. The coefficients of determination are higher
in the four-factor model than in the three-factor model for six out of the eight
significant strategies. The coefficient of determination is higher in the four-factor
model for logprc, max_dprc, wret, cumret2, cumret3, and cumret4. This means that
the four-factor model explains more of the variation than the three-factor model
for these six strategies. The average coefficient of determination for the four-factor
model over the eight strategies is 0.214, while the average for the three-factor
model over the eight strategies is 0.180.
   As for the alphas, they are closer to zero in the four-factor model compared to
the three-factor model for six of the eight strategies. The strategies for which the
alphas are closer to zero in the four-factor model than in the three-factor model are
logmcap, logprc, max_dprc, cumret2, cumret3, and cumret 4. This means that the
four-factor model captures more of these six strategies’ returns than the three-
factor model does. The average alpha for the four-factor model is 0.720 away from
0. The average alpha for the three-factor model is 0.891 away from 0.

                 V. Empirical Analysis
A. Different Time Frames
   The time frame used in the replicated article by Liu et al (2022) spans from the
beginning of 2014 to July 2020, or around 339 weeks. Replicating the article
resulted in an extension in the time period of 96 weeks or about 28%. The models
showcase different results in the two time periods, both with regard to which

                                     21
strategies are significant and with regard to what strategies' returns are captured
by the three-factor model.
   In order to compare the three-factor model to our four-factor model, we
shortened the time frame to 33 weeks. The reason for this is that decentralized
finance protocols have not been around for long and that the data on their revenue
does not stretch far back. In order to be able to include multiple decentralized
finance protocols that have revenue, the time frame's start was set to September
2021. Accordingly, the time frame for the cryptocurrency data was set to start at
the same time.
   The time frame used for the four-factor model, and thus for the comparison with
the three-factor model, tests the models on the same eight significant strategies
that were significant in the longer time frame. When the individual zero-
investment long-short strategies are tested on the shorter time frame, the output
is different. Only the logvol, logvolscaled, and logmcap strategies are significant.
This is not relevant for the comparison between the three- and four-factor strategy
comparison, though. It is shown that the eight originally significant strategies are
significant in a longer time frame, and therefore, it is those strategies that are
interesting to look at with regard to the factor models, even though they might not
be significant in the shorter time frame. According to the three-factor model, those
eight strategies are the significant ones, and we can only assume that this result
is more reliable than the one for the shorter time frame. This logic also implies
that the comparison between the three- and four-factor models in the short time
frame is not reliable, which is true. Had a longer time frame for decentralized
finance protocols been available, that data would have provided more reliable
results. The short time frame is all that is available at the moment, even though
the eight strategies are not individually significant in the shorter time frame, the
four-factor model does capture more of their returns than the three-factor model
does. There is nothing explicitly indicating that the four-factor model would not
capture more of the eight originally significant strategies’ returns in a longer time
frame, but as time goes on, the comparisons will have to be updated in order to
explore whether the four-factor model can remain dominant over time.

B. Availability of Cryptocurrency Data
  An important fact when analyzing historical cryptocurrency data is that the
data has not always been available to the extent it is today, and that it has not
always been as unambiguous as today, even though it is still not perfect. Although
cryptocurrency had its birth in 2009 with the launch of Bitcoin, there was not a
sufficient amount of data on cryptocurrencies to analyze until later in the 2010s.
Large reliable data sources regarding cryptocurrencies (coinmarketcap and
coingecko) launched at the end of 2013 and the beginning of 2014 respectively.
Thus our timeframe starts at the beginning of 2014. Our use of another data source
for our project than Liu et al (2022) used, means that the data for any given
cryptocurrency at any given date, will not necessarily be equal.

C. Cryptocurrency Data Sources
   Liu et al (2022) collected their data from APIs listed on coinmarketcap.com. In
our study, we collected data from CoinGecko. The reason for this is that

                                     22
   Coinmarketcap is an expensive tool for gathering historical data on
cryptocurrencies while CoinGecko provides all historical data for free. The
difference in data sources has made it harder to cross-check our variables and
compare our results with the replicated article.

D. Removal of Faulty Data
   The dataset used initially contained around 150 million data points. Removing
duplicates resulted in almost 90% of the data points being removed. In this dataset,
some smaller coins displayed behaviors such as sustaining the same market
capitalization for the entire period, or price dropping to zero, just for it to increase
by over an undecillion percent5. These observations were either replaced with
correct data or, in the cases this was not feasible, removed. While the observations
removed did not account for a large share of the total market capitalization, and
thus not a large share of the portfolios they would have been included in, the fact
that the data had to be cleaned of faulty data could have changed the outcome.

E. Size Effect
   For the one-, two- and three-factor models, the significant strategies belonging
to the Size group are all exposed to the size factor at a significance level of less
than 1%. The three long-short strategies belong to the Size group and are
specifically designed to take advantage of the size factor, and thus their exposure
to the size factor is not peculiar in itself. However, the results are ambiguous.
Highly significant exposure to both the cryptocurrency market excess return and
the size factor implies that the model to a certain degree of certainty can be said
to successfully explain the returns of the long-short strategies. Yet, the alphas
remain statistically significant, implying that the cryptocurrency market excess
return and the size factor do not successfully capture the returns of the long-short
strategies.
  We have analyzed the reason why this is the case and found the possible
explanation that it is correlated to how the market capitalization data is filtered
in our variable construction process. In one of these filters, we remove all
cryptocurrencies that have had the same market capitalization for ten consecutive
days, which resulted in 140 cryptocurrencies being removed from our data sample.
By experimenting with, and changing the limit from ten consecutive days we found
that the alphas change significance level depending on the number of consecutive
days we allow the cryptocurrencies in our data sample to have the same market
capitalization. However, the lower the filter limit, the more cryptocurrencies we
remove from our data sample. By reducing the filter limit to two consecutive days
we effectively remove over 1000 cryptocurrencies from the data sample. To
motivate such a large decrease in sample size, we would have to embark on the
tedious process of manually ensuring that all of these cryptocurrencies indeed
should be excluded from our data sample. Additionally, hardening the limit for the
consecutive day filter had a negative impact on the momentum factor’s
performance of capturing the return of the long-short strategies in the Momentum
group. Therefore, we have in this study decided to have the limit set to four

5
 Over 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000%

                                     23
consecutive days as it provides a more reliable data composition from on which to
apply strategies and factors.

F. Cryptocurrency Data Filtering
  We decided to only include observations where the coin or token has a market
capitalization of at least $1 million. Since cryptocurrencies can be created and
listed on an exchange in just a few minutes, a market capitalization restriction
helps filter out coins that are created as a joke or that never gained any traction
or recognition. A cryptocurrency with a market capitalization of at least $1 million
implies, to some extent, that some actor has invested in it with the hopes of making
a return on the investment. Additionally, cryptocurrencies with a market
capitalization below $1 million, regardless of return, would have such a minimal
weight representation in our market return index, as well as any portfolios they
would be included in, that they would not contribute with a significant impact on
the results.
   During the past few years, and after the end of the data timeframe used by Liu
et al (2022), the cryptocurrency market has changed. From just consisting of a few
cryptocurrencies in 2014, the market now also consists of decentralized finance
protocol tokens, "meme coins", data storage tokens, non-fungible token project
tokens, stablecoins, and more. Most of these different kinds of tokens and coins are
built in a unique way, and all of them cannot reasonably be included in asset
pricing experiments. For example, stablecoins are programmed to have a set value
denominated in another currency, without much fluctuation (Hampl, Gyönyörová
2021). The biggest one is USDT or Tether. Tether is a stablecoin backed by
securities and other currencies made to stay valued at $1. It has done its job so far,
and in doing so, its price has remained at about $1. Meanwhile, its market
capitalization has grown from $304,000 in February 2015, peaking at around $83
billion in April 2022, and dropping to $66 billion in November 2022. These
fluctuations in market capitalization, paired with a non-fluctuating price,
stablecoins impact asset pricing models differently than traditional
cryptocurrencies and other tokens. This is because the 22 market-based
characteristics take into account, among other things, changes in market
capitalization, price, and the relationship between the two. Thus, an asset with a
stagnant price and a large market capitalization will take up a big weight, in the
market return index and any portfolios it is part of, with its zero percent returns.

G. Insignificant Strategies
  The list of established return predictors from Chen and Zimmermann (2020)
predicts cross-sectional stock returns, not cross-sectional cryptocurrency returns.
Although all 22 strategies used in this study are statistically significant return
predictors in the original papers, only eight strategies remain statistically
significant when applied to our cryptocurrency data. And none of the statistically
significant strategies belong to the Volume or Volatility group. An explanation for
this could be that the cryptocurrency market is relatively younger and less mature
than the stock market. It does not have the same level of liquidity, depth, and
efficiency as the stock market, which could affect the results of volume and
volatility-related strategies (Hamed Al-yahyaee, Mensi, Ko, Yoon, and Hoon Kang
2020). Furthermore, another possible explanation could be that the cryptocurrency

                                     24
market is more volatile than the stock market which could make it harder to
predict movements and returns in the cryptocurrency market using volume and
volatility-related strategies (Corbet, Lucey, Urquhart, and Yarovaya 2019). See
results for insignificant strategies in Table XVIII.

H. Possible Theoretical Explanations
   Theoretical explanations explored by Liu et al (2022) are applied to our results
in order to provide possible explanations for the factors and their relationship with
returns. The paper suggests two mechanisms that could explain the size premium:
the liquidity effect and the capital gains versus convenience yield trade-off. The
convenience yield is higher for larger cryptocurrencies in equilibrium and with
regard to market capitalization. This means their capital gains should be lower
(Sockin and Xiong 2018), (Prat, Danos, and Marcassa 2019), (Cong, Li, and Wang
2021). The paper also suggests that the investor overreaction model could explain
the momentum premium (Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam 1998), (Sockin
and Xiong 2018). The big moves in the cryptocurrency markets, time after time
displaying powerful, often parabolic, returns, before reversing and retracing
quickly to previous price levels, reinforces the argument that the investor
overreaction model could explain the momentum premium. The fact that most
cryptocurrencies, as opposed to equities, for example, do not have cash flows or a
business model to rely on, could explain why investors rely more on what other
investors do - what the market does - leading to a display of investor overreaction.

I. Comparing Results
   The three-factor model in this thesis and the one in Liu et al (2022) are identical,
but the replication examines a longer time period and one where a lot happened in
the cryptocurrency market, at that. The model captured fewer strategies' returns
over a longer time period. One of the possible reasons for this is increased
competition and saturation in the cryptocurrency market. As evident in our data,
the number of cryptocurrency projects has increased since the creation of the
replicated article, and growing competition could reduce the potential returns for
investors. This, paired with the unregulated nature of the cryptocurrency market
possibly leading to information asymmetry, could skew the potential returns to
some actors' advantage. Funds, firms, and persons being able to utilize spoofing,
or simply having more insight into projects and the market as a whole, could
reduce the share of returns captured by a model such as the three-factor model.
Macroeconomic factors could also contribute to the lower prediction power of the
three-factor model. The implications of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as trade
tensions and other macroeconomic factors, have affected markets globally, and the
cryptocurrency market is no exception.
  The time period covered by the DFUSG factor is shorter than the period covered
by the three-factor model. Thus, the three-factor model was applied to the shorter
time period, before adding the DFUSG factor for comparison. In the shorter time
period, the three-factor model did capture all significant strategies’ returns,
displaying non-significant alphas for every strategy. The three-factor model also
displays higher coefficient of determination values in the short time period than in
the long time period. The addition of the DFUSG factor does not affect the
coefficient of determination values much, but it does display strategy alphas closer

                                     25
to zero for six of the eight strategies, compared to the three-factor model in the
same time period. One possible reason for the lower alphas in the four-factor model
is the fact that new decentralized finance protocols show accounting metrics such
as revenue publicly per the design of their technology. Such information, commonly
used in the valuation of equities, was not available to the same extent as today
when Liu et al (2022) was created. The accounting metrics give insight into the
actual performance of the cryptocurrency assets, which could help predict price
moves in the assets themselves, but also give an indication of the performance of
the cryptocurrency market as a whole.

                      VI. Conclusion
   We show that traditional asset pricing models can be used to analyze the cross-
section of the cryptocurrency market and that the addition of a web3 usage factor
increases the power of the model. First, zero-investment long-short strategies
based on 24 characteristics - in turn, based on cryptocurrency price, market
capitalization, and volume - are analyzed, and eight of the strategies are shown to
deliver statistically significant excess returns.
   Second, a one-factor model, similar to the Capital Asset Pricing Model and
consisting of the leadmkt factor, is shown not to capture the returns of the
cryptocurrency market. The leadcmom and leadcsize factors are added, creating a
three-factor model that captures the returns of five out of the eight significant
strategies. In the time period of the paper that the model is replicated from, the
three-factor model captures more strategies’ returns.
   We add a new factor to the model, making it a four-factor model. The new factor,
DFUSG, represents web3 usage. It is applied to a smaller time period, where the
three-factor model captures the returns of all eight significant strategies. The four-
factor model, however, displays similar coefficient of determination values, and
strategy alpha values closer to zero.
  Liu, Tsyvinsky, and Wu bring up the possibility that the dynamics of the
cryptocurrency markets change after the publication of their paper. The
fundamentals and the conversation on cryptocurrencies have changed, and our
results replicating their paper show that the market has changed as well. Our
extension of their model is an addition that showed to improve the traditional asset
pricing models. As the cryptocurrency market progresses, retracts, fluctuates, and
eventually (possibly) finds some stability in price, purpose, and role, these models
will most likely have to be modified again.
   In conclusion, our research has shown that traditional asset pricing models can
be applied to the cryptocurrency market and that the addition of a web3 usage
factor can increase the power of the model. We found that zero-investment long-
short strategies based on cryptocurrency characteristics can deliver statistically
significant excess returns and that a one-factor model is not sufficient to capture
the returns of the cryptocurrency market. By adding two additional factors, we
were able to create a three-factor model that captures the returns of several
   strategies. Furthermore, we showed that the addition of a web3 usage factor to
the model improved its ability to capture the returns of the significant strategies.
  Overall, our findings suggest that asset pricing models can be useful for
analyzing the cryptocurrency market, but that they may need to be modified as the
market evolves. As the fundamentals and conversation around cryptocurrencies

                                     26
continue to change, it will be important for researchers to update and refine these
models in order to better understand and predict the behavior of the market.

                                     27
                 References

Amihud, Yakov, 2002, Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and time-series
effects, Journal of Financial Markets 5, 31–56.

Ang, Andrew, Robert Hodrick, Yuhang Xing, and Xiaoyan Zhang, 2006, The cross-
section of volatility and expected returns, Journal of Finance 61, 259–299.

Bali, Turan, Nusret Cakici, and Robert Whitelaw, 2011, Maxing out: Stocks as
lotteries and the cross-section of expected returns, Journal of Financial Economics
99, 427–446.

Banz, Rolf, 1981, The relationship between return and market value of common
stocks, Journal of Financial Economics 9, 3–18.

Chen, Andrew, and Tom Zimmermann, 2020, Publication bias and the cross-
section of stock returns, Review of Asset Pricing Studies 10, 249–289.

Chordia, Tarun, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, and Ravi Anshuman, 2001, Trading
activity and expected stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 59, 3–32.

Cong, Lin William, Ye Li, and Neng Wang, 2021, Tokenomics: Dynamic adoption
and valuation, Review of Financial Studies 34, 1105–1155.

Corbet, Shaen, Brian Lucey, Andrew Urquhart, and Larisa Yarovaya, 2019,
Cryptocurrencies as a financial asset: A systematic analysis, International Review
of Financial Analysis 62, 182-199.

Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1998, Investor
psychology and security market under- and overreactions, Journal of Finance 53,
1839–1885.

De Bondt, Werner, and Richard Thaler, 1985, Does the stock market overreact?
Journal of Finance 40, 793–805.

Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on
stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.

Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1996, Multifactor explanations of asset
pricing anomalies, Journal of Finance 51, 55–84.

Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 2015, A five-factor asset pricing model,
Journal of Financial Economic 116, 1-22.

Fama, Eugene, and James MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium:
Empirical tests, Journal of Political Economy 81, 607–636.

                                     28
George, Thomas, and Chuan-Yang Hwang, 2004, The 52-week high and
momentum investing, Journal of Finance 59, 2145–2176.

Gogel, David, 2021, DeFi Beyond the Hype: The Emerging World of Decentralized
Finance, In collaboration with Wharton Blockchain and Digital Asset Project and
World Economic Forum, Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, 3-11.

Hamed Al-Yahyaee, Khamis, Walid Mensi, Hee-Un Ko, Seong-Min Yoon, and
Sang Hoon Kang, 2020, Why cryptocurrency markets are inefficient: The impact
of liquidity and volatility, The North American Journal of Economics and Finance
52, 1-13.

Hampl, Filip and Lucie Gyönyörová, 2021, Can fiat-backed stablecoins be
considered cash or cash equivalents under international financial reporting
standards rules? Australian Accounting Review 98, 233-255

Hou, Kewei, and Tobias Moskowitz, 2005, Market frictions, price delay, and the
cross-section of expected returns, Review of Financial Studies 18, 981–1020.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners
and selling losers: Implications for stock market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48,
65–91.

Liu, Yukun, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Xi Wu, 2022, Common risk factors in
cryptocurrency, Journal of Finance 77, 1133-1154.

Perold, André, 2004, The capital asset pricing model, Journal of Economic
Perspectives 18, 3-4.

Prat, Julien, Vincent Danos, and Stefania Marcassa, 2019, Fundamental pricing
of utility tokens,Working paper, Echole Polytechnique.

Sockin, Michael, and Wei Xiong, 2018, A model of cryptocurrencies, Working paper,
Princeton University.

                                     29
                  Appendix
                                                  Table XVII
                                             Protocol Definitions and Links
      The decentralized finance protocols whose revenue data make up the base of the web3 usage factor DFUSG.

Protocol Description Link

Aave Open Source Protocol to create Non-   https://aave.com/
                custodial Liquidity Markets

Bancor DeFi trading and staking protocol   https://home.banco
                 with Single-Sided Liquidity               r.network/

BENQI Liquid Staking and Algorithmic   https://benqi.fi/
                Liquidity Market Protocol

Cap Decentralized Perpetual Exchange https://www.cap.fi
                                                      nance/

Compound Algorithmic and Autonomous Interest   https://compound.f
                Rate Protocol                           inance/

Curve Decentralized Exchange Liquidity   https://curve.fi/#/et
              Pool                                 hereum/swap

dYdX Decentralized Exchange https://dydx.excha
                                                        nge/

Euler Non-Custodial DeFi Protocol https://www.euler.
                                                           finance/

GMX Decentralized Perpetual Exchange https://gmx.io/#/

Goldfinch Decentralized Credit Protocol https://goldfinch.fi
                                                      nance/

Homora Multi-Chain lending and leveraged   https://homora.alp
                yield Farming Protocol                  haventuredao.io/

Kyber Decentralized Liquidity Protocol https://kyber.netw
                                                            ork/

                                   30
Liquity Decentralized Borrowing Protocol https://www.liquit
                                                               y.org/

Loopring Open-Source, non-Custodial   https://loopring.org
                 Exchange and Payment Protocol         /#/

MakerDAO Open-Source, Decentralized   https://makerdao.c
               Autonomous Currency creator          om/en/

Maple         Institutional Crypto-Capital Network https://www.maple
Finance                                            .finance/

MCDEX Decentralized Perpetual Exchange https://mcdex.io/ho
                                                 mepage/

Notional      Decentralized Lending and Borrowing   https://www.notion
Finance       Protocol                               al.finance/

Pangolin Multichain Decentralized Digital   https://www.pango
                Assets Exchange                       lin.exchange/

Perpetual     Decentralized Perpetual Contract   https://perp.com/
Protocol      Protocol

Reflexer Decentralized Borrowing Protocol https://reflexer.fin
                                                        ance/

Rook MEV Marketplace https://www.rook.fi
                                                                                                /

Spooky        Decentralized Exchange https://spooky.fi/#/
Swap

Sushi Swap Decentralized Exchange https://www.sushi.
                                                   com/

Synthetix Decentralized Perpetual Exchange https://synthetix.io
                                                                                                /

                                   31
Trader Joe Decentralized Exchange https://traderjoexy
                                                    z.com/home#/

1inch Decentralized Liquidity and   https://1inch.io/
                Aggregation Protocol

                                   32
                           Table XVIII
                        Error Terms
The root-mean-squared errors (RMSEs) for each of the significant
        long-short strategies in the different factor models

                  33