PANDEMIC REACTIONS

A STUDY ON THE IMPACT OF SHARE REPURCHASE
ANNOUNCEMENTS ON ABNORMAL RETURNS DURING THE
COVID-19 PANDEMIC

EMILIA HELD

NATHALIE STENVALL

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2022
Pandemic Reactions: A Study on the Impact of Share Repurchase Announcements
on Abnormal Returns During the Covid-19 Pandemic

Abstract:
   This paper examines how U.S. equities listed on Nasdaq and NYSE reacted to open-
   market share repurchase announcements during Covid-19. We document abnormal
   returns following share repurchase announcements during the pandemic and attempt
   to investigate if a causal relationship can be established.  Our  findings  suggest  that the
   elevated returns  was  affected  by  differences in firm characteristics  among  companies
   choosing to  announce  during the pandemic.  Therefore, we cannot conclude  that  the
   Covid-19  pandemic  gave rise  to higher  abnormal  returns  following share repurchase
   announcements.  This paper contributes to prior studies  on  share  repurchases and
   uncertain market conditions and encourages further research on legislative initiatives.

Keywords:
   Covid-19, Share Repurchase, Announcements, Nasdaq, NYSE

Authors:
   Emilia Held (24701)
   Nathalie Stenvall (24753)

Tutors:
   Marieke Bos, Deputy  Director, Swedish House of Finance

Examiner:
   Adrien d`Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance,  Stockholm School of
  Economics

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in  Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
©  Emilia  Held  and  Nathalie  Stenvall,  2022

                                   1
1. Introduction
In December 2019, the coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, first surfaced in Wuhan, China. After
a few months,  the virus had been identified in 114 countries and following the alarming
levels of severity and spread, the World Health Organization characterized Covid-19 as
a global pandemic in March 2020. Consequently, plenty of countries adopted strict
policies, including workplace closures and travel bans (Oxford University, 2022). By the
end of March 2020, over 100 countries had a full or partial lockdown (BBC, 2020). As a
result, labor markets, economies and  businesses, including global supply chains, were
largely impacted, resulting in business disruptions and uncertainty worldwide (ILO,

                                                 th                           rd
2022). Between February 19 and March 23 , the S&P 500 fell by approximately 40
percent (S&P Global, 2022). Consequently, due to the prevailing  uncertainty and its
impact on financial markets, Covid-19 poses an interesting area for further research. In
this paper, we examine the stock market reactions to share repurchase announcements
during the pandemic, compared to normal market conditions.
       Share repurchases, that is when a company repurchases some of its shares and
then either retires them or holds them as treasury  stock, is an interesting area of study for
various reasons. Firstly, the number of share repurchases in the United States has grown
steadily  over  many years  and has recently become the primary form of payout (Skinner,
2008).  Grullon and Ikenberry (2000) studied a sample of US companies and concluded
that in 1972, less than 27% of the companies repurchased shares, compared to over 84%
in 2000. The boom  in the United States is partly attributed to  the  implementation of SEC
Rule 10b-18 in 1982 (Grullon and Ikenberry, 2000; Grullon and Michaely, 2002).
        Secondly, share repurchases have lately become a frequent topic of discussion in
business and political  contexts. Opponents of share repurchases argue that the buyback
benefits management  when the money instead could be reinvested into the company and
its staff (Chen and Obizhaeva, 2022). There have been numerous suggestions  to limit the
corporate payout policy. For instance, the Biden administration signed a bill in August

                                                                                                                              st
2022 on a new excise tax of 1 percent, applicable on all share repurchases after  the  31 of
December 2022 (White House, 2022). Share buybacks were also limited during the
pandemic by the  ”Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act” (CARES) that
was passed into law in March 2020. If a company received a loan or financial aid from
this act or the following similar acts, it was prohibited from buying back shares until
September 2022  or until the load was repaid (U.S.  Department of the Treasury, 2022).
       Thirdly, there has been extensive research on share repurchase during normal
market conditions, but only a few attempts to better understand it during  market
uncertainty. Lintner (1956) concluded that share repurchases are pro-cyclical and increase
during booms  while decreasing during busts, and similar findings have been reported by
Jagannathan,  Stephens  and  Weisbach  (2000).
       Furthermore,  studies  on  information  uncertainty  have shown  that  earnings
announcements during market busts generate high abnormal returns, compared to
announcements during market booms (Schmalz and Zhuk, 2019). Similarly, during times
of uncertainty when  the  implications of  new information for a company’s value  are

                                   2
ambiguous, the market reacts with higher expected returns following good news (Zhang,
2006). If applied to the case of Covid-19, when there was a high degree of information
uncertainty, this would indicate a higher share price reaction to new information. Since
share repurchases  also  are found to convey a signaling value according to the literature
(e.g., Vermaelen, 1981; Ikenberry, Lakonishok and Vermaelen, 1995; Dittmar, 2000), we
wanted to investigate this further.
        We conduct the study by testing if share repurchase announcements during Covid-
19 generated higher abnormal returns than during normal market conditions. Particularly,
we focus on open-market share repurchase announcements in the United States by
companies listed on Nasdaq and NYSE.  Our stated research questions are:

   i.     Does share repurchase announcement give rise to higher abnormal share price
       reactions during Covid-19 compared to normal market conditions?

  ii.    To what  extent can the difference in abnormal returns be explained by
       announcement, company and trading characteristics?

 iii.     To what extent can the difference in abnormal returns be explained by increased
       uncertainty?

Prior  literature  on  share  repurchases  has  primarily  investigated  how  repurchase
announcements impact abnormal returns, as well as  their  signaling value. Our study,
however, investigates whether there is a difference in abnormal repurchase announcement
returns during Covid-19, compared to normal market conditions. In addition, we also
investigate whether firms with  specific  characteristics were more likely to announce a
share repurchase during Covid-19, compared to normal market conditions. Thus,  in
addition to  elaborating  findings from literature studying the dynamics and characteristics
of share buybacks, we also  incorporate  the unprecedented uncertainty stemming from
Covid-19. Thereby,  our study stands out and contributes to exciting research.
       To   determine   whether   share   repurchase   announcements   during   Covid-19
generated abnormal returns,  we study U.S.  firms listed on Nasdaq and  NYSE  during the
fiscal  years  2017  until  the  beginning  of  2022.  We  retrieve  data  on  repurchase
announcements  from Thomson Financial  Securities Data Company (SDC) Mergers and
Acquisitions   database.   The   database   also   provides   additional   details   such   as
announcement date, deal size, and transaction technique. Further, Refinitiv is used to
retrieve  stock  price data and company financials.
       To  test our stated research questions, we  first  calculate abnormal returns during a
3-day window surrounding the repurchase announcements during the control-  and
treatment period. Based on these, a time-series ordinary least squares (OLS) regression  is
employed  to  investigate if abnormal returns were obtained during Covid-19.  Thereafter,
we conduct a fixed-effects regression with panel data to conclude if the difference in
abnormal returns can be explained by  unobserved heterogeneity. A probit regression is

                                   3
then conducted  to  study if  firms with different characteristics chose to repurchase shares
during Covid-19, compared to the  pre-Covid-19  period. Lastly, we test the robustness of
our results by employing a placebo and permutation test.
       We found that abnormal share returns  (3-day BHAR)  during Covid-19 were on
average  1.04% higher compared to the control period. In addition, Covid-19 correlated
with abnormal returns at a significance level of 1%.  To  conclude if the abnormal return
stemmed from  differences in firm characteristics  among  repurchasing firms, noise in the
market, or purely due to a change in market reactions, we performed  multiple  robustness
tests.  A placebo  and permutation test  indicated that  our main regression had not  captured
general market noise. However, a  fixed effects  regression  indicated that  unobserved
heterogeneity  affected  the results.  By the same token,  the probit regression found that
firm characteristics  impacting the likelihood of repurchasing  shares  largely differed
between  the control and treatment  periods.  Thus, the increase in  abnormal announcement
returns  was  likely  attributed  to  firm  differences  between  companies  announcing
repurchases during Covid-19, compared to  pre-Covid-19.

2. Theoretical  Framework and Literature Review

2.1 Background
In order to study the impact of share repurchase announcements on abnormal returns
during Covid-19, we have developed a theoretical framework based on prior areas of
research. In section one, we describe the informational value of share repurchases and
how  they  can be used by firms as a means of conveying private information. Here, we
also shed light on prior literature researching the motives behind share repurchases, as
well  as  market reactions to firm-specific announcements. The second section covers  the
documented impact  of  some of  the above-mentioned factors during market uncertainty.
Lastly, the third section discusses the contribution of this study to  prior literature.

2.2 The Informational Value, Motives and Stock Market Reactions to Share
Repurchases
Prior research has been conducted  on  firm-specific  announcements and the following
stock market reactions. In a study conducted by Mitchell and  Mulherin  (1994),  a direct
relation between market activity variables, such as the absolute value of  firm-specific
stock returns, and the number of news announcements reported on Dow Jones & Co was
established. Mehndiratta and Gupta (2010) also found that the stock market has an instant
reaction to dividend announcements.  Neuhierl,  Scherbina  and  Schiusene  (2013) found
strong stock price reactions to firm-specific news announcements, as well as a decreasing
level of informational asymmetry. These studies illustrate how the market re-prices
securities following meaningful news announcements and are in line with Fama’s (1970)
conclusion that security prices  in efficient markets incorporate all available information.
Based on the efficient market notion and the fact that equity markets often are
experiencing semi-strong efficiency, share repurchase announcements should have an

                                   4
instant effect on security prices. However, the question of how and why share repurchases
could convey new information to the market remains  to be answered.
       Extensive prior research has been conducted  concerning  the motivation behind
share repurchase  announcements, as well as the signaling value and consequent market
reactions.  The signaling hypothesis,  mentioned in prominent share repurchase literature
(Vermaelen, 1981; Dittmar, 2000),  suggests that firms  buy back  shares when their stock
is recognized as undervalued. In line with this, Ikenberry et al. (1995) found that abnormal
returns often are experienced by firms with low market-to-book ratios. Likewise, Lang
and Litzenberger  (1989) found a positive relationship between abnormal returns  post-
dividend  announcements and the firm’s capacity to overinvest, measured by Tobin’s Q.
Due to the nature of dividends as a means of corporate payout, it is reasonable to argue
that it possesses similar characteristics to share repurchases, and thus these findings could
potentially be applied to buybacks as well. However,  He,  Howe,  and  Kao  (1992)  did not
find a relation between abnormal returns and Tobin’s Q following tender offer  share
repurchases.
       Another useful hypothesis is therefore free cash flow. Jensen (1986) and
Easterbrook (1984)  proposed that firms with excess cash, exceeding  their  potential
investment opportunities, tend to invest in negative present value (PV) projects. The
agency costs arising from this may be reduced by  the  dispense of cash, either in the form
of a share repurchase or dividend. Hence, they suggest that one major influencing factor
behind share repurchases is  the  distribution of excess cash.  In line  with this,  Grullon and
Michaely (2004) found that high abnormal announcement returns are anticipated for firms
that typically  overinvest in negative PV projects, as it decreases the excess cash as well
as the systematic risk. Stephens and Weisbach (1998),  as well as Barth and Kasznik
(1999), also found  a positive  relationship  between the level of cash flow and share
repurchases, indicating that firms with more excess cash are more likely to repurchase
shares (Dittmar 2000; Mitchell  and  Dharmawan 2007).  Similarly,  Anolick,  Batten,
Kinateder and Wagner (2021) concluded that repurchase announcements from firms with
excess cash generate higher abnormal returns, compared to firms with less excess cash.
Contradicting these findings,  He et al. (1992)  did not find any evidence for the principal-
agent hypothesis when studying the relationship between free cash flow and firm value
for fixed-price tender offers.  This finding  implies that open-market share repurchases
might not affect firm value since they reduce excess cash flow by a smaller  amount than
fixed-price tender  offers (McNally, 1999).
        Prior literature further indicates that one objective with share repurchases is to
reduce information asymmetry. Information-signaling theory advocates that firms have
better information regarding their type (good or bad) than investors, and thus good firms
can differentiate themselves  by  conveying a high-cost signal, such as distributing cash
(Bhattacharya, 1979; Miller and Rock, 1985). Since share  repurchase is an example of
distributing cash, it is reasonable to apply the theory to share repurchases. Furthermore,
Ikenberry et al. (1995) found that small-size firms generate higher abnormal returns than
large firms following share repurchase announcements. The explanation provided for this

                                   5
is that firm size is suggested to have a negative relation with information asymmetry
(Vermaelen, 1981).
       The  vast  majority  of  this  paper  is  based  on  Babenko,  Tserlukevich  and
Vedrashko’s paper “The Credibility of Open Market Share Repurchase Signaling”,
published in the Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis (2012). The authors
researched whether insider purchase is an important factor to consider when assessing the
reliability of undervaluation signaling values from open market share repurchase
announcements. In order to conduct the study, data on share repurchase announcements
between 1993-2008 were collected from Thomson Financial Securities Data Corporation
(SDC). Further, insider trading data was obtained through the Thomson Financial
database, while stock price return data was extracted from CSRP.  Then  a  3-day window
was used to calculate abnormal returns. The findings indicated that the stock market
responded in  favor of announcements by firms where insiders recently purchased stock.
        Moreover, the area of study, as well as the methodology used in Babenko et al.’s
research has similarities and is applicable to our study, although a few differences are
prevalent. Their  study examines if insider purchases  contribute to the undervaluation
signaling value from open market share repurchase announcements. On the other hand,
our study rather examines if times of uncertainty have an effect on the signaling value of
share repurchase announcements. As a result, we  will also draw inspiration from studies
researching stock market reactions to announcements during times of uncertainty.

2.3 Share Repurchase Announcements During Times of Uncertainty: Motives and
Stock Market Reactions
Our main research question  aims  to  answer if Covid-19  had  an  impact on abnormal
returns following share repurchase announcements.  To the best of our knowledge, no
prior literature has investigated  this specific effect  on U.S. stocks during Covid-19.
However,  there  is  extensive  literature  on  how  general  uncertainty  impacts  news
announcements, firm characteristics and abnormal announcement returns.
       Prior  studies have found a positive  relationship  between high uncertainty and
abnormal returns. Anolick et al. (2021) concluded that high levels of economic policy and
financial uncertainty were linked to considerably higher abnormal returns following share
repurchase announcements. Similar findings are reported by Schmalz and Zhuk (2019),
stating that certain firms experience up  to 70% stronger stock price reactions following
earnings announcements during busts compared to booms. Zhang (2006) also studied the
relationship between information uncertainty and stock returns and found that increased
information uncertainty results in  lower expected returns following bad news, while
higher expected returns are associated with positive news.
       Moreover, since share repurchases are more flexible than dividends, for instance
as firms are not obliged to follow through on open market share repurchases, Jagannathan
et al. (2000)  suggested that firms might reduce the completion rate of share repurchases
during times of uncertainty. Likewise,  e.g.  Lie  (2005) and Anolick et al. (2012) found
that  firms are more likely to have strong precautionary motives to hold on to cash during

                                   6
times  of  uncertainty,  rather  than  paying  it  out  through  e.g.,  share  repurchases.
Nonetheless, these  findings  give no implications of how the number of share repurchase
announcements will be impacted during Covid-19, as firms are not obliged to follow
through  on open-market buyback  announcements.  Thereby, the signaling hypothesis
becomes an area of interest as this might explain why firms announce share repurchases,
while the completion rate decreases.  There  is  a  documented increased  risk of  incorrect
valuation during times of high policy uncertainty,  due to information  asymmetry  (Nagar,
Schoenfeld  and Wellman, 2019). In the context of share repurchase activity, it is  thereby
plausible to suggest that  firms' propensity to use share  repurchase  announcements  as a
means of sending positive signals to the market about their underlying  could increase
during times of uncertainty.

2.4  Contribution
To the best of our knowledge, this report is the first to study how share repurchase
announcements impact abnormal returns for U.S. stocks during Covid-19, as well as
research  if the types of firms  repurchasing shares during the pandemic had different
characteristics compared to companies repurchasing in the control period. In addition, our
study contributes to  the  existing literature on the  characteristics,  signaling value  and
market reactions  to  share repurchases  announcements  by  e.g.,  Vermaelen (1981), Jensen
(1986), Ikenberry et al. (1995), Dittmar (2000)  and others.  Further, we contribute to
literature on the motives behind share repurchase by investigating what types of firm
characteristics impacted the likelihood of repurchasing shares during Covid-19, compared
to normal market conditions.  Our  study  also adds value  to the continuously developing
stream of literature that studies the effects of uncertainty on firm-specific announcements
(e.g., Zhang,  2006;  Schmalz and Zhuk,  2019).  By  combining the previously mentioned
research and incorporating the relatively  recent  event of Covid-19, our study stands out
and contributes to the exciting research.

3. Hypotheses

   i.     We expect higher abnormal stock returns to share repurchase announcements
        during Covid-19 compared to  pre-Covid-19.

To begin with, there is evidence that significant abnormal returns are achieved  post-share
repurchase announcements, as documented by for instance Ikenberry et al. (1995).
Further, Mitchell and  Mulherin  (1994) and  Neuhierl  et al. (2013) have found a positive
relation between firm-specific news announcements and high abnormal returns. We
expect these findings to still be applicable during times of uncertainty due to a number of
reasons. For instance, Schmalz and Zhuk (2019)  suggest  that firms experience immense
abnormal positive returns following earnings announcements during market busts,
compared to booms. Combining these findings, we expect to find higher abnormal returns
to share repurchase announcements during Covid-19.

                                   7
  ii.     We hypothesize that  the abnormal returns will vary across industries, and we
       anticipate that the strongest market reactions will be seen among stocks  within
        wholesale trade, retail trade, services and  high-tech.

Since  different industries have varying characteristics, there are inherent differences in
terms of default risks when comparing industries that are more and less impacted by times
of uncertainty. In addition, it is reasonable to expect  variations  in terms of informational
value between industries during the  pandemic, as they were impacted to various extents
(S&P, 2022). For instance, some of the industries most impacted by the pandemic were
wholesale  and retail trade,  transportation and storage, and lastly services  divided into
food, accommodation and others  (Office for National Statistics, 2021). Thereby,  based
on  our broad  industry classifications  (SIC), we  anticipate  strong market reactions in the
following  industries:  “wholesale trade”,  “retail  trade”  and  “services”.  However, we  do
not include  “transportation and storage”  in this hypothesis as it does not  correspond to
our obtained industry definition  of  “transportation and  public utilities”.  In  line with
Babenko et al. (2012),  we also formed the industry “high-tech” since Covid-19 positively
impacted the  industry in terms of  demand  (McKinsey, 2020).

 iii.     We predict that the independent regression variables “Cash to Asset”,
        ”Repurchase Program Size”,  “Insider Purchases”, “Report on Announcement
       Day” and  “Stated Reason: Undervaluation” will have a positive correlation
       with the dependent abnormal returns variable.

Jensen (1986) found that firms with a large amount of excess cash flow are likely to invest
heavily in projects with negative present value, consequently increasing agency costs.
Nonetheless, agency costs can be reduced by distributing the excess cash through share
buybacks. In  addition, Grullon and Michaely (2004)  suggest  that share repurchase
announcements from firms that are inclined to overinvest in negative present value
projects will give rise to positive stock returns. Hence, we expect the Cash to Assets ratio
to  be positively correlated to abnormal returns.
       We expect the Repurchase Program Size  variable to have a positive correlation
with abnormal returns post announcement, in line with Ikenberry and Vermaelen (1996),
as well as Comment and Jarell (1991).  In addition, Babenko et al. (2012) found that
insider purchases prior to share repurchase announcements are associated with higher
positive abnormal returns. Based on this, we anticipate that Insider Purchase is positively
correlated with abnormal returns.

 iv.    We  expect that the independent variables “Share Price Run-Up”, “Firm Size”,
       “Tobin’s Q”, “Insider Sales” and “Recurring Announcement” will have a
       negative correlation with the dependent abnormal returns variable.

                                   8
In  accordance  with  the  signaling  hypothesis,  firms  repurchase  shares  when  they
characterize their stock as undervalued  (Vermaelen, 1981; Dittmar, 2000).  Stephens and
Weisbach (1998) also concluded that prior stock market returns have a negative relation
with share repurchase activity, implying that the Share Price Run-Up variable should be
negatively correlated with abnormal returns.
       Furthermore, small firms are more likely to experience higher abnormal returns
than large firms after share buyback announcements, as information asymmetry and firm
size  is negatively correlated (Ikkenberry et al., 1995). Consequently, we expect the Firm
Size variable to be negatively correlated with abnormal returns.  In addition, Ikenberry et
al (1995) suggested that firms with low Tobin’s Q commonly experienced abnormal
returns, hence the  hypothesis  of negative correlation between  them.
       Moreover, we expect that Insider Sales have a negative correlation with abnormal
returns  in line with the findings by Babenko et al. (2012). Lastly, our data includes firms
that  repurchase  shares on multiple occasions during our time period.  Andriosopoulos and
Lasfer (2015)  suggested that due to the large amount of recurring share repurchase
announcements in the United States, recurring announcements generate lower returns.
Therefore, we expect Recurring Announcements to be negatively correlated with
abnormal stock  returns.

4. Data

4.1 The Ideal Data Set
In the ideal data set, the firms that  repurchased  shares would be completely randomized
in  the two periods. Alternatively, the same firms would have  repurchased in both periods,
or only  companies with identical characteristics  and  announcements.  However, this does
not hold true in reality as  share repurchases are largely associated with signaling motives
and other management objectives that can be more common in certain types of firms,
making it difficult to find any causality. The consequence of this is that the likelihood of
sample selection bias increases. In addition, the sample size would ideally be large and
there would be no missing data points for any variables in order to avoid bias in the
estimation of parameters or reduce the representativeness. Furthermore, every industry
and year  would have the same  number  of announcements and the frequency of the
announcements would be constant in the time periods. Using this ideal data set would
eliminate biases and unwanted effects and isolate the Covid-19 effect to a greater extent,
which would  develop more robust results. However, it is not possible to access this type
of data in reality. Additionally, in an ideal setting, firms’ true motives behind share
repurchase announcements would be observable. As we can only rely on literature to find
indications of motives there is a margin of error prevalent, and limited conclusions that
can  be  drawn  on  why  companies  repurchase  shares  during  Covid-19.  Additional
limitations to our study are discussed in section  8.2.

                                   9
4.2 Share Repurchases
Adhering to Babenko et al. (2012), we obtain data on share repurchase announcements
through  the  Thomson Financial Securities Data Company (SDC) Mergers & Acquisition
database. The export includes all share repurchase announcements by public companies
that are listed on Nasdaq and NYSE.  Exchanges in other countries,  over-the-counter
exchanges,  and small exchanges are excluded as they  vary in terms of transactional
activity,  regulations and requirements  (Manconi, Peyer and Vermaelen,  2019). For
instance, board approval is required for buybacks in the U.S. and there is no time limit on
the authorization, while explicit shareholder meeting approval is needed in the EU and
there is an 18-month time limit on the authorization. In addition, adhering to the reasoning
by Grullon and Michaely (2004), highly regulated industries such as financial institutions
are not excluded from the sample since they  constitute  a large proportion of  it.
       In   total,   we   obtained   2293   announcements   for   the   period.   Besides   the
announcement date, we also exported other information on  the  repurchase program,
repurchase technique, value of  the  transaction, stated reason and company identifiers,
industry code and more.  Once the share repurchase announcement data from SDC was
extracted, additional filters described below were applied to address incomplete data and
insufficient relevance to our study.

Table 1:

Filtering action 2 is in line with the methodology used by Babenko et al. (2012) and  is
because  open market share repurchase is the most common technique (Skinner, 2008).
Because the different types of share  repurchase  techniques  differ, including all types in
our analysis would require us to test and analyze them separately and later compare the
results (Comment and Jarell, 1991). Since the less common  techniques  only accounted
for a minor part of the sample, it would  likely not contribute to any  valuable conclusions.

4.3 Trading  and Financial  Data
Daily  share  price  data  was  collected  from  Refinitiv  for  each  share  repurchase
announcement. However, as SDC does not report the specific time of the announcement,
it is not possible to determine whether  the announcement was done during,  or outside  of,
market opening hours.  Hence,  we calculate share price returns  using a 3-day window
surrounding the announcement.  This methodology is  in line with Babenko et al. (2012),
and  is  also  extensively used in previous stock repurchase literature.
      We  retrieve data on company financials from Refinitiv for all firms announcing
share repurchases. Specifically, we obtain data on Book Assets, Book Equity, Market

                                  10
Capitalization, Free Cash Flow and Shares Outstanding. Data on insider purchases and
sales are  collected through Thomson  Table 1, accessed through WRDS. The database
collects the data from the SEC Form 4 filed by investors after a PDMR transaction has
occurred. In line with Babenko et al. (2012), we excluded shares obtained via stock
options or grants.

4.4  Time Series Regression: Variables
4.4.1 Abnormal Stock Returns
In order to quantify the informational value of share repurchases during Covid-19, we
measure abnormal stock returns. In line with the methodology used by Babenko et al.
(2012), as well as previous prominent share repurchase  literature  by for instance
Comment and Jarell (1991) and Maxwell and Stephens (2003), abnormal returns are
calculated using a 3-day window for share price data. Further, we calculate abnormal
returns  as the  3-day buy-and-hold (BHAR) return of the firm minus the expected return
of the market, estimated as the return of the stock exchange index, that is Nasdaq or NYSE
composite  depending on what index the firm is listed on.
       Given that share repurchases  are not  limited to  being  announced solely when the
market is open, some announcements in our sample took place when the stock market
was closed. In this event, the next market trading date was applied as an adjusted date of
announcement, in an effort to  isolate  the impact of share repurchase announcements on
the abnormal price returns to the largest extent possible.

4.4.2  Independent  Variables
4.4.2.1 Treatment Variable: Covid-19
The treatment variable is represented by a dummy variable that stipulates whether the
share repurchase was announced during the control period or the treatment period. In
order to define the treatment period, we used societal restrictions in the United States as
a proxy for the prevailing uncertainty in society. As seen in the graph below, the
Government Response Tracker in the United States spiked on 2020-02-05 (Oxford
University, 2022), and hence this is used as the start date for the treatment period.
Moreover, the Government Responses slightly decreased approximately two  years after
the spike, the specific date  is  however  difficult to extract. Bearing in mind that Russia
invaded Ukraine on 2022-02-24 and that we want to isolate the Covid-19 effect, we chose
2022-02-23 as the end of our treatment period.

                                  11
Figure 1. Government Stringency Index, United States

Stringency index based on nine indicators including school and workplace closures, travel
bans, etc. (100 = strictest) (Oxford University, 2022)

The control period is defined as 2017-01-01 until 2020-02-04, that is until the day prior
to the  spike in societal restrictions. Notably, the control period is not symmetric to the
treatment period in terms of number of days, however,  it is nearly symmetric in terms of
number of announcements. The main reasoning behind choosing 2017-01-01 as the start
date is based on the argument that the longer the control period, the higher certainty that
it is not skewed by other significant events.

4.4.2.2  Firm Characteristics:  Cash to Assets, Firm Size, and Tobin’s Q
To begin with, we  attempt to capture the main  firm characteristics  impacting abnormal
returns following announcements.  Proxies for these are then used as independent
variables, in line with the methodology set by Babenko et al. (2012). The variable  Cash
to  Assets  is applied  as a proxy for the  free-cash-flow  hypothesis, largely discussed by
Jensen (1986) and Easterbrook (1984).  It  foremost  aims to capture firms with high
Cash/Asset ratios,  as firms with excess cash are more likely to repurchase  shares  to
diminish agency costs  (Grullon and Michaely, 2004).  Firm Size, defined as the logarithm
of book assets, is included as literature found a negative relation between firm size
information asymmetry, while smaller firms experience higher  abnormal returns  post-
buyback  announcements (Ikenberry et al., 1995; Comment and Jarell, 1991).  Lastly,
Tobin’s Q, defined  using the  proxy  market-to-book ratio, is incorporated since firms that
perceive their stock as undervalued are more likely to announce repurchases, in line with
the signaling hypothesis (Ikenberry et al., 1995).

                                  12
                                 !        "#$%&' )#*+& ,- ./+0'1
                     Tobin s Q  =                                        ( 1 )
                                        2,,% )#*+& ,- ./+0'1

4.4.2.3  Insider Purchases and Sales
Extensive research has been conducted  about  notable insider trading  surrounding
corporate announcements, and the implied signaling value (e.g., John and Mishra, 1990;
Lee,  Mikkelson  and  Partch  1992). Further building on these findings,  Lakonishok and
Lee  (2001) suggest that insiders often earn abnormal returns  on their trades. Similarly,
Babenko et al. (2012) found that share repurchase announcement returns are higher and
positive for firms if  insiders purchase shares  prior to the announcement, while insider
sales could however have a slightly negative effect on returns.  Adhering to the
methodology used by Babenko et al. (2012), we include two variables for insider  trading:
Insider Purchases  and Insider Sales.

4.4.2.4  Recurring Repurchases
Recently, it has become common for firms to repurchase shares  frequently  and Skinner
(2008) even concluded that share repurchases have become the main form of payout. As
a result, there are likely varying reasons and motives behind firms  that  repurchase shares
on a frequent basis, compared to firms who only repurchase shares occasionally. By the
same token,  Andriosopoulos and Lasfer (2015)  suggested that the credibility of a firm
decreases  after  an  initial  announcement  and  found  that  recurring  announcements
generated significantly lower results. Hence, with inspiration from  the methodology used
by Jagannathan and Stephens (2003),  we apply  the  dummy  Recurring Repurchases,
taking the value 1 if a firm repurchases  share  more than once during our time period.

4.4.2.5  Report on  Announcement Day
Since  we  want  to  isolate  the  additional  informational  value  of  share  repurchase
announcements during Covid-19, it is of interest that the abnormal returns are not affected
by other events such as reporting dates. Thus, we apply  the  dummy variable Report on
Announcement  Day, indicating  if the share repurchase announcements coincided with a
reporting date. Specifically, we investigate whether the reporting date occurs within the
3-day window centered around the announcement date, as this is the period applied when
calculating abnormal returns.

4.4.2.6  Percentage Sought
The fraction of shares sought in repurchase programs is positively correlated to abnormal
returns following the announcement, as stated by both Comment and Jarell (1991) and
Ikenberry and Vermaelen (1996). Hence, in line with the application used by Babenko et
al. (2012), we control for the percentage of shares sought in the repurchase  program  by
dividing the value of shares sought by the firm’s market capitalization.

                                  13
4.4.2.7  Share Price Run-Up
Schultz (2003) proposed that the abnormal returns calculated in event studies could
potentially be impacted by  pseudo-market  timing, as managers often consider previous
stock performance when making decisions. In the instance that share repurchases are
announced following bad stock performance, it is implied that positive abnormal returns
can be expected. In addition, Stephens and Weisbach (1998) concluded that share
repurchase activity is negatively correlated with former stock returns. Comment and Jarell
(1991) also found that stock price run-up is negatively correlated with abnormal returns
following  share  repurchase  announcements.  Therefore,  we  include  a  variable  for
abnormal  stock  price  returns  40  days  before  the  announcement,  following  the
methodology used by Babenko et al. (2012).

4.4.2.8  Stated Reasons
Peyer and Vermaelen (2009) concluded that stated reasons for share repurchases reflect
insider information. In addition, they found that the stated reason  “undervaluation” is
associated with higher abnormal announcement returns. Therefore, we include dummy
variables for the stated reasons that are prevalent in our sample; Undervaluation, General
Corporate Action and Employee Benefit Plans, Enhance Shareholder Value and Offset
Dilution Effects.

4.5  Probit Regression
The purpose of the probit regression is to observe  how  different characteristics  impacted
the likelihood  of  repurchasing  shares during Covid-19, compared to the  pre-Covid-19
period. Until this point, data on firms that repurchased shares during the control or
treatment period has been obtained. However, in order to create a  dependent  dummy
variable  Repurchase,  stipulating if a  firm repurchased shares  or not, it is implicit that data
on firms not repurchasing shares is required as well. Hence, all firms listed on Nasdaq
and NYSE are retrieved through  Nasdaq’s website.  Thereafter, the following  financial
line items  and ratios  are obtained from Compustat:  Total Assets, Cash, Sales/Turnover,
Book/Market, Dividend Payout Ratio, Return on Capital Employed (ROCE), Free Cash
Flow/Operating Cash Flow, Total Debt/Total Assets and Current Ratio.

4.5.1  Independent Variables
Expanding on the independent variables  in the probit regression, their overarching
purpose  is  to capture firm characteristics  that may vary between firms  choosing  to
repurchase shares or not.  Particularly, we aim to capture firm characteristics that are
related to  motives  for  share repurchases according to literature.  Hovakimian, Opler and
Titman (2001) and D’Mello and Shroff (2000) proposed that one reason  why firms
repurchase shares is to make progress towards an optimal leverage ratio. Expanding on
this hypothesis, Dittmar (2000), Jagannathan and Stephens (2003) and Mitchell and
Dharmawan (2007)  suggest  that firms with below target leverage ratios are more prone
to repurchase shares. Hence, Debt to Assets is included as an independent variable.

                                  14
       Grullon and Michaely (2002) found that U.S. companies repurchase shares using
funds that otherwise had been attributed to paying out dividends. Likewise,  Brav,
Graham, Harvey and Michaely (2005)  implied that  when free of dividend payout
constraints, firms tend to  substitute dividends  for  buybacks. These findings are in line
with the dividend substitution hypothesis. Hence, as it is suggested that the funds used
for repurchases could originally have been used to increase dividends, we include
Dividend Payout  Ratio as an independent variable.  Lastly, while the variables described
in section 4.4.4.1 have large signaling values and impact abnormal returns, they also
reflect certain  motives  for conducting share repurchases. Hence,  Firm Size, Cash to
Assets and  Tobin’s Q  are  incorporated.
       To  capture motives that might be related to repurchase activity during Covid-19
specifically, we further aim to capture variables describing  the  firm’s profitability,
operational activity and liquidity. Thereby, Current Ratio, Sales/Assets, Return on Capital
Employed (ROCE) and Free Cash Flow/Operating Cash Flow are included.

5. Methodology

5.1 Background
Following the methodology of Babenko et al. (2012), this study performs an event study
with the aim of  capturing  abnormal returns to share  repurchase announcements.  While
following  much of the model specification and analysis in Babenko et al. (2012)  we
diverge slightly by adding  additional robustness  tests.

5.2  Statistical T-tests
In line with the methodology set  by Babenko  et al. (2012),  we conduct a t-test to compare
the mean of the abnormal  returns around share repurchase announcements pre-Covid-19
(control) and during Covid-19 (treatment). We are using Welch's t-test, which is
commonly used for testing if the means of two populations are equal when the sample
sizes and variations  are different. The t-test is executed by calculating the t statistic based
on information from Newbold et al. (2013), where  x  is the sample mean of the treatment
period,  y  the  sample mean of the control period,  s  the sample variance and  n  is the
number of observations in the sample.

                                            34516
                                  t  =                                         (  2  )
                                                     #  !#
                                                   !"   %
                                7 8
                                              $" $%

We can analyze the significance level of each t-test by calculating the  probability value
(p-value). The p-value gives us the smallest significance level where  the  null hypothesis
can be rejected. First, we make a t-test for all share repurchase announcements by
comparing the control and treatment period. As stated in our hypothesis section, we
expect higher abnormal returns during Covid-19 compared to our control period.
Therefore, we will perform a one-sided t-test with the following null and alternative

                                  15
hypotheses, where  R9  (R')  represents average abnormal returns in  the  control period
(treatment period):

                            H:  =  R19 − R1'  >  0                        ( 3 )

                            H;  =  R19 − R1'  <  0                        ( 4 )

Secondly, we perform separate t-tests for each industry  to  investigate if the difference in
abnormal  returns  during  Covid-19  varies  across  industries,  which  is  one  of  our
hypotheses. Since the difference in abnormal returns are expected to vary in size and
direction, we will perform two-sided Welch’s t-tests, with the following null and
alternative hypotheses:

                            H:  =  R19 − R1'  =  0                        ( 5 )

                            H;  =  R19 − R1'  ≠  0                        ( 6 )

5.3  Time Series Regression
Following the methodology set by Babenko et al. (2012), we perform an ordinary least
square (OLS) linear regression  to  determine  correlations between the dependent variable
3-day BHAR, and the independent variables presented in section 4.4.2.  However, in
contrast to  the  execution  by Babenko et al. (2012), we perform a time-series regression
due to the characteristics of our data set; containing  multiple firms  that  announce
repurchases  during different fiscal years.  The model of the OLS regression  can be
expressed as  follows:

R  =  β: + β;Covid + β< Repurchase Program Size + β= Share Price Run Up +
                                                                             !
β> On Report Date + β? Firm Size + β@ Tobin s Q + βA Cash to Assets +
βB Insider Purchase + βC Insider Sale + β;: Firm with Recurring Programs +
β;;  Reason: Employee Benefit Plans +  β;<  Reason: Enhance Shareholder Value +
β;=  Reason: General Corporate Action + β;>  Reason: Offset Dilution Effects +
β;?  Reason: Undervaluation                                                (  7  )

5.4  Placebo Test
As our data span over a longer period  of  time, there is  a risk  of capturing underlying time
trends in our data that are not related to Covid-19.  Thereby,  a placebo test is performed
in order to  test  the robustness of the regression results.
       The  test is conducted by creating  a  subset of the  announcement  data,  only
including  announcements in the control period. These are then  divided  into two
symmetric and sequential  groups  based on the number of  announcements, and this  equal
split  occurs  on 2018-05-08.  Thereafter,  the period prior to this date is  labeled as the  new
control period,  receiving a placebo  dummy  variable  obtaining the value 0. However,  the

                                  16
subsequent  period is labeled as the placebo  period, where the placebo dummy variable
received the value 1.  Subsequently, the main regression model, explained in section 5.4,
is employed again using this data subset.  If the coefficient received for the placebo period
obtains the same coefficients and  significant results as during the true treatment period
(Covid-19), we can conclude that we have captured unwanted effects.

5.5  Permutation Test
In order to further test the robustness of our main regression, a permutation test is
performed. Specifically, the test investigates if general noise was captured in our
regression by coincidence.  This  is particularly  likely  during  periods  when multiple
significant events occur at the same time, making it nearly impossible to draw clear causal
relationships between market reactions and specific events.  Additionally,  as  abnormal
returns are calculated using the 3-day BHAR surrounding the announcement, it is
plausible that stock price reactions stemming from other events were captured.
       The  permutation test is performed by running the same regression model as in
section 5.4, however only using data on share repurchases in the control period (2017-01-
01 to 2020-02-04). The test randomly assigns a value (0 or 1) on the Covid-19 dummy
variable  for  all announcements, thereby creating false Covid-19 dummy variables.
Thereafter, the regression is performed hundreds of times until a close-to-normal
distribution of the Covid-19 coefficient is found. If the observed coefficient for the Covid-
19 dummy in our main regression is outside or in the tails of this normal distribution, we
can conclude that our findings do not capture noise.

5.6  Fixed Effects Regression
The main regression performed in section 5.4 does not consider  heterogeneity across
industries and companies.  However, if  neglecting  to control  for fixed effects, there is an
increased risk  of  omitted variable biased.  Thereby,  to  further  address  the robustness of
our results, we employ a fixed effects regression for both industry- and firm-fixed effects.
       Due to  the panel data outline, the regression can only be performed on a subset of
our data, namely entities repurchasing in both the control and treatment period. This
represents  41.7%  of  the  companies  repurchasing  shares  during  Covid-19.  Since
companies in this data subset by definition announce repurchases frequently, it should
however be noted that literature has found that firms with recurring  announcements
generate lower abnormal announcement returns (Andriosopoulos and Lasfer, 2015).
Moreover,  the regression model is identical to our main regression described in section
5.4,  except for  removing the independent variable Recurring Announcements since all
firms in this sample will be considered recurring firms, according to the  definition in the
section  4.4.2.4.

5.7  Probit Regression
To establish a causal relationship between Covid-19 and abnormal announcement returns,
it is crucial to study if firms with different types of characteristics repurchased shares

                                  17
during Covid-19 compared to the control period.  Hence, a probit regression is employed,
studying  the  likelihood  of  announcing  share  repurchases  based  on  certain  firm
characteristics, described in section 4.5.1. Separate panel probit regressions are conducted
for each period (control and treatment).
       This  is particularly interesting to investigate due  to  the low overlap in firms
repurchasing in both periods, restrictions on share repurchases placed on firms receiving
financial aid (U.S Department of the Treasury, 2022),  and the pro-cyclical characteristics
of buybacks (Lintner,  1956). If significant distinctions are found, it would neglect the
effect of Covid-19 and rather imply that differences in abnormal returns stemmed from
variations in firm characteristics.

The model of the probit regression is  as  follows:

                                                         !          Cash
               R  =  β: + β;Firm Size + β< Tobin sQ + β=
                                                        Assets
          Debt
      +β>      + β? Dividend Payout Ratio + β@Current Ratio + βA ROCE
           Assets
                          Free Cash Flow
                 + βB
                        Operating Cash Flow
                                                                                    (  8  )

6. Empirical Results
6.1  Results
6.1.1 Statistical T-Tests

                           Table 2. T-Test Results for All Announcements
                                          Change in Return

                                     1.04%***

 The table presents the results a one-sided Welch's t-test for all share repruchase announcements in our sample. The value
 presented is the difference in average abnormal returns between the control and treatment period. A positive value means
 that the average abnormal returns during Covid-19 was higher compared to the control group. The test is conducted on the
 data presented in section 4. Values with a significance level at 10% are bolded.
 *** p-value<0.01, ** p-value<0.05, * p-value<0.1

Table  2  presents the results of Welch's t-test, testing the difference in  3-day  BHAR
following  share repurchase  announcements.  The test results show  a  highly significant
increase  in average abnormal returns of  1.04%,  at a  p-value<0.01.  Consequently, this
finding is in line with our hypothesis that share price reactions to share buybacks will be
higher during Covid-19, compared to  the  pre-Covid-19  period.

                                  18
                                    Table 3. Industry T-Test Results

 Industry                                                       Change in Return
 Agriculture, Forestry, & Fishing                                        0.67%

 Construction                                                     -0.98%

 Finance, Insurance, & Real Estate                                      0.82%**

 High-Tech                                                    1.76%*

 Manufacturing (Excluding High-Tech)                                  0.48%

 Mining                                                       -3.06%

 Retail Trade                                                       0.02%

 Services (Excluding High-Tech)                                      3.56%**

 Transportation & Public Utilities                                       0.78%

 Wholesale Trade                                               12.03%***
 The table presents the results from two-sided Welch's t-tests for each industry found in our sample (based on SIC codes). High-
 tech industry is defined by the SIC codes 3571, 3572, 3575, 3578, 3671, 3672, 3674–3677, 3661, 3678, 3679, 3875, 7371–7376,
 and 7379. The values presented are the difference in average returns between the control and treatment period. A positive value
 means that the average abnormal returns during Covid-19 was higher compared to the control group. The test is conducted on
 the data presented in section 6.1. Values with a significance level at 10% are bolded.
 *** p-value<0.01, ** p-value<0.05, * p-value<0.1

Table  3  presents  the results from the t-tests performed on different industries. The test
results for three industries showed significant results.  Finance,  insurance and  real  estate
showed 0.82% higher  abnormal returns during Covid-19, at  a  significance level  of  5%.
This is  slightly below the difference on an aggregate level, found in the t-test in  table 2.
At the  same significance level,  services,  in line with our hypothesis  show  an  increase  in
average abnormal returns of  3.56%.  Wholesale  trade  obtained  12.03% higher average
abnormal returns during Covid-19 at a significance  level  of 1%.  Even though this is in
line with our hypothesis, it  is slightly surprising  that the increase is  immensely higher
than the increase in average abnormal returns on an aggregate level.  The industry  high-
tech had on average 1.76% higher abnormal returns during Covid-19, which is also higher
than shown on an aggregate level  but only at a significance level of  10%. The rest of the
industries showed no significant results with high p-values. The results of these t-tests
indicate that the magnitude of the  impact Covid-19 had on abnormal returns varies across
industries.

                                  19
6.1.2  Time-Series  Regression

                                                  Table 4. Regression Results

                                                                                          Dependent Variable:

                                                                                         Abnormal Returns

                    Covid-19 (Yes)                                     1.3%***

                                                                                                  (0.4%)

                     Repurchase Program Size (%)                               -0.0%

                                                                                                  (0.0%)

                    Share Price Run-Up                                   -4.7%***

                                                                                                  (1.5%)

                    On Report Date (Yes)                                   0.7%*

                                                                                                  (0.4%)

                    Firm Size                                         -1.1%***

                                                                                                  (0.2%)

                    Tobin's Q                                         -0.0%**

                                                                                                  (0.0%)

                    Cash/Assets                                         0.7%

                                                                                                  (1.7%)

                    Insider Purchase (%)                                    15.6%

                                                                                               (25.3%)

                    Insider Sale (%)                                       10.5%

                                                                                                  (7.3%)

                    Firm with Recurring Programs (Yes)                           0.6%

                                                                                                  (0.4%)

                    Reason: Employee Benefit Plans                            6.4%*

                                                                                                  (3.5%)

                    Reason: Enhance Shareholder Value                         2.5%**

                                                                                                  (1.3%)

                    Reason: General Corporate Action                            1.4%

                                                                                                  (1.2%)

                     Reason: Offset Dilution Effects                               -1.9%

                                                                                                  (3.9%)

                    Reason: Undervaluation                                 5.0%

                                                                                                  (3.5%)

                    Constant                                        9.8%***
                                                                                                  (2.4%)

                     Observations                                         1,493

                      2
                     R                                                         0.045

                              2
                         Adjusted R                                                            0.036

                                 The table presents the results of the regression on all share repurchase announcements studied, both in the control and
                                treatment period. Dependant variable is the 3-day BHAR in percent. Bolded values are significant at α<0.1 and standard
                                 errors are shown in paranthesis.
                              *** p-value<0.01, **p-value<0.05, *p-value<0.1

                                  20
Table  4  presents the outcome of the OLS regression performed on all share repurchases
in the control and treatment  periods.  The results on  the  3-day  BHAR  illustrate  that the
dependent Covid-19 dummy had a positive  effect of 1.3% on  abnormal returns with a
significance level  of 1%.  Five  of the independent variables included also show  a
significant correlation with abnormal returns.  Share Price Run-Up  has a relatively high
correlation with abnormal returns, with a  negative coefficient of  -4.7% at the significance
level of  1%.  Firm  Size is also negatively correlated with abnormal returns, though with a
smaller  coefficient of  -1.1% at a  significance  level of 1%.  In addition, the variables for
stated reason, namely  Reason: Enhance Shareholder Value and Reason:  Employee
Benefit Plans obtained significant results at a p-value<0.05 and p-value<0.1, respectively.
The  last independent variable with significant results is  variable Tobin’s Q, surprisingly
with a coefficient of  -0.0% at a significance level of 5%.
                           <
       Moreover, the low  R  value  is expected since our model aims to capture only the
incremental effect Covid-19 had on abnormal  returns  and not the total explanations for
abnormal returns overall.  We  also  perform a Breusch-Pagan test for heteroscedasticity,
since it is one of the main assumptions in the OLS  regression and  find that we can reject
the null hypothesis that residuals are homoscedastic. This means that the OLS regression
is not the most efficient method for our model data. Although this does not mean that the
coefficients in our model are biased, it can affect the standard  errors presented which can
result in biased inference. This can therefore limit the conclusions that can be drawn from
the results.
                                    Table 5. Heteroscedasticity Test
                                                                                     Statistic

 Regression                                                 99.58***

 The table presents the result of a Breusch-Pagan heteroscedasticity test the regression model in table 5. Bold value means statistical
 significance at α<0.1.
 *** p-value<0.01, **p-value<0.05, *p-value<0.1

6.1.3  Placebo Test
In line with the  reasoning in  5.4,  we perform  a placebo test  to  determine  if  the time-series
regression, described in section 5.3, potentially could have captured any overarching time
trends, distorting our findings.  Thereby,  we would preferably obtain insignificant results
for the placebo variable,  since this  implies  that  no  general time trends were captured.  As
seen in table  6, the placebo variable was not statistically significant,  receiving a positive
coefficient of  0.5%, further  strengthening the results in our main regression.

                                  21
                                      Table 6. Placebo Regression Results

                                      Dependent Variable: Abnormal Return

                                                        Placebo                     Covid-19

Placebo/Covid-19 (Yes)                                0.5%                     1.3%***

                                                          (0.4%)                       (0.4%)

Repurchase Program Size (%)                              -0.0%                      -0.0%

                                                          (0.0%)                       (0.0%)

Share Price Run-Up                                  -3.9%*                    -4.7%***

                                                          (2.2%)                       (1.5%)

On Report Date (Yes)                                 1.0%**                     0.7%*

                                                          (0.4%)                       (0.4%)

Firm Size                                        -0.5%*                    -1.1%***

                                                          (0.3%)                       (0.2%)

Tobin's Q                                         -0.0%                     -0.0%**

                                                          (0.0%)                       (0.0%)

Cash/Assets                                       0.8%                      0.7%

                                                          (2.2%)                       (1.7%)

Insider Purchase (%)                                   -5.0%                      15.6%

                                                        (28.3%)                      (25.3%)

Insider Sale (%)                                     3.7%                      10.5%

                                                          (7.5%)                       (7.3%)

Firm with Recurring Programs (Yes)                         0.7%                      0.6%

                                                          (0.5%)                       (0.4%)

Reason: Employee Benefit Plans                          7.1%*                     6.4%*

                                                          (3.8%)                       (3.5%)

Reason: Enhance Shareholder Value                         2.3%                     2.5%**

                                                          (2.0%)                       (1.3%)

Reason: General Corporate Action                          0.8%                      1.4%

                                                          (2.0%)                       (1.2%)

Reason: Offset Dilution Effects                                                         -1.9%

                                                                                                           (3.9%)

Reason: Undervaluation                                2.5%                      5.0%

                                                          (4.5%)                       (3.5%)

Constant                                        4.1%                     9.8%***

                                                          (3.2%)                       (2.4%)

Observations                                        876                       1,493

 2
R                                                     0.028                       0.045

         2
Adjusted R                                                  0.012                        0.036

Column 1 presents the results of the regression on all share repurchase announcements studied in the control, with a placebo variable for Covid-19. Column 2
shows the same results as in table 5 for comparison. Dependant variable is the 3-day BHAR in percent. Bolded values are significant at α<0.1 and standard errors
are shown in paranthesis. There was no data on the variable "Reason: Offset Dilution Effects" during the placebo period.
*** p-value<0.01, **p-value<0.05, *p-value<0.1"

                                22
6.1.4  Permutation Test

To further examine the robustness of the regression results, we perform a permutation
test. The test is performed by randomizing the binary value of the Covid-19 dummy for
each announcement. This is performed 100 times and plotted in a histogram to see the
close-to-normal distribution. The x-axis is the coefficient values from each regression and
the y-axis is the number of times each value was observed. Since the Covid-19 coefficient
in our main OLS regression, with the  value of 1.3%, is  outside the tail, we can conclude
that our model has not captured random noise.  This is illustrated with the blue dotted line
in  Figure  2.  Furthermore, this finding  adds  to  the  robustness  of  our findings and
strengthens the conclusion that Covid-19 had an effect on abnormal returns.

6.1.5  Fixed Effects Regression
Since the OLS regression model does not consider heterogeneity across entities, we run
a separate regression  to control for this.  As mentioned  in section 5.6, this is  done by
adding fixed effects in a separate regression for all companies that made a repurchase in
both the control and treatment period. Initially, we run the panel regression without any
fixed effects to control that  the Covid-19 effect on abnormal returns is still present. Then,
we add industry fixed effects to the same model and compare. As indicated in the t-tests
for industries, Covid-19 might have affected industries differently. Furthermore, we make
a third regression with firm fixed effects. Lastly, we include a new version of the
regression with firm fixed effects, where all firm-specific variables have been removed.

                                  23
                                                    Table 7. Fixed Effect Panel Regression Results

                                                    Dependent Variable: Abnormal Return

                                           Without FE            Industry FE             Firm FE            Firm FE (short)

 Covid-19 (Yes)                           0.9%**              0.9%*               0.1%               0.2%

                                             (0.5%)               (0.5%)               (0.6%)               (0.4%)

 Repurchase Program Size (%)                    13.0%***            15.2%***             10.1%              10.7%*

                                             (4.5%)               (4.6%)               (6.1%)               (6.2%)

 Share Price Run-Up                         -5.8%***             -5.7%***              -3.0%               -3.4%

                                             (2.2%)               (2.2%)               (2.4%)               (2.4%)

 On Report Date (Yes)                         0.8%               0.8%               0.3%               0.5%

                                              (0.5%)               (0.5%)               (0.6%)

 Firm Size                              -1.2%***             -1.2%***              0.3%

                                              (0.3%)               (0.3%)               (2.9%)

 Tobin's Q                              -0.1%**             -0.04%**             -0.1%**

                                              (0.0%)               (0.0%)               (0.0%)

 Cash/Assets                             1.1%               1.3%               7.3%

                                              (3.1%)               (3.2%)               (6.0%)

 Insider Purchase (%)                         -21.5%              -14.5%               6.7%               5.2%

                                            (61.5%)              (61.7%)              (64.4%)              (66.3%)

 Insider Sale (%)                           -0.8%               0.3%              64.2%***             29.1%

                                             (9.6%)               (9.7%)               (22.7%)              (20.7%)

 Reason: Employee Benefit Plans                    -0.2%               -0.5%               -0.3%               -0.3%

                                             (6.1%)               (6.1%)               (7.3%)               (7.5%)

 Reason: Enhance Shareholder Value                  2.3%               2.0%               1.6%               1.7%

                                             (1.9%)               (1.9%)               (2.1%)               (2.1%)

 Reason: General Corporate Action                   0.8%               0.6%               1.1%               1.2%

                                             (1.9%)               (1.9%)               (2.1%)               (2.1%)

 Reason: Offset Dilution Effects                    -3.5%               -4.5%               -0.1%               0.1%

                                             (4.1%)               (4.2%)               (4.5%)               (4.6%)

 Reason: Undervaluation                        0.4%               -0.3%               1.8%               1.4%

                                             (5.8%)               (5.9%)               (7.1%)               (7.3%)

 Observations                             662                662                662                680

  2
 R                                           0.082               0.080               0.056               0.020

        2
 Adjusted R                                       0.062                0.048                -0.526                -0.558

 The table presents the results of panel regressions on all share repurchase announcements made by companies that announced in both the control and treatment period. The variables are the same as in the regression presented in
 table 5 but excludes the variable "Firm with Recurring Programs (Yes)" since this applies to all companies in this sample. Column 1 shows the result without fixed effects. Column 2 includes industry fixed effects and column 3
 includes firm fixed effects. Column 4 includes firm fixed effects but excludes firm-specific control variables (Firm Size, Tobin's Q and Cash/Assets ). Dependant variable in all regressions is the 3-day BHAR in percent. Bolded
 values are significant at α<0.1 and standard errors are shown in paranthesis.
 *** p-value<0.01, **p-value<0.05, *p-value<0.1

Based on table  7,  column  1 with fixed-effects illustrates that  the  Covid-19 coefficient is
significant and  in line with the findings in  the main  OLS regression.  However, it  has a
slightly lower correlation with abnormal  returns  at  0.9%, instead of 1.3%. In addition, the
significance  level is 5% instead of 1%, which potentially could be explained  by the
smaller sample size. When adding industry fixed effects,  the Covid-19 variable is no
longer significant.  Similarly, when solely adding  firm fixed effects, the coefficient  does
not obtain statistical significance  and  slightly increases  to 0.1%.  Consequently,  when
including both industry-  and firm-fixed  effects, the Covid-19 variable  is no longer
significant.  This indicates that there are  industry and firm  fixed  variables that are not
observed and controlled for in the main regression, which  can explain the  increase in
abnormal returns.
        Since the fixed effects control for unobserved firm-specific variables that are
constant over time, we perform a second regression  for firm fixed effects but  exclude  the

                                  24
firm-specific variables Firm Size,  Tobin’s Q  and  Cash  to  Assets. The aim is to identify if
the decrease in the Covid-19 coefficient is solely due to time-invariant unobserved
heterogeneity,  or the combination with added firm-specific control variables. The results
are presented in  column 4 and  we find that the Covid-19 coefficient  is 0.2% with  firm
fixed effects and without firm-specific control variables.  While the coefficient is not
significant,  it is higher than in the combined version presented in column 3.

6.1.6  Probit Regression

                                       Table 8. Probit Regression Results

                            Dependent Variable:  Repurchase Announcement (Yes/No)

                                                    Pre-Covid-19 (Control)          Covid-19 (Treatment)

 Cash/Assets                                        6.2%                    5.8%

                                                          (21.4%)                     (5.5%)

 Current Ratio                                      -2.9%**                   0.3%*

                                                           (1.4%)                     (0.2%)

 Debt/Assets                                        2.9%                     2.2%

                                                          (13.2%)                     (3.8%)

 Dividend Payout Ratio                                 -0.1%                   -0.1%**

                                                           (0.6%)                     (0.1%)

 Firm Size                                        38.7%***                 -25.8%***

                                                           (3.7%)                     (5.1%)

 Free Cash Flow/Operating Cash Flow                       4.5%*                    -0.0%

                                                           (2.5%)                     (0.0%)

 Market/Book                                       0.0%                    -0.0%

                                                           (0.0%)                     (0.0%)

 Return on Capital Employed                              1.6%                    -0.0%

                                                           (1.4%)                     (0.3%)

 Sales/Assets                                       8.1%**                 -11.3%***

                                                           (3.5%)                     (3.4%)

 The table presents the results of two panel probit regressions on all companies listed on NYSE or Nasdaq. The binary dependent variable takes the
 value 1 if a firm did a share repruchase announcement during the year and o if they did not. Column 1 shows the results of the probit regression for
 the control period and column 2 for the treatment period. Bolded values are significant at α<0.1 and standard errors are shown in paranthesis.
 *** p-value<0.01, **p-value<0.05, *p-value<0.1

In line with  the  reasoning in  section 5.8, we  perform a probit  regression  to identify how
company characteristics correlated with the decision to repurchase,  and how this differs
between the control and treatment  periods. To compare the difference, a panel probit
regression is conducted  separately for the control and treatment period. The variables are
in line with  the  reasoning in section 4.7.1.

                                  25
       Table 8 presents the results from the probit model. Firm size is strongly negatively
correlated with share repurchase announcements during Covid-19, obtaining a coefficient
of  -25.8% and  a  p-value<0.01. This implies that  during  Covid-19,  smaller  firms were
more likely  to announce a share repurchase. However,  opposite significant  results  are
found for the  control  period, indicating that large firms  were more prone to repurchase
shares.  Dividend payout ratio had the same coefficient in both periods, but it  was only
significant during Covid-19.  This shows that for each unit increased in dividend payout
ratio,  the  likelihood  of  share  repurchase  announcement  decreased.  The  variable
Sales/Assets was significant in both  periods but  showed contrasting effects. In the control
period, companies with higher Sales/Assets were more inclined to announce,  while they
were less likely to do so during Covid-19. Lastly,  pre-Covid-19,  the current ratio showed
a negative effect on the likelihood of announcement, with a significance  level of 5%.
However, current ratio showed opposite effects during Covid-19, but only with a
significance level of 10%.

7.  Discussion

7.1 Implications of Abnormal Returns Following Share Repurchase Announcements
during Covid-19
The findings from the t-test on abnormal returns  had  a  statistically significant  correlation
with abnormal returns  of  1.04%  at  a p-value<0.01,  in line with our hypothesis.  The time-
series regression performed on abnormal returns obtained  a  positive correlation with
abnormal  returns of  1.3%, at  a  significance level of 1%.  Hence, this finding, combined
with the t-test,  illustrates  that abnormal returns were obtained following share repurchase
announcements during Covid-19. This finding thereby confirms our hypothesis  and
contributes   to   literature   studying   firm-specific   announcements   during   times   of
uncertainty (e.g.,  Schmalz and Zhuk, 2019; Anolick et al., 2021).
       The  regression results  also showed  that  Tobin’s Q  correlated slightly  negatively
to  abnormal  returns with a coefficient of  -0.0%, at a significance level of 5%. While the
coefficient is quite small, this  finding is largely in line with prominent repurchase
literature stating that one of the main objectives  of  share repurchases is to signal
undervaluation (Vermaelen, 1981; Dittmar, 2000).
       Additional  highly significant independent  variables (p-value<0.01) included
Share Price Run-Up and Firm Size, which both had a negative correlation with abnormal
returns. This is in line with prior literature, stating that a weak stock price performance
prior to announcements results in higher positive market reactions following the
announcements (Schultz, 2003; Stephens and Weisbach, 1998; Lie and Lie, 1999).
Likewise, previous studies have found a negative relationship between firm size and
information asymmetry, and that smaller firms experience higher abnormal returns
following announcements (Vermaelen, 1981; Ikenberry et al., 1995; Comment and Jarell,
1991).

                                  26
       Lastly, the  stated Reason: Enhance Shareholder Value correlated with abnormal
returns  by  6.4%, obtaining significant results at a p-value<0.05.  While no prior literature
elaborates on the motive to enhance shareholder value, it seems plausible that the market
reacts positively to the statement. In addition  to  this,  the  independent variable Report on
Announcement Day positively correlated with abnormal returns with 0.7%, at a slightly
low significance level (p-value<0.1).

7.2  Causality
While the findings in the t-test and time-series regression are at the highest significance
level (p-value<0.01),  these cannot identify causality. Thus, further tests are required in
order to draw informed conclusions regarding if Covid-19 gave rise to increased abnormal
announcement returns.  Thereby, we aim to capture  if the abnormal returns were a
consequence of general time trends and noise, omitted variable bias or selection bias.
       To begin with,  the placebo test did not indicate that the abnormal returns during
Covid-19 stemmed from capturing general time trends or noise. By the same token, the
permutation test showed that the probability that our results had captured random noise
is very small as  the Covid-19 coefficient was outside the tail of the  close-to-normal
distribution of the results from all randomized regressions. Thus, the findings from the
placebo and permutation tests provide  a  strong indication that we did not  capture general
time trends or random noise.
       In addition,  various industries have inherent differences in terms of performance
and risk. When employing a t-test on industries, we  find that some industries obtain
abnormal returns  during Covid-19, namely  wholesale trade,  services,  high-tech and
finance, insurance and real estate. This was partly in line with our hypothesis. Further,
the t-test  acknowledged  that differences in industries  impact  abnormal returns.  Since this
could potentially  explain  our documented increase in abnormal returns during Covid-19,
further tests  are  required  to  find indications  of  causal relationships.
        Further,  we run regressions with both industry-and firm-fixed effects and find
indications that  unobserved heterogeneity  in the data can explain parts of the result.  This
challenges our findings in our main regression and  implies  that the effects on abnormal
returns most likely could be explained by differences in firm- and industry characteristics
However, an interesting aspect is that the fixed effects regression using panel data could,
by definition,  only be performed on firms that repurchased both in  the control and
treatment period. As our repurchasing firm sample solely overlaps with  299  firms  over
the control and treatment period, the fixed regression is therefore only performed on a
small sample. This could slightly indicate that the results from  this regression might be
impacted by biases, as literature for  instance states that firms repurchasing shares
regularly  experience lower abnormal returns post announcement, as this is already
expected by the market (Andriosopoulos and Lasfer, 2015). However, the implications
from this are likely small and should not be considered to largely impact the fixed effects
results,  especially  since  the  variable  Recurring  Announcement  did  not  receive  a
significant result in our main regression.

                                  27
       Furthermore, the probit regression found that firms with  different characteristics
were more likely to repurchase during Covid-19, compared to the control period.
Specifically, we found that  Firm Size was negatively correlated with  the likelihood to
repurchase, at a significance level of 1%. This is somewhat in line with the reasoning that
smaller firms experience more informational  asymmetry  and thereby repurchase shares
to convey their true value (Vermaelen, 1981).  Moreover, an interesting finding is that
Firm Size is significant and negatively correlated to the dependent variables in both the
time-series and probit regressions.  In addition,  Sales/Assets was negatively correlated to
repurchasing, indicating that  firms with low Sales/Assets ratios were more likely to
repurchase shares. Lastly, Dividend Payout Ratio also obtained a negative coefficient and
high   statistical   significance   with   a   p-value<0.01.   This   strengthens   the   dividend
substitution hypothesis, arguing that firms  substitute  dividends  for  repurchases when  no
constraints  are prevalent  (Brav et al,  2005).  Moreover, these results, combined with the
finding  from the fixed effects regressions,  sum  up to the conclusion that the observed
difference  in  abnormal  returns  likely  can  be  attributable  to  differences  in  firm
characteristics.

7.3  Limitations
This study has been designed  to provide  robust results and  mitigate  risks of capturing
unwanted  effects, but  some challenges can  limit the conclusions that can be drawn. To
begin with, there are inherent limitations  to  our data sample. Since share repurchases are
associated   with   signaling   values   and   management   often   chooses   the   time   of
announcement  strategically  depending  on  motives  and  general  market  conditions,
selection biases are prevalent. In addition, companies receiving financial aid in line with
the CARES Act were restricted from repurchasing shares  for  12 months after they repaid
the loan, or until September 2022  (U.S Department of the Treasury, 2022).  The selection
bias is further strengthened and confirmed by our firm fixed effects- and probit regression.
Ideally, in order to avoid selection bias,  repurchasing firms should be completely
randomized or alternatively, firms with identical characteristics should repurchase in both
the control and treatment period. In an ideal experiment, we would also study multiple
Covid-19 periods in history  to  find patterns, eliminate one-off effects and find evidence
that the results are robust. However, since Covid-19 only happened once in history, we
cannot perform the test on multiple shocks and compare the results. This challenges the
conclusions that  can be drawn from our study.
        In addition,  the average abnormal stock price returns are calculated using the 3-
day BHAR during the days surrounding the announcement. This is in line with prior
literature, in an attempt to capture the entire effect of the  announcement. While both the
placebo and permutation tests indicated that we did not capture noise, there is an apparent
risk in capturing unwanted effects from other events happening in the studied timeframe.
An ideal experiment would solely test announcements from firms with no conflicting
events that could affect stock prices, although this is nearly impossible in reality.
However, one potential way of more precisely capturing the  abnormal announcement

                                  28
returns would be by studying intraday data. Unfortunately, data availability limits this
option since the SDC database only provides the date of each repurchase announcement
and not the specific time. Hence, we cannot calculate the  price reaction at the time of
announcement, nor determine if it was done before, during or after market opening.
However, we have tried to mitigate the risk of including unwanted effects by including a
control variable for all financial reports being published during the three days surrounding
the share buyback announcement. Controlling for the event of financial reporting means
the study excludes one of the events where most information is provided to the market.
Nevertheless,  other informational events can  affect the price reactions,  such as M&A
transactions, that are not taken into account.
        Further, we study abnormal returns specifically since we aim to isolate each firm’s
stock market performance and remove macro effects. This is done by calculating
abnormal returns adjusting for market returns, defined as the stock exchange index for
each company. However, as Covid-19 affected various companies and industries
differently, adjusting for the aggregate market return might not be optimal. For instance,
adjustments with matching portfolio returns or industry index returns could have been
used instead.
       To isolate the effect that the treatment variable, Covid-19, had on abnormal
returns, we included 13 control variables. In order to restrict time-invariant unobserved
heterogeneity, we also  perform separate regressions for both industry and fixed effects.
Despite these efforts, one should acknowledge the risk of omitted variable bias, that is
when the model specification is not exhaustive, for instance by having missing or
correlating variables. This can result in a skewed model outcome. To mitigate this risk,
the model specification is thoroughly anchored in evidence from previous literature on
the subject. To avoid relying on one research result only and overlooking important
variables, we  have used multiple research papers as a foundation for the model
specification. However, since there is not a lot of research on the effects of Covid-19,
there could potentially be  variables specifically needed for this study that would capture
the change  in dynamics. For example, if media attention surrounding certain companies
or share repurchase announcements had increased due to Covid-19 effects, this could have
affected our results. Hence the reader should be aware of this risk.
        The risk of omitted variable bias can also be applied to the probit regression. The
variables included aimed to investigate what company characteristics correlated with the
decision to repurchase or not  and if differences in characteristics in turn can affect  the
abnormal returns. The model specification was mainly based on literature on share
repurchase announcements, but  also included variables to capture financial distress and
general   company   characteristics.   However,   capturing   every   variable   potentially
correlating  with  share  repurchase  announcements,  while  also  giving  insight  into
differences between companies, is difficult and therefore there is a risk of omitted variable
bias.
       Lastly, as mentioned in the Empirical Results section, heteroscedasticity  was
found in our data, which indicates that ordinary least squares (OLS) regression is not the

                                  29
optimal method. This is because the OLS regression assumes a constant variance of all
residuals drawn from a population, also called homoscedasticity. Although the coefficient
estimates remain unbiased in OLS regressions with heteroskedasticity, the standard errors
can be biased, which can lead to biased inference. This means that confidence levels and
hypothesis tests can be incorrect. Therefore, heteroscedasticity does not mean that the
results presented in this study are invalid, but the reader should be aware of the
consequences and that for example a weighted least squares (WLS) regression might have
worked better in this case.

8.  Concluding Remarks

8.1 Conclusion
Covid-19 was an unprecedented event that largely impacted financial markets and
economies, giving rise to business disruption and global  uncertainty.  In this study,  we
investigate whether Covid-19 gave rise to higher abnormal returns following share
repurchase announcements. This is primarily done  by  building on the methodology used
by Babenko et al. (2012) in their study “The Credibility of Open Market Share
Repurchase Signaling”. Our main hypothesis was that Covid-19 would result in higher
abnormal returns post-buyback announcements, in line with prior literature studying firm-
specific announcements during uncertainty.
      Our t-test illustrates that abnormal announcement returns were on average 1.04%
higher during Covid-19, with  p-value<0.01.  The  industry t-test indicated that  the
increased  abnormal returns during Covid-19 varied across industries, and  significant
results  were obtained for the  wholesale trade, services,  high-tech and finance, insurance
and real estate industries. In addition, the time-series regression analysis on the dependent
variable abnormal returns showed  Covid-19 correlated with average abnormal  returns
with 1.3%, at a significance level of 1%. It also found that Firm Size and Share Price Run-
Up were highly  correlated with abnormal returns, at a p-value<0.01, which was in line
with literature.
        While the findings in the t-test and time-series regression find a relationship
between Covid-19 and increased abnormal returns, these cannot identify causality  and
thus, further robustness  tests  were conducted.  To  determine if abnormal returns could
have been  derived from capturing general time trends or market noise, a placebo test and
permutation test was  performed and neither  generated any implications for this.  The
placebo variable was lower and not  significant,  while  the permutation test found the
Covid-19 coefficient from our time-series regression to be outside the tails.
       When  running  fixed effect regressions we find  that  the  abnormal announcement
returns could be explained by  unobserved heterogeneity. However, it is of relevance to
note that this regression was performed on a sample of our data, including  firms
announcing in both the control and treatment period. Hence, there is a slight possibility
that these results are skewed and not applicable to  the complete data set.

                                  30
       Knowing that  unobserved heterogeneity  might have had an effect on the results,
we further investigated whether different types of firms repurchased shares during Covid-
19 compared to the prior period, as this could explain  the  difference in abnormal returns.
The results from the probit regression indicated that the kind of firms repurchasing shares
in the two periods largely differed. Specifically, smaller firms, firms with higher lower
Sales/Assets  ratios  or firms with lower Dividend  Payout  Ratios  were more likely to
repurchase shares during Covid-19.  These  findings  strongly  contrast  the results from the
control period, where larger firms, firms with higher Sales/Assets ratios and lower current
ratios  were more likely to repurchase  shares.
       The main finding  from our study is that while increased abnormal returns during
Covid-19  were  found, we cannot draw a causal relationship between Covid-19 and
abnormal returns. Combining the findings from the fixed effect regressions and the probit
regressions, we conclude that the observed difference in abnormal returns was likely
attributed to the fact that different types of firms chose to repurchase shares during Covid-
19, compared to the control period. As a result, we cannot conclude that the  observed
difference  in abnormal returns was caused by Covid-19. Nonetheless, it is plausible that
since Covid-19 largely  impacted financial markets and businesses, this could have
indirectly affected which type of companies  were able to repurchase shares. However,
while  the decision of repurchasing could have been impacted by Covid-19, we cannot
draw any conclusion regarding this since we have little to no information on the true
motives behind the buybacks. In order to be able to draw any conclusion regarding if
Covid-19 impacted firms' decisions to repurchase, either the sample selection would need
to be completely random, or multiple periods of uncertainty should be studied.

8.2 Future Research
Since Covid-19 posed an unparalleled shock to financial markets, businesses and
individuals worldwide, relatively much research has been conducted on the subject during
a short period of time. However, the impact of Covid-19 on share repurchases in general,
and specifically on abnormal announcements returns,  is still relatively  unexplored.
Hence, this study largely contributes to a better understanding of share buybacks in
general, as well as the subsequent market reactions. However, as previously mentioned,
there are limitations to our study, as well as certain areas that would  be  interesting  to
further research.
       Focusing on the latter, rather than solely determining the end and the beginning
of the treatment period based on the extent of government restrictions, it would be
interesting to relate the abnormal returns to a specific measure that captures the level of
uncertainty during the specific time of announcement. This could for instance be done by
using a proxy for market uncertainty, such as a volatility index. By doing this, the specific
uncertainty effect stemming from Covid-19 would be easier to isolate and relate to
abnormal returns.
        Yet another interesting approach would be to break down Covid-19 into further
periods such as “wave 1” or “vaccinations”. By doing this, it would be possible to capture

                                  31
differences in abnormal returns during the pandemic and perhaps relate them to the
market sentiment at that specific time. In addition, future research could also include
additional exchanges or countries in order to make valuable comparisons. Specifically, it
would be of high interest to compare the abnormal announcement returns during the
pandemic in two countries with very different share repurchase regulations in order to
capture the impact of legislative changes.

                                  32
References

Andriosopoulos, D., Lasfer, M. (2015).  The market valuation of share repurchases in
Europe.  Journal of  Banking & Finance, 55, pp. 327-339.

Anolick, N., Batten, J. A., Kinateder, H., Wagner, N. (2021).  Time for  gift giving:
Abnormal share repurchase returns and uncertainty.  Journal of Corporate Finance,  66.

Babenko, I., Tserlukevich, Y., Vedrashko, A. (2012).  The Credibility of Open Market
Share Repurchase Signaling.  Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 47:5, pp.
1059-1088.

BBC. (2020).  Coronavirus: The world in lockdown in maps and charts.
Retrieved from:  https://www.bbc.com/news/world-52103747  Accessed 14 November
2022.

Barth, M. E., Kasznik, R. (1999).  Share  Repurchases and Intangible Assets.  Journal of
Accounting and Economics, 28:2, pp. 211-241.

Bhattacharya, S. (1979).  Imperfect Information, Dividend Policy, and “The Bird in the
Hand” Fallacy.  The Bell Journal of Economics, 10:1, pp. 259-270.

                                                                                                                                                         st
Brav, A.,  Graham, J. R.,  Harvey, C. R., Michaely, R. (2005).  Payout policy in the 21
century.  Journal  of Financial Economics, 77, pp. 483-527.

Chen, A., Obizhaeva, O. A. (2022).  Stock Buyback Motivations and Consequences.
CFA Institute Research Foundation.

Comment, R., Jarell, G. A. (1991).  The Relative Signaling Power of Dutch-Auction and
Fixed-Price Self-Tender Offers and Open-Market Share Repurchases.  The Journal of
Finance, 46:4, pp. 1243-1271.

Dittmar, A. K. (2000).  Why Do Firms Repurchase Stock.  The Journal of Business, 73:3,
pp. 331-355.

D’mello, R., Shroff, P. K. (2000).  Equity Undervaluation and Decisions Related to
Repurchase Tender Offers: An Empirical Investigation.  The Journal of Finance, 55:5,
pp. 2399-2424.

Easterbrook, F. H.  (1984).  Two Agency-Cost Explanations of Dividends.  The American
Economic Review, 74:4, pp. 650-659.

                                  33
Fama, E.  F.  (1970).  Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work.
The Journal of Finance 25:2, pp. 383-417.

Grullon, D., Ikenberry, D. (2000).  What Do We Know About Share Repurchases?
Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 13.

Grullon, G., Michaely, R. (2002).  Dividends, Share Repurchases, and the Substitution
Hypothesis.  The Journal of Finance, 57:4, pp. 1649-1684.

Grullon, G., Michaely, R. (2004).  The Information of Share Repurchase Programs.  The
Journal of Finance, 59:2, pp. 651-680.

He, J., Howe, K. M., Kao, G. W. (1992).  One-Time Cash Flow Announcements and
Free Cash-Flow Theory: Share Repurchases and Special Dividends.  Journal of Finance,
47:5, pp. 1963-1975.

Hovakimian, A., Opler, T., Titman, S. (2001).  The Debt-Equity Choice.  The Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 36:1, pp. 1-24

Ikenberry, D., Lakonishok, J., Vermaelen, T.  (1995).  Market underreaction to open
market share repurchases.  Journal of Financial Economics, 39:2-3, pp. 181-208.

Ikenberry, D. L., Vermaelen, T. (1996).  The Option to Repurchase Stock.  Financial
Management 25:4, pp. 9-24.

International Labour Organization (ILO). (2022).  Business and COVID-19.
Retrieved from:  https://www.ilo.org/global/topics/coronavirus/key-
resources/WCMS_741005/lang--en/index.htm  Accessed 14 November 2022.

Jagannathan, M., Stephens, C. P. (2003).  Motives for Multiple Open-Market Repurchase
Programs.  Financial Management, 32:2, pp. 71-91.

Jagannathan, M., Stephens, C. P, Weisbach, M. S. (2000).  Financial flexibility and the
choice between dividends and stock repurchases.  Journal of Financial Economics, 57:3,
pp. 355-384.

Jensen, M. C. (1986).  Agency  Cost of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and
Takeovers.  American Economic Review, 76.2, pp. 323–329.

John, K., Mishra, B. (1990).  Information Content of Insider Trading  Around Corporate
Announcements: The Case of Capital Expenditures. The Journal of Finance, 45:3, pp.
835-855.

                                  34
Lakonishok, J., Lee, I. (2001).  Are Insider Trades Informative?  The Review of
Financial Studies, 14:1, pp. 79-111.

Lang, L. H. P., Litzenberger,  R. H. (1989).  Dividend Announcements, Cash Flow
Signaling vs. Free Cash Flow Hypothesis?  Journal of Financial Economics, 24:1, pp.
181-191.

Lee, D. S., Mikkelson, W. H., Partch, M. M. (1992).  Manager’s Trading Around Stock
Repurchases.  The Journal of Finance, 47:5, pp. 1947-1961.

Lie, E. (2005).  Financial Flexibility, Performance, and  the Corporate Payout Choice.
The Journal of Business, 78:6, pp. 2179-2202.

Lie, E., Lie, H. (1999).  The role of personal taxes in corporate decisions: An empirical
analysis of share repurchases and dividends.  Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis, 34, pp. 533-552.

Lintner, J. (1956).  Distribution of incomes of corporations among dividends, retained
earnings, and taxes. American Economic Review, 46, pp. 97-113.

Manconi, A., U. Peyer and T. Vermaelen (2019).  Are buybacks good for long-term
shareholder value? Evidence from buybacks around the world. Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis, 54, pp. 1899–  1935.

Maxwell, W. F., Stephens, C. P.  (2003).  The Wealth Effects of Repurchases on
Bondholders. The Journal of Finance, 58:2, pp. 895-919.

McKinsey. (2020).  How COVID-19 has pushed companies over the technology tipping
point  –  and transformed business forever.
Retrieved from:  https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/strategy-and-corporate-
finance/our-insights/how-covid-19-has-pushed-companies-over-the-technology-tipping-
point-and-transformed-business-forever  Accessed:  1  December  2022.

McNally,  W. J. (1999).  Open Market Stock Repurchase Signaling.  Financial
Management, 28:2, pp. 55-67.

Mehndiratta, N.,  Gupta,  S. (2010).  Impact of dividend announcement on stock prices.
International Journal of Information Technology and Knowledge Management, 2:2, pp.
405-410.

                                  35
Miller, M. H., Rock, K. (1985).  Dividend Policy under Asymmetric Information.  The
Journal of Finance, 40:4, pp. 1031-1051.

Mitchell, M. L., & Mulherin, J. H. (1994).  The Impact of Public Information on the
Stock Market.  The Journal of Finance, 49, pp. 923-950.

Mitchell, J. D., Dharmawan, G. V. (2007).  Incentives for on-market buybacks: Evidence
from a transparent buy-back regime. Journal of Corporate Finance, 13:1, pp. 146-169

Nagar,  V.,  Schoenfeld  J.,  Wellman,  L. (2019).  The effect of economic policy uncertainty
on investor  information asymmetry and management disclosures. Journal of Accounting
and Economics, 67:1, pp. 36-57.

Neuhierl, A., Scherbina, A., Schiusene, B. (2013).  Market Reaction to Corporate Press
Releases.  The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 48:4, pp. 1207-1240.

Office for National Statistics. (2021).  Effects of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic
on “high-contact” industries.
Retrieved from:
https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/grossvalueaddedgva/articles/effectsofthecoronavirusc
ovid19pandemiconhighcontactindustries/2022-05-06  Accessed  1  December  2022.

Peyer, U., Vermaelen, T.  (2009).  The Nature and  Persistence of Buyback Anomalies.
Review of Financial Studies, 22:4, pp. 1693–1745.

Skinner, D. J. (2008).  The Evolving Relation between Earnings, Dividends, and Stock
Repurchases.  Journal of Financial Economics, 87:3, pp. 582-609.

Schmalz, M. C., Zhuk,  S. (2019).  Revealing Downturns.  The Review of Financial
Studies, 32:1, pp. 338-373.

Schultz, P. (2003).  Pseudo Market Timing and the Long-Run Underperformance of
IPOs.  Journal of Finance, 58:2, pp. 483–517.

Stephens, C. P., Weisbach, M. S. (1998).  Actual  Share Reacquisitions in Open Market
Repurchase Programs.  The Journal of Finance, 53, pp. 313-333.

S&P Global. (2022).  S&P Dow Jones Indices.
Retrieved from:  https://www.spglobal.com/spdji/en/indices/equity/sp-
500/#overview  Accessed 14 November 2022.

S&P Global. (2022).  S&P 500 Buybacks Set Quarterly and 12-Month Records  –  Again.

                                  36
Retrieved from:  https://press.spglobal.com/2022-06-16-S-P-500-Buybacks-Set-
Quarterly-and-12-Month-Records-Again  Accessed 14 November 2022.

Oxford  University.  (2022).  Covid-19 Government Response Tracker.
Retrieved from:  https://www.bsg.ox.ac.uk/research/covid-19-government-response-
tracker  Accessed 14 November 2022.

U.S. Department of the Treasury. (2022).  Covid-19 Economic Relief.
Retrieved from:  https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/coronavirus  Accessed 14
November 2022.

Vermaelen, T. (1981).  Common stock repurchases and market signaling: An empirical
study.  Journal of Financial Economics, 9:2, pp. 139-183.

White House. (2022).  Fact Sheet: The Inflation Reduction Act Supports Workers and
Families.
Retreieved from:  https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2022/08/19/fact-sheet-the-inflation-reduction-act-supports-workers-and-
families/  Accessed 14 November 2022.

WHO. (2020). WHO Director-General’s Opening Remarks at the Media Briefing on
Covid-19  –  11 March 2020.
Retrieved  from:  https://www.who.int/director-general/speeches/detail/who-director-
general-s-opening-remarks-at-the-media-briefing-on-covid-19---11-march-2020
Accessed 14 November 2022.

Zhang, F. (2006).  Information Uncertainty and Stock Returns.  The Journal of Finance,
61, pp. 105-137.

                                  37
Appendix

                                           15
                                                                                                      1.0000



                                           14
                                                                                                     1.0000-0.0020



                                           13
                                                                                                 1.0000-0.076**
                                                                                                            -0.141***




                                           12
                                                                                           1.0000 0.082**0.0240
                                                                                                    -0.881***




                                           11
                                                                                           1.0000-0.0180 -0.0020-0.0030
                                                                                                    -0.101***



                                           10
                                                                                       1.0000-0.0210-0.01400.053*-0.0020-0.0490

                                                                                                                        <0.1.
                                                                            α


                                             9
                                                                                  1.0000-0.0320-0.00800.0040-0.0060-0.00600.0210




                                             8
                                                                               1.00000.113***-0.061*-0.0030-0.01800.0160-0.00400.0160



                                             7
                                                                         1.00000.02300.01300.077**0.0090-0.01400.01400.04400.0170




                                             6
                                                                       1.00000.122***-0.02900.0070-0.0110-0.00500.0070-0.00100.03400.070**

                             Correlation Matrix for Time-Series Regression


                                             5
                                                                   1.0000-0.0220-0.059* -0.054*0.209***-0.00100.0430-0.03600.0010-0.0140
                                                                                -0.096***
                                            Appendix A.



                                             4
                                                              1.0000-0.055*0.02000.074**0.00800.0410-0.02000.0450-0.076**0.04500.0310-0.0100




                                             3
                                                           1.00000.03000.151***0.02300.0010-0.0020-0.04300.074**0.01900.0130-0.02100.0090-0.0460



                                             2
                                                         1.0000-0.0100-0.0180-0.0020-0.0100-0.0170-0.0020-0.0040-0.0400-0.0020-0.00800.0090-0.0010-0.0010




                                             1
                                                    1.0000-0.0220 -0.0450-0.03200.00300.0270-0.0090-0.0360-0.0170-0.0170 0.082**0.053*0.0090
                                                            0.090***                           -0.103***
















                                                    Variables1. Covid-19 (Yes)2. Repurchase Program Size (%)3. Share Price Run-Up4. Report Date (Y)5. Firm Size6. Tobin's Q7. Cash/Assets8. Insider Purchase (%)9. Insider Sale (%)10. Firm with Recurring Programs (Y)11. Reason: Employee Benefit Plans12. Reason: Enhance Shareholder Value13. Reason: General Corporate Action14. Reason: Offset Dilution Effects15. Reason: UndervaluationThe table presents the results from Pearson Product-Moment Correlation test on all variables included in regression model presented in table 5. Bold values are significant at*** p-value<0.01, ** p-value<0.05, * p-value<0.1

                                  38
    9                                                          9
                                                                                                                   <0.1.
                                   1.0000                                                   1.0000α
                                               <0.1.
                                    α


    8                                                          8
                                  1.00000.042***                                                 1.0000
                                                                                                    0.094***



    7                                                          7
                              1.00000.01400.0010                                               1.00000.00200.0210



    6                                                          6
                          1.00000.00000.00500.0080                                           1.00000.00100.0000-0.0070





    5                                                          5
                       1.00000.0240-0.031*0.119***                                          1.00000.0180-0.0140 -0.0100
                                       -0.083***                                                  0.094***




    4                                                          4
                   1.00000.064***0.0030-0.00300.0080-0.0020                                    1.0000 0.0000 0.00400.0030
                                                                                     0.040** 0.063***





    3                                                          3
               1.00000.026*  0.0220-0.00200.025*                                    1.00000.028*  0.0050
                       0.427***       -0.045***                                      0.456***0.076***0.077***0.074***





    2                                                          2
            1.0000 -0.033**-0.01700.0030-0.033**                               1.0000 -0.0220 0.0000-0.0030
 Correlation Matrix for Probit Regression (Control Period)-0.518***-0.373***      -0.118***                               -0.485***-0.317***   -0.054***-0.186***
                                                          Correlation Matrix for Probit Regression (Treatment Period)




    1                                                          1
Appendix B.1.0000     -0.040**-0.0100                                    1.0000                 0.029*
            0.449***-0.343***-0.526***0.060***-0.122***-0.104***                           0.423***-0.030* -0.0150
                                                               Appendix C.     -0.434***-0.556***   -0.101***-0.178***













    Variables1. Cash/Assets2. Current Ratio3. Debt/Assets4. Dividend Payout Ratio5. Firm Size6. Free Cash Flow/Operating Cash Flow7. Market/Book8. Return on Capital Employed9.Sales/AssetsThe table presents the results from Pearson Product-Moment Correlation test on all variables included in probit regression for the control period. Bold values are significant at*** p-value<0.01, ** p-value<0.05, * p-value<0.1Variables1. Cash/Assets2. Current Ratio3. Debt/Assets4. Dividend Payout Ratio5. Firm Size6. Free Cash Flow/Operating Cash Flow7. Market/Book8. Return on Capital Employed9.Sales/AssetsThe table presents the results from Pearson Product-Moment Correlation test on all variables included in probit regression for the treatment period. Bold values are significant at*** p-value<0.01, ** p-value<0.05, * p-value<0.1

                                  39