Cryptocurrency Return Predictors -
A Replicative Reassessment

Rising Stablecoin Growth - Cryptocurrency Return Predictors in New
Market Conditions

ALEXANDER RIPE
ERIK STÅLMAN

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2022
Abstract:
We successfully construct nine significant cryptocurrency return predictor strategies based on
market capitalization, momentum and volatility characteristics. We replicate the methods
used in the article “Common Risk Factors In Cryptocurrency” using a larger and more recent
dataset encompassing changed cryptocurrency market conditions and asset composition (Liu,
Tsyvinski, Wu, 2022). Following increasing stablecoin market shares we show unexplained
volatility effects in the presented three-factor model, add a volatility factor and create a
four-factor model that better prices volatility. Furthermore, we investigate the continued
viability of the return predictors facing changed market conditions, and compare them to
equity market characteristics.

Keywords: Cryptocurrency, Factors Model, Zero-Investment Long-Short Strategies,
Quintiles, Size, Momentum, Volatility Stablecoins, Stable Coins, Stale Coins

Authors:
Alexander Ripe (25147)
Erik Stålman (25216)

Tutors:
Adrien d'Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance, SSE
Michael Florian Klug, PhD Student, Department of Finance, SSE

Examiner:
Adrien d'Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance, SSE

Acknowledgements:
We would like to take this opportunity to thank for the wisdom and aid from our supervisor
and teachers; Adrien d'Avernas and Michael Florian Klug.

Bachelor Thesis

Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics

© Alexander Ripe and Erik Stålman, 2022

                                         1
  1. Introduction

     A. Background and Relevance

An increased growth of the cryptocurrency market has meant rapid addition of coins in
various classes. Among these are stablecoins that have significantly increased their market
dominance over the past few years and hold ~16% of total cryptocurrency market share as of
December 2022 (CoinGecko, 2022). Stablecoins is a coin-class that aims to keep price stable
through a currency peg or algorithmically controlling supply (Sveriges Riksbank, 2022).
Given their naturally low volatility, remarkably high volume and close to zero returns, their
effects on cryptocurrency return predictor models should be substantial going forward. The
large growth of the still relatively immature cryptocurrency market should gradually reduce
investor uncertainty and thus change the viability of current return predictors (Liu, Tsyvinski,
Wu, 2022). Hence, we investigate and reassess common cryptocurrency return predictors
with recent data to accommodate these changes.
The changed conditions in the cryptocurrency market could pose issues for the continued
viability of the cryptocurrency three-factor model and long-short strategy return predictors as
defined in. This is especially presuming one intends to capture coin returns based on common
risk factors dependent on an adequate level of price volatility, which would possibly not be
the case for stablecoins. We find that a zero-investment long-short quintile volatility strategy
conducted after 2017 generates significant 1.7% average weekly excess returns in contrast
while remaining insignificant prior to that. This could indicate that the effect of stable coins is
present as the period after 2017 has a significantly larger share of stable coins. We attain the
same effect when evaluating a long-short decile strategy over the entire period and generate a
2,78% weekly excess returns when longing coins in the highest volatility decile and shorting
coins in the lowest decile. The groups with the lowest volatility in both tests successfully
manage to obtain the largest stable coins measured in market capitalization, which amplifies
this connection and emphasizes the importance of investigating this more closely.

The first goal of this paper is to examine and reassess the viability of a number of common
return predictors, given the changed cryptocurrency market conditions.
The second goal of this paper is to, more specifically, examine if the introduction of a new
volatility strategy and volatility factor could help explain the possible effects caused by the
increasing market share and amount of stablecoins. This new factor model is compared to the
cryptocurrency version of the Fama French three factor model, containing cryptocurrency
market-, size-. and momentum factors. The generally high volatility of cryptocurrencies, and
the increased market share of stale coins and stablecoins, creates reason for accounting for
volatility effects in the factor model. We observe certain characteristics in our data
attributable to stablecoins, such as low volatility and a large stablecoin trading volume
overrepresentation.
To capture the effects of this rapidly growing cryptocurrency class, we will identify
stablecoins as stale coins, and according to the following definition: stale coins are the coins

                                         2
in the decile of lowest volatility each week. The group is referred to as stale coins, since some
non-stablecoins are also included. As illustrated by Figure 2, this group is measured to have
the vast majority of coins around 2% weekly volatility and successfully captures most
                                                                                   1
stablecoins, including top stablecoins by market capitalization .

     B. Contribution

We partially replicate and use the methodology of the article “Common Risk Factors in
Cryptocurrency” when constructing strategies and factor models according to the relevant
methods carried out by the authors (Liu, Tsyvinski, Wu, 2022). We use the data aggregator
CoinGecko to collect cryptocurrency data from January 2014 to May 2022, while the
replicated article uses CoinMarketCap to retrieve market data from January 2014 to July
2020. In total, this paper cover a dataset of 3742 coins compared to 1827 coins in the
replicated article, and features a time period of ~620% in total market market capitalization
                                                                                                               2
growth since July 2020, despite sharp recent market downturns (CoinGecko, 2022) . Given
that the total market capitalization share for stale coins in our data have risen from ~5% up to
~12%, compared to the end date of the replicated article, it will also contrast the effects of
changing market composition (Appendix 1).

Liu, Tsyvinski, and Wu (2022) show significance for ten out of 24 cryptocurrency return
predictor strategies: market capitalization, price, maximum price, past one-, two-, three-,
four-, and one-to-four-week return, price volume, and standard deviation of price volume.
Furthermore, they found that the cryptocurrency three-factor model consisting of a
cryptocurrency market-, size- and momentum-factor, accounts for all of the 10 significant
strategy returns.
The methods used when constructing the factor models are originally retrieved from
traditional asset pricing methodology and later applied to cryptocurrencies by Liu, Tsyvinski,
and Wu (2022). The Fama and French (1993) three-factor model originally contained a value
factor. However, since cryptocurrencies do not obtain book-values in the traditional sense, the
value factor is not applicable to this type of asset. Instead, a momentum factor is used
(Carhart. M, 1997). We use the methods related to sorting composed by Fama French to
construct a volatility factor controlling for both size and momentum effects. Hence, this
article also evaluates the applicability of Fama-French methodologies on cryptocurrencies.

The strategies are constructed in line with the methods used in the replicated article, which
are originally based on traditional asset pricing strategies (Liu, Tsyvinski and Wu, 2022). We
sort coins each week based on the value of the strategy characteristics, and divide coins into
quintiles, where the 5th quintile represents the coins with highest value by a characteristic.

1
 Largest Stable Coins (included in our dataset) according to Coingecko: Tether, USD Coin, Binance USD, Dai,
Frax, True-USD, USDD, Gemini Dollar, Tether Gold,, Euro Tether, Liquity USD, Alchemix USD, Stasis EUR,
Neutrino USD, Magic Internet Money, XSGD, Fei USD, Flex USD and MAI.
2
 (Total Market Capitalization 2022-05-05)/(Total Market Capitalization 2020-07-01) -1
(1.886915e+12)/(261634147225) -1 = 6.212

                                         3
For the quintile groups, we track the weekly excess returns (based on last-day weekly prices)
over the risk free rate for the week that follows the portfolio formation week, and value
weigh the returns with the last-day market cap of the portfolio formation week. The value
weights and quintile sorting are rebalanced weekly. Zero-investment long-short portfolios are
then created by going long on the coins in the 5th portfolio and shorting coins in the 1st
portfolio.

We also try to investigate possible differences and similarities between investment strategies
in the stock market and the cryptocurrency market. The methodology for investigating the
size effect is based on Banz (1981), Miller and Scholes (1982) and George and Hwang (2004)
who find that small, low-price, and low-maximum-price stocks generate higher mean returns
than bigger stocks. To estimate the momentum effect, the work of Jegadeesh and Titman
(1993) is used as reference. They discuss the profitable effects of betting on coins with high
past week momentum and that an overreaction of the market can make this trade less
beneficial due to a reversal effect, both in the short and long term. We will nuance the
discussion by including the conclusions made by Tzouvanas, Kizys and Tsend-Ayush (2020),
that support our findings that the cryptocurrency market seems to have an inverse relationship
to the stock market in regards to long- and short-term market efficiency. As shown with our
significant long-short past 100-week return strategy with a negative coefficient, we also
discuss De Bondt and Thaler's (1985) conclusions that the stock market seems to have an
inverse effect for winners and losers in the long term. This means that the cryptocurrency
market and the stock market both seem to be experiencing the same effects, although the
effect past the 100-week period (25 months) is not investigated in this article.

Moreover, related to volume we find that when adjusting for stale coins (including
stablecoins), that absorb a large share of total volume and naturally have close to zero returns,
we see consistencies with the stock market where high-volume coin portfolios outperform
low-volume ones (Wang, 2021). Prior to the adjustment, we found that there were no
significant long-short mean returns. This is reasonably due to the high volume portfolio
containing stale coins with low returns distorting the results. Hence, like the replicated article,
we find no support in the cryptocurrency market that coins with low volume have higher
returns as suggested by Chordia, Subrahmanyam, and Anshuman (2001).

Regarding volatility (percent of price standard deviation), we see significant outperformance
of coin portfolios with abnormally large volatility versus those with abnormally low
volatility. This is consistent with results on the stock market, although those relationships are
weak (Baillie and Ramon, 2022). We find that this could be attributed to the increased market
dominance of stable coins as the effect could be found sorting for weeks after 2017 and in a
long-short decile strategy for the entire period.

                                         4
     C. Disposition

The analysis is divided into three sections. Starting by analyzing the long-short
cryptocurrency strategies for the given period of the replicated article (January 2014 - July
2020), we obtain significant results for the market capitalization, price, maximum price, and
past one-, two-, three-, four-, and 100-week return strategies. Also, the volume long-short
strategy measured a p-value of 10,4% indicating its slightly above indicating it is slightly
above the 10% significance level. Thus, we do not achieve the same significance levels as
measured by Liu, Tsyvinski, and Wu (2022) for the past one-to-four-week return, price
volume and standard deviation of price volume, but support for the newfound significant
long-short strategy past 100-week return. Reasons for these discrepancies can mainly be
attributed to differences in data aggregation sources and the fact that cryptocurrency price,
volume and market cap data naturally differ in cryptocurrency exchanges. This problem
arises from the decentralization of the digital asset exchanges that are inefficient and price
arbitrage opportunities can be exploited due to different fees, or shifting levels of volume and
liquidity (Gemini, 2022). A clear example of this difference can be seen in Figure 1 for
Ethereum compared to the corresponding value-weighted market portfolio graph plotted by
Liu, Tsyvinski and Wu (2022). The higher value of investment could be explained by the
difference in starting price where CoinGecko reports a value of USD 1.33, compared to USD
2.79 in CoinMarketCap the same date whilst growing to more similar figures later in the
period. Hence, it is evident that the differences could have an impact on for instance returns.
We also discovered that there were anomalies in the initial CoinGecko data obtained from the
API which we need to filter out by removing certain coins. Liu, Tsyvinski and Wu (2022)
also pointed out an analysis about the risk of fabricated and boosted trading volumes due to
inter alia a high ratio of unreliable and deceptive Chinese trading exchanges in
CoinmarketCap (Ribes, 2018). This could explain the differences in results for
volume-related strategies.

Thereafter, we test the significance of the cryptocurrency investment strategies on our
extended time period (January 2014 - May 2022), and conclude that the cryptocurrency
strategies market capitalization, price, maximum price, and the past one-, two-, three-,
100-week momentum strategies remained significant. We also obtain a reduced significance
level for the volume strategy (p-value=0.113) which could be explained by an increased share
of stable coins that represent a large part of the total volume although they have very low
returns and volatility. If we then carry out an isolated effect for coins with 90% highest
volatility (and therefore sort out stale coins according to our definition), we obtain a
significant long-short volume strategy. To evaluate the effect of the increased stable coin
market dominance, we construct a volatility zero-investment quintile long-short strategy
(defined as percentage of price standard deviation) on our time period. The volatility weekly
zero-investment quintile long-short strategy, longing the fifth quintile (highest volatility) and
shorting the first quintile, showed insignificant excess returns (p-value: 0.147). The
corresponding 10-1 decile strategy however, showed weekly significant mean excess returns
of 2,78% (p-value: 0.070), which is an unexplained effect that needs to be accounted for in
the factor models. Given the significant excess return of the decile volatility strategy (and

                                         5
significant long-short quintile strategy for the period after 2017), we create a volatility factor
(CVOLAT) to evaluate if we could account for this return.

Next, we analyze the cryptocurrency factor models by comparing the one-, three-, and
four-factor model constructed by a cryptocurrency market factor (CMKT), a cryptocurrency
small minus big factor (CSMB), cryptocurrency momentum factor (CMOM), and a
cryptocurrency volatility factor (CVOLAT). We confirm that the one-factor model using only
the cryptocurrency market factor accounts for the past four-week return strategy, while
having significant alphas for the rest of the significant strategies. The three-factor model,
consisting of a cryptocurrency size and momentum factor, could account for four of the
non-momentum strategies past two-, three-, four-, and 100-week returns, and the market
capitalization strategy. Finally, by adding the volatility factor we find that the four-factor
model performs better in pricing the volatility strategy than the three-factor model. Overall, it
performs somewhat better, but notably, still fails in accounting fully for the size strategies,
since it gets significant alphas.

  2. Data

The historical data series have been attained from the independent cryptocurrency data
aggregator CoinGecko. This database tracks 13,000+ different crypto assets tracked across
more than 500+ exchanges worldwide and are frequently cited by different publications
(CoinGecko, 2022). This means that there will be separation between the data used in
“Common Risk Factors In Cryptocurrency”, which uses aggregated data from ~400
exchanges taken from CoinMarketCap.

We set our time horizon from January 2014 until May 2022. Applicable coins were required
to meet the following delineations; the currency must be traded on a public exchange, have
coin-specific information on price, volume, and market capitalization, and exceed market
capitalization of USD 1m. From the historical coin data series, we obtained daily market
capitalization, price, and volume measured in dollars. An overview of the data is observed
from the summary statistics presented in Table 1, Panel A. As illustrated, the sample of coins
starts at 56 in 2014 and grows to 2788 in 2022, and including all coins, the total amounts to
3742. For market capitalization, the daily mean and median amount to USD ~828m and USD
~9.92m. This corresponds to a daily volume mean and median of USD ~118m and USD
~0.32m. Moreover, moving into detail we also found that stale coins (10% lowest by weekly
volatility) had an average mean weekly volume of ~8x higher than the other coins (90%
highest coins measured in weekly volatility).

In Panel B, summary statistics for the coin market index and major coins are presented.
During the period 2014 - 2022, the mean coin market index return is 1.35% per week, which
is lower than the weekly mean returns for the major coins. Ethereum measured a weekly
return of 3.79%, Bitcoin 1.39% (per week), and Ripple 2.56% (per week). The new entry,
Binance Coin delivered a significantly higher weekly mean return of 16.23% during the same

                                         6
period. The weekly standard deviation of the coin market index was measured at 0.102,
which is in line with the Bitcoin standard deviation of 0.103 per week. Ethereum and Ripple
were found to have higher standard deviations which were measured to be 0.18 and 0.22
respectively. However, the spread on the data was significantly smaller than the standard
                                             3
deviation of Binance Coin of 1.96 . The great similarity between the market and Bitcoin is
due to the undisputed Bitcoin market dominance.

To calculate excess return we replicate the daily risk-free rate with the 1-Month United States
                                                                                                                       4
Bond Yield (“USA 1-månads Obligationsränta”), which we attained from Investing.com .

   A. Data processing and filtering

We organized and cleaned the daily data, making it feasible to convert into weeks. The
original data contains daily historical data series, which was matched with a weekly number
based on seven day intervals. However, since the number of days in a year is not a multiple of
seven, the last week of the year consists of 8 days - in accordance with the replicated paper.

3
  Bitcoin, Ethereum, Binance Coin and Ripple are four of the largest cryptocurrencies by market capitalization
on the 2022-05-05 (dataset end date). Measured from the end date used in “Common Risk Factors In
Cryptocurrency” (2020-07-01), Ripple held the position as the third largest Cryptocurrency, a position that
Binance Coin has taken at the end of our period
4
  This is a global financial markets platform with 46 million monthly users, and is one of the top three
international financial websites according to both SimilarWeb and Alexa (Investing, N.A).

                                         7
Hence, there is a total of 52 weeks per year and the 31st of December each year was allocated
to week one the following year and the 29th of December is allocated to week 52.
Considering the additional day during leap years, the 29th of December was excluded for
2016 and 2020, to make it comparable with the residual years.

During the processing, various incorrect data points were also detected. This conclusion was
established considering the abnormal cumulative market return, extreme daily value
increases, and constant market capitalization for a longer period despite changes in price and
trading volume. Three filters were applied, one for price, market capitalization, and volume
respectively. These involved excluding coins with constant market capitalization and volume
over ten days as well as price changes of a hundred times daily increase. It was often the
same coins that had errors. By completely removing coins with incorrect data points, we
avoid gaps in the data. A total of 188 coins were removed. Filtering the data, reduced the risk
of distorted value weights in portfolios or market performance.
Moreover, data gaps for the risk-free rate during weekend days (Saturday and/or Sundays)
were adjusted for copying the last observation.

3. Cross-Sectional Return Predictors

The first step in the cross-sectional return analysis of the investment characteristics involves
constructing the 23 strategies using the price, volume and market capitalization data (strategy
definitions are presented in Appendix 2). These data characteristics are advantageous due to
the consistent availability and applicability which can contribute to a more reliable result.
Each week, the coins are divided into quintiles based on the value of the strategy
characteristic, which is related to size, momentum, volatility or volume. All quintile strategies
are constructed with the same methodology. For the quintile groups, we track the weekly
excess returns (based on last-day weekly prices) over the risk free rate for the week that
follows the portfolio formation week, and value weigh the returns with the last-day market
cap of the portfolio formation week. The value weights and quintile sorting are rebalanced
weekly. We then create the zero-investment value-weighted quintile portfolio excess returns
by subtracting the value-weighted quintile returns in the fifth quintile by the value-weighted
quintile returns in the first quintile. Moreover, we also construct a coin market return index
consisting of all coins in the dataset. Each week we value-weighted the one-week returns
with last-day market capitalisation.

                                         8
                                                                       5
Figure 1. This figure plots the aggregate cryptocurrency market (3742 coins value-weighted)
                   against Bitcoin, Ethereum, Ripple, and Binance Coin.

5
 Value of investment is the value of investing one dollar from the first day.

                                         9
   A. Size characteristics

The methodology for creating the weekly zero-investment quintile long-short strategies is
described in the beginning of this section. For the size group we analyzed the performance of
the zero-investment long-short strategies based on the size-related characteristics of market
capitalization, price and maximum day price. Table 3 illustrates the results of the three
significant strategies in the size group. The mean excess return for the fifth over the first
quintile amounts to -9.0% (MCAP), -2.6% (PRC), and -2.7% (MAXDPRC). Intuitively, a
zero-investment strategy that longs the coins in the first quintile and shorts the coins in the
fifth quintile provides a 9.0% weekly excess return for the market capitalization strategy.
Like the replicated article, we confirm a size effect for the cryptocurrency size long-short
strategies, where smaller coins outperform larger ones.

   B. Momentum Characteristics

The methodology for creating the weekly zero-investment quintile long-short strategies is
described in the beginning of this section. Corresponding to the momentum group, we
analyze the performance of the zero-investment long-short strategies based on past one-,
two-, three-, four-, one-to-four-, eight-, 16-, 50-, and 100-week returns. Analysis of the nine
momentum strategies concluded that only the past one-, two-, three-, four-, and 100-week
return strategies provided significant results. The mean weekly excess return for the fifth over
the first quintile ranges from -2.4% to 4.4%. All strategies except the past 100-week
momentum yield a positive mean return. A long-short strategy that longs the coins in the

                                        10
highest quintile for past one, two, three and four-week returns and shorts the coins in the
lowest quintile in the same categories, provides a mean weekly return of 3%. For the
momentum strategies, we observe reversed momentum effects for the 16-, 50- and 100-week
momentum, where the lowest momentum quintile outperforms the highest one, although the
16- and 50-week momentum strategies were not statistically significant. This means that if an
investor shorts the coins in the upper quintile of past 100-week momentum and longs the
coins in the smaller quintile, the portfolio generates a weekly return of 2.4%.

   C. Volatility Characteristics

In addition to the strategies examined in “Common Risk Factors in Cryptocurrency”, we test
an additional volatility decile long-short strategy, defined as the percent of closing price
standard deviation each week. It is constructed by calculating the return of the
value-weighted returns of the tenth minus first deciles by volatility each week. The decile
volatility strategy was significant, with significant weekly excess returns for the highest
minus lowest decile portfolio, meaning one would, on average, earn weekly returns of 2.78%
by longing the top volatility decile and shorting the lowest one. The lower decile successfully
captures the largest stablecoins and stale coins by market capitalization and stale coins. The

                                          11
quintile volatility is not significant during the full time period (p-value of 0.147), but turns
significant at the 10% level on a segmented period Jan. 2017 - May. 2022, which is further
discussed in section IV Additional Return Predictor Findings.

   D. Significant strategies

In this section we discuss the significant return predictors in relation to literature, theory and
driving mechanisms. The 23 strategies in the different groups are based on previous research
in the stock market, and we also discuss how the results for cryptocurrencies compare.
Significant size return predictors
Banz (1981), Miller and Scholes (1982), and George and Hwang (2004) demonstrated three
breakthrough discoveries relating to size. They find that small, low-priced and low-maximum
priced stocks attain higher returns than stocks with the opposite characteristics relating to
size. We demonstrated that the long-short strategies MCAP, PRC and MAXDPRC measured
greater returns in the lowest quintile compared to the top one, meaning the findings for coins
within cryptocurrencies are analogous to equity markets. Also, the results are in line with the
findings made by Liu, Tsyvinski, and Wu (2022) on cryptocurrencies using the same
strategies - thus indicating consistency in both theory and methodology.

Significant momentum return predictors
As mentioned, the momentum strategies are based on the work of Jegadeesh and Titman
(1993), who conclude that a long-short strategy on stocks longing those with high past three-
to twelve-month returns and shorting those with low past three- to twelve-month returns yield
statistically significant positive returns. Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) also found that the
long-short strategy had a reversal effect for the past one-month momentum. Our results
indicate that the momentum effects hold for a one to four week horizon and that one attains
statistically significant mean returns from longing coins with high past one-, two-, three, and
four-week momentum and shorting coins with low corresponding momentum.

                                        12
These findings are in line with the results of Liu, Tsyvinski, and Wu (2022), indicating that
there in fact could be a positive momentum effect within a four week horizon. However, the
results obtained from the cryptocurrency long-short momentum strategies stand in contrast to
the equity market. Moreover, the research made by Tzouvanas, Kizys and Tsend-Ayush
(2020) on the cryptocurrency market is in line with our findings that profitable
momentum-based investing can be performed in the short run. This gives indications on the
short-term inefficiency of the cryptocurrency market, which transitions to improved
efficiency after just over a month - hence reverse results compared to the stock market.

Further, we obtained significant results from the past 100-week long-short strategy. However,
the past 100-week long-short strategy excess return yielded negative 2,4%, implying the
100-week momentum strategy of going long on low momentum and shorting high
momentum would yield a positive return. The results for the 50-, 16- and 100-week
momentum strategies indicate the momentum reversal effect comes into effect sometime after
the past 16- or 50-week returns, although these strategies are insignificant. Support for these
findings can be found in De Bondt and Thaler (1985) that suggest former “losers'' outperform
previous “winners” after longer periods. As the past 100-week return held significant
negative mean return in the long-short strategy it would suggest a possible overreaction by
investors exists after 100 weeks after the portfolio formation week (or possibly earlier but not
statistically significant). We can also argue that this element suggests that the cryptocurrency
market does not either follow Bayes' efficient market.

Significant volatility return predictor
The lower decile captures stale coins with price standard deviation within weeks of mainly
between 0%-4% (Figure 2), and also successfully includes the largest stablecoins. The few
instances of higher-volatility coins are mainly attributable to the beginning of the dataset,
such as in 2014, where the number of coins each week are fewer. We observe statistically
significant positive weekly excess returns of 2,78% for coins with top 10% volatility over
those with lower 10% volatility. This is consistent with results on the stock market, although
the relationships are weak (Baillie and Ramon, 2022).
The period after 2017 contains substantially larger market shares of stablecoins (Appendix 1).
Given that the excess returns and significance of high-volatility coins increases when we sort
for weeks after 2017 as opposed to before 2017, a plausible reason for the statistically
significant returns for the volatility strategy post-2017, could be the increased market
dominance of stablecoins. This lines up with theory, since the number of non-volatile coins
with low returns should increase, and thus create more significant returns for the long-short
strategy. However, as concluded by Liu, Tsyvinski, and Wu (2022), most strategies increased
in significance during this period, possibly due to less investor uncertainty - further discussed
in section IV.

                                        13
                Figure 2. High density centered around 2% weekly volatility

   E. Insignificant strategies

Insignificant Strategy Returns
Our results indicate that 14 out of our 23 long-short strategies did not generate significant
results. These strategies are: past one-to-four-, eight-, 16-, and 50-week returns, price volume,
standard deviation of price volume, volume, scaled volume, beta, beta squared, the standard
deviation of returns, maximum day return, delay, and the Amihud illiquidity measure.
Reasons for the insignificance and differences to the replicated paper regarding volume
strategies are discussed more in depth in section IV A. Volume data sourcing issues,
discussed by Liu, TSYVINSKI and WU (2022), are also of special interest in explaining error
sources and insignificance for the volume strategies. They present evidence of manipulated
volume data on certain cryptocurrency exchanges (Ribes, 2018).

4. Further Return Predictor Findings

In this section, we present additional findings related to our contribution of assessing the
robustness of the return predictors on more recent data encompassing a different market
climate and new asset classes.

                                        14
   A. The Stablecoin Volume Characteristics Affecting Return
     Predictors

In the context of this paper, an interesting finding is related to the volume strategies. As
previously discussed, we found that the coins placed in the lower 10% by volatility
(representing the major stablecoins by market capitalization) had ~8x higher mean weekly
trading volume than the upper 90% by volatility. Our long-short volume strategy was
insignificant (p-value of 11.3%), but when testing on the upper 90% weekly volatility
segment data, we found that the volume strategy delivered significant results at the 5% level
(p-value of 2,5%) and 2,0% average weekly returns. Tests on this data segment attempting to
control for the volume distortion caused mainly by stablecoins, shows high-volume coins
outperform lower-volume ones, which is in contrast to effects observed in the stock market,
where (Chordia, Subrahmanyam and Anshuman, 2001). It makes sense that increasing
amounts of stablecoins, that generally have high volume and low returns, would affect the
significance of the long-short volatility strategy since they end up in the top quintile together
with other high-volume coins that do not have an inherent mechanism to limit returns.
However, one may also note possible bias from excluding coins with low volatility in this
segment. The volume strategy was almost significant (p-value of 0.104) for our replication on
time period of “Common Risk Factors In Cryptocurrency” with excess return of 1,82%.

   B. Evaluation on different time periods

Further, we present results on segmented data in two time periods to evaluate the viability of
the return predictors in an early-market condition and a period of less market immaturity and
investor uncertainty. In the first period, Jan. 2014 - Jan. 2017, all zero-investment quintile
long-short strategies turned insignificant except the 2-week-momentum and market
capitalization strategies. The period from Jan. 2017 - May. 2022, featured all previously
significant strategies. Additionally, the long-short quintile volatility strategy turned
significant, which was previously only the case for the decile volatility strategy. Liu,
Tsyvinski and Wu (2022) confirm there is major cryptocurrency market uncertainty in this
first subperiod. By segmenting the period and proving increased strategy significance for the
second subperiod and in more current market conditions, we ensure our results should not be
short lived.
5. Fama-MacBeth Cross-Sectional Regression

In this section, the significant strategies will be evaluated using Fama-Macbeth
Cross-Sectional Regression (1973). We use the portfolio rank number of each return predictor
characteristic as the explanatory variable, following the methodology used by Liu, Tsyvinski
and Wu (2022). Table 6 reports the results from the Fama-MacBeth regression. Panel A
shows that all size strategies are significant at the 1% level both individually and jointly.

                                        15
Panel B reports the quintile volatility return predictor, which is significant at the 1% level.
This differs from the findings in the previous section, where only the decile volatility strategy
was significant for the entire period.
Panel C reports the momentum strategies, which are all individually significant, but only
100-week momentum is jointly significant. This is interesting, given that Liu, Tsyvinski and
Wu (2022) found none of the momentum strategies significant in their shorter time period
using Fama-MacBeth. Only when they sorted for market capitalization above 10 MUSD all
momentum strategies turned individually significant but, consistent with our results, none
was jointly significant. This indicates that momentum return predictors work better in pricing
all coins in the time period Jan. 2014 - May. 2022 than Jan. 2014 - July. 2020.

6. Cryptocurrency Factors

As ascertained in the previous section, nine cross-sectional cryptocurrency return predictors
(strategies) were proven to have significant returns. In this section we will build on these
discoveries and test whether four factors can span all significant strategies. We first evaluate a

                                        16
one-factor model, or the cryptocurrency CAPM, using the cryptocurrency market factor
(CMKT). Then, we create a two-factor model for cryptocurrency market factor and
cryptocurrency size factor (CSMB). Using the same methodology, we create two more
two-factor models where we combine the cryptocurrency market factor with either the
cryptocurrency momentum factor (CMOM) or our new cryptocurrency volatility factor
(CVOLAT). Thereafter, we combine the mentioned factors to construct and test a three-factor
model that includes the cryptocurrency market factor, cryptocurrency size factor and the
cryptocurrency momentum factor, following the methodology in “Common Risk Factors in
Cryptocurrency”. Next, we create a four-factor model, adding a volatility factor to the
three-factor model.
Considering that stale coins have ~8x higher weekly trading volume than the upper 90%
measured by volatility, and holding only 12% of total market capitalization (Appendix 1) in
May 2022, and given that they naturally have low volatility and low returns, makes
long-short strategies not very applicable to coins of this nature. The share of stablecoins has
risen substantially since the end of 2020, which poses issues for testing the continued
viability of the cryptocurrency three-factor model, presuming it intends to mainly capture
“normal coins” (not stablecoins and stale coins). In previous sections, we have shown that the
excess returns for high-volatility coins increases in more recent time periods. We attempt to
control for this effect by creating a four factor model including a volatility factor. Our results
show that this model performs mostly the same as the three-factor model, but better accounts
for the high-volatility premium, and reduces alpha for the volatility strategy tenfold from
3,3% to 0,33%. Given a continued trend in the rise of stablecoin market share, our factor
model results are of importance for the evaluation of cryptocurrency factor models going
forward.

The cryptocurrency excess market return (CMKT) is constructed summarizing the weighted
one-week returns for all coins each week, which adds up to value-weighted weekly market
portfolio returns, representing returns in the week following the portfolio formation week.
Both returns and market weekly returns are then subtracted by the corresponding weekly
risk-free rate, calculated from the one-month US Treasury bill rate. The CMKT one-factor
model (cryptocurrency CAPM) has significant exposure to all significant long-short strategies
except four-week return, volatility and volume, but, like its stock-market counterpart,
performs poorly in predicting returns and does not account fully for any of the strategies.

We are creating the cryptocurrency size and momentum factors close to the method by Fama
and French (1993), and in accordance with “Common Risk Factors in Cryptocurrency”. The
size factor (CSMB) is constructed by dividing the coins' weekly market capitalization into
relative size groups: Bottom 30% (Small), middle 40% (Middle), and top 30% (Big). We then
form value-weighted portfolios for each of the three groups and measure the differences
between the portfolios of the small and the big-size portfolios, representing the returns in the
week following the portfolio formation week.

                                        17
As for the momentum factor (CMOM), each week we divide all coins into two 50/50 equal
size groups (Big and Small) based on weekly market capitalization (represented by the
last-day market capitalization in the portfolio formation week) to control for size bias. Within
each size bucket we create three groups based on the three-week momentum constructed
using the last-day closing price in the portfolio formation week; bottom 30% (Low), middle
40%, and top 30% (High). We then organize value-weighted portfolios with the returns in the
week following the portfolio formation week, representing the bottom and top groups in
regards to three-week returns. Lastly, CMOM is attained by the difference between the two
equally weighted size groups, representing returns for the week following the portfolio
formation week.

We extend on the replicated paper by adding a volatility factor (CVOLAT) to account for the
observed significant return differences between volatile coins and stale coins in the long-short
decile volatility strategy (described in section III. B). We control for both size and momentum
effects, and construct the CVOLAT factor by dividing the coins into two size groups each
week; Small (bottom 50%) and Big (top 50%), whereby the two size groups are then
segmented into two buckets each based on the three week momentum, top 50% (High) and
bottom 50% (Low), creating four momentum groups in total. Within each momentum group
we track the one-week returns of the week following the portfolio formation week, and
calculate the differences between two value weighted groups sorted by volatility; top
volatility (top 10%, V) minus non-volatile/stale coins (bottom 10%, S). The four groups are
then summed up with equal weights.

Because of the lower amount of coins in the initial 2 years (Table 1), the weekly factor
portfolios are affected. Especially for the volatility factor, when applying both the size and
momentum sorts, it is not feasible to create the factor on the earlier part of the data set
because of missing entries. Moreover, given the smaller coin market in earlier periods
(2014-2016), including them would risk the upper and lower volatility deciles to not
accurately represent stale and volatile coins, and thus not allow the volatility factor to work as
intended. Hence, we will evaluate the factor models starting from 2016. Thereby, we get a
fair comparison with equal periods between especially the three-and four-factor models. As
previously presented, no strategies are significant between Jan. 2014 - Jan. 2017 except
2-week-momentum and market capitalization. After this period, also the quintile volatility
strategy turns significant. Liu, Tsyvinski and Wu (2022) show major uncertainty for the

                                        18
cryptocurrency market in this first subperiod and also, by testing the model on the later
period, we ensure our results should not be short lived.

   A. Cryptocurrency One-Factor Model

The results from the Cryptocurrency One-Factor model (CAPM) are presented in Table 6.
The results indicate that from the significant strategies, the past one-, two-, three- and
100-week returns as well as last day price, maximum price of the portfolio formation week
and market capitalization and volatility have significant exposures to the coin market excess
return. This means that the remaining zero-investment long-short strategies are not
                                                                                  2
significantly exposed to the coin market return. The long-short strategy R ranges from 0.1%
to 6.9% which means the one-factor model explains a small portion of the excess returns for
all strategies, but reasonably better for last day price and the maximum price of the portfolio
formation week zero-investment long-short strategies. Moreover, the long-short alphas for all
strategies, except the past four-week return are significant, meaning it does not account for
their excess returns.

   This table shows the alph, alpha t-statistic, cryptocurrency CAPM market beta, its corresponding t-statistic
 R-squared for the cryptocurrency one-factor model. *,**,*** denote significance at the 1%,5% and 10% levels.

                                        19
   B. Cryptocurrency Two-Factor Model

Size
As presented in Table 8, Model (1) constructing a two factor combining the cryptocurrency
size factor to the cryptocurrency CAPM model, we can observe that all the size-based
strategies MCAP, PRC and MAXDPRC have significant exposure to the size factor at the 1%

                                        20
level. In addition, it also has significant betas for the one-, two-,100-week momentum and
volatility strategies. This two-factor model has insignificant alfa's and accounts for four-week
momentum and volatility. This means, in contrast to the findings in Risk Factors in
Cryptocurrency, the size factor alone no longer succeeds to account for all the size-related
strategies in our longer time period. This suggests other mechanisms, perhaps effects from
price volatility or changing market conditions may be in effect.

However, we obtain considerably larger R-squared values for the zero-investment long-short
size strategies, ranging between 21%-24.2%. The residual strategies indicate no significant
changes compared to the one-factor model except for significant exposure to the
cryptocurrency size factor for the past one-, two-, and 100-week momentum strategies. This
indicates that the two-factor market and size model explains the excess returns for the past
four-week investment strategy. However, it is not significantly exposed to the market- or size
factors. Also, the volatility strategy has significant exposure to both the market and size
factor, whilst the alpha is insignificant, meaning this two-factor model accounts for the
volatility strategy.

Momentum
As presented in Table 7, model (2), the two factor model containing a cryptocurrency
                                                                                                                     2
momentum factor and a cryptocurrency market factor increase the explanatory value (R ) for
all the long-short momentum strategies. This could be explained by strategies increased
exposure to the cryptocurrency momentum factor. In this model, the long-short momentum
                   2
strategies have R ranging from 2.4% based on past four-week return to 7.9% based on
                                                                                               2
past-one week return. This indicates significant improvements to the CAPM model R for the
momentum strategies that ranged between 0.2% to 1.9%. As discussed, all non-momentum
long-short strategies have significant exposures to the momentum factor, but overall the
explanatory value of the return fluctuations decreased when replacing the size factor with the
momentum factor. Also, the long-short alphas for the PRC and MAXDPRC factor remain
significant whilst MCAP is estimated to have insignificant results. This would suggest that
the momentum factor, which controls for size in its creation, captures the mean return
difference between the small and big coins better than the size factor, which has significant
alpha for all size strategies. Moreover, using the momentum factor could not account for the
volatility strategy as it holds a significant alpha. However, the strategy has significant
exposure to both the market- and momentum factors.

Volatility
Next, we adjust the nine significant zero-investment long-short strategies to an alternative
two-factor model consisting of the market factor (CMKT) and the volatility factor
(CVOLAT) to the nine significant strategies. The results of this model are reported in Table 8,
model (4). The volatility factor has significant exposure to two- and 100-week momentum
and volatility strategies, with factor loadings of 16,3%, -10,54%, 10,1% at the one-, ten- and
one-percent levels, respectively. R-squared for the zero-investment quintile long-short
strategy ranges from 11,8% on the volatility strategy, between 0,2% and 3% on the

                                        21
momentum strategy and between 7% and 7,5% on the size strategies. The model performs
poorly in explaining the variance in the size strategies, but has at least equal performance
compared to the other two two-factor models in regards to both explaining the variance for
the momentum long-short strategies and their corresponding quintile portfolios. The model
has insignificant alfas for and accounts for the following quintile long-short strategies:
volatility and two-and four-week-momentum. two-week-momentum is of interest since the
strategy has twice the volume and variance explained by the volatility factor compared to
momentum, although they both account for the strategy. This also suggests the high volatility
corresponds to high two-week momentum vice-versa, and that these factors could be related.

   C. Cryptocurrency Three-Factor Model

We thereafter evaluate a three-factor model consisting of CMKT, CSMB and CMOM. As
seen in Table 8, model (4), the model has adjusted R-squared values for the zero-investment
quintile long-short size strategies ranging between 25,0% and 32,3%, whereas for the
corresponding quintile portfolios the R-squared averages are between 57,3% and 65,1%. For
the momentum long-short strategies the adjusted R-squared values are between 1,7% and
7,7%, and for the quintile portfolios the R-squared averages are between 49,9% and 62,6%.
The model explains 12,5% of the variance in the volatility long-short strategy, and 56,4% for
the quintile portfolio. The model still holds significant long-short alphas for the past
one-week momentum, the size strategies and volatility, meaning there are still returns the
model does not explain.

                                        22
   D. Cryptocurrency Four-Factor Model

Next, we test a four-factor model consisting of CMKT, CSMB, CMOM and CVOLAT (the
volatility factor) following the methodology above. The results are presented in Table 8,
model (5). Given that the two-factor model consisting of the market and volatility factor
could account for the volatility long-short strategy, but not the three-factor model with the
market, size and momentum factors, we now test whether the four-factor model adding the
volatility factor could improve the three-factor model. The model explains 14,92% of the
variance (adjusted R-squared) in the volatility long-short strategy (compared to 12,5% in the
three-factor model), and 60,0% for the corresponding quintile portfolios (unadjusted). The
model still fails to account fully for the volatility zero-investment long-short strategy, but the
significant alfa decreases tenfold down to 0,33% from 3,3% in the three-factor model. The

                                        23
factor loadings on the other factors remain the same, and the exposure to the volatility factor
amounts to 7,6%.
The four-factor model has adjusted R-squared values for the zero-investment quintile
long-short size strategies ranging between 24,8% and 32,3%, whereas for the corresponding
quintile portfolios the averages are between 63,6% and 69,5%. For the momentum long-short
strategies adjusted R-squared is between 3,4% and 10,1%, and for the quintile portfolios
between 50,1% and 63,0%. The model still holds significant long-short alphas for the size
strategies and there is no notable change in alpha values. The model fails to account for the
one-,three- and four-week-momentum strategies which now have statistically significant
alpha, but once again, there are no large alfa increases compared to the three-factor model
(0,1 percentage point). In essence, the four-factor model performs mainly the same as the
three-factor model for the size strategies, but accounts for about twice the variance for the
momentum strategies, when comparing adjusted R-squares. Although it does not fully
account for the cross-sectional volatility return predictor, the alpha for the volatility
long-short strategy alpha decreases substantially.

7. Conclusion

This paper concludes that a number of standard cryptocurrency return predictors representing
size, momentum, volatility and volume characteristics can be successfully constructed, which
is consistent with Fama-Macbeth regressions. We also show that the significance of many
return predictors used in the replicated article increase in the later time periods.
This could mainly be attributed to decreased investor uncertainty, and indicates continued
viability for the significant return predictors going forward. We also show that the
three-factor model proposed by (Liu, Tsyvinski, and Wu (2022) no longer accounts for the
size strategies. Further, we document many results consistent with observations on the equity
markets; such as size premium, momentum effects, long-term momentum reversal effects and
positive excess returns for volume and volatility 5-1 long-short quintile strategies. We
investigate the trend and effects of increasing market shares of stablecoins and stale coins,
and indicate that they negatively affect the significance and usefulness of some return
predictors, and especially those relating to volume. We find indications that they magnify the
excess returns of high-volatility coins over low-volatility ones. We therefore create a
four-factor model encompassing a volatility factor, that overall performs better than the
three-factor model, and especially in pricing the cross-section of the volatility strategy excess
returns. Given the rising share of stablecoins, these results are of importance for the
evaluation of cryptocurrency asset pricing models going forward.

                                        24
25
References

Literature
Amihud, Yakov (2002) “Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and time-series effects”
Journal of Financial Markets 5, 31–56.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1386-4181(01)00024-6

Ang, Andrew, Robert Hodrick, Yuhang Xing, and Xiaoyan Zhang (2006) “The cross-section
of volatility and expected returns” Journal of Finance 61, 259–299.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2006.00836.x

Baillie, Richard T., and Ramon P. DeGennaro. “Stock Returns and Volatility.” The Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis, vol. 25, no. 2, 1990, pp. 203–14. JSTOR,
https://doi.org/10.2307/2330824. Accessed 3 Dec. 2022.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/2330824

Bali, Turan, Nusret Cakici, and Robert Whitelaw (2011) “Maxing out: Stocks as lotteries and
the cross-section of expected returns” Journal of Financial Economics 99, 427–446
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2010.08.014

Banz, Rolf (1981) “The relationship between return and market value of common stocks”.
Journal of Financial Economics 9, 3–18.
https://www-sciencedirect-com.ez.hhs.se/science/article/pii/0304405X81900180?via%3Dihu
b

Barry, Christopher, and Stephen Brown (1984) “Differential information and the small firm
effect” Journal of Financial Economics 13, 283–294.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0304-405X(84)90026-6

Carhart, M. (1997) “On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance” Journal of Finance, 52(1)
https://www.jstor.org/stable/2329556?seq=3#metadata_info_tab_contents

Chordia, Tarun, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, and Ravi Anshuman (2001) “Trading activity and
expected stock returns” Journal of Financial Economics 59, 3–32.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0304-405X(00)00080-5

De Bondt, Werner, and Richard Thaler (1985) “Does the stock market overreact?” Journal of
Finance 40, 793–805.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.1985.tb05004.x

Fama, E., & French, K. (1993). Common risk factors in the Returns on Stocks and Bonds,
Journal of Financial Economics 33(1), 3-56.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0304-405X(93)90023-5

                                        26
Fama, Eugene, and James MacBeth (1973) “Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests”
Journal of Political Economy 81, 607–636.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/260061

Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French (1992) “The cross-section of expected stock returns”
Journal of Finance 47, 427–465. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.1992.tb04398.x

George, Thomas, and Chuan-Yang Hwang (2004) “The 52-week high and momentum
investing” Journal of Finance. 59, 2145–2176.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2004.00695.x

Hou, Kewei, and Tobias Moskowitz (2005) “Market frictions, price delay, and the
cross-section of expected returns” Review of Financial Studies 18, 981–1020.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhi023

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman (1993) “Returns to buying winners and selling
losers: Implications for stock market efficiency” Journal of Finance 48, 65–91.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.1993.tb04702.x

Liu, Yukun ; Tsyvinski, Aleh ; Wu, Xi (2022) “Common Risk Factors In Cryptocurrency”
Journal of Finance (New York), 2022, Vol.77 (2),p.1133-1177
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/jofi.13119

Miller, Merton, and Myron Scholes (1982) ”Dividends and taxes: Some empirical evidence”.
Journal of Political Economy 90, 1118–1141.
https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/10.1086/261114

Tzouvanas, Panagiotis ; Kizys, Renatas ; Tsend-Ayush, Bayasgalan (2020). “Momentum
trading in cryptocurrencies: Short-term returns and diversification benefits” Economics
letters. Vol.191 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0165176519303647

Zijun Wang, “The high volume return premium and economic fundamentals”
Journal of Financial Economics
Volume 140, Issue 1, 2021, Pages 325-345, ISSN 0304-405X.
https://www-sciencedirect-com.ez.hhs.se/science/article/pii/S0304405X20302816?via%3Dih
ub
Internet sources
CoinMarketCap, 2022
https://coinmarketcap.com/charts/

CoinGecko.com (2022) “About”
https://www.coingecko.com/en/about

                                        27
Cryptopedia Staff (2022) “Profiting From Price Differences Across Crypto Exchanges”.
Gemini
https://www.gemini.com/pt-BR/cryptopedia/crypto-arbitrage-crypto-exchange-prices

Investing.com “About us”
https://www.investing.com/about-us/

Riksbanken (2022) “Stablecoins är tänkta att hålla ett stabilt pris över tid” Sveriges Riksbank
https://www.riksbank.se/sv/press-och-publicerat/publikationer/staff-memo/en-oversikt-over-fi
ntech-och-kryptotillgangar/vad-ar-kryptotillgangar/stablecoins-ar-tankta-att-halla-ett-stabilt-p
ris-over-tid/

Rybes, Sylvain (2018) “Chasing fake volume: a crypto-plague” Medium
https://sylvain-ribes.medium.com/chasing-fake-volume-a-crypto-plague-ea1a3c1e0b5e

                                        28
Appendix

Appendix 1

                                        29
Appendix 2 - Attained from “Common Risk Factors in Cryptocurrency” (Liu,
Tsyvinski, and Wu, 2022)

                                        30
31