Private Equity: The Secret
Sauce for Pandemic-Proof
Performance or Just Another
Quarantine Regret?

How PE-backed companies performed during COVID-19
pandemic compared to non-PE-backed companies

Anna Muizniece
Gabriela Lenerte

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2023
Abstract

This study utilizes a dataset comprising 99 private equity-backed firms and 317
non-private equity-backed firms in Sweden to investigate whether private
equity-backed firms were more resilient during  the COVID-19 pandemic
compared to similar firms. Our findings indicate that private equity-backed
firms experienced a significant increase in investment, credit, and equity
inflows, and exhibited better operational performance when compared to
similar firms in the wake of the COVID-19 outbreak.  Additionally, our analysis
yields mixed results regarding the effect that private equity has on  financially
constrained  firms.  Most of the results are consistent with previous studies
conducted during the 2008 financial crisis, which suggest that private equity-
backed firms are better equipped to navigate financial instability during times of
crisis.

Key Words

Private  equity, COVID-19 crisis,  Capital investment, Financial  crisis, Financial
fragility

Authors

Anna Muizniece (25015)
Gabriela Lenerte (25090)

Tutor

Zhang Ye, Assistant Professor in Finance

Examiner

Adrien D’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Anna Muizniece and Gabriela Lenerte, 2023

                               2
1. Introduction

1.1.  Research focus

       Private equity  (PE)  plays a significant role in the economy by providing
capital and expertise to companies that may not have access to traditional sources
of funding. Private equity  firms invest in a wide range of companies, from small
startups to large, established companies, and can help to spur innovation, create
jobs, and drive economic growth. For example, by providing funding for research
and development, private equity firms can help to bring new products and
technologies to market  (Lerner, Sørensen, & Strömberg,  2011), which can drive
economic growth and improve the standard of living for consumers.
       However, it  is important to note that private equity is not without its
controversies and criticisms. Some argue that private equity firms prioritize
short-term profits over long-term growth  which  can lead to job losses and other
negative impacts on the companies they invest in  (Davis, Haltiwanger, Handley,
Jarmin, Lerner, & Miranda, 2014). Additionally, some have raised concerns about
the lack of transparency and regulation in the private equity industry  known for
its use of  high leverage  when acquiring companies  that  pose significant risks
(Kaplan  &  Stein,  1993).  If  the  acquired  company's  financial  performance
deteriorates, the private equity firm may struggle to  meet its debt obligations,
potentially leading to default, bankruptcy, or other financial distress. During
economic downturns, high levels of leverage can exacerbate these risks, as
companies may struggle to generate sufficient cash flow to service their debts.  In
the wake of the 2008 financial crisis, private equity firms that had used high levels
of  leverage  to  acquire  companies  were  particularly  vulnerable  to  market
downturns, as they struggled to meet their debt obligations. As a result, many
private equity-backed companies faced financial distress and bankruptcy.  Some
private equity  firms  have since reduced  their  use of  leverage  or  pursued
investments with less leverage to  manage these risks.
      Despite  the  risks of private equity ownership during turbulent periods,
private equity firms can also play a role in helping  companies  weather economic
crises. By providing capital and expertise, private equity firms can help struggling
companies  restructure their operations, reduce costs, and improve profitability
(Cohn, Hotchkiss, &  Towery, 2022). Bernstein, Lerner,  and Mezzanotti (2019) in
their research  explore  if and how private equity  contributes to  financial fragility
during  economic crises.  Their analysis is focused on the  Global  Financial  Crisis
and finds that  during the 2008 crisis, companies backed by private equity
reduced their investments less than their non-PE-backed peers, and also saw
higher inflows of equity and debt, increased asset growth, and greater market
share. These effects were particularly significant for financially constrained
companies and those with private equity investors who had greater resources at
the beginning of the crisis.
       Motivated by the ongoing discussion on the private equity firm role during
crisis times and the results obtained by Bernstein, Lerner, and Mezzanotti (2019)
we  aim to  analyze  the private equity firm  effect  on  companies during the recent

                                3
COVID-19  crisis.  Our research is focused specifically on  the  Swedish market  and
compares  PE-backed   (target  group)  and  non-PE-backed  (control  group)
companies' performance during the  pre-pandemic years from 2018 throughout
the pandemic until 2021. The presence of comprehensive financial data on private
companies  in the Swedish market  creates a favorable setting  for us to bring this
discussion further  in  new dimensions.  There is a vast amount of research
completed on the private equity firm impact on company performance worldwide
and several  such as  Bernstein, Lerner,  and  Mezzanotti (2019)  that focuses on
crisis  periods.  With our research  focused  specifically on  the  COVID-19  crisis
period  we aim to contribute to the  existing literature on the Swedish economy
and  private equity industry  and  further extend  the existing research on  PE-
backed company performance during both normal times and  crisis impact  on
company performance.

1.2. Private equity value creation

       Before  delving into the interpretation of our collected data  and research
findings,  it is of  great  importance to underscore the significance of the private
equity  industry  presented and thoroughly discussed in prior  literature. The
private equity firms  have  demonstrated  their  capacity to add value to  their
portfolio companies  in  different  dimensions, many of which have surfaced as
potential value drivers in our investigation. The articulation of these points is
fundamental to our ensuing analysis  which is why we  aim to  discuss both the
value creation aspects of private equity ownership and later the possible risks that
might come along with it.
       An extensive range of research has  analyzed  the effects of private equity
ownership in the form of productivity and efficiency  increase in firms, specific
industry growth where private equity firms  are especially active and many other
similar impact dimensions.  Bernstein, Lerner, Sorensen, and  Stromberg (2016)
in their research explore the impact of PE on industry performance across nations
and industries. They try to investigate the conflicting views of  the impact of PE
investments on aggregate growth  and cyclicality  by  examining  the relationship
between the presence of PE investments and the growth rates of total production,
employment, and  capital  formation across 20 industries in 26 major  nations
between 1991 and 2009. They found that industries where PE funds have invested
in  the past five years have grown  more quickly  additionally  suggesting that the
results are at least partly driven by spillover effects from PE-backed firms to other
firms  in the industry.
       Several other researchers, on the other hand, specifically explore the many
ways  how private equity firms create value  for  their acquired companies and
analyse different performance metrics of the private equity-backed companies in
order to understand the effects of private equity ownership. Cohn, Hotchkiss, and
Towery (2022), for example, focus their research on  sources of value creation in
private equity buyouts of private firms. They find that private equity-owned firms
grow rapidly post-buyout, especially those undertaking add-on acquisitions, and
profitability  increases  for  both  profitable  and  unprofitable  targets.  In  the
research, they also show that PE acquirers disproportionately target private firms

                               4
with weak operating profitability and those  that have growth potential but are
highly levered and dependent on external financing.  One of the value levers that
Cohn, Hotchkiss, and Towery (2022) find in their research results is the way how
private equity acquirees  create value by relaxing financing constraints for firms
with strong investment opportunities and improving the performance of weak
firms.  Even though financial engineering could play a role in the increased
performance results, for example  as  discussed in the research by Johnson, Ryan,
and Tian (2009),  the evidence obtained by  Cohn, Hotchkiss, and Towery (2022)
suggests the contrary.  Notably,  our obtained results  possibly indicate a similar
finding  relating to the  private equity ownership's role in helping their companies
in securing  financing which will later be  elaborated upon.
       Another study completed by  Sraer and Thesmar (2011)  gives  insights  into
additional findings that  play a meaningful role in our analysis relating to PE-
backed company  financing  and investment policy  decisions.  Sraer and Thesmar
(2011)  in their analysis discuss  the change in corporate behavior  following a
leveraged buyout (LBO)  completed by a private equity firm  relative to an
adequately chosen control group  by using a data set of 839 French deals. They
found in  their research that  in the  three  years following a leveraged buyout,
private equity-backed companies become more profitable, grow much faster than
their peer group, issue additional debt, and increase capital expenditures.
Similarly,  to  Cohn, Hotchkiss, and Towery's  (2022)  findings, their results also
indicate that  private equity funds create value by relaxing credit constraints,
allowing LBO targets to take advantage of  unexploited growth opportunities.
       Somewhat  contrary research  is introduced by Kaplan  (1989), which  more
closely  looks at  the effects of  specifically  management buyouts on  companies'
operating performance and value. By analyzing a sample of management buyouts
of public companies completed between 1980 and  1986 he finds that in the three
years after the buyout, these companies experience increases in operating income
(before depreciation),  however,  saw  decreases in capital expenditures, and
increases in net cash flow.
       Additional research looks at the effects  of  private equity buyouts on
specific   industries,   such   as   manufacturing   and   the   restaurant   industry.
Lichtenberg and Siegel (1990)  chose to  investigate the effect of LBOs on  plant
operating performance  (total factor productivity (TFP)  and related  variables).
The research shows that  LBOs  (particularly MBOs) that occurred during 1983-
1986 had a strong positive effect on TFP in the first three post-buyout years.  Plant
productivity increased from  2.0% above  the  industry  mean in the  three pre-
buyout years to 8.3% above the industry mean in the three post-buyout years. The
restaurant industry also seems to experience operational improvements after a
private equity buyout.  Bernstein and  Sheen (2016)  explore  the  operational
consequences of private  equity buyouts  in the restaurant industry, and they find
that store-level operational practices improve after  private equity buyout, as
restaurants become  cleaner, safer, and better maintained. Their research also
indicates that these improvements  are particularly apparent when  private equity
partners have prior  industry experience.  Therefore, industry expertise is another
value lever identified which helps  private equity  firms  improve firm operations.
In our research  even though  one of  the operating  performance metrics  EBITDA

                                 5
over revenue turned  out to be not a  significant result  the  evidence  provided by
Lichtenberg and Siegel (1990)  and  Bernstein and  Sheen (2016)  in  their analysis
shows us the contrary  and  adds to the  many  value creation aspects of private
equity  ownership.
       In summary, a large amount of prior research including the ones discussed
above have explored the different value levers a private equity firm ownership can
deliver to their portfolio companies, several of which we  have indicated in our
analysis. Next, we want to consider the possible risks that the companies and thus
the economy at large  might face  as a result of  private equity ownership.

1.3. Private equity potential threat

       Despite the potential benefits of private equity during stable economic
conditions, there is a significant issue regarding its potential to worsen economic
downturns. Private equity has demonstrated a strong correlation with economic
cycles and equity valuations, which has resulted in significant fluctuations in
transaction volume. Additionally,  deals executed at market peaks  appear to
exhibit significant variations compared to those made in other timeframes.
Kaplan  and  Stein (1993)  in their research explore the  changes in the pricing and
financial structure of large management buyouts in the 1980s. Notably, they find
that market "overheating" results in  higher valuations, transactions in riskier
industries,  higher  leverage, and  weaker alignment among key  stakeholders.
Blundell-Wignall  (2007)  in his analysis supports the trend of transactions
increasingly happening in riskier industries. He writes that deals in  Europe  are
spreading to industries such as airlines that are inherently more cyclical and
exposed to risk factors (e.g., oil prices and terrorism). He also emphasizes that as
the cycle continues to mature, making  LBOs work  gets increasingly tougher,
therefore leverage becomes more risky.
       Moreover, in another study, Davis, Haltiwanger, Handley, Jarmin, Lerner,
and Miranda (2014) attempt to test the claims made by private equity critics that
leveraged buyouts bring major job losses and few gains in operating performance.
With a dataset covering US buyouts from 1980 to 2005 tracking target firms
before and after acquisition,  they found, among many other findings, that the
results  support the view that private equity buyouts lead  to greater job loss  at
establishments operated by target firms as of the buyout year. However,  tracking
each firm’s constituent establishments,  they found that  target firms  create new
jobs in newly opened establishments at a faster pace than  control firms.  Even
though we have decided not to focus on the private equity ownership effect on job
loss or creation it is important to outline the different perspectives discussed in
prior literature.

1.4. Private equity industry in Sweden

       The Swedish private equity  market  is  undoubtedly  among the largest
private equity markets globally and  plays an instrumental role in the country's
economic landscape, contributing significantly to investment, growth, and job
creation. As a hub of innovation and entrepreneurial activity, Sweden has proven

                               6
to be an attractive destination for private equity investment, with a well-
established ecosystem that supports business development and growth. The
private equity sector in Sweden not only fuels the expansion of established
companies but also fosters the emergence of start-ups, facilitating their transition
to global competitors. This market's importance extends beyond immediate
economic contributions, as it influences the broader Swedish economic structure
and competitiveness on an international scale. Therefore, we think it is important
to understand  not only the  importance of  the  Swedish  private equity  market but
also its performance during  our focus period,  the COVID-19  crisis.
       The Swedish private equity  industry is globally recognized as a key player
in the PE sector. Swedish PE firms manage substantial amounts of capital and
have a strong international focus, with investments going to companies located
outside of Sweden. The country's PE industry includes some of the largest and
most active firms in Europe, which have created a competence cluster in the PE
sector in Stockholm.  When compared to the size of the country's economy,
Sweden has the second-highest amount of PE funds raised in the European
Union, with only  Luxembourg having  raised  more  according  to  SVCA (2022)
report.  In  the  pre-pandemic period,  the higher-than-average  amount of capital
managed by Swedish PE firms is evidence of this trend, with an average of
approximately EUR 730 million  in 2019  according  to  SVCA (2019)  report.  This
figure surpasses that of many other European countries, including Germany, the
Netherlands, and even the UK. Moreover, the PE industry in Sweden boasts some
of the biggest and busiest PE firms in Europe, primarily because of the extensive
experience of prominent Swedish firms like EQT, Nordic Capital, Altor  and FSN.
These firms have established a hub of expertise in the PE sector in Stockholm.
According to SVCA's (2020) report, over the last decade PE investments totalling
more than SEK 240 billion have been  provided to  nearly 3,000 Swedish
companies.  If we consider the combined direct and indirect effects of PE
investments and the influence of venture capital, SVCA (2020) report shows that
since 2007, these investments in Swedish companies have contributed to an
increase in the country's GDP by SEK 230  billion. This amount is roughly
equivalent to nearly 5% of the GDP.
      When considering the private equity market performance  in Europe as a
whole, despite the ongoing impact of the COVID-19  pandemic in 2021, including
the reintroduction of lockdowns and restrictions, private equity and venture
capital   firms   remained   highly   active,   achieving   unprecedented   levels   of
investment and fundraising.  According to Invest  Europe  (2021)  research  the
amount of fundraising in Europe in 2021 reached an all-time high of €118 billion,
which is a 7% increase from the previous year's figure.  Additionally,  in  2021, the
total equity investment in European companies reached a level of  €138 billion,
which is a significant increase of 51% compared to the total of €91 billion recorded
in 2020.  A  total of 8,895 companies  received  these investments, which is 13%
higher than the average recorded in the previous five years.
       When looking  specifically  at the Swedish private equity industry during
the  pandemic,  SVCA's  (2021) report shows  an increase in funds raised from  50
billion  in 2019  to 70 billion SEK in 2020.  Year 2021 has been particularly strong
with SEK 185 billion raised by funds  which is  an increase of 166%  in 2021

                                   7
compared to 2020 and the largest fundraising to date.  During the initial stages of
the pandemic in 2020, the Swedish private equity market, like many other
markets in Europe, faced uncertainties and volatility due to the global economic
downturn.  However, the Swedish private equity  market began to recover as the
pandemic progressed, driven by various factors such as government support
packages  (White & Case LLP,  2020), low-interest rates, and  overall resilience in
the Nordic region's economy.
      In summary,  the Swedish private equity  market has demonstrated its
robustness and adaptability in the face of unprecedented challenges brought
about by the COVID-19 pandemic. Despite initial uncertainties and disruptions,
the sector has not only recovered but also thrived, achieving record-breaking
fundraising and investment levels. Its significance as a pivotal player in Sweden's
economic landscape, and its influence on a global scale, cannot be overstated and
is the motivation behind our belief  that  it is  meaningful to further extend the
existing research  focusing on Sweden  and its private equity  industry.

1.5. Sweden during COVID-19 crisis

       In this section, we want to briefly discuss the Swedish economy during the
COVID-19 crisis period and the several important initiatives that the Swedish
government implemented  in its efforts to reduce the severity of the  COVID-19
crisis impact on Swedish businesses  that in some ways  impact our research
findings later discussed.
       According to OECD (2022) data,  the  Swedish  economy's  GDP dropped
about 8% in the second  quarter of 2020 and around 3%  in  2020 due to several
restrictions introduced related to gathering, reduced mobility, as well as plant
closures.  The many initiatives the government implemented in order to reduce
the severity  of the pandemic crisis accounted  for almost 29% of the yearly GDP,
inclusive of loans and guarantees. These efforts comprised  8.5% of GDP in fiscal
measures during the 2020-21 period (OECD, 2021). Some of those support
programs for Swedish businesses included an increased short-time work scheme
subsidy. The subsidy, with a level during normal times of 33%, was set to 75% for
2020  and the first quarter of 2021 and 50% for the second quarter of 2021. The
maximum working hour cut, normally 60%, was increased to 80% during May-
July 2020 and  January-September 2021 meaning that with a 60% (80%)
reduction in working time, employees receive 92.5% (88%) of their wages and the
employer’s wage costs are reduced by 53% (72%). The new initiative also implies
that from January 2021, employers are eligible for financial support covering
60% of the cost of initiatives to develop or validate the competencies of employees
on reduced working hours (OECD, 2021). Another government support initiative
was reorientation support. According to OECD (2021) report this initiative
implies that between March 2020 and January 2021, businesses having lost a
sizeable share of their turnover (between 30% and 50% depending on the period
of the year) were eligible  for  reimbursement of a share of their fixed costs, up to
70% (with exceptions), subject to ceilings. On 20 January 2021, the government
announced that during the period of business closures imposed by the Pandemic
Act (which started on 10 January 2021), businesses are entitled to receive

                             8
compensation for up to 100% of fixed costs, up to a maximum of SEK 75 million
(EUR 7.4 million) per business and month.  Additional government support
included reduced employer social contributions from March to June 2020 with
only old-age pension contributions payable, for up to 30  persons per company
and up to a monthly salary of SEK 25 000 (EUR 2 470), providing monthly relief
of up to SEK 5 300 (EUR 525) per employee.
       Besides the government support,  there were several notable measures
(among many others) taken by the financial authorities during the crisis. The
central bank (Riksbank) introduced a programme for corporate lending via banks
that entailed that the Riksbank is providing long-term loans of up to SEK 500
billion at the repo rate, under certain conditions, against collateral to banks to
stimulate onward lending to Swedish non-financial companies. Additionally, the
Riksbank enhanced access to liquidity by offering banks the opportunity to
borrow at the repo rate an unlimited amount on a weekly basis against collateral
at three-  and six-month maturity. The Riksbank also reduced  the  overnight
lending rate to banks from +0.75% prior to the pandemic to a repo rate of + 0.10%
(OECD, 2021).
       In conclusion, the Swedish economy and its businesses faced significant
challenges during the COVID-19 crisis. However, the swift and substantial
response by the Swedish government and financial authorities, encompassing a
range of fiscal measures and support programs, played a critical role in mitigating
the pandemic's impact.  The analysis of these government responses provides
valuable insights for understanding the resilience of the Swedish economy in the
face of global  crises and  highlights the vital role of government support in
safeguarding businesses and stimulating economic recovery.  Several of  the
discussed  government initiatives  are  crucial  to understand in order to better
interpret our obtained results  which we will elaborate on  later in our research.

1.6. COVID-19 crisis compared to the Global Financial Crisis

       Before  discussing  our research  results,  we want to briefly  discuss  why the
COVID-19 crisis is  particularly different from the other crisis in the past,
especially  the Global Financial Crisis  as the implications are  important to
understand  the context of our results.  The COVID-19 crisis and  the Global
Financial Crisis of 2008 share similarities in that both had severe impacts on the
global economy, but they have major differences in their causes, consequences,
and  policy   responses.   While  the  GFC  originated  from   financial  market
vulnerabilities and the collapse of the housing market, the COVID-19 crisis
stemmed from a global pandemic that led to widespread economic disruptions.
       When compared to the Global Financial Crisis, COVID-19 crisis had a
more abrupt and severe impact on the European economy due to  entirely new
factors  companies  had  to  face,  such  as  widespread  lockdowns  and  social
distancing  measures,  which  caused  a  sharp  decline  in  economic  activity.
According to  Anabela M. Santos, Karel Haegeman, Pietro Moncada-Paternò-
Castello,  (2021)  during the 2008 economic crisis, European firms identified
access to financing and customer acquisition as the primary obstacles to business
activity. However, in  2020,  the initial year of the COVID-19 crisis, access  to

                               9
financing was deemed a less significant issue due to many new COVID-19-specific
factors, such as lockdowns,  travel  restrictions,  border closures, and disruptions
in  production  and  global  supply  chains,  as  well  as  logistical  bottlenecks.
Therefore, in the beginning of the COVID-19 crisis,  the second most critical issue
for EU firms was to attract new customers while facing demand as well as supply
shocks at the same time.
       The nature of this crisis required more direct fiscal support, leading to
unprecedented  stimulus  packages  from  European  governments  to  protect
businesses, employment,  and incomes. The ECB also introduced the Pandemic
Emergency Purchase Programme (PEPP) to support the economy through asset
purchases (European Central Bank, 2020). OECD (2020) report on the tax and
fiscal policy response to the Coronavirus Crisis finds that most OECD member
countries   have   introduced   similar   lending   programs   (such   as   tax   filing
extensions, tax payment deferrals, more flexible tax debt repayments, enhanced
tax refunds, enhanced loss offset  provisions etc.) as discussed in the analysis of
Brown, Martinsson,  and  Thomann (2021).  Ungku's  (2022) article noted that
Sweden  re-launched the  Global Financial Crisis  lending program in 2020  nearly
identical to the one introduced in 2009 but with a broader set of taxes eligible for
deferral, such as VAT.
      On the other hand,  the GFC  in Europe  was characterized by  a  banking
crisis, sovereign debt issues, and a prolonged recession, particularly affecting
countries like Greece, Spain, and Ireland. These countries experienced high levels
of public debt, which led to austerity measures, high unemployment, and social
unrest. The European Central Bank and other central banks implemented
monetary policies, such as  low-interest rates and quantitative easing, to stabilize
financial markets and facilitate economic recovery (European Central Bank,
2018). According to an article written by Fathin Ungku (2022) and research done
by Brown, Martinsson,  and  Thomann (2021) the  Global Financial  Crisis had a
severe effect on the Swedish economy. Even though the Swedish government had
introduced several support initiatives in order to lower the negative effects of the
crisis as previously discussed, it was concerned that the financial crisis had spilled
over to the real economy, constraining liquidity in otherwise healthy firms. Their
analysis found that during the peak of the Global Financial Crisis in April 2009,
more than 15% of Swedish firms reported a “considerably harder than normal”
access to finance and more than half of the  respondents said it was harder than
usual to access normal bank loans. In order to improve the situation, the Swedish
government introduced a program which allowed firms to postpone paying all
labor-related taxes and fees typically due at the end of each month. Such
payments included withheld personal income taxes, fees to cover employees’
social   security,   government-provided   healthcare   insurance   and   workers’
compensation. These payments were considered as a loan from the government
that came with a non-trivial interest rate at about 5.3% a year and the maximum
amount loaned amounted to approximately 9% of the firm’s annual total annual
wage bill. Worth noting that by focusing on a company's employment  taxes,
businesses could obtain liquidity from the policy regardless of their profitability.
Brown, Martinsson, and Thomann (2021) found that only around 6% of Swedish
companies took part in the government’s support program with manufacturing
and service firms being the most active ones. All the firms that participated in the

                                 10
program mostly shared common characteristics of being younger, generated less
internal cash flow, had lower cash buffers, had already used up a larger fraction
of their granted credit line and had high debt-to-asset ratios on  the  Global
Financial  Crisis horizon. To a surprise,  the results of the analysis showed that the
newly issued loan by the government in most cases was used to increase the firm’s
investment level instead of paying down the existing debt thus further increasing
the already large  leverage level.
       In summary, distinguishing the unique features of the COVID-19 crisis
from the Global Financial Crisis is of paramount importance. The pandemic-
induced economic disruption necessitated different business strategies and
policy responses,  with a shift in focus from access to financing to customer
acquisition under  unexpected supply and demand shock  circumstances. The
fiscal support extended during this period was unprecedented and instrumental
in   mitigating   the   crisis's   impact.   Recognizing   these   disparities   not   only
contextualizes our research findings but also  helps to  further  extend  the  existing
literature on company performance during  economic turmoils.

1.7. Overview of the main results

       In our research,  we focused on a sample of 99 Swedish companies that
underwent a leveraged buyout before the pandemic in 2020 and for which we
have financial data. We compared the financial performance and  investment
decisions of 99 PE-backed companies in the target group with 218 comparable
peer companies  in the control group using  the  difference-in-difference (DiD)
model. The control group companies were selected from the same industry as the
PE-backed firms and had comparable size, profitability, and leverage in 2019. The
control group follows a similar pre-pandemic trend as the target firms, meeting
the requirements of the DiD model which allows us to study the difference
between the two group companies' performance.
      We  based  our  paper  on  research  done  by  Bernstein,  Lerner,  and
Mezzanotti (2019) where they instead focused on the difference  between PE and
non-PE-backed company performance during the 2008 Global Financial Crisis.
Their  results  indicate  that  during  the  2008  crisis,  PE-backed  companies
decreased investments less than  their peers  did  and experienced greater  equity
and debt inflows, higher asset growth, and increased market share, with effects
being especially strong among financially constrained companies and those
whose PE investors had more resources in the beginning of the crisis. By using a
similar research approach used in Bernstein, Lerner,  and  Mezzanotti's  (2019)
paper, we aimed to extend their analysis by trying to understand if there is a
significant difference in the trend of PE-backed company performance and
investments compared to the control group during the pandemic years.
       The  main  results  show  that  investments  over  assets  for  PE-backed
companies increased during the pandemic years when compared to the control
group over the same period. The  coefficient of the variable  is significant and
creates around  5.3% increase in the investments over assets compared to the
control group.  Net  equity contribution over assets  could provide  insight into the
heightened  investments  observed in  PE-backed companies.  Amid COVID-19

                                        11
pandemic  net  equity contribution over assets was approximately 5.4% larger for
the target group when compared to the control group companies and it was
strongly  statistically  significant.  Next, the  findings indicate that private equity-
backed companies exhibit a larger  coefficient for net debt issuance over assets
when compared to the control group. This observed difference is both statistically
significant and  equates to a roughly  3.9% increase for  the  target group  in
comparison  to the control group during the pandemic  period. Similarly,  the  debt
over assets  ratio  increased  around 3.5% more for  PE-backed companies  and is
also statistically significant.  The interest rate on debt resulted in around 1.1%
increase for the target group during the pandemic years compared to the control
group, however,  the results were not statistically significant.
       We also analyzed operational performance variables for companies during
the pandemic years. Asset turnover decreased for the PE-backed companies
during the COVID-19 crisis period which is in line with the obtained results of
increased investments over assets. The asset turnover decrease is statistically
significant, and it amounts  to around 16.7%. We then find that asset  growth for
PE-backed companies has a statistically significant result of approximately 26.8%
increase over the control group during the pandemic years. That helps to explain
the decrease in  asset turnover for the target group companies. EBITDA over
revenue, however, did not result in a statistically significant difference between
the target and the control groups.
       In summary, our research  results  provide  evidence that private equity
ownership possibly  helps  companies to relax financial constraints during the
COVID-19 pandemic crisis by providing necessary capital injections and help
companies to maintain a desired investment level. Our analysis contributes to the
existing  research  on  private   equity  firms'  effect  on  companies’  financial
performance post-buyouts in normal times and during crisis periods.

2.  Data

2.1. Sample construction

      To  analyze  the  performance of PE-backed and non-PE-backed companies
during  the crisis, we use  four  different databases:  Mergermarket,  Capital IQ,
Retriever,  and Serrano.
      We start the data  collection process  by  obtaining information  from
Mergermarket  regarding  Swedish  companies  that have received backing  PE
groups  prior to  the  onset of the  COVID-19  pandemic. To ensure the accuracy of
the data, we conducted a search for private equity deals with a target geography
in Sweden, buyer sector in  “Venture Capital / Private Equity”, and completion
date  between  01/03/2010  and  01/03/2020.  Our  search  criteria  exclude
investments made by  venture capital, investment funds, and  family office  firms.
We  specifically  focus  on  companies  that  meet  the  following  criteria:  (1)
headquartered in Sweden at the time of the deal, (2) received a PE investment by
01/03/2020, and (3) did not experience an exit by the PE group throughout the

                                   12
COVID-19 crisis.  To determine the status of the transaction,  we  use  CapitalIQ,
Mergermarket and  Retriever  databases  to identify corporate events that qualify
as exits. These exits can take various forms, including (a) secondary buyouts
where only the PE owner changes, (b)  sale of the PE-backed firm to a non-PE
owner, (c) bankruptcy or financial restructuring,  (d)  sale to management, or (e)
Initial Public Offering (IPO). We did not exclude companies that have undergone
acquisition, IPO or other PE exit in 2022 as most companies in dataset have  not
realized 2022 results  and we’re not able to use these the data from this year in
our analysis. Our search criteria yielded 181 transactions during the defined focus
period.
       To ensure the accuracy and reliability of our data, we applied additional
filters to our sample by retaining only those firms with balance sheet and income
statement information in Retriever  database. We also associated each company
with its respective Swedish organization number, which enabled us to extract
financial information from the  Serrano  database  for the period from 2016 to
2021. The Serrano database is particularly useful for our study due to its reliable
presentation of data, including a single data entry per calendar year for each field
in the database and adjustments made for phenomena such as broken accounting
periods and short or long accounting periods. Furthermore, Sweden provides an
ideal setting for our study as limited companies are required to file annual reports
with  Bolagsverket  in accordance with current regulations. Unlike previous
studies that focused on medium-sized companies, we  included smaller firms in
our research as Swedish regulations mandate comprehensive financial reporting
for these businesses.  This approach  not only  introduces  a fresh outlook to the
current body of literature but also  ensures that our sample remains  diverse.
     We match the financial data of PE-backed companies with the financial
information of Swedish firms from the Serrano database.  Our study employs a
sample   selection   procedure   that   encompasses   companies   with   financial
statement data available from the years 2017  to 2021. Consequently, 104 firms
were excluded from our sample due to the unavailability of financial data for the
specified time frame.
       To steer clear of  company  policies  governed by regulation, we opted to
exclude  companies  operating  in  regulated  industries  such  as  Mining  and
quarrying (05-08), Electricity, gas, steam, and air conditioning supply (35),
Financial and insurance activities (64-65), certain segments of Real estate (68,
excluding three digit code equal to 683), and Public Administration (84), as
classified by the two-digit Swedish Standard Industrial Classification (SNI) code.
This approach aligns with the methodology used by Michaely and Roberts (2012)
and is a commonly used industry sample selection method in PE literature.

2.2. Empirical strategy

       To investigate the  influence of the financial crisis on the financial and
investment policies of PE-backed companies, a preferred approach would involve
comparing two identical companies during the crisis period, with the only
difference being the  presence or absence of PE backing. However, since such
companies do not exist, we employ a difference-in-differences methodology. This

                                   13
approach entails comparing PE-backed firms to a matched group of control
companies during the financial crisis period. We  first detail the process of
selecting  the  matched  firms  before  explaining  the  empirical  specification
employed.  Our methodological approach allows us to examine the effect of PE
backing on firms' responses to the financial crisis while controlling for other time-
varying factors that may influence the outcomes of interest. It is important to note
that   our   approach   does   not   entirely   eliminate   the   potential   impact   of
unobservable firm characteristics  differences between PE-backed and non-PE-
backed firms,  as discussed in detail later.

2.2.1.  Constructing a matched control group

       To assess the impact of PE operations, we adopt a matching approach that
compares companies that have undergone such transactions to similar firms
without PE backing. To identify an appropriate control group, we follow the
methodology of Boucly, Sraer, and  Thesmar (2011) and Bernstein, Lerner,  and
Mezzanotti  (2019), which involves selecting matching companies that satisfy the
following criteria: (1) belong to the same industry (two-digit SNI code) as the PE-
backed firm; (2) have total assets within a 40% range of the target firm; (3) have
firm leverage within a 50% range of the target firm; and (4) have ROA within a
20% range of the target firm on the onset of the  COVID-19 crisis.  We faced a
tradeoff between matching accuracy and the inclusion of as many control firms
as possible when selecting the brackets for total assets, firm leverage, and ROA.
As we widened the brackets to allow for a larger pool of control firms,  86  targets
were excluded due to the unavailability of a suitable match. If we had reduced the
brackets to 30% as done in the method used by Bernstein, Lerner, and Mezzanotti
(2019), the number of excluded targets would have increased, leading to a
substantial reduction in the sample size.
       If this screening returned more than three companies for a certain target
company, we calculated the Least Square Distance using the following equation:

                           2                         2                               2
      2     (𝑅𝑂𝐴𝑖  −  𝑅𝑂𝐴𝑗)     (𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑖  −  𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠𝑗)     (𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑖  −  𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑗)
   𝑑 𝑖𝑗  =                +                    +
                 σ𝑅𝑂𝐴                 σ𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠                     σ𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒

      We measured the distance between two firms, i and j, using the squared
                    /
distance metric (𝑑 01 ). Each accounting metric, such as return on assets (ROA),
total assets (Assets),  and  leverage (Leverage) was subscripted with  i and j,
respectively. We calculated the sample standard deviation (σ) for all the matched
companies for each treatment company. To ensure that each variable contributed
equally to the distance measure, we scaled the distance in each dimension by the
sample standard deviation of that variable. This approach prevented variables
with larger absolute values from having a greater influence on the distance
measure than variables with smaller absolute values. We then selected the closest
three neighbors to our treatment company. If a company in our treatment sample
didn’t match any companies using the criteria described above, we excluded it
from our data sample.

                                   14
       Overall, this procedure  is a more conservative version of  the  method used
by  Boucly, Sraer, and  Thesmar  (2011), since, similarly to  Bernstein, Lerner, and
Mezzanotti  (2019),  we added leverage in our matching process, however, we use
a wider matching bandwidth than  Bernstein, Lerner,  and  Mezzanotti  (2019)  to
avoid  a  significant decrease in our sample size.  We end up with 99 target PE-
backed firms and 218 control firms in the final  sample.
      For each firm  in the final sample, we extracted  income and financial
information from the Serrano database from 2016 to  2021 and  complemented it
with data from the Retriever database. To supplement the Serrano data, we
followed the method used by Bernstein, Lerner, and Mezzanotti (2019) by
including additional measures of firm activity for both control and treatment
groups. Specifically, we calculated investments as the  change in assets plus
reported depreciation, computed equity contributions as the change in equity
minus profit for the year, and estimated net debt issuance as the change in total
debt. We normalized these calculations by total assets and limited outliers by
winsorizing all data at 2%.

2.2.2. Data summary

       Table 1 displays the industry distribution of both the PE-backed firms and
the matched group in our test sample.  The largest proportion  of firms in our
sample are engaged in wholesale and retail  trade (26%), followed by the
information and communication (25%) and professional and technical activities
(17%) industries. Manufacturing and construction industries also account for a
significant  portion of the sample, at 11% and 8%, respectively. Notably, the
industry distribution of the PE-backed firms is highly similar to that of the control
group, which is a result of the matching procedure employed.
       In Table 2, we compare the characteristics of firms in the PE group and the
matched control group in 2019. The average firm in the sample is a mid-sized
firm with around mSEK 250 in revenue. Across the two groups, firms have very
similar profitability,  asset turnover,  ROA, investment, leverage, and  equity and
debt issuance. The only notable difference is that the control group companies
are  slightly larger than the PE-backed companies in terms of  revenue, however,
all differences are insignificant. Based on this matching procedure, it appears that
variations between the PE-backed,  and control groups are largely eliminated
when we examine companies within the same industry that have similar sizes,
leverage ratios, and profitability.
       As the main method employed in this paper is difference-in-differences
analysis, it is important to explore whether the assumption of pre-COVID-19
parallel trends holds. We check whether this assumption holds in the observables
by testing the significance of the mean difference in Table 3 for the firm one- and
two-year growth trends ending in 2019 for the relevant firm characteristics.

                                    15
Table 1: Industry distribution

                                PE sample          Matched sample            Total
                                       Share                 Share                 Share
                        N                N                N
                                      (%)                  (%)                  (%)

Construction                 6        6%         19       9%         25       8%

Entertainment & Recreation       3        3%          7        3%         10       3%

Finance & Real Estate           6        6%         10       5%         16       5%

Health & Education             2        2%          4        2%          6        2%
Information &
                             27       27%         52       24%         79       25%
Communication
Manufacturing                11       11%         25       11%         36       11%
Professional & Technical
                             19       19%         35       16%         54       17%
Activities
Transportation & Storage         3        3%          5        2%          8        3%

Wholesale & Retail Trade        22       22%         61       28%         83       26%

Total                       99       100%        218      100%        317      100%
This table provides the industry distribution of firms in each group. Columns ”PE sample” represents the
distribution of PE-backed firms in our test sample. Column ”Matched sample” represents the distribution
of all non-PE-backed firms our test sample.

Table  2: Firms’ characteristics in 2019

                               PE sample                Matched sample
                                                                    Mean
                      Mean   Median    SD       Mean    Median    SD
                                                                                                                         diff.

Revenue                  2.66      1.19      3.69        2.40      0.92      3.78        0.26

Asset turnover              1.54      1.48      1.23         1.61      1.40      1.32        -0.07

EBITDA/revenue           0.01      0.06      0.33        0.02      0.09      0.40        -0.01

ROA                     0.06      0.03      0.12        0.08      0.06      0.12        -0.02

Investment/assets          0.16      0.13      0.26        0.14      0.11      0.22        0.03
Net equity
                            -0.02      0.00      0.11        -0.04      0.00      0.12         0.02
contribution/assets
Net debt issuance/assets     0.10      0.08      0.21        0.07      0.04      0.18        0.04

Debt/assets               0.67      0.69      0.20        0.64      0.64      0.20        0.03

Interest rate on debt         0.02      0.01      0.03        0.02      0.00      0.03        0.01

Table 2 reports the summary statistics of sample firms in 2019 across treated (PE-backed companies) and
nontreated firms (non-PE-backed  companies). The last column reports the mean difference across the
two groups. Level variables are in hundred-millions SEK. The appendix provides more information about
the variable definitions. * denotes significance at the 1% level.

                                  16
 Table 3: Firms’ trends in 2019

                                PE sample                Matched sample
                                                                     Mean
                       Mean   Median     SD       Mean   Median     SD
                                                                                                                           diff.
 1-year growth

 Revenue                 0.15      0.10      0.33        0.16      0.07       0.35          0

 Asset turnover             0.00      -0.01      0.26         0.03      0.01       0.26         -0.03

 EBITDA/revenue           -0.51      -0.14      1.82         0.01      0.02       1.67         -0.51

 ROA                     -0.27      -0.16      5.15         0.53      0.04       4.49         -0.8

 Investment/assets          0.46      -0.09      2.80         0.64      0.08       2.54         -0.18
 Net equity
                           83.01     0.06     1,369.16      56.69     0.05     1,560.80       26.32
 contribution/assets
 Net debt issuance/assets     1.18      -0.12      5.35         1.60      0.12       5.08         -0.42

 Debt/assets               0.04      0.01      0.20        0.02      0.01       0.21         0.02

 2-year growth

 Revenue                 0.41      0.24      0.66        0.33      0.19       0.63         0.08

 Asset turnover             0.07      -0.05      0.54         0.11      0.03       0.51         -0.04

 EBITDA/revenue           -0.37      -0.12      1.50        -0.06      0.05       1.74         -0.31

 ROA                     -0.32      -0.54      4.47         0.65      0.01       5.27         -0.97

 Investment/assets          1.78      0.05      6.48         2.05      -0.16       6.77         -0.28
 Net equity
                           358.20     0.93     3,147.12      -713.57     0.07     13,135.58     1071.77
 contribution/assets
 Net debt issuance/assets     1.65      0.21      5.66        1.47      -0.11      5.82         0.19

 Debt/assets               0.07      0.01      0.31        0.05      0.01       0.31         0.01

 Table 3 reports the 1-  and the 2-year growth as a percentage increase in the characteristics in 2019. The
 last column reports the mean difference across the two groups. The appendix provides more information
 about the variable definitions. * denotes significance at the 1% level.

      The results show that the growth rates between the two groups are not
significantly different from  zero across all metrics. Figures  A.1., A.2.,  A.3., A.4.,
A.5., A.6. graphically present similar patterns. In these figures, both PE group and
control firms follow similar trends in the years leading to the crisis, which
alleviates concerns that PE-backed companies were outperforming the control
group before the crisis. As we discuss below, our estimates are consistent with the
assumption of parallel trends between treated and control groups during the
period leading to the crisis, the main identification assumption in our difference-
in-differences design  according  to Angrist and Pischke (2008).

                                     17
2.2.3. Empirical strategy

       Our research utilizes panel data from  2017-2019 to establish a baseline
model, which is then compared to data from the years 2020-2021, during the
Covid-19 crisis. The  decision to begin our analysis in 2020 was based on the
widespread impact of the  COVID-19  pandemic on the global economy that  year.
We define the following equation:

                𝑦02  =  𝛼2  +  𝛼0  +  𝛽3(𝑃𝐸  𝑓𝑖𝑟𝑚  ∗  𝐶𝑅𝐼𝑆𝐼𝑆)  +  𝜃𝑋02  +  𝜀02,

where  y45  is an outcome variable measured for company i at time t, (𝛼5, 𝛼4)  is  a set
of company and year fixed effects, PE firm is a dummy for the companies that are
backed by PE investors, and CRISIS is a dummy for the period from 2020 to 2021.
We also incorporate a set of firm-specific covariates  X45  into our model. To
account for potential clustering at the firm level, we use the approach of Bertrand,
Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004)  to cluster standard errors.
       To ensure a more causal interpretation of our results, we incorporate firm
fixed effects to eliminate time-invariant differences between the treatment and
control groups. However, the validity of our findings relies on the parallel trend
assumption, which assumes that the  behavior of PE-backed companies would
have followed a similar trajectory to non-PE-backed companies in the absence of
the COVID-19 crisis. We address this assumption by examining pre-shock trends,
thereby assessing whether the groups exhibited similar patterns prior to the onset
of the crisis. By doing so, we aim to strengthen the robustness of our analysis and
provide greater confidence in the causal  inference of our results.
       First, it is important to acknowledge that our treatment and control groups
exhibit considerable similarity in terms of observable characteristics. Both groups
have identical industry distributions and display similar levels of profitability,
investment, and leverage, as previously discussed. Additionally, the pre-crisis
growth rates of both PE and non-PE companies are comparable, as demonstrated
in Table 3. To  further  support the parallel trend assumption, we  can formally
evaluate  the time-varying behavior of the treatment effects for the  primary
outcomes  of our study  with the following equation:

                    𝑦02  =  𝛼2  +  𝛼0  +  𝛴𝛽6(𝑃𝐸  𝑓𝑖𝑟𝑚)  +  𝜃𝑋02  +  𝜀02,

where  we estimate different values of the parameter  βk for each year before the
COVID-19 crisis.  This allows us to examine the time-varying behavior of the
treatment effect and evaluate  whether the parameter  βk is capturing the causal
effect of the crisis on private equity firms or simply a differential trend between
the two groups. If the effect of private equity is indeed being correctly captured
by  βk, we would expect it to be  insignificant  before  the onset of the crisis.  In the
robustness  section, we will present supporting evidence for this argument.
       We include  two additional measures to further reinforce the analysis.
Firstly, to account for the differences in key characteristics among firms before
the crisis, we introduce controls for firm size (revenue's logarithm), revenue
growth, profitability (ROA), and leverage. To avoid any endogeneity concerns

                                  18
with controls, we measure these variables in 2019 and then interact them with
the  Crisis dummy, enabling them to have varying impacts around the shock.
These controls also address any concerns regarding any observable imbalances
across treatment and control groups before 2020.
       Secondly, we add a complete set of time-varying industry fixed effects to
test the robustness of the primary results. These fixed effects account for changes
in industry demand and other industry considerations around the financial crisis.
We specifically interact industry fixed effects with the Crisis dummy.

2.2.4. Limitations of the method

      We must recognize a significant limitation in our matching approach and
methodology, as PE transactions are not exogenous occurrences. For example, PE
funds may be inclined to invest in companies exhibiting distinct qualitative
attributes, which could potentially result in a correlation between PE backing and
unobservable firm quality. This hidden elevated firm quality may contribute to
the increased resilience of these companies during the COVID crisis.
       While controlling for pre-crisis characteristics, as done in this study,
alleviates this issue to some extent, it is impossible to definitively eliminate all
unobservable differences in firms  that may have influenced the PE group's
decision to acquire a specific company. The observed differences between the two
groups that appear precisely on the onset of the crisis are reassuring; however,
lacking  a reliable  source of exogenous variation in  the likelihood  of  deal
involvement, our findings may be prone to endogeneity bias. As a result, the
results presented in this study should be regarded as descriptive rather than
causal.

3.  Regression analysis

3.1. Investment and funding

      We  decided to  analyze  the private equity  firm  effect on their backed
companies  by looking at the change in  two  types of variables:  Investments and
performance-based.  First,  we  look at the  investment  variables.  In  Column  1  of
Table 4,  we  look  at the  investment and funding policies'  differences  for the PE-
backed companies and the control group in the pandemic years 2020  and 2021.
The results show that during the pandemic period  the  coefficient of  investments
made at the PE-backed companies have been larger when compared to the control
group. This  difference  portrayed  in the results is  statistically significant  and
amounts to around 5.3%.  Bernstein, Lerner,  and  Mezzanotti (2019)  completed  a
similar  analysis,  however,  their research  centered  around  the 2008 Global
Financial Crisis. They find that PE-backed companies decreased investments less
than non-PE-backed companies around the crisis  period  which is  similar  to our
results.  Another  previously completed study  by  Sraer and Thesmar (2011)
analyzed  the change in corporate  behavior  following a leveraged buyout  and

                                   19
found that  three  years after  becoming  PE-owned, companies  issued  additional
debt  and increased  capital  expenditures.  Even though we  have not  specifically
analyzed the difference in the level of capital expenditures for the PE-backed and
non-PE-backed companies  it  somewhat  supports our results  that private equity
ownership  possibly  creates value by helping  companies  to maintain  a desired
level  of  investments.  However, research  done  by  Kaplan  (1989)  finds that  three
years after a management buyout of public companies they experience a decrease
in capital expenditure and an increase in net cash flow which possibly contradicts
our result for  increased investment level. Important to note that the  previously
completed research  that we are  referring  to has been completed  much earlier  in
different market conditions and specifically focusing on capital expenditures, not
investment  level.
       Next,  we want to understand  what might have contributed to  the  higher
investments  for the PE-backed companies.  Several research  papers, such  as
Cohn, Hotchkiss, and Towery (2022)  and Sraer and  Thesmar (2011)  have
provided evidence  that  private equity firms  help their portfolio companies  by
relaxing  financial  constraints  either by injecting additional capital or  securing
debt financing  from banks  thus  allowing  companies  to  take advantage of
unexploited growth opportunities.  Ivashina  and  Kovner (2011)  in their research
show that private equity firms tend to have strong relationships with banks which
makes  it easier for  PE-backed  companies  to  secure financing  from credit
institutions during economic crisis periods.  In order to  understand the  high
coefficient of  investment level for PE-backed companies  during the pandemic
compared to the control  group  we  need to look at  the differences in  both the
equity contributions and debt issuance  between the target and control  group
companies. During the pandemic years, the results portray that the coefficient for
equity contribution over assets for the target group was larger when compared to
the control group of non-PE-backed companies amounting to approximately
5.4% difference between the two groups. This effect in Column 2, Table 4 is not
only statistically significant  but also large in economic magnitude.  Next, the
results in Column 3, Table 4 show that the net debt issuance over assets  is
approximately 3.9%  higher for the PE-backed companies than for the control
group  and the result is statistically significant.  Similarly,  in  Column 4, Table 4
debt over assets is also  larger for the target group when compared to the control
group.  The difference  in debt to assets ratio  between the two groups amounts to
3.5% and is statistically significant. The obtained results are in line with the prior
research findings  that  indicate that  private equity firms support companies  with
both equity injections and securing debt financing during crisis periods. Next, we
try to understand  whether  the difference in  the  cost of debt  is  significant and
could have possibly  been  one of the reasons  for  the increased debt ratio.  In
column 5, Table 4, however, we see that the result for the  difference in interest
rate  for  the  PE-backed  and  non-PE-backed  companies  is  not  statistically
significant implying that the cost of debt does not have a notable difference in the
pandemic period for PE-backed and non-PE-backed companies.
       In conclusion,  these  findings  show that  private equity firms  do support
their portfolio companies  in  maintaining  high investment level  by  relaxing
financial constraints during the pandemic  both by  providing equity  and debt
injections.

                             20
 Table 4: Investment and funding policies
                                              (2)              (3)
                            (1)                                                     (4)               (5)
                                        Equity         Net debt
                  Investment/assets                                     Debt/assets     Interest rate
                                          contr./assets      iss./assets

                       0.053**           0.054***         0.039*          0.035**          0.011
 PE x CRISIS
                          (0.049)             (0.001)           (0.076)           (0.014)           (0.441)

 Year fixed
                      Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 effects

 Firm fixed
                      Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 effects

 Firm controls         Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes

 Observations         1,585            1,585          1,585          1,585          1,585

 Adjusted R-
                      0.134            0.351          0.076          0.749          0.352
 squared

 Table 4 reports the estimates of a  difference-in-differences fixed effects model on the investment and
 funding variables. All specifications include firm and year fixed effects. The main parameter of interest is
 the interaction between the Crisis dummy and PE-backed company dummy variable.  All specifications
  include a set of firm-level controls measured before the crisis and interacted with the Crisis dummy. These
 variables include firm size (log of revenue), growth in revenue, ROA, and leverage. In Column 1 the
 outcome is investment scaled by assets; in Column 2 the outcome is net equity contribution over assets;
 in Column 3 the outcome is the net debt issuance scaled by assets; in Columns 4 the outcome is the total
 leverage; and in Columns 5 the outcome is average interest rate. Standard errors are clustered at the firm
 level.   The appendix provides more information about the variable definitions. Standard errors are
 clustered at the firm level. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10%
  level.

3.2. Operational performance

       In the previous section, we learned that the PE-firms have a positive effect
on  companies’ ability to maintain a high investment level. Now, we want to
examine  whether  this effect  might  also result  in increased company  operational
performance.
      In Column 1, Table 5  we  can see that the  result for the  asset turnover
coefficient  during the pandemic period  is  negative implying that  PE-backed
companies  experienced a lower asset turnover when compared  to their peer
group. The result is statistically significant and amounts to  a negative  16.7%
difference between the two groups.  That is in line with  the  asset growth variable
in Column 2, Table  5.  The results show that the  asset growth  coefficient  for PE-
backed companies during 2020 and 2021 is positive which would possibly explain
the lower asset turnover for PE-backed companies.  The  coefficient  for  asset
growth for  PE-backed companies  during the COVID-19 crisis was  26.8%  higher
than  for the non-PE-backed companies  and it is a statistically significant result.
Bernstein, Lerner, and Mezzanotti's (2019) analysis shows similar findings of PE-
backed firms’ assets growing  faster than those of the matched firms.
       When looking at the operational performance ratio EBITDA over revenue,
our  and Bernstein,  Lerner,  and  Mezzanotti's  (2019)  analysis did not produce a

                                   21
statistically significant result  neither  during the pandemic years  or during the
Global Financial Crisis.

 Table 5: Performance analysis
                                         (1)                         (2)                         (3)
                             Asset turnover           Asset growth          EBITDA/revenue

                                        -0.167**                      0.268*                       -0.038
 PE x CRISIS
                                       (0.013)                      (0.053)                      (0.184)

 Year fixed effects                Yes                   Yes                   Yes
 Firm fixed effects                Yes                   Yes                   Yes
 Firm controls                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
 Observations                   1,585                  1,585                  1,585
 Adjusted R-squared              0.914                  0.016                  0.710

  Table 5  reports the estimates of a difference-in-differences fixed effects model on the performance variables. All
 specifications include firm and year fixed effects. The main parameter of interest is the interaction between the
 Crisis dummy and PE-backed company  dummy variable. All specifications include a set of firm-level controls
  measured before the crisis and interacted with the Crisis dummy. These variables include firm size (log of revenue),
  growth in revenue, ROA, and leverage. In Column 1 the outcome is asset turnover; in Column 2 the outcome is 1-
 year assets growth; in Column 3 is the total EBITDA scaled by revenue. Standard errors are clustered at the firm
  level. The appendix provides more information about the variable definitions. Standard errors are clustered at the
  firm level. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.

3.4. Heterogeneity

      The analysis so far supports the notion that PE can aid in financial turmoil
by alleviating the financial constraints encountered by their portfolio companies.
To further  analyze  this hypothesis,  we examine the situation of financially
constrained firms through several measures that serve as proxies for financing
constraints. We focus  on the differences across firms in size and leverage.
       First, we analyze the impact of PE backing between large and small firms
as the effects of financial crisis  are passed on  to  firms through credit contraction,
which particularly negatively affects the investment decisions of smaller  firms
according to Bottero, Lenzu, and Mezzanotti (2015). We determine large firms by
identifying  those with net sales at the top 20% of the distribution in  2019, which
serves as the final year in our pre-shock period, while  the remaining firms are
classified as small.  Based on  the results presented in Panel A of Table 6, we
observe that the only statistically significant difference between big and small
firms is related to the EBITDA/revenue measure. Specifically, we find that the
decline in EBITDA/revenue  was more pronounced for larger companies,  which
contrasts with the findings reported in Bottero, Lenzu, and Mezzanotti's (2015)
literature.   This   discrepancy   may   arise   from   differences   in   the   crisis's
characteristics or the industry distribution of the larger firms in our sample. If big
firms were disproportionately concentrated in industries that were particularly
vulnerable to supply chain disruptions during the  COVID-19  crisis, this would
manifest in our results as a larger decrease in EBITDA/revenue for these  firms.
This is  partly mitigated by the inclusion of industry control  variables,  however,

                               22
these findings still offer insightful implications for future research in this area. By
way  of  contrast,  EBITDA/revenue  developed  similarly  for  all  PE-backed
companies. Another interesting observation is that the interaction variable of PE
with the crisis and size dummy is significant  and negative in asset growth. This
indicates that the positive effect of private equity on  asset growth is stronger
among small firms.  However, all other  operational  variables are insignificant,
indicating that there is no clear difference between  the effect of private equity  on
small and large firms.  According to the results presented  in Panel A of Table  7,
we  observe that there are  also  no  significant  variations in the investment and
funding of firms between small and large firms.
       The second  measure we consider for assessing financial constraints  is a
firm's leverage. In general,  companies with  high leverage tend to have limited
financial leeway and are more susceptible to increased default risks, resulting in
a higher debt cost. Consequently, they are more vulnerable during unexpected
credit market fluctuations.  To  determine high  leverage firms, we use leverage  in
2019 as a benchmark and categorize firms with the top 20% of  the  highest
leverage as high leverage firms.  The outcomes presented in Panel B of Table  6
reveal that there are no differences in  the operational performance of firms  with
different leverage levels. Conversely, Panel B of  Table  7  discloses that firms with
high leverage exhibit  significantly  lower debt issuance compared to firms with
low leverage.  Moreover, highly leveraged companies  experience a slightly higher
net equity contribution during the crisis. However, these variations between
highly leveraged firms and firms with low leverage are absent when PE backs the
firms during the crisis.
       Our  findings are somewhat contrary to the  results obtained by  Bernstein,
Lerner, and Mezzanotti (2019),  which suggest that  the positive effect of PE on
investments  was stronger among firms that were more likely to be financially
constrained.  When it comes  to firm size being the  constraining  factor,  one
difference  in our  research results could stem from the fact that  our sample
selection generally includes smaller firms due to the accessibility of financial data
for small companies in  the  Swedish setting  compared to  the UK  setting where
Bernstein, Lerner, and Mezzanotti (2019)  was conducted.  Thus, when defining
the  dummy variable BIG,  we  select  smaller  firms  compared to the previous
research.  However,  these differences  in  our research  also provide interesting
results for  further potential analysis on  the  impact that PE-backing has on  the
likelihood of receiving  government  support.  As  introduced  in  section  1.6.  of this
paper,  the firms that  participate  in  government  support  programs during  crisis
shared common  characteristics  of being financially constrained  according to
Brown, Martinsson,  and  Thomann (2021).  In the face of these  findings, it is
important to recall  that in section 1.6, we delineated the unique nature of the
COVID-19  crisis,  which  necessitated  exceptional  stimulus  packages  from
European governments and the implementation of the Pandemic Emergency
Purchase   Programme   (PEPP)   by   the   European   Central   Bank   (2020).
Consequently, it may be worthwhile to broaden the scope of the investigation and
explore  the  possibility  that  financially  constrained  firms  and  their  non-
constrained   counterparts   exhibit   no   discernible   differences,   particularly
concerning the private equity effect, as these differences may have been mitigated

                               23
by substantial government support specifically aimed at financially constrained
firms during the COVID-19 pandemic.

 Table  6: Heterogeneity across firms’ financial constraints
                                         (1)                         (2)                         (3)
 Panel A
                             Asset turnover           Asset growth          EBITDA/revenue

                                         -0.003                       0.180                      -0.055**
 CRISIS x BIG
                                       (0.966)                      (0.229)                      (0.032)

                                         -0.234                       -0.349*                       0.052
 PE x CRISIS x BIG
                                       (0.140)                      (0.082)                      (0.209)

 Year fixed effects                 Yes                   Yes                   Yes
 Firm fixed effects                Yes                   Yes                   Yes
 Firm controls                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
 Observations                   1,585                  1,585                  1,585
 Adjusted R-squared              0.915                  0.015                  0.710

 Panel B                         (1)                    (2)                    (3)

 CRISIS x High                      0.016                      -0.052                      0.016
 Leverage                          (0.812)                    (0.802)                    (0.706)

 PE x CRISIS x High                0.006                     -0.069                     -0.053
 Leverage                          (0.980)                    (0.786)                    (0.544)

 Year fixed effects                Yes                   Yes                   Yes
 Firm fixed effects                Yes                   Yes                   Yes
 Firm controls                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
 Observations                   1,585                  1,585                  1,585
 Adjusted R-squared              0.914                  0.015                  0.710

 Table  6  reports  results  of  standard  difference-in-difference  fixed  effects  model  and  repeat  the
 specification of Table 5 in exploring the effect of pandemic and PE on firms with heterogeneous financial
 constraints in 2019. All specifications include firm, year, and industry fixed effect. Panel A  investigates
 interacted effect with business size. BIG is a dummy variable equal to one of the firm’s net sales in the
 year 2019 is in the top 20% and zero otherwise. Panel B investigates interacted effect with firms’ leverage.
 High Leverage is the dummy variable that describes firms’ leverage that will equal one if the firm’s
 leverage is in the top 20%, and  zero otherwise.  All specifications include a set of firm-level controls
 measured before the crisis and interacted with the Crisis dummy. These variables include firm size (log of
 revenue), growth in revenue, ROA, and leverage. In Column 1 the outcome is asset turnover; in Column
 2 the outcome is 1-year assets growth; in Column 3 is the total EBITDA scaled by revenue. Standard errors
 are clustered at the firm level. The appendix provides more information about the variable definitions.
 Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level,
 and * at the 10% level.

                               24
Table  7: Heterogeneity across firms’ financial constraints
                                            (2)              (3)
                          (1)                                                     (4)               (5)
Panel A                              Equity        Net debt
                 Investment/assets                                     Debt/assets     Interest rate
                                        contr./assets      iss./assets

                          0.044               -0.007             0.018             -0.011            -0.033
CRISIS x BIG
                         (0.197)             (0.706)           (0.459)           (0.554)           (0.501)

PE x CRISIS x          -0.064               0.002            -0.039            -0.030            0.051
BIG                   (0.303)             (0.937)           (0.424)           (0.367)           (0.310)

Year fixed
                     Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
effects

Firm fixed
                     Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
effects

Firm controls         Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes

Observations         1,585            1,585          1,585          1,585          1,585

Adjusted R-
                     0.136            0.350          0.075          0.750          0.352
squared

Panel B               (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)

CRISIS x
                         -0.040              0.020*          -0.080***          -0.001             0.017
High
                         (0.231)             (0.098)           (0.004)           (0.919)           (0.206)
Leverage
PE x CRISIS x
                         -0.006               0.028            -0.025            0.023             0.007
High
                         (0.934)             (0.494)           (0.671)           (0.463)           (0.725)
Leverage

Year fixed
                     Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
effects

Firm fixed
                     Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
effects

Firm controls         Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes

Observations         1,585            1,585          1,585          1,585          1,585

Adjusted R-
                     0.136            0.352          0.085          0.749          0.352
squared

Table 7 reports results of standard difference-in-difference fixed effects model and repeat the specification
of Table 7 in exploring the effect of pandemic and PE on firms with heterogeneous financial constraints
in 2019. All  specifications include firm, year, and industry fixed effect. Panel A investigates interacted
effect with business size. BIG is a dummy variable equal to one of the firm’s net sales in the year 2019 is
in the top 20% and zero otherwise. Panel B investigates interacted effect with firms’ leverage. High
Leverage is the dummy variable that describes firms’ leverage that will equal one if the firm’s leverage is
in the top 20%, and zero otherwise. All specifications include a set of firm-level controls measured before
the crisis and interacted with the Crisis dummy. These variables include firm size (log of revenue), growth
in revenue, ROA, and leverage. In Column 1 the outcome is investment scaled by assets; in Column 2 the
outcome is net equity contribution over assets; in Column 3 the outcome is the net debt issuance scaled
by assets; in Columns 4 the outcome is the total leverage; and in Columns 5 the outcome is average interest
rate. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. The appendix provides more information about the
variable definitions. Standard errors are clustered  at the firm level. *** denotes significance at the 1%
level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.

                               25
3.5. Robustness and limitations

       The first  concern that we address is the possibility that PE-backed
companies’  and the control group companies’  industries may respond differently
to concurrent changes in demand during the crisis. In general, this should not be
a concern since we matched our PE group with the control group within the same
two-digit  SNI industries, however, due to  the  limited availability of control
companies,  some  PE-backed  companies  were  matched  with  more  control
companies than others, resulting in slight differences in the industry distribution
between the  two groups.  To address this concern, we included a set of industry
fixed effects, which were interacted with the  Crisis  dummy, to further control for
variations in demand and other time-varying industry characteristics, which
could be especially  relevant  during the supply and demand shocks  throughout
COVID-19 crisis. We have presented the results of these  tests in Table  A.2.  and
A.3.  Despite the introduction of  the  fixed effects, our primary results remain
consistent. The estimates are similar in size and  statistical significance to those
reported in the main text.
       Next, we test the robustness of our results by using different firm controls
to ensure the validity of our findings. In this case, we have previously used size,
growth in revenue, ROA, and leverage measured before the crisis in 2019 and
interacted with the Crisis dummy as our firm controls. However, we have now
incorporated new firm controls  to capture the heterogeneity across firms along
important characteristics one year before each test year, including lagged one
year of firm leverage, lagged one year of log of net sales, and relative one-year net
sales growth.  After presenting  the results in Table  A.4.and  A.5.,  we can confirm
that our primary findings remain consistent despite the introduction of new firm
controls. The estimated effects are of a similar magnitude and level of statistical
significance as those reported in the main body of our research. These results
indicate  that  the  inclusion  of  different  firm  controls  has  not  altered  the
conclusions drawn from our analysis.
       Finally, to the extent possible, we address the concern that firms in the PE-
backed  group  exhibit  elevated  firm  quality  that  would  prevent  us  from
establishing  a  causal relationship between PE  backing during  crisis  and firm
performance.  The chosen matching procedure, robust standard errors along with
inclusion of control variables and firm fixed effects should to a high degree elevate
these concerns. However, we go one step further  and examine the  differences in
the variable development pre-crisis.  In tables A.6. and A.7., where  the main
parameter of interest is the interaction between individual years before the crisis
and  the PE-backed company dummy variable, we can observe that  differences in
investment  and  main operational variables of concern do not appear to  be
significant.  With this,  we confirm  that the impact of private equity  remains
insignificant before the pandemic, which strengthens the causal interpretation of
our  results.  At the same time, this  only elevates the concern  of differences
between the two groups in the observable firm  characteristics.  This leads us  to
the  main  limitation of our study  and  the  study  done  by  Bernstein, Lerner, and
Mezzanotti (2019) which relates to the allocation of PE backing and unobservable
firm  characteristics.  As previously expounded upon in the discourse concerning
the constraints of our empirical approach, we recognize that PE transactions are

                               26
not exogenous  occurrences.  Companies backed by PE might be chosen on the
basis of distinct qualitative  characteristics, leading  to  correlation between PE
backing and unobservable firm quality differences. This could impede our ability
to establish a causal inference regarding the effects of PE  backing and  the  firm
financial  performance  during  the  crisis.  To  further  explore  the  possible
differences in  the unobservable firm  characteristics, a possible next step would
be to conduct a thorough qualitative analysis of the firms in the PE-backed group
and the  practices of PE general managers. This analysis could involve surveys or
interviews with PE general managers, as well as consultations with industry
experts, to identify any significant differences in the unobservable characteristics
of these firms  and possible  managerial  and funding  decisions  during  the  crisis
that could  have led  to the positive differences  in funding and operational metrics
between the PE-backed and non-PE-backed groups.

3.6. Conclusion

       In   this  paper,  we   examined  how   PE-backed  companies’   financial
performance,  investments  and funding policies  differed during the COVID-19
crisis  when  compared  to  a  control  group  of  non-PE-backed  companies.
Understanding the impact of private equity on firms during crisis periods, and
specifically during the COVID-19 crisis, is critical for several reasons. The
unprecedented nature of the pandemic and its ripple effects throughout the
global economy have put to test the resilience of PE-backed firms. Therefore, the
performance of these firms during this period can offer valuable insights into the
role of private equity in crisis management, the effectiveness of their strategies,
and their potential to foster economic recovery.
       Our analysis reveals that throughout the turbulent years of 2020 and 2021,
companies backed by private equity were able to sustain elevated investment
levels, asset growth, and lower asset turnover when benchmarked against a
control group of non-PE-backed companies. Similarly, the issuance of debt and
equity infusions were also noticeably higher among PE-backed firms, reinforcing
the perspective that private equity ownership plays a pivotal role in mitigating
financing constraints. Interestingly, despite the contrasting nature of the COVID-
19 crisis and the 2008 financial crisis,  marked by unique challenges such as
government-imposed  distancing  measures  during  the  former,  our  findings
remain consistent with those of Bernstein, Lerner, and Mezzanotti's 2019 study
on the 2008 crisis. This congruity underscores the resilience and adaptability
inherent in private equity-backed firms across varied crisis environments.
       Our main objective of  this research was to understand  whether  private
equity ownership  increased the fragility of the economy during this  pandemic
period or helped companies to get through the economic turmoil of the pandemic
as found by  the research conducted by  Bernstein, Lerner,  and  Mezzanotti (2019)
thus  further  extending the scope of their analysis.  Additionally,  our  aim  was  to
contribute with our  research  result  implications  to the existing literature on the
Swedish private equity  market both during normal times and in crisis  periods.

                                27
References

Adrian Blundell-Wignall. (2007). The Private Equity Boom: Causes and Policy
Issues. Financial Market Trends, 2007(1), 59–86. https://doi.org/10.1787/fmt-
v2007-art4-en

Santos, A. M., Haegeman, K., & Moncada-Paternò-Castello, P. (2021). The
impact of  Covid-19 and of the earlier crisis on firms’ innovation and growth: A
comparative analysis. European Commission. https://joint-research-
centre.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2021-06/jrc125490.pdf

Angrist, J., & Pischke, J.  -S. (2008).  Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An
Empiricist's Companion.  Princeton  University Press,  5(2), 169-182.
https://rb.gy/6zg2b

Bernstein, Lerner, J., & Mezzanotti, F. (2019).  Private Equity and Financial
Fragility during the Crisis. The Review of Financial Studies, 32(4), 1309–1373.
https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhy078

Bernstein, Lerner, J., Sorensen, M., & Strömberg, P. (2017).  Private Equity and
Industry Performance. Management Science, 63(4), 1198–1213.
https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2015.2404

Bernstein, S., &  Sheen, A. (2016). The operational consequences of private
equity buyouts: Evidence from the restaurant industry. Review of Financial
Studies,  29(9), 2387-2418.  https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhw037

Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., & Mullainathan, S. (2004). “How Much Should We
Trust Differences-in Differences Estimates?”.  The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 119(1), 249–275. https://doi.org/10.1162/003355304772839588

Bottero, M., Lenzu, S., & Mezzanotti, F. (2020). Sovereign debt exposure and
the bank lending channel: Impact on credit supply and the real economy.
Journal of  International Economics,  126, 103328.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinteco.2020.103328

Boucly, Q., Sraer, D., & Thesmar, D. (2011). “Growth LBOs”. Journal of
Financial Economics, 102(2), 432–453.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2011.05.014

Brown, M., Martinsson, G., & Thomann, C. (2021). Government lending in a
crisis.  Journal of Corporate Finance,  71, 102116.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcorpfin.2021.102116

Capolaghi, L., & Rech, S. (2022).  European Private Equity snapshot at the end
of 2021.  EY.  Retrieved from  https://www.ey.com/en_lu/private-
equity/european-private-equity-snapshot-at-the-end-of-2021

                              28
Cohn, J. B., Hotchkiss, E. S., & Towery, E. M. (2022). Sources of Value Creation
in Private Equity Buyouts of Private Firms.  Review of Finance,  26(2), 257-285.
https://doi.org/10.1093/rof/rfac005

Copenhagen Economics. (2019).  Economic footprint of Swedish venture
capital.  Retrieved from
https://www.copenhageneconomics.com/dyn/resources/Publication/publicatio
nPDF/4/494/1558009849/economic-footprint-of-swedish-venture-capital-
may-2019.pdf

Davis, S., Haltiwanger, J., Handley, K., Jarmin, R., Lerner, J., & Miranda, J.
(2014).  Private equity, jobs, and  productivity.  American Economic Review,
104(12), 3956-3990.  https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.104.12.3956

European Central Bank. (2018). The financial crisis 10 years on: what has
changed? Retrieved from
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2018/html/ecb.sp180917.en.html

European Central Bank. (2020). ECB announces €750 billion Pandemic
Emergency Purchase Programme (PEPP). Retrieved from
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2020/html/ecb.pr200318_1~3949d
6f266.en.html

EY. (2022). European Private Equity snapshot at the end of 2021.  Retrieved
from  https://www.ey.com/en_lu/private-equity/european-private-equity-
snapshot-at-the-end-of-2021

Invest Europe (2020).  Investing in Europe: Private Equity Activity 2020.
Retrieved from  https://www.investeurope.eu/media/4004/investing-in-
europe_private-equity-activity_2020_invest-europe_final.pdf

Invest Europe (2021). Investing in Europe: Private Equity Activity 2021.
Statistics on fundraising, Investments, & Divestments. Retrieved from
https://www.investeurope.eu/media/5184/invest-europe-activity-data-report-
2021.pdf

Ivashina, & Kovner, A. (2011). The Private Equity Advantage: Leveraged Buyout
Firms and Relationship Banking. The Review of Financial Studies, 24(7), 2462–
2498.  https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhr024

Johnson, S. A., Ryan, H. E., Jr., & Tian, Y. S. (2009).  Managerial Incentives and
Corporate Fraud: The Sources of Incentives Matter.  Review of Finance,  13(1),
115-145.  https://doi.org/10.1093/rof/rfn014

Jordà, Ò., Kornejew, M., Schularick, M., & Taylor, A. M. (2022). Zombies at
Large? Corporate Debt Overhang and the Macroeconomy. The Review of
Financial Studies,  35(10), 4561-4586.  https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhac018

                               29
Kaplan, S. (1989).  The effects of management buyouts on operating
performance and value.  Journal  of Financial Economics,  24(2), 217-254.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-405X(89)90047-0

Kaplan, S., & Stein, J. (1993). The evolution of buyout pricing and financial
structure in the 1980s.  Quarterly Journal of Economics,  108(2), 313-357.
https://doi.org/10.2307/2118334

Lerner, J., Sørensen, M., & Strömberg,  P. (2011).  Private Equity and Long-run
Investment: The Case of Innovation.  Journal of Finance,  66(2), 445-477.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2010.01639.x

Lichtenberg, F., & Siegel, D. (1990). The effects of leveraged buyouts on
productivity and related aspects of  firm behavior.  Journal of Financial
Economics, 27(1), 165-194. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-405X(90)90025-U

Michaely, R., & Roberts, R.M. (2012). Corporate Dividend Policies: Lessons
from Private Firms.  The Review of Financial Studies,  25(3), 711–746.
https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhr108

OECD (2020).  Tax and Fiscal Policy in Response to the Coronavirus Crisis:
Strengthening Confidence and Resilience.  Retrieved from  https://read.oecd-
ilibrary.org/view/?ref=128_128575-o6raktc0aa&title=Tax-and-Fiscal-Policy-in-
Response-to-the-Coronavirus-Crisis

OECD (2021). Oecd Economic Survey Sweden. Retrieved from
https://www.oecd.org/economy/surveys/Sweden-2021-OECD-economic-
survey-overview.pdf

OpenAI. (2023). GPT-3.5 Language Model. Retrieved from
https://chat.openai.com

Swedish Private Equity and Venture Capital Association, SVCA. (2022).
Economic Footprint of Swedish Private Equity. Copenhagen Economics.
Retrieved from https://copenhageneconomics.com/wp-
content/uploads/2023/01/The-economic-footprint-of-Swedish-VC-and-PE.pdf

Swedish Private Equity and Venture Capital Association, SVCA. (2020).
Economic Footprint of Swedish Private Equity. Retrieved from
https://www.investeurope.eu/media/3539/economic_footprint_of_swedish_p
rivate_equity.pdf

Swedish Private Equity and Venture Capital Association, SVCA. (2021). 2021
Swedish Private Equity Activity. Fundraising, Investments, Divestments and
Performance.  Retrieved from  https://www.svca.se/wp-
content/uploads/2022/06/Swedish-Private-Equity-Activity-2021.pdf

Ungku, F. (2022). Government lending in times of crisis. Retrieved from
https://www.hhs.se/en/houseoffinance/outreach/news--

                             30
press/news/2022/government-lending-in-times-of-crisis-what-swedens-global-
financial-crisis-lending-program-can-teach-a-post-pandemic-world/

White & Case LLP (2020). COVID-19: Swedish Government Financial
Assistance Measures.  Retrieved from  https://www.whitecase.com/insight-
alert/covid-19-swedish-government-financial-assistance-measures

Appendix

 Table A.1.: Variable definitions

 Variable                        Definition

                                         (Total Asset(t) - Total Asset(t-1)+Depreciation(t)) / Avg Total
 Investment / assets (t)
                                          Asset(t)

 Net debt issuance / assets (t)           (Total Liability(t) - Total Liability(t-1)) / Avg Total Asset(t)

                                             (Total Equity(t)-Total Equity(t-1)-Net profit(t)) /Avg Total
 Equity contribution / assets (t)
                                          Asset(t)

 Firm leverage (t) or Debt/assets (t)      Total Liability(t) / Total Asset(t)

 ROA(t)                           Net Profit(t) / Avg Total Asset(t)

 EBITDA/revenue (t)                 (Operating Profit(t)+Depreciation(t))/Net Sales(t)

 Asset turnover (t)                    Net Sales / Total Asset (t)

 Asset growth (t)                       (Total Asset(t)-Total Asset(t-1))/Total Asset(t-1)

 Log of revenue                      Ln(Net Sales(t))

 Growth in revenue                     (Net Sales(t)-Net Sales(t-1))/Net Sales(t-1)

 Lagged one year of firm leverage (t)     Lag(Total Liability(t) / Total Asset(t))

 Lagged one year of log of revenue (t)    Lag(Ln(Net Sales(t)))

 Relative one year revenue growth (t)    Ln(Net Sales(t))- Ln(Net Sales(t-1))

 Avg total assets (t)                    (Total Asset(t) + Total Asset(t-1))/2

 (t) represents year when the variable of interest is measured

                                   31
Figure  A.1.: Average investments over time
This figure illustrates the change in the variable ‘average investments’ for PE-backed and non PE-backed
companies for the time period between 2018 and 2021. Standard errors are plotted at group level.

Figure  A.2.: Average net equity contribution over time
This figure illustrates the change in the variable ‘net equity contribution’ for PE-backed and non-PE-
backed companies for the time period between 2018 and 2021. Standard errors are plotted at group
level.

                              32
Figure  A.3.: Average net debt issuance over time
This figure illustrates the change in the variable ‘net debt issuance’ for PE-backed and non-PE-backed
companies for the time period between 2018 and 2021. Standard errors are plotted at group level.

Figure  A.4.: Average leverage over time
This figure illustrates the change in the variable ‘leverage’ for PE-backed and non-PE-backed companies
for the time period between 2018 and 2021. Standard errors are plotted at group level.

                              33
Figure  A.5.: Average asset turnover over time
This figure illustrates the change in the variable ‘asset turnover’ for PE-backed and non-PE-backed
companies for the time period between 2018 and 2021. Standard errors are plotted at group level.

Figure  A.6.: Average profitability over time
This figure illustrates the change in the variable ‘EBITDA/revenue’ for PE-backed and non-PE-backed
companies for the time period between 2018 and 2021. Standard errors are plotted at group level.

                              34
Table  A.2.: Robustness adding time-varying industry fixed effects
                                       (1)                         (2)                         (3)
                            Asset turnover           Asset growth          EBITDA/revenue

                                      -0.166**                      0.273*                       -0.044
PE x CRISIS
                                      (0.012)                      (0.057)                      (0.139)

Year fixed effects                Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Firm fixed effects                Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Firm controls                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Observations                   1,585                  1,585                  1,585
Adjusted R-squared              0.916                  0.013                  0.715

Table A.2. reports a robustness test, where we estimate the standard difference-in-differences fixed effects
model on various outcomes adding set of fixed effects generated as the product of industry and the Crisis
dummy. All specifications include firm and year fixed effects. The main parameter of interest is the
interaction between the Crisis dummy and  PE-backed company dummy variable. All specifications
include a set of firm-level controls measured before the crisis and interacted with the Crisis dummy. These
variables include firm size (log of revenue), growth in revenue, ROA, and leverage.  In Column  1 the
outcome is asset turnover; in Column 2 the outcome is 1-year assets growth; in Column 3 is the total
EBITDA scaled by revenue. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. The appendix provides more
information about the variable definitions. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. *** denotes
significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.

Table  A.3.: Robustness adding time-varying industry fixed effects
                                            (2)              (3)
                          (1)                                                     (4)               (5)
                                 Equity       Net debt
                Investment/assets                                    Debt/assets     Interest rate
                                         contr./assets      iss./assets

                      0.053*           0.054***         0.040*          0.034*           0.014
PE x CRISIS
                         (0.051)             (0.001)           (0.069)           (0.022)           (0.392)

Year fixed
                     Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
effects

Firm fixed
                     Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
effects

Firm controls         Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes

Observations         1,585            1,585          1,585          1,585          1,585

Adjusted R-
                     0.137            0.350          0.081          0.750          0.367
squared

Table A.3. reports a robustness test, where we estimate the standard difference-in-differences fixed effects
model on various outcomes adding set of fixed effects generated as the product of industry and the Crisis
dummy. All specifications include firm and year fixed effects. The main parameter of interest is the
interaction between the Crisis dummy and PE-backed company dummy variable. All specifications
include a set of firm-level controls measured before the crisis and interacted with the Crisis dummy. These
variables include firm size (log of revenue), growth in revenue, ROA, and leverage. In Column 1 the
outcome is investment scaled by assets; in Column 2  the outcome is net equity contribution over assets;
in Column 3 the outcome is the net debt issuance scaled by assets; in Columns 4 the outcome is the total
leverage; and in Columns 5 the outcome is average interest rate. Standard errors are clustered at the firm
level.   The appendix provides more information about the variable definitions. Standard errors are
clustered at the firm level. *** denotes significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10%
level.

                               35
Table  A.4.: Robustness adding different firm-level controls
                                       (1)                         (2)                         (3)
                            Asset turnover            Asset growth          EBITDA/revenue

                                     -0.179***                     0.284*                       -0.041
PE x CRISIS
                                      (0.007)                      (0.082)                      (0.155)

Year fixed effects                Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Firm fixed effects                Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Firm controls                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Observations                   1,585                  1,585                  1,585
Adjusted R-squared              0.915                  0.239                  0.716

Table  A.4.  reports the estimates of a difference-in-differences fixed effects model on the performance
variables. All specifications include firm and year fixed effects. The main parameter of interest is the
interaction between the Crisis dummy and PE-backed company  dummy variable. All specifications
include a set of firm-level controls measured before the crisis. These control variables include lagged one
year of firm leverage, lagged one year of log of net sales, and relative one-year net sales growth. In Column
1 the outcome is asset turnover; in Column 2 the outcome is 1-year assets growth; in Column 3 is the total
EBITDA scaled by revenue. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. The appendix provides more
information about the variable  definitions. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. *** denotes
significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.

Table  A.5.: Robustness adding different firm-level controls
                                                   (2)                   (3)
                               (1)                                                                 (4)
                                             Equity             Net debt
                    Investment/assets                                             Debt/assets
                                               contr./assets          iss./assets

                          0.061*             0.049***            0.056***             0.030**
PE x CRISIS
                             (0.019)                (0.001)                (0.009)                (0.015)

Year fixed effects          Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes

Firm fixed effects          Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes

Firm controls             Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes

Observations             1,585              1,585              1,585              1,585

Adjusted R-
                        0.137             0.350             0.081             0.750
squared
Table  A.5.  reports the estimates of a difference-in-differences fixed effects model on the performance
variables. All specifications include firm and year fixed effects. The main parameter of interest is the
interaction between the Crisis dummy and PE-backed company  dummy variable. All specifications
include a set of firm-level controls measured before the crisis. These control variables include lagged one
year of firm leverage, lagged one year of log of net sales, and relative one-year net sales growth. In Column
1  the outcome is investment scaled by assets; in Column 2 the outcome is net equity contribution over
assets; in Column 3 the outcome is the net debt issuance scaled by assets; in Columns 4 the  outcome is
the total leverage.   Standard errors are clustered at  the firm level.   The appendix provides more
information about the variable definitions. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ***  denotes
significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.

                              36
Table  A.6.: Investment and funding policies pre-crisis
                                            (2)              (3)
                          (1)                                                     (4)               (5)
                                       Equity         Net debt
                 Investment/assets                                     Debt/assets     Interest rate
                                         contr./assets      iss./assets

                         0.015               0.022             0.029            -0.003           -0.0005
PE x 2018
                         (0.699)             (0.291)           (0.307)           (0.806)           (0.980)

                       0.009              0.032            0.035            0.012            0.026
PE x 2019
                         (0.809)             (0.112)           (0.256)           (0.520)           (0.437)

Year fixed
                     Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
effects

Firm fixed
                     Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
effects

Firm controls         Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes

Observations         1,585            1,585          1,585          1,585          1,585

Adjusted R-
                     0.134            0.351          0.075          0.749          0.352
squared

Table  A.6.  reports the estimates from a time-varying fixed effects model the investment and funding
variables. All specifications include  firm and year fixed effects. The main parameter of interest is the
interaction between the year and PE-backed company dummy variable. All specifications include a set of
firm-level controls measured before the crisis and interacted with the Crisis dummy. These variables
include  firm size (log of revenue), growth in revenue, ROA, and leverage. In  Column 1 the outcome is
investment scaled by assets; in Column 2 the outcome is net equity contribution over assets; in Column 3
the outcome is the net debt issuance scaled by assets; in Columns 4 the outcome is the total leverage; and
in Columns 5 the outcome is average interest rate. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. The
appendix provides more information about the variable definitions. Standard errors are clustered at the
firm level. *** denotes  significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.

                                37
Table  A.7.:  Performance analysis pre-crisis
                                       (1)                         (2)                         (3)
                            Asset turnover            Asset growth          EBITDA/revenue

                                     -0.078*                      0.475                       0.013
PE x 2018
                                      (0.087)                      (0.114)                      (0.607)

                                       -0.106*                       0.467                        -0.053
PE x 2019
                                        (0.085)                       (0.127)                       (0.154)

Year fixed effects                Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Firm fixed effects                Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Firm controls                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Observations                   1,585                  1,585                  1,585
Adjusted R-squared              0.914                  0.017                  0.710

Table A.7. reports the estimates from a time-varying fixed effects model on the performance variables. All
specifications include firm and year fixed effects. The main parameter of interest is the interaction
between the year and PE-backed  company dummy variable. All specifications include  a set of firm-level
controls measured before the crisis and interacted with the Crisis dummy. These variables include firm
size (log of revenue), growth in revenue, ROA, and leverage. In Column 1 the outcome is asset turnover;
in  Column 2 the outcome is 1-year assets growth; in Column 3 is the total EBITDA scaled by revenue.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. The appendix provides more information about the
variable definitions. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ***  denotes significance at the 1%
level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.

                             38