NAVIGATING UNCERTAINTY

A  STUDY ON THE  IMPACT OF  POLICY UNCERTAINTY  ON
STOCK RETURNS,  FIRM INVESTMENT, AND INVESTOR
SENTIMENT  IN THE UNITED STATES

AXEL BOSTRÖM

GUSTAF LINDSTRÖM

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2023
Navigating Uncertainty: A Study on the Impact of Policy Uncertainty on Stock Returns,
Firm Investment, and Investor Sentiment in the United States

Abstract:
  We investigate how US policy uncertainty is related to US stock returns, firm investments,
   and investor sentiment  -  in order to  shed light on the responses made by firms and
   investors when faced with higher uncertainty. Leveraging  the  economic policy uncertainty
   index,  we find that policy uncertainty is negatively correlated with  US  stock returns  in the
   same month following a  shock to uncertainty,  and  propose  evidence that  points towards
   policy uncertainty  potentially  being  a source of return predictability in the US.  Our results
   also point towards policy uncertainty having effects on  the demand for downside
   protection by looking at how investors respond to shocks  in uncertainty, but find no
   conclusive evidence regarding its  effects on market wide investor sentiment.  We find a
   delayed  and negative  impact on firm investment, implying that policy uncertainty could
   have an impact on firms’ investment decisions  as they defer investments in favor of
   waiting for more information.

Keywords:

   Economic policy uncertainty,  US stock returns,  firm  investments, investor sentiment

Authors:

   Axel Boström (24911)
   Gustaf Lindström  (24916)

Tutor:

   Riccardo Sabbatucci,  Assistant Professor,  Department of  Finance, SSE

Examiner:

   Adrien  d'Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance, SSE

Acknowledgements:  We would like to thank our tutor  Riccardo Sabbatucci  for his  support
during the  process of writing this Bachelor Thesis.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in  Business and  Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Axel Boström and Gustaf Lindström, 2023

                                     1
1     Introduction

The United  States'  economic and political  landscape  has been surrounded by a great deal of
uncertainty during the past decades. The global financial crisis in 2008,  the  2011 debt-ceiling
dispute, turbulent elections, Covid-19, and the recent signs of deteriorating trust in the banking
system following the collapse of Silicon Valley Bank,  are all examples of events that have had
an adverse effect on the predictability of future policy action. Events like these trigger a need
for political intervention, highlighted by actions such as the resulting bailouts of the 2008 crisis
or lockdowns and extreme quantitative easing  following  Covid-19. Such interventions or
policy decisions are often surrounded by major uncertainty  regarding  both  the direction and
magnitude of government action. The dramatic run-up to the 2016 presidential election is a
good example, illustrating how the future direction of US policies and trade relations  was
dependent on  the outcome of  a highly uncertain election. This uncertainty made its mark on
financial markets leading up to the election, and on the day following the  final result,  the  chief
strategist  at  a  large  US broker was quoted by CNBC saying “Overnight was all about
uncertainty. Today we know” when commenting on the  250-point  surge in the Dow after
Trump’s victory  (Imbert and Cheng,  2016).
     This unpredictability in policy action has arguably been further amplified by the nature
of the US political system, which has several times been characterized by partisan gridlock and
political polarization. The current state makes it inherently difficult  to reach a consensus on
major policy decisions and can lead to delays, inaction, or uncertainty regarding said policies.
For instance, the 2011 debt-ceiling dispute resulted in a downgrade of the US credit rating by
Standard & Poor's, which fueled uncertainty in the market.  Currently, in May 2023, there is
another debt-ceiling dispute looming, with the US Secretary of Treasury, Janet Yellen, warning
that the US  may run out of cash by the beginning of June  (Debusmann, 2023).  Understanding
the consequences of ambiguity  in  economic policy on financial markets is crucial for
policymakers, as it can have real economic-  and financial implications. Likewise, from an
investor perspective, it is without a doubt important to understand the various factors that affect
financial markets.
     Blattner, Catenaro, Ehrman, Strauch, and Turunen (2008) stress the importance of
predictability in monetary policy  particularly, and the dire effects of uncertainty on inflation,
asset pricing, and overall economic welfare. The authors  highlight four potential sources of
information asymmetry which impair predictability in policy actions. First, private market
participants may not be fully aware of the central bank’s objectives, making it hard to predict
the timing and direction of policy decisions. Following this, it becomes hard to deduce whether
a certain policy decision is a result of changes in objectives or rather due to changes in the
economic outlook of the central bank, or both. Second, market participants may not be fully
aware  of which indicators, and third, how these indicators are being interpreted by central
bankers. Finally, there may be general uncertainty regarding the workings and construction of
monetary policy. These four sources rely on the level of transparency and method of forward
guidance that central banks employ, meaning uncertainty does not necessarily stem from
agents’ own lack of predictability regarding economic variables (such as inflation), but also
from the level of efficiency in communication  and transparency  between market participants.
Important to highlight is that this insight is not restricted to central banks and monetary  policy
but  could very well be generalized to cover other government bodies constructing different
types of policy as well. Policymakers do not only have to consider the direct effects of their
policy decisions but also how they manage expectations, as it affects each actor’s ability to
accurately forecast and assign probabilities to future outcomes. This predictability has,
according to the authors, implications on both macroeconomic variables but also consequences

                                     2
for asset pricing, capital allocation, and the size of uncertainty-related risk premiums in
financial markets.
     The bulk of  prior research on the topic of uncertainty  has been dedicated to studying the
macroeconomic implications of policy uncertainty (e.g., Bloom, 2009; Bachmann, Elstner, and
Sims,  2013; Jones and Olson,  2013), or its effect on real investments. Bernanke (1983) made
important contributions  to the  uncertainty  literature  by considering the effects of uncertainty
on firm investments through the lens of real options theory. In his paper, he provides a
theoretical framework that  shows  how the implicit real option value associated with deferring
irreversible investments in favor of waiting for more information increases with uncertainty.
Such theory would imply that firms are more cautious when making investment  decisions in
periods of high uncertainty, which we  will  test empirically in this paper. Even though the vast
majority of the literature has focused on  the effects of  uncertainty  on macroeconomic variables
and real investment, there is a growing body of literature dedicated to the relationship between
policy uncertainty and financial markets.
     Progress in the studies of policy uncertainty and its implications for firms and financial
markets was made when Baker, Bloom, and Davis  (2013)  developed and published the
                                                                                                                 1
economic policy uncertainty index, a  method to measure and quantify policy uncertainty.
Later, Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016) show that firms with more exposure to government
purchases face higher stock price volatility, lower investments, and lower employment growth
when policy uncertainty is higher. Specifically, they find that firms within  the  defense,
healthcare, and financial sectors are particularly sensitive to changes in uncertainty.
     After Pástor and Veronesi (2013) published their theoretical contributions on uncertainty
and its effects on financial markets, more empirical research has been published to test the
validity of their theoretical findings. Pástor and Veronesi’s equilibrium model presents several
interesting  predictions for how stock markets react to what they refer to as “political
              2
uncertainty”.  The main findings of their model and brief empirical work are that higher
political uncertainty leads to increased volatility of returns and higher correlation among
stocks. Political uncertainty also demands an equity risk premium. All of these effects are
further predicted to have a stronger impact during worse economic conditions. They manage
to find some empirical evidence to support the predictions of their model, however, the bulk of
empirical work comes from other sources.
     Kelly, Pástor, and Veronesi (2016) continue on the path of empirical research on the topic
and study how uncertainty during national elections and global summits impacts option pricing.
Their empirical findings  imply  that options whose duration span major political events on
average are more expensive (around 5.1%) compared to neighboring options not spanning such
events, suggesting that political uncertainty is priced into the  options market. They also find
that the value of option protection against price risk, tail risk, and variance risk is higher during
less favorable economic conditions (one-month at-the-money options are 8% more expensive
during weak economic times compared to only 1% more expensive during favorable economic
conditions).
     Brogaard, Dai, Ngo, and Zhang (2020) study  the cross-border implications of global
political uncertainty surrounding US presidential and midterm elections and find that  equity
returns in  non-US markets  on average  fall during the period leading  up to a US  election.
     This paper aims to expand the scope of empirical research on the broad topic of policy
uncertainty and its implications for firms, investors, and financial markets. With the focal point
being on stock returns in particular, our results will also provide answers to questions regarding

1
  The  index,  underlying  data,  and  more  information  about  the  index  and  its  authors  is  available  at
www.policyuncertainty.com
2
  Political uncertainty in their study is focused on the uncertainty regarding future government policies. We
consider this to be equivalent  to the  term “policy uncertainty” which we will use throughout this paper.

                                     3
market efficiency in periods of doubt and the return predictability of economic policy
uncertainty. To gain such insights, the bulk of this paper will  be dedicated to studying how
policy uncertainty directly impacts (i) stock returns, (ii) firm investments, and (iii) investor
sentiment.

1.1   Research  question  and  hypotheses

While our work largely serves as an extension of the work carried out by the researchers cited
above, our targeted focus on empirically investigating the implications and predictive power
of policy uncertainty on US stock returns allows us to  explore  the following  question.

          How, and to what extent, does economic policy uncertainty impact stock returns?

We do this by addressing and investigating the credibility of the following hypotheses:

       H1: Changes in policy uncertainty adversely impact realized stock returns and can be
        used to predict future stock  returns.

One of the key predictors of Pástor and Veronesi’s (2013) theoretical model is that political
uncertainty commands a risk premium. They proceed to  conduct  some simple empirical
analysis but find, at best, modest support for that prediction when considering the 3-, 6-, and
12-month market excess return. We aim to expand on their empirical analysis through the use
of a larger  dataset with firm-level stock returns and a decade of additional  return-  and
uncertainty  data. As previously mentioned, during the past decade, the US has been subject to
major  uncertainty  shocks which further validate the relevance of this analysis.  Beyond testing
for any potential predictive power of policy uncertainty on future returns, we also test the
hypothesis that a positive  change  in policy uncertainty  is associated with lower returns for the
same month.
     The rationale for our hypothesis is based on  Pástor  and  Veronesi's  (2013) theoretical
equilibrium model, and subsequent research on the topic (e.g., Brogaard and Detzel 2015;
Brogaard et al. 2020; Kelly et al. 2016). Further, it is reasonable to suggest that portfolio
managers and investors, when faced  with a shock in policy uncertainty, adjust their beliefs
regarding the future performance of firms and the perceived risk of financial investments. Here
we argue, in line with most of the prior research, that an increase in policy uncertainty generally
leads to expectations of weaker firm performance and increased risk.

       H2: These effects are more prominent during times with less favorable economic
       conditions.

Pástor  and Veronesi’s (2013) theoretical model mentioned above also predicts that the impact
of political  uncertainty is more prominent during times with less favorable economic
conditions. However, regarding the potential risk premium they also discuss the value of a
potential put protection stemming from the government’s tendency to intervene and support
financial markets in economic downturns. Naturally, the theoretical framework suggests that
the value of this protection is higher with worse economic conditions as the potential
government intervention (i) becomes more likely, and (ii) becomes more valuable to match the
severity of the downturn. The financial crisis of 2008 and the Covid-19 pandemic provide good
illustrations of  how the  government  provides  put  protection  for  financial markets. In 2008,
failing banks were bailed out to prevent a collapse of the financial system, while in 2020,
extensive fiscal and monetary policies were implemented to mitigate the impact of the

                                     4
pandemic on the economy and support  financial markets. In both situations, the Federal
Reserve carried out  large  programs of quantitative easing to inject liquidity into financial
markets and  facilitate  economic recovery.
     Rational investors should consider the value of this government put protection when
pricing stocks which  could reduce the risk premium in less favorable economic conditions,
according to  Pástor  and Veronesi (2013).  During economic downturns, the aforementioned put
protection depresses the equity premium, whereas policy uncertainty  has the opposite effect.
However, it is unclear  to them  what force should prevail  as it is entirely  dependent on the
parameters  in their  theoretical  model.
     We argue that amidst challenging economic circumstances, a shock to policy  uncertainty
would have the same impact as in H1, but  stronger  due to the economic circumstances.  Our
hypothesis builds on the assumption that  a  shock to policy uncertainty  negatively impacts the
expected value of the put protection as the probability of protective government policy  should
decrease when  policy uncertainty  is higher.  To illustrate, imagine a state with no uncertainty
where investors are perfectly informed about the put protection  provided by the government.
In such  a  state, investors  would  account for the fact that they,  to some  degree,  are protected
against downside risk. When  policy  uncertainty grows, investors can no longer  assume the
same  protection  and will adjust their required return accordingly.  Hence,  as the put protection
is more valuable during recessions,  we hypothesize that policy uncertainty shocks during
periods of economic downturn will have a greater effect on stock returns, compared to  times
of strong economic conditions.

       H3: Changes in policy uncertainty negatively impact  firm investments, and

       H4: Changes in policy uncertainty negatively impact  investor  sentiment.

In their recent paper, Brogaard et al. (2020) suggest that uncertainty  surrounding US  elections
can influence equity returns through two fundamental channels; (i) expected cash flows, and
(ii) discount rates (expected returns). They  find evidence  supporting  the discount rate  channel
as  the main driver of the lower returns  leading up to elections. We adopt a similar framework
by investigating how uncertainty affects two underlying components that could have an impact
on stock returns, namely (i) firm investments, and (ii) investor sentiment. However, our
analysis is grounded in a more action-based perspective, meaning we want to study how policy
uncertainty impacts actual, put-into-action, investment decisions among firms and investors.
One key reason why such a perspective is useful is because it yields actionable insights into
the tangible, real-world consequences of policy uncertainty, rather than merely focusing on
theoretical constructs. Important to note, however, is that both of these hypotheses are
theoretically motivated by established finance-  and economic research.
     The investment-driven effect can be intuitively motivated by considering that each
irreversible investment opportunity gives rise to a real option to defer investments in favor of
waiting for more information, and has an inherent  option value  that increases with uncertainty.
Bernanke (1983) makes the case that, assuming NPV-maximization (risk-neutrality), the
expected value of “bad news” (e.g.,  an unfavorable policy change) determines the option value
of deferring an irreversible investment decision and waiting for new information. In simple
terms, the benefits of deferring an investment are higher when uncertainty regarding parameters
impacting the outcome is high. In periods with perfect information, firms will always choose
to invest in projects with the highest NPV due to the option value being zero, but as uncertainty
increases so does the value of the real option. If the investment is made, the opportunity cost is
represented by the option value at the time of the investment decision, which is zero with
perfect information and increases with uncertainty.  Assuming that firms only invest in NPV-

                                     5
positive projects, deferring investments  pushes  cash flows further into the future,  which has an
adverse effect on their present value.
     The sentiment-driven component is theoretically motivated by considering the notion that
in an efficient market, investor sentiment, defined as beliefs about cash flow and risk that  are
not justified by firm fundamentals, should not impact security prices (Baker and Wurgler, 2006,
2007). However, Baker and Wurgler (2006), as well as Huang, Jiang, Tu, and Zhou (2015) find
evidence that different measures of investor sentiment can be used to predict stock returns,
following the theory that investors make  overly  optimistic (pessimistic) judgments during
times with positive (negative) investor sentiment.  This  challenges the efficient market
hypothesis and  poses some questions regarding the rationality of investors.  On the topic of
rationality, it is reasonable to  presume that uncertainty distorts investors' ability to forecast
probability distributions (Knight 1921), making it inherently difficult to assess the risk and fair
market price of securities accurately, and thus inhibits the ability to make rational investment
decisions. Birru and Young (2022) find that when uncertainty is higher,  and valuations more
subjective, investor sentiment has a significantly larger  ability  to predict  stock returns.
     The focus in prior literature has been to study the relationship  between  sentiment and
stock returns, as well as the  amplifying  effect  of  uncertainty.  The prior literature does not,
however,  consider a potential direct connection between  uncertainty and investor sentiment,
leaving a gap in the literature that we  deem important to study.  Our  hypothesis on this
relationship is simple.  Policy uncertainty creates ambiguity, impairs forecasting capabilities,
and  reduces investor confidence.  These factors, among others, should have an adverse  effect
on investor sentiment which  presumably  translates  to more pessimistic trading patterns.

1.2   Overview and preliminary findings

To proxy for policy  uncertainty,  we follow  a  method commonly  adopted in prior literature  and
use the Economic Policy Uncertainty index (EPU-index) developed by Baker, Bloom, and
Davis (2013).  To  test the first hypothesis, we begin  by  regressing firm level monthly  log-
returns on the  log-transformed  percentage change in the EPU-index.  We  find that  changes in
the index are negatively and significantly correlated with monthly realized log-returns.  When
including  lags,  we also find suggestive evidence that increases in the EPU-index significantly
and negatively predict log-returns for the next  month, and positively predict log-returns 3, 4,
and 5 months ahead. This could imply that an increase in EPU induces lower realized returns
today and subsequently higher expected returns in future periods.
     To test for the second hypothesis, we incorporate  variables indicating the state of the
economy into our model.  By leveraging a recession indicator and the Chicago FED National
Activity Index,  our results suggest that the impact of policy uncertainty shocks  on log-returns
is  amplified during recessions and during periods when the economy is growing below trend.
The final part of our  main empirical  analysis examines whether changes in EPU trigger a
response when it comes to firm-level investments and shifts in investor sentiment.  To proxy
for investor  sentiment,  we utilize both the Total Exchange Put/Call  Ratio from CBOE, and the
sentiment index developed by Baker and Wurgler (2006). Our findings on capital expenditures
are somewhat ambiguous but points toward policy uncertainty having a delayed negative effect
on capital expenditures,  significant  at the  two-quarter  lag. Our analysis  of  investor  sentiment
suggests that there is a negative relationship between policy uncertainty and  the Put/Call Ratio.
However,  we find no significant relationship  between Baker and Wurgler’s (2006) investor
sentiment and the EPU-index.
     After finding preliminary results suggesting that uncertainty might have an impact on US
stock returns and firms on an aggregated level, we proceed to study if this impact takes different

                                     6
shapes  depending  on  the  industry,  based  on  the  theory  that  the  relationship  is  not
heterogeneous.
     The paper is divided into 7 sections and is organized as follows. Section 2 explains our
data and descriptive statistics. Section 3 describes the empirical framework used to investigate
our research question and hypotheses and section 4 presents the results.  Section 5 discusses the
results,  while  section 6  presents a short industry analysis  and  tests  the external validity of our
results.  Section 7 concludes.

                                     7
2     Data and descriptive statistics

Our main set of data consists of monthly stock returns and various firm characteristics for
stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) during 1985-2022, available through
Compustat via WRDS. For convenience and to eliminate any potential issues with outliers and
stocks with low trading volumes we limit our dataset to only include securities with at least
USD 2bn in market cap.  We exclude extreme outlier  returns from our dataset.  All firm-level
accounting data is gathered from Compustat. The Subsequent list includes 2,535 mid-  and
large-cap stocks for a total period of 456  months and  contains both live as well as dead stocks
to ensure that the data is free of survivorship bias.
     Components of the Fama-French three-factor model are downloaded from Kenneth
French’s website. To proxy for stock market  volatility,  we use the VIX index, available from
1990 via the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE). As the VIX is only available from
1990 and onwards our final dataset is limited to only include monthly observations since 1990.
     To  capture the  policy  uncertainty,  we follow  Pástor  and Veronesi (2013), and several
others, using the Economic Policy Uncertainty index developed by Baker, Bloom, and Davis
(2013). The US index is available with a monthly frequency from 1985 until the present. The
index is constructed through a weighted average of three underlying components designed to
measure  policy uncertainty. The first component quantifies the coverage of policy-related
uncertainty in 10 large US newspapers, using a keyword search method for words related to
policy uncertainty. The other two components measure disagreement among forecasters
regarding the US economic outlook, such as inflation and government spending, and the total
number of US federal tax codes that are due to expire within the next ten years. Data on the
disagreement between economic forecasters are drawn from the Philadelphia FED survey of
professional forecasters.  Since the start of the US index, there have been spikes in the EPU-
index around major US political events and economic turbulence. These events include the
Dot-com crash, the global financial crisis of 2007-08, the 2011 debt-ceiling dispute, and
recently the Covid-19 pandemic and subsequent lockdowns.
     We identify a few advantages in using this measure for policy uncertainty above other
methods  used in prior literature (such as global elections or summits),  partly following  the
reasoning of Brogaard and Detzel (2015). First, the EPU-index provides a continuous measure
of  policy  uncertainty.  With  historical  data  from  1985,  combined  with  the  consistent
methodology used to construct the index, this approach yields a more nuanced and consistent
measure that does not rely on the assumption of homogeneity regarding the level of uncertainty
between isolated political events. The EPU-index has been used  to identify statistical
relationships in prior literature, which we deem strengthens its validity and speaks of its
predictive power.  Further,  during the construction of the index, Baker, Bloom, and Davis
conducted an extensive audit  including 12,000 randomized newspaper articles,  and find a  0.93
correlation between the human-  and computer-generated  indexes.  However, the index cannot
be seen as entirely uncontroversial. Kelly et al. (2016)  mention  the inherent difficulties in
isolating  exogenous variation in uncertainty. It is, for instance, not impossible to imagine that
major stock market events such as the 1987 “Black Monday” or 2010 “Flash Crash” can trigger
responses in the EPU-index, and not just the other way around. We also recognize that the
index may be a source of collinearity between itself and other variables within our models.
Furthermore, its strong dependence on news media could potentially bias the index due to
uncertainty  being an attention-inducing media buzzword.  However,  given  the widespread use
of the index and the robust method used to construct it, our stance is that the EPU is an adequate
proxy of policy uncertainty for this paper.
     To measure the state of the US economy we will rely on the monthly recession indicator
published by the St. Louis FED (FRED) and the Chicago Fed National Activity Index

                                     8
(CFNAI), which comprises 85 different measures of economic activity in the U.S. These
measures can be divided into four broad categories: Employment, Industrial Production,
Personal  Consumption, and Manufacturing and  Trade Sales. The index is designed to show
deviations from the expected growth trend on a monthly basis and is structured so that a value
of 0 indicates that the economy is growing in line with the trend. The  St. Louis FED recession
indicator is an interpretation of data released by the National Bureau of Economic Research
(NBER). The recession indicator is expressed in the form of a dummy variable, returning a
value of 1 in recessionary periods. NBER defines  a recession as “a significant decline in
economic activity that is spread across the economy and that lasts more than a few months”.
Albeit the lack of specificity in this definition, we deem it to be sufficient for this paper,
especially since the indicator is consistent, commonly used, and easily accessible. Since the
start of the EPU-index in 1985 there have been 40 months of recession in the US, spread across
different periods: The 1990-91 recession, the Dot-com bubble burst, the global financial crisis,
and the short 3-month recession during the start of the Covid-19 pandemic.
     For the second part of our analysis, we also include the volume-based  Total Exchange
Put/Call Ratio to measure market wide investor sentiment. The Put/Call Ratio gives an intuitive
and simple interpretation of overall sentiment on financial markets and is calculated by dividing
the trading volume of put options by the volume of call options in a given period, yielding a
ratio that signals whether investors are  bearish (buying puts) or bullish (buying calls) given the
current market conditions. The data is publicly available via CBOE and dates back to
September 1995. As the Put/Call Ratio is published with daily frequency we manually calculate
a monthly average  to match the structure of the EPU-index. Furthermore, to address concerns
stated in prior literature regarding the ability to construct a reliable measure of investor
sentiment, we also use the composite sentiment index constructed by Baker and Wurgler (2006,
2007), henceforth denoted as the BW-index. This index is available on  Jeffrey Wurgler’s
                                                                                               3
website,  and the data covers our entire sample period with monthly frequency.
     The data on firm level capital expenditures (CAPEX) used in the later stage of our analysis
is available with a quarterly frequency via Compustat. Since the data is only reported on a YTD
basis,  we manually calculate the isolated quarterly capital expenditures.
     To ensure consistency in our subsequent empirical analysis, before moving on we remove
all observations with one or more  missing values. Summary statistics  are reported  in Table 1.
In Table 2 (see  Appendix  1.A), we show summary statistics for the four periods of recession
that  are included in  our  sample period.  Figure 1 (Appendix  1.B) plots the economic policy
uncertainty index with recessions shaded in red.

3
 The data  is  available at  https://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~jwurgler/

                                     9
10
3    Empirical method

3.1   H1:  Policy uncertainty and stock returns

The main dependent variable in our core model is the monthly realized log returns for the stocks
in our  sample. To then investigate the relationship between policy uncertainty and stock return
we run several different linear regressions, beginning with a simple OLS.

                 𝐿𝑜𝑔  𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛!,#  =  𝛽$  +  𝛽%𝐿𝑜𝑔  ∆𝐸𝑃𝑈#  +  𝛽&𝑋!,#  +  𝜀!,#                  (1)

Where  Log  Returni,t  is  the natural  logarithm  of firm-specific monthly stock returns, and  Log
ΔEPU  is the natural logarithm of the monthly percentage change in the economic policy
uncertainty index. The reason for using Log ΔEPU is to avoid issues with non-stationarity and
eliminate the presence of a unit root within the EPU time series. Using the EPU  index in this
way is preferred and supported by the results from an Augmented Dickey-Fuller test where we
can reject the null hypothesis of the presence of a unit root at the 1% level. Furthermore, KPSS
tests on both versions of the EPU confirm the results, where we fail to reject the null hypothesis
of stationarity for ΔEPU, but not for the raw index. This method of transforming our time series
is also consistent with the way we treat stock data,  i.e.,  using stock returns instead of monthly
closing prices  to induce stationarity. The way we treat the EPU-index differs from some of the
other approaches seen in prior literature on the topic. For example, Pástor and Veronesi (2013)
uses the raw values of the index but scales it down by a factor of 100.
     Gulen and Ion (2016) suggest that using the change in the EPU-index is more appropriate
when attempting to answer the question of how firms are affected by short-term shocks to
policy uncertainty. While they opt to use the level of uncertainty rather than the change in EPU
(for reasons specific to their  investigation on capital expenditures), we are interested in
studying how investors and firms react to uncertainty shocks. Hence, the change in the EPU-
index  appears  to be an  appropriate independent variable  for our purposes. Further, our view is
that our approach reduces the risk of spurious regressions and biased estimators caused by non-
stationarity issues in our time-series variables.
     The variable  Xi,t  is a vector of control variables  containing the three-month moving
average of the Chicago Fed National Activity Index (CFNAI), the natural logarithm of the
monthly percentage change in the implied volatility series on the S&P 500 (Log ΔVIX), and
the components of the Fama-French 3-factor  model (SMB, HML, Rm-Rf). To capture  the
effects of firm-specific characteristics on stock returns we also include control variables for
profitability (ROCE) and leverage (D/A).
      To account for heterogeneous effects stemming from unobservable firm characteristics
that  could also  impact the monthly realized log returns for each stock in our sample, we extend
the model to include fixed effects on the firm level. Due to the structure of our data, where our
main variable of interest and  the  majority of controls  are constant across each entity in the
cross-section but  vary  over time, we do not add any time-fixed effects  -  as these effects  would
mechanically absorb the potential explanatory power of the EPU-index. Following Gulen and
Ion (2016) we instead  control for macroeconomic factors via the CFNAI. For robustness, we
compute Huber-White heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors. Equation (2) shows the final
regression equation, where  𝛼i  captures firm-specific fixed effects. Complete outputs of all tests
are reported in Table 3.

              𝐿𝑜𝑔  𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛!,#  =  𝛽$  +  𝛽%𝐿𝑜𝑔  ∆𝐸𝑃𝑈#  +  𝛽&𝑋!,#  +  𝛼!  +  𝜀!,#               (2)

                                     11
3.2   H1:  Predictability of stock returns

The second part of our first hypothesis is that policy uncertainty should positively predict future
returns  as investors sell stock in response to an increase in policy uncertainty, driving down
prices and increasing expected returns. To address this  question,  we construct a set of lagged
variables  of the EPU-index  which we incorporate  into  our model. Deciding on the number of
lags to consider is somewhat discretionary and different methods have been applied in the
literature.  Pástor  and Veronesi (2013) opted for  a  3, 6, and 12-month lag. Brogaard and Detzel
(2015) considered 1–3-, 6-, and 12  months. For this paper,  the main focus is on the  short-term
effects on stock  returns,  and we hence opt to consider 1–6 months of lag  in  the EPU index.
This decision is further supported by the high volatility in the index with spikes persistent only
for a short number of periods, as illustrated in  Figure  1.
      When testing the predictability of the EPU-index on stock return we run regressions with
the following specifications

              𝐿𝑜𝑔  𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛!,#  =  𝛽$  +  𝛽%𝐿𝑜𝑔  ∆𝐸𝑃𝑈# – )  +  𝛽&𝑋!,#  +  𝛼!  +  𝜀!,#            (3)

     Where Log ΔEPUt–k, denotes the monthly percentage change in the EPU-index by Baker,
Bloom, and Davis (2013), and k  ∈  {1,2, 3, 4, 5, 6} indicating the number of lags.  Xi,t  denotes
the vector of control variables used in equation  (1). Similar to equation  (2), we include firm
level fixed effects.

3.3   H2:  Policy uncertainty  and adverse  economic  conditions

To test for the second hypothesis, that policy uncertainty has a larger impact during worse
economic conditions, we run a similar fixed effects regression as above but include an
interaction term between Log ΔEPU and two indicators on the state of the economy.

    𝐿𝑜𝑔  𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛!,#  =  𝛽$  +  𝛽%𝐿𝑜𝑔∆𝐸𝑃𝑈#𝐸#  +  𝛽&𝑋!,#  +  𝛽*𝐿𝑜𝑔∆𝐸𝑃𝑈#  +  𝛽+𝐸#  +  𝛼!  +  𝜀!,#   (4)

Et is the indicator of economic activity, either the monthly recession indicator published by the
St. Louis FED or the three-month moving average of the Chicago Fed National Activity Index.
Log  ΔEPU  is the same as in equation  (1).  Xi,t  is the vector of the same control variables as in
equation  (1). For the regression that includes the interaction effect, we exclude the CFNAI-
variable from the set of control variables, as it is already present in  Et.
     The recession indicator is a dummy variable that takes the  value of 1 during recessions
and 0 otherwise. Since higher values of the recession dummy indicate less favorable conditions,
and higher values of  Log  ΔEPU  indicate an increase in uncertainty, our hypothesis is that
β1 <  0.
      For the interaction with CFNAI,  we use a slightly different specification to make the
interaction term easier to interpret. As both the CFNAI and  Log  ΔEPU  can take on negative
                                                                                                4
and positive values the interpretation of the β-coefficient would become very ambiguous. To
avoid this ambiguity and make the coefficient easier to interpret we use log-EPU instead of
ΔEPU in equation (4). As positive values of CFNAI indicate a stronger economy and negative
values indicate a weaker economy our hypothesis is that β1  > 0.

4
 For example: in a strong  economy (CFNAI > 0) and with decreasing EPU (ΔEPU  < 0), the interaction term
would be < 0 and we would expect positive returns (meaning, β < 0). However, in a weak economy (CFNAI < 0)
and with increasing EPU (ΔEPU > 0), the interaction term would also be < 0 but we would expect negative returns
(meaning, β > 0).

                                     12
3.4   H3:  Policy uncertainty  and  firm investments

For our purposes, firm investments  are  measured by using data on capital expenditures,
available on a quarterly basis for the firms in our dataset. We then run the following regression.

                      𝐶𝐴𝑃𝐸𝑋!,#  =  𝛽$  +  𝛽%∆𝐸𝑃𝑈#  +  𝛽&𝑋!,#  +  𝛼!  +  𝜀!,#                 (5)

Where  CAPEXi,t  is the quarterly capital expenditures expressed in  USD  millions. Opting for
the raw values of capital expenditures is a consequence of the structure of the capital
expenditures data. As the capital expenditures in our dataset take on both negative and positive
values, calculating the % change would yield inaccurate values for mathematical reasons which
would impact the accuracy of our models. Another approach would be to follow Gulen and Ion
(2016) and use the investment intensity (capital expenditures divided by sales). However,
assuming that capital expenditures are  stickier  compared to sales, the dependent variable could
change simply as a result of  changes in sales without any conscious decision from the firm to
change its investment behavior.
     Xi,t  is a vector of control variables including ΔVIX, CFNAI, ROCE,  and D/A. Similar to
equation  (2), to isolate the within-entity  change in capital expenditures for the firms in our
sample, we include firm fixed effects. Since the EPU-index is reported on a monthly basis
compared to the quarterly CAPEX data, we adjust ΔEPU  to match the frequency of reported
capital expenditures.  To find values that most accurately describe the uncertainty during a
quarter, we argue that the mean of the EPU-index during the quarter is appropriate to use, as it
represents the average level of policy uncertainty under which firms operate during a given
quarter. By only considering  the end-of-quarter levels of policy uncertainty, one would neglect
short-term EPU shocks that may occur within each quarter, which would impair the predictive
power of the model.  The method of using  the arithmetic mean of the EPU-index also follows
prior literature on this topic (see  Gulen and Ion,  2016). After calculating the quarterly  mean,
we proceed to compute the  quarter-on-quarter  change in the EPU-index, which is the ΔEPU.
We expect a negative coefficient, implying that firms cut back on investments when uncertainty
is higher.
      It is reasonable to assume that the effects of policy uncertainty on capital expenditures are
delayed rather than instant because firms may need time to gather and analyze information
about policy changes, assess the potential impacts on their business, and adjust their investment
plans accordingly. Furthermore, the actual investment process often involves a series of  time-
consuming  steps, including managerial and board approval, obtaining financing, making
projections,  and executing the investment plan. This should result in a lag between changes in
policy uncertainty and corresponding changes in capital expenditures. Hence, it is highly
relevant to further investigate if policy uncertainty shocks have a delayed impact on firm
investment beyond any potential impact during the same quarter.
     We test for this by simply replacing ΔEPUt  with ΔEPUt–k  in equation (5),  where
k  ∈  {1,  2,  3, 4} and denotes the number of quarterly lags applied in the model.

3.5   H4:  Policy uncertainty and investor sentiment

We proceed to investigate if the EPU-index  negatively  impacts investor sentiment, through  the
use of two different proxy variables, the Put/Call Ratio,  and the BW-index.  The Put/Call Ratio,
as mentioned in section 2, is the total volume of put options traded, divided by the total volume
of call options, which yields a simplistic but easy-to-interpret measure of how investors
respond to changes in uncertainty. A value  larger than 1 means that higher  relative  volumes  of

                                     13
put options are being traded which could be interpreted as market  wide skepticism  regarding
stock prices,  following an increased  demand for protection against downside risk.
      It is to be noted that the approach of using the Put/Call Ratio has its clear limitations.
Baker and Wurgler (2007) briefly discuss the difficulties in identifying a reliable and
uncontroversial proxy for investor sentiment. They opt for creating a composite index based
on components suggested in prior literature,  the  BW-index as  mentioned above in section 2.
To address these concerns, we run identical models with the BW-index instead of the Put/Call
Ratio to see if  the  results are consistent when substituting the measure for investor sentiment
to a more robust and less noisy  proxy.
     To test for the hypothesis that policy uncertainty negatively impacts investor sentiment
we run the following  regression.

                       𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡#  =  𝛽$  +  𝛽%∆𝐸𝑃𝑈#  +  𝛽&𝑋#  +  𝜀#                  (6)

Where  Sentimentt represents both measures for  investor sentiment, the Put/Call Ratio and BW-
index, respectively.  For this regression, the control variables included in  Xt  are ΔVIX and
CFNAI, in the same form as previously used. Our hypothesis suggests that an increase in EPU
would lead to a relative increase in the volume of traded puts, as demand for hedging against
downside risk increases, hence a β1  > 0. Conversely, the BW-index increases when sentiment
is higher, which means that we would expect a negative β1.

                                     14
4     Results

The following section briefly  presents the results  from  our  empirical analysis. Further
interpretations  and  critical reflections  are  presented in section  5.

4.1    Policy uncertainty and log-returns

The regression output in Table 3 shows the estimates and related t-statistics for our independent
variables when testing their relationship with log-returns as the dependent variable for both
regular OLS-  and fixed effect regressions. Our model suggests a negative and significant
relationship between economic policy uncertainty and log-returns  -  while controlling for

                                     15
market  wide risk factors, implied market volatility, the state of the US economy,  and firm-
specific characteristics for profitability and capital structure, as well as firm-level fixed effects.
The model suggests that a 1% increase in ΔEPU is associated with a -0.069% change in returns
for the same month.
     Based on the output in  Table  3, we find suggestive evidence in support of the hypothesis
that economic policy uncertainty does in fact negatively impact stock returns on an aggregated
level in the United States. The estimates for the ΔEPU are significant at the 0.1% level with all
specifications of the model.

4.2   The predictive  power of policy uncertainty

The output presented in  Table  4  shows the results from equation (3) and  suggests that policy
uncertainty may have a degree of predictive power on log-returns, beyond the immediate
effects shown in  Table  3. Lags 3, 4, and 5 of ΔEPU  are positively correlated with log returns,
and significant at the 1%, 0.1%, and 1%  levels  respectively.  The one-month lag of  ΔEPU  is
negatively correlated with log-returns, significant at the 0.1% level.

                                     16
The coefficients imply that a 1% increase in ΔEPU  is associated with a 0.003%, 0.004%, and
0.004% increase in returns 3, 4, and 5 months ahead.  Also, a 1% increase is associated with a
-0.008% change in return for the following month. These results support our hypothesis that
EPU shocks positively predict future log-returns, after a short-term decrease.

4.3   Policy uncertainty and log returns during adverse economic conditions

Table 5 shows the regression results of equation (4) where we test the hypothesis that the effect
of policy uncertainty on log-returns is stronger during adverse economic conditions. The output
suggests that policy uncertainty has a larger impact during recessions as the coefficient of the
interaction term between LogΔEPU and the recession dummy is negative and significant at the
0.1% level. The coefficient of  -0.0495% suggests that a 1% increase in ΔEPU  is associated
with a  -0.0495% change in return  during recessions.

                                     17
The interaction term between CFNAI and LogEPU is positive and significant at the 0.1% level,
which further supports the hypothesis  of amplified effects during economic downturns, as the
CFNAI is >0 when the economy is growing above trend.  As  mentioned in  section 3.3, we use
Log-EPU instead of ΔEPU  in the second regression  to avoid the ambiguity that otherwise
would arise regarding the interpretation of the coefficient given the structure  of the variables.
With the current structure, the interpretation is that when the economy is strong, the interaction
term will be positive and vice versa. Hence, a positive coefficient indicates that positive returns
are observed during stronger economic  periods, and negative returns are associated with a
weaker economy.

4.4   Policy uncertainty and firm investment

When testing the hypothesis that policy uncertainty has an adverse impact on firm investment
on a quarterly basis, the results presented in Table 6 show evidence in support of H4. Based on
the results of the model, changes in policy uncertainty have a negative and highly significant
effect on firm-level capital expenditures two quarters in the future, whereas the same-quarter
and the immediately following quarter are positively associated with shocks in policy
uncertainty. In short, a 1% increase in policy  uncertainty is related  to  a  0.1826 USD million
lower  capital expenditures two quarters in the future. The same 1% increase in the EPU-index

                                     18
is also associated with  0.1775 USD million  in  higher  capital expenditures for the  same quarter,
followed by  0.1157 USD million  in  higher  capital expenditure for the following quarter.

4.5   Policy uncertainty and investor sentiment

Table 7 presents the results of an OLS model testing the hypothesis that policy uncertainty has
a negative impact on investor sentiment, using  the volume-based total exchange Put/Call-ratio
as  the  dependent  variable.  The  model  suggests  a  positive  and  statistically  significant
relationship between changes in policy uncertainty and the ratio of traded put  and call options.
A 1% increase in policy  uncertainty triggers a 0.0011  increase in the Put/Call  Ratio, implying
that more put options are traded relative to call options, signaling that investors become more
skeptical. We find no significant relationship between the BW sentiment index and the  EPU-
index  for the same period.

                                     19
5     Discussion

The following section aims to further dissect and critically analyze the results presented in the
previous section, as well as highlight any potential limitations of our data and research design
that may give rise to biased results.

5.1   Policy uncertainty and its implications on stock returns

The empirical results presented in  Table  3  under  Section  4  suggest  that  we can confirm our
hypothesis that changes in policy uncertainty  are  negatively  associated  with US stock returns
for the same month. The result is expected and consistent with findings in previous literature
on the topic of uncertainty and stock returns (Pástor  and Veronesi 2013; Brogaard and Detzel
                                5
2015; Brogaard et al. 2020).  As shown in  Table  4, one lag of the change in EPU is also
negatively and significantly correlated with stock returns which further supports the thesis that
increases in policy uncertainty  are  associated with negative returns  in  the immediate and short
term.  This  implies  that the economic policy uncertainty index has the ability  to  negatively
predict  stock returns for the month following  an  uncertainty  shock.  From an intuitive point of
view, we could explain these results as investors failing to immediately and accurately estimate
the implication of uncertainty. Given the nature of a shock to policy uncertainty, it is reasonable
to expect that there is some uncertainty surrounding the actual level and implication of
uncertainty, making it difficult for investors to rationally  account for the implication of the
uncertainty.  Then, as the implications of the uncertainty shock become more observable it
allows investors to better account for the policy uncertainty. Our results are valuable as they
suggest that investors in general  (in the same month) underestimate uncertainty.
     As alluded to in section 4, our model suggests that policy uncertainty  also  has a  positive
predictive power on stock returns  further in the future. Specifically, Table 4 shows the positive
predictive power of policy uncertainty on stock returns in the 3–5 months following the policy
uncertainty shock. The results are  again  in line with the findings in prior literature. On one
hand, it could imply that investors are indeed rational and identify a change in risk,  or adjust
their forecasts as a result of a change in policy uncertainty. This change would then likely have
implications on their estimates of the fair value of the asset, or the required return of holding
that asset. If that is the case, the  asset  price would change to reflect that. Another explanation
could be that investors are irrational and overreact to the noise stemming from major shocks to
policy uncertainty, which subsequently  leads  to  a reversal in returns for the following periods
when  rational  investors  take  advantage  of  arbitrage  opportunities  following  potential
mispricing.  In section 3 we also discussed that uncertainty makes it difficult for investors to
forecast probability distributions which can interfere with the ability to make rational
investment decisions. In short, the result could both be a result of behavioral biases from
investors, and a result of the uncertainty altering probability distributions with unknown
consequences.  Another aspect to consider is the structure of the EPU-index. As illustrated in
Figure  1, the index is rather volatile and does not tend to remain at highly elevated levels for
long periods of time. Hence, another explanation of our results could be that as the uncertainty
is reduced  after a couple of months, investors  readjust their expectations with the new
information,  and asset prices adjust accordingly.
     Brogaard et al. (2020) found that returns  tended  to revert and increase again after the
outcome  of an uncertain election was revealed. They also find evidence that it is the discount

5
  These authors take slightly different approaches in their empirical work. Pástor and Veronesi (2013) and
Brogaard and Detzel suggest policy uncertainty demands a positive risk premium which is consistent with stock
prices immediately dropping as the policy uncertainty increases. Brogaard et al. (2020) find that stock returns are
negatively impacted during the period leading up to US elections.

                                     20
rate that drives the impact of uncertainty on returns. This resonates well with our theory that
investors, when faced with uncertainty (either through  a  shock or an upcoming election) are
unable to accurately predict probability distributions and when the uncertainty is resolved they
are once again able to make better predictions which is reflected in stock returns.
     It is important to note that we have found no evidence  of  causality,  or  proved that policy
uncertainty is what  causes the movements on the US stock market. The relatively low
explanatory power of our models further suggests that we likely excluded important control
variables, which could have a  material impact on our statistical model.
     In section 2 we also mention that finding a truly exogenous measurement of policy
uncertainty is complicated (Kelly et al. 2016). Given how the EPU-index is structured, with
two of the three components likely being sensitive to changes in other variables (newspaper
component and disagreement amongst forecasters) it is possible that we are failing to identify
variables that could have a causal impact on both the EPU-index and stock returns. There is
also the possibility that significant stock market events, bankruptcies,  and scandals could raise
a need for policy intervention which in turn leads to an increase in uncertainty,  i.e.,  we could
face  a form of  reverse causality.  However,  it is important to  note  that we do  not find any
evidence for that  kind of alternative interpretation of our results.
     Another important limitation of our models is related to the sample selection bias. As we
only include mid-  and large-cap firms listed on NYSE (> $2bn  in  market capitalization) we
disregard both smaller firms and firms listed on other exchanges. Thus, we are not able to make
any broader inferences for the entire US stock market or firm universe, but only on stocks
filling the  above-mentioned  criteria.
     An interesting and perhaps slightly counterintuitive observation is that the  β-estimate for
the CFNAI is negative, meaning that a better state of the economy has a negative correlation
with stock returns. One explanation for this could simply be inaccuracies in our model. Another
possible explanation can be provided by  Pástor  and Veronesi (2013) where they discuss the
potential value of what they refer to as the “Greenspan Put” or the “Government put
protection”.  I.e.,  the fact that governments are more likely to intervene during worse economic
times, which provides a put protection on asset prices and hence could mitigate the negative
impact of  worsening  economic conditions.  A somewhat related aspect also highly relevant for
asset prices is the federal funds rate. As seen during the past months of the rate-hiking cycle,
indications of better economic conditions can imply that the Federal Reserve will increase rates
further or at a higher pace to “cool off” the economy  and bring inflation down to the target.
This in turn  could lead to lower liquidity and higher interest rates  which all  else equal should
drive prices down.  In short,  when the economy is strong and growing above trend it  might lead
to the expectation of higher interest rates which depress asset prices. However, we  do not aim
to make any definite conclusions  here,  and for the purpose of this paper,  we will not investigate
this  relationship  any deeper.

5.2    Policy uncertainty, adverse economic conditions, and log-returns

As  Pástor  and Veronesi’s (2013) theoretical model suggests, we find that the  correlation
between policy uncertainty  and  stock returns  is  significant and negative during periods of
adverse economic conditions. As discussed above  in section 5.1  and in section 1.1  there is a
possibility that the put protection during recessions could counteract the effect, but the result
seems more supportive of our hypothesis that the expected value of this protection decreases
when there is a policy uncertainty shock during recessionary periods,  as it becomes uncertain
if this government put protection still exists to the same extent. In short, the findings in this
section support our second hypothesis that investors are more sensitive to uncertainty shocks

                                     21
during periods of adverse economic conditions.  However,  it is important to notice that the
limitations  of our model  mentioned above  in section 5.1  still apply to the empirical analysis.

5.3   Policy uncertainty and firm investments

Our study provides suggestive evidence of a delayed relationship between changes in policy
uncertainty and capital expenditures, most significant at the two-quarter lag. These results are
in line with our hypothesis and consistent with the notion that the  value of deferring
investments increases as firms are faced with higher uncertainty. The intuition behind such
results  is, as previously mentioned, that uncertainty distorts agents’ ability to accurately assess
and forecast the risks and outcomes of capital investments. However, a potential problem arises
as we are only including mid-and large cap firms listed on NYSE in our sample. This selection
bias limits our ability to make inferences that  apply  to a wider variety of firms, such as early
start-ups and  scale-up firms where the  decision-making  process for investments may look
entirely different. One could argue that such firms have less flexibility when it comes to
deferring investments that are crucial for scaling operations in  the  early stages of their  life
cycle, which is not captured in our  empirical analysis. Firms may also differ substantially in
their ability to reverse investments, and the associated cost of doing so. The value of deferring
an investment is not relevant if investments can be easily reversed, as no benefits can be seized
by waiting for more information. Gulen  and  Ion (2016) find empirical evidence that  supports
this claim by controlling for four different measures of investment  irreversibility and  find that
higher investment irreversibility amplifies a firm’s sensitivity to policy uncertainty in the
context of corporate investments. Furthermore, as firms operate in different industries with
varying levels of capital intensity, among other things, our model is unable to comment on
sector characteristics that may impact firms’ sensitivity  to  policy uncertainty. Baker et al.
(2016) find that firms that operate within policy-sensitive sectors such as defense, health care,
and financial services are especially responsive to policy uncertainty, as they are highly
dependent on government contracts and are more exposed to shifts in regulatory policy. Such
industry  differences  undoubtedly  affect  the  relationship  between  uncertainty  and  firm
investment, and it would be of great value to conduct sector-level analyses with a more
heterogeneous sample of firms to address issues of this nature.
     We also find that the  short-term  relationship between capital expenditures and policy
uncertainty is positive, which  to us  appears somewhat  surprising  as  it contradicts our
hypothesis that we  would find  a  negative relationship  between  policy uncertainty and  firm
investments.  This also contradicts  the findings from Gulen and Ion (2016), but one should note
that we are using a different method and studies the actual capital expenditures and not the
intensity relative to sales.  One  potential explanation, although  very speculative,  could be that
firms increase their  short-term investments  to hedge for  a potential increase in  the  cost of
capital as a result of the uncertainty.  One could also consider  a scenario  where  firms operating
in favorable regulatory environments increase their  immediate  capital expenditures to capture
the benefits from  existing opportunities  that could be at risk  following  an  uncertainty  shock.

5.4   Policy uncertainty and  investor sentiment

As hypothesized, our results suggest a positive correlation between changes in policy
uncertainty and the Put/Call Ratio, or in other words; a negative relationship between policy
uncertainty and  market  wide investor sentiment. As the levels of policy uncertainty grow
higher, it’s reasonable to assume that the demand for hedging the risk of unfavorable outcomes
grows as a result. Kelly et al. (2016) show that option protection is more valuable, and as a
result more expensive, if a major political event lies within the option’s life span. Their results
imply a significant and positive relationship between put prices and political uncertainty, which

                                     22
is amplified in weak economic conditions. Our findings  act as a complement to these results,
as it shows how the demand for downside protection increases in response to higher
uncertainty, even though put options are priced higher in these periods. Combined, these results
suggest that  uncertainty increases the value of put protection in financial  markets and that
investors are willing to pay for it  –  as demonstrated by the significant relationship with the
Put/Call Ratio.
     Interestingly, we do not find any significant correlation between economic policy
uncertainty and the BW sentiment index. This could simply be a consequence of a rather limited
sample size,  or that there is no significant relationship between that sentiment proxy and
uncertainty.  The latter case  could highlight that the Put/Call  Ratio is not as  suitable  of a  proxy
for investor sentiment  as the more robust BW-index. However, we still believe that the results
we find are valuable as the Put/Call  Ratio  clearly  illustrates the response of investors when
uncertainty changes, through the lens of tangible trading data, which matches the action-based
perspective that we aim to develop through our empirical methodology.  The BW-index may
be a less noisy and more appropriate proxy for overall sentiment in the market, but  since  we
are interested in investors’ actions, and not the overall market attitude, the Put/Call Ratio paints
a clear and  intuitive  picture of investors’ actions following a shift in sentiment or beliefs.
     Given the relatively simple empirical method, there is a possibility that important control
variables are omitted from our model. Hence, a more robust statistical analysis of the
relationship would be valuable for future researchers to consider.
     Despite the different and  arguably  less sophisticated proxy for investor sentiment used  in
this study, the possibility to find interesting conclusions on the back of prior research still
exists. Both Baker and Wurgler (2006) and Huang, Jiang, Tu, and Zhou (2015) find empirical
evidence that investor sentiment has a degree of predictive power on stock returns. The latter
find that a positive sentiment leads to overly optimistic estimates and judgments,  which is
predictive of  lower returns  in future periods. Combining this result with the correlation we find
between policy uncertainty and  the Put/Call Ratio  there is an argument to be made that policy
uncertainty can have an impact on investor sentiment which in turn is driving  some of  the
predictive power  of future returns.  Another relevant aspect to consider from Huang, Jiang, Tu,
and  Zhou  (2015)  is  their  findings  regarding  which  underlying  channel  drives  return
predictability.   Their   empirical   results   suggest   that   investor   sentiment   negatively   and
significantly predicts future cash flows (using dividend growth as a proxy),  which drives the
predictability of the returns. But they find no evidence for investor sentiment being able to
forecast the dividend-price ratio (a proxy for discount rate), implying that it is the cash-flow
channel that is driving the predictability in the US. A plausible interpretation would be that
positive investor sentiment is associated with optimistic beliefs about future cash flows that are
not justified by fundamentals. When the true state of the cash flows then  is  revealed, stocks
adjust accordingly.
     Interestingly, Brogaard et al. (2020)  find  that the impact of  election  uncertainty on stock
returns  is  mainly  driven  by  the discount-rate channel. At first,  this might appear contradicting,
but when considering the notable difference between our proxy for uncertainty (EPU-index)
and theirs (federal elections),  the result does not have to be counterintuitive. On one hand, it is
perfectly reasonable that investors,  when facing uncertainty regarding the outcome of an
election,  would demand a higher return for holding stocks leading up to the election. On the
other hand, when faced with a shock to uncertainty,  such as Covid-19,  it is  also plausible  that
investor sentiment rapidly decreases and investors as a consequence overestimate the negative
impact on future cash flow, rather than demanding higher returns for holding stocks during the
time of uncertainty. Further disentangling which of the traditional channels  explains the
predictive  power  of EPU-index on returns could be a meaningful extension of our analysis.

                                     23
6     Robustness &  external  validity

The following section presents a brief discussion of the robustness and external validity of the
results gathered in previous sections by applying our methodology to different  contexts.
Section 6.1 presents a short and selective non-US study  to see if our  results apply to European
economies, and Section 6.2 considers potential heterogeneous effects in a subset of 30 different
US industries.

6.1   Policy uncertainty and index returns in Sweden and the United Kingdoms

To test the validity of our results outside of  the US, we extend our methodology to a European
setting by testing whether Swedish and UK index returns are sensitive to policy uncertainty.
To do this, we download monthly value-weighted returns for Sweden and the United Kingdom
from WRDS monthly World Indices database, and the corresponding policy uncertainty
                             6
indexes for both countries.  We then proceed to regress these index returns on both the US
economic policy uncertainty and the respective  countries'  economic policy uncertainty, to
capture both domestic uncertainty effects and potential spillovers from the US. Brogaard et al.
(2020) showed that uncertainty  surrounding  elections  has  cross-border implications, which
warrants a quick investigation if that transfers to the economic policy uncertainty index as well.
Our results are in line with the results we present in section 4  and prior research on this topic.
Shocks in the US economic policy uncertainty and the country-specific economic policy
uncertainty are negatively and significantly correlated with same-period returns in both Sweden
and the United Kingdom.

6.2   Policy uncertainty and industry heterogeneity

In section 4 above we found suggestive evidence that shocks to policy uncertainty are
associated with a negative impact on stock returns. While we, in our regressions, controlled for
firm fixed effects we disregard industry belonging  and thus ignore potential heterogeneous
effects that may be of importance. Prior studies have shown that some sectoral returns are only
weakly predictable  or unpredictable (see Phan, Sharma, and Tran, 2018)  in relation to
uncertainty. Hence, it is unlikely that the relationship between uncertainty and stock returns is
homogeneous across all industries. Due to this, investigating if the relationship differs across
industries  is  both  relevant  and  interesting  to  understand,  as  there  may  be  potential
heterogeneous effects that affect cross-industry sensitivity to policy uncertainty.
     Baker et al. (2016) found that industries that are relatively exposed to government
spending are more sensitive to changes in policy uncertainty. More specifically they find that
volatility for these firms  increases, while investments and employment decrease during times
of high policy uncertainty. In their paper,  they specifically refer to policy-sensitive industries
such as defense, health care, finance, and infrastructure construction. They also proceed to
study industry-specific uncertainty and find that defense, health care,  and financial sectors are
especially sensitive to each own industry uncertainty measure.
     Other research on this topic finds similar results. Gulen and Ion (2016)  show  that the
relationship between firm-level capital expenditures and policy uncertainty is significantly
stronger for firms that are more dependent on government spending and for firms with a high
degree of investment irreversibility. From an intuitive standpoint,  the  degree of  irreversibility
is  likely  different across industries. For example, industries that require large up-front

6
 The monthly index return data is available from 1986–2022 for both countries. The Swedish economic policy
uncertainty index covers the entire period. For the United Kingdom, the economic policy uncertainty data is
available from 1998 and onwards.

                                     24
commitments/investments such as ship-  or aircraft-manufacturing, construction, or oil and gas
might face higher irreversibility and thus also be more sensitive to policy uncertainty.
     Boutchkova, Doshi, Durnev, and Molchanov (2012) study  how the return volatility of
different industries  is  sensitive to political events. Their results indicate that industries that are
more dependent on trade, contract enforcement, and labor  intensity  show greater return
volatility when local political risks are higher.
     To  find industry returns we download the Fama-French value-weighted 30-industry
portfolios, which  classify  industries using 4-digit SIC  codes. The dataset and industry-specific
control variables are available via Compustat.
     We run regressions for each of the 30 industries with specifications similar to that of
equation  (1) where log-returns instead are the  log-transformed  value-weighted average return
for each industry, and the firm-specific controls are replaced by industry  averages. Results are
reported in  Table  8, showing all significant coefficients of interest and excluding the rest.
     We find modest evidence for the theory that industries are heterogeneous in their
sensitivity to policy uncertainty shocks, and our  results  are not entirely consistent with prior
literature on volatility and investment. For example, Baker et al. (2016) suggested that the
volatility, investment,  and employment growth in the health care, defense,  and financial
services industries would be more  sensitive to a higher level of uncertainty. Our model,
however,  suggests that the relationship between policy uncertainty and same-period returns for
the health care industry is positive. Despite us studying returns, not volatility and investments,
one could reasonably expect that the results would be somewhat transferable in terms of which
industries are most sensitive to policy uncertainty. This could imply that the results from the
investment, volatility,  and employment literature are  not completely transferable to the study
of stock returns, but it could also be the case that our limited sample size and industry
classifications impair our ability to accurately compare these studies against our own results.
     On the other hand, Gulen and Ion (2016) find  that investments in firms with a higher
degree of investment irreversibility are more sensitive to higher uncertainty levels. More
specifically, they consider industries that produce durable goods to be associated with a high
degree of investment irreversibility.  Shleifer and Vishny (1992)  provide the intuition behind
this  methodology by showcasing that firms in industries characterized by  a  high  degree of
cyclicality, such as producers of durable goods, should be simultaneously affected by negative
demand  shocks as the main buyers of these goods tend to operate within the same industry.
When hit by a negative demand shock, or in our case  -  uncertainty, firms operating in highly
cyclical industries disinvest and become more financially constrained, hence lowering the
demand and recovery value of their assets, which could,  in turn,  explain the lower returns
following uncertainty shocks.  Studying our output in  Table  8, several of the industries with
negative and significant  relationships  between returns and policy uncertainty shocks do  seem
to belong to industries that produce durable goods, suggesting that the results have some degree
of theoretical support from the literature on uncertainty and capital expenditures.

                                     25
It is important to highlight that 23  out of the 30 industries did not yield any significant results
between policy uncertainty and value-weighted industry log returns. This could imply that there
are no significant relationships for those 23 industries, or that 395 monthly observations  are
not enough to find any statistically significant relationships.  However, it is strange given the
highly significant results presented in section 4  that we do not find  more  significant  results  in
this section. If  the  reality is that there  are  no significant relationships  between uncertainty and
returns in 23 out of 30 industries,  the ability to translate our aggregated results into actionable
insights for policymakers and  investors  is notably impaired.

                                     26
7     Conclusion

This paper provides additional evidence regarding the relationship between policy uncertainty
and stock returns, firm  investment,  and investor sentiment.  First,  we show that policy
uncertainty is negatively correlated with same-period stock returns  and that this effect is
amplified in times of worsening economic conditions. Second, we show that policy uncertainty
positively predicts stock returns in the 3–5 months past an uncertainty shock, providing support
to the theory and evidence of policy uncertainty demanding a risk premium.  Our models show
mixed evidence when testing the effects of policy uncertainty on capital expenditures, but
suggest  a delayed negative  effect two quarters into the future, implying that uncertainty may
be a factor affecting investment decisions within firms.  Furthermore, our study highlights how
policy uncertainty impacts investor behavior and increases demand for downside protection in
financial markets through its effect on the Put/Call Ratio, but fails to establish a statistically
reliable correlation with a more robust measure of investor sentiment.
     In conclusion,  our study has contributed to the understanding of  how stocks, firms, and
investors are impacted by economic policy uncertainty.  By better understanding how these
market actors  react to ambiguity and lack of transparency surrounding policy decisions,
policymakers can take steps to mitigate  uncertainty and avoid  its negative effects  on the
economy  and financial markets.  With our results in mind, market participants  can better
anticipate, assess,  and manage risks  stemming from  uncertainty, ultimately leading to  more
rational and  informed decision-making.

                                     27
References

Bachmann, R., Elstner, S., & Sims, E. R. (2013). Uncertainty and economic activity: Evidence
     from business survey data.  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5(2), 217-49.
    doi:10.1257/mac.5.2.217

Baker, M., & Wurgler, J. (2006). Investor sentiment and the cross-section of stock returns. The
     Journal of Finance, 61(4), 1645-1680. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6261.2006.00885.x

Baker, M., & Wurgler, J. (2007). Investor sentiment in the stock market.  The Journal of
    Economic       Perspectives,       21(2),       129-151.       Retrieved       from
     http://www.jstor.org/stable/30033721

Baker, S.R. Bloom, N. and Davis, S. J., Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty  (2013).
Chicago Booth Research Paper No. 13-02.  doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2198490

Baker, S. R., Bloom, N., & Davis, S. J. (2016). Measuring economic policy uncertainty.  The
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4),  1593-1636. doi:10.1093/qje/qjw024

Debusmann, B. JR.,  Debt ceiling: Janet Yellen warns US could run out of cash by  1 June,
    BBC News,  May 2.  https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-65452444

Bernanke, B. S. (1983).  Irreversibility, uncertainty, and cyclical investment.  The Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 98(1), 85-106. doi:10.2307/1885568

Birru, J., & Young, T. (2022). Sentiment and uncertainty.  Journal of Financial Economics,
     146(3), 1148-1169. doi:10.1016/j.jfineco.2022.05.005

Bloom, N. (2009). The impact of uncertainty shocks. Econometrica, 77(3), 623-685. Retrieved
    from  http://www.jstor.org/stable/40263840

Boutchkova, M., Doshi, H., Durnev, A., & Molchanov, A. (2012). Precarious politics and
     return  volatility.  The Review of Financial Studies, 25(4), 1111-1154. Retrieved from
     http://www.jstor.org/stable/41407857

Brogaard, J., Dai, L., Ngo, P. T. H., & Zhang, B. (2020). Global political uncertainty and asset
     prices.  The Review of Financial Studies, 33(4), 1737-1780. doi:10.1093/rfs/hhz087

Brogaard, J., & Detzel, A. (2015). The asset-pricing implications of government economic
    policy    uncertainty.    Management    Science,    61(1),    3-18.    Retrieved    from
     http://www.jstor.org/stable/24551068

Gulen, H., & Ion, M. (2016). Policy uncertainty and corporate investment.  The Review of
     Financial Studies, 29(3), 523-564. doi:10.1093/rfs/hhv050

Huang, D., Jiang, F., Tu, J., & Zhou, G. (2015). Investor sentiment aligned: A powerful
     predictor of stock returns.  The Review of Financial Studies, 28(3), 791-837. Retrieved
    from  http://www.jstor.org/stable/24465727

                                     28
Imbert, F., & Cheng, E., 2016. Dow closes up 250 points; financials surge after Trump election
     upset. CNBC, November 9.  https://www.cnbc.com/2016/11/09/us-markets.html

Jones, P. M., & Olson, E. (2013). The time-varying correlation between uncertainty, output,
     and inflation:  Evidence from a DCC-GARCH model.  Economics Letters, 118(1), 33-37.
     doi:10.1016/j.econlet.2012.09.012

Kelly, B., Pástor, Ľ, & Veronesi, P. (2016). The price of political uncertainty: Theory and
     evidence   from   the   option   market.   The   Journal   of   Finance,   71(5),   2417-2480.
     doi:10.1111/jofi.12406

Knight, F. H. (1921).  Risk, uncertainty and profit. Boston, Houghton Mifflin.

Pástor, Ľ, & Veronesi, P. (2013). Political uncertainty and risk premia.  Journal of Financial
     Economics, 110(3), 520-545. doi:10.1016/j.jfineco.2013.08.007

Phan, D. H. B., Sharma, S. S., & Tran, V. T. (2018). Can economic policy uncertainty predict
     stock returns? global evidence.  Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions
     and Money, 55, 134-150. doi:10.1016/j.intfin.2018.04.004

Shleifer, A., & Vishny, R. W. (1992). Liquidation values and debt capacity: A market
equilibrium approach.  The Journal of Finance, 47(4), 1343-1366. doi:10.2307/2328943

                                     29
Appendix 1

1.A

1.B

      This graph illustrates the US policy  uncertainty index developed by Baker, Bloom,  and Davis (2013)
      between 1990 and 2022. Recessions, classified by the St. Louis FED recession indicators, are highlighted
      in red. For an annotated index, see below.

                                     30
1.C

Figure 2: Annotated US policy uncertainty index between 1985 and 2019, with major events
highlighted

                                     31