  Broken promises:  The failure of green
     stock outperformance in Europe

The importance of rating coherence

ELLEN HÅDÉN
EBBA GRAFF-LONNEVIG

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2023
Broken promises: The failure of green  stock outperformance in Europe

Abstract

Increasing  interest  for sustainable investment have caused  a trend within the investment
sector towards more ESG engagements.  Our study finds no  outperformance of  green
portfolios  over brown portfolios, when using  industry-adjusted environmental pillar scores.
The same applies  when controlling for unexpected climate concerns.  However,  we  do find
evidence of  across-industry greenness having more impact on stock returns  when including
both  measures of  greenness.  This indicates that within-industry alone does not have the
capacity to capture stock return variations to explain any green outperformance.  Lastly, we
provide evidence that  the choice of  model in calculating  unexpected climate concerns
significantly impacts  the  interaction  between greenness and unexpected climate concerns.

Keywords

Sustainable investing; ESG; Environment; Climate change; Green stocks

Authors

Ellen Hådén (24947)
Ebba Graff-Lonnevig (24937)

Supervisor

Mehran Ebraheimian, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner

Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Acknowledgements
We would like to direct our gratitude towards our supervisor Mehran Ebraheimian,  assistant
professor at the Stockholm School of Economics,  for providing us with guidance and
valuable insights throughout the research process.  We would also like to thank our  friends
and family for the great support.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Management
Stockholm School of Economics
© Ellen Hådén and Ebba Graff-Lonnevig, 2023

                                     2
Over the past decade the importance of sustainable investments  has  been widely debated in
financial literature. In 2022, $2.5 trillion were invested in Global ESG fund assets, where
Europe accounted for $2.1 trillion of these, which corresponds to the region representing 83%
of investments in Global ESG fund assets (Baker, 2023). Thus, the demand for sustainability
in the investment sector can be viewed as high, however, discussions  remain  regarding the
impact of these more specific investments.
       Furthermore, there are divergences in literature on whether CSR and ESG
investments benefit  corporations. Relating back to Milton Friedman’s doctrine (Friedman,
1970), the agency theory view on corporate responsibility aligns with Friedmans questioning
on the claim that firms have responsibilities towards society other than to increase profits. A
summarizing study by Friede, Busch and Bassen (2015)  examine  the results from over 2000
studies within the field of ESG relation to financial performance, where 90% of the studies
demonstrates a non-negative relationship between ESG and company financial  performance.
Likewise, there is a trend within the investment sector towards more extended ESG
engagement (Uzoki 2020). Zerbib (2019) suggests there is a green bond premium because of
investor non-pecuniary motives. Baldauf, Garlappi and Yannelis (2020) detects changes in
consumer preferences in the real estate market, where climate crises are shown to cause a
more conscious consumer behavior. Large asset management companies also advise their
customers to invest in ESG stocks. For example, BlackRock in a recent report claims that
sustainability is their “standard for investing” while also promoting their product screener to
match customer preferences with  companies’  sustainability goals (BlackRock,  2023). From
this we can conclude that there is a clear demand for ESG investments in the stock market,
both from asset managers and private investors.
       Previous research investigating the impact of ESG engagements on financial
performance as well as stock returns, have  examined  regional as well as global markets.
However, the primary focus of these studies  has  been with regards to the US stock market (or
                                 1
markets with global actors) . Thus,  factors such as emerging vs developed markets, high-
income vs developing countries and varying regulations and jurisdictions with regards to
ESG reporting might be overlooked due to gaps in the body of research. In most of Europe,
laws and jurisdictions now demand firms to take action, for example, as ESG reporting is
mandatory in the EU due to  the  non-financial  reporting directive, founded by the European
Commission in 2014 (Directive  2014/95/EU  of the European Parliament and of the Council,
2014).  As a result of differences in regulation in  Europe  and the US, EU firms outperform US
firms in ESG disclosures (Rezaee, Homayoun, Poursoleyman and Rezaee, 2023).
Additionally, the European market performs better on average in terms of Environmental and
Social scores (Auer, Schuhmacher,  2016) and Liang and Renneboog (2017) find a strong
correlation between the firm's legal origin and their CSR score, where Scandinavian legal
origins give the highest correlation with high CSR scores. One of the main objectives of this
study is therefore to address the question of stock performance of green portfolios vs  brown
portfolios in Europe.
       The fact that ESG data providers differ in their nature is well established.  One  of the
main objectives of these organizations  is to prevent information asymmetry. However, the
differences in these agencies' processes to obtain  ESG scores, creates obstacles that are hard to
combat.  Several previous studies have examined the differences and biases of the major ESG
agencies that today gather and provide ESG scores for firms worldwide. Even among the
prominent global ESG rating agencies, Dorfleitner,  Halbritter  and  Nguyen  and Sparrer (2015)

1
 Top 10 most cited articles when searching on ESG and stock returns on google scholar, adopt a  sample set
either from firms listed on S&P 500 or use a global universe as sample for their studies.

                                     3
and Chatterji Durand, Levine, and Touboul  (2016) highlight the absence of consistent ESG
measurement frameworks, where they also report a lack of homogeneity amongst ESG rating
agencies. A study  by Berg, Kolbel and Rigobon (2022) examines the divergence between the
scoring system that rating agencies use. The study investigates categories and their respective
scores from six global ESG agencies. Their findings suggest that the main issue of divergence
in scores is due to measurement divergence, i.e.,  the difference in choice of methodology to
realize the scores. However, there are also instances of the same methodology being applied
using different databases where results have been similar (Demers,  Hendrikse et al. 2021).
Another objective of our study is therefore to use the methodology of Pástor, Stambaugh et al.
(2022) to examine stock returns of green vs brown portfolios using a different ESG database
than the original paper.

The aim of the study is to replicate the  green-minus-brown estimation of  Dissecting Green
Returns  (Pástor, Stambaugh et al. 2022)  to  answer the following research question:

       Do green portfolios outperform  brown portfolios in the European market?

There are several challenges in examining green stock performance.  Firstly, there is a great
disparity in methodologies used and few replications in the field. We address this by applying
the same methodology as Pastor, Stambaugh et al (2022) with another database for ESG scores
to examine European and US stock returns separately.  Secondly, green stock can temporarily
outperform brown stocks due to immediate stock price effects  occurring from  unexpected
climate concerns (Pástor, Stambaugh et al. 2021).  The outperformance is explained through
two aspects; Firstly, the demand from investors for green assets which directly increases these
assets prices, and secondly, the demand from consumers for green  products, which increases
company profits that consequently drives up stock prices (Pástor, Stambaugh et al. 2021). We
address this by incorporating unexpected climate concerns in our regressions by using the
MCCC index as a proxy for  climate  sentiment.
       To address the first challenge, we estimate the green-minus-brown factor (from now on
referred to as GMB factor) for a sample of 723 European firms during the period November
2012 to December 2020. The greenness measure  used is the Refinitiv Eikon environmental
pillar score, which is industry-adjusted. Brown  portfolios contain firms with the ⅓ lowest
environmental scores, while the green portfolios contain the firms with the ⅓ highest
environmental scores. The portfolios are constructed in June each year and the returns are value
weighted. Time series regressions are performed on the difference of monthly green and brown
value-weighted portfolio returns which are performed according to the methodology of Fama
and French (Fama, French 2015) (Fama, French 1992) and Carhart (Carhart 1997). For
comparison objectives, we repeat this analysis for a sample of 674 US firms.  Our results give
no incentive to believe that there is an outperformance of green portfolios over brown portfolios
for either  geographic region, when using industry-adjusted environmental pillar scores.
However, we find evidence for differences between the regions as  our estimates of  the US
GMB factors are negative and significant  whilst we  cannot find evidence  for  the European
GMB factors differing from  zero.
       To address the second challenge, two different analyses  are conducted.  The MCCC
index (both  2020 and updated 2022 version)  is  used to calculate unexpected climate concerns
through a rolling AR  (1) model with an estimation period of 36 months. First, an aggregated
analysis with regular OLS regressions  is  used to analyze GMB returns and GMB alphas when

                                     4
controlled for unexpected climate concerns (for both current and previous month). Then, we
use a fixed effects panel regressions to analyze the effect of within-industry and across-industry
greenness on firm stock performance at individual level.  Here, the two measures of greenness
are interacted with both same and previous month unexpected climate concern.  The across-
industry  greenness  here is the industry-averages of GICS categories and subcategories,  as
collected from  Pástor et.  al (2022).  For  comparison objectives, we repeat this analysis for US
firms.  After having included  across-industry greenness,  we find evidence of across-industry
greenness having more impact on stock returns. This in turn indicates that within-industry alone
does  not  have  the  capacity  to  capture  stock  return  variations  to  explain  any  green
outperformance.
       In a further analysis, we also examine the difference between using a rolling AR  (1)
and rolling AR  (2) model to estimate unexpected climate concerns. The intuition behind this is
that since the regressions containing unexpected climate concerns are in principle multi-step
regressions due to the calculations of unexpected climate concerns, small changes in
unexpected climate concerns can greatly impact the regression results. Furthermore, there is a
risk of a rolling AR  (1) model not being able to properly capture trends lasting several months,
which a model containing more months might be able to do. Therefore, we concentrate the last
part of our analysis on this issue, constructing a new index for unexpected climate concerns
from the rolling AR (2) model. First, an aggregated analysis with regular OLS regressions were
used to analyze GMB returns and GMB alphas when controlled for unexpected climate
concerns (for both current and previous month). Then, we use a fixed effects panel regressions
to  analyze  the  effect  of  within-industry  and  across-industry  greenness  on  firm  stock
performance at individual level. The results from these are later compared with the results from
the regressions having used the rolling AR (1) model. Here, we provide evidence that the choice
of model in calculating unexpected climate concerns significantly impacts the interaction
between greenness and unexpected climate concerns.

The remainder of the  paper will be structured as follows. Section I. Covers close papers on the
key concepts applied, as well as our contribution to current body of literature. Section II.
Presents the data and methodology used. Section III. Consists of the empirical analysis  on the
performance of green stocks in the EU. Whilst  Section IV. Discusses the results guided by the
results from the empirical analysis as well as the key concepts of previous literature.  Finally,
Section V. concludes the paper.

                                     5
                     I.    Related Literature

1.1 Divergence in literature; Perspective and Methodology
There is various literature covering ESG stock performance and its implications. However,  the
variation  in perspective, procedures and methodology applied are distinctive  even though the
studies  seem to investigate and explain the same phenomenon at first.  For example,  Dissecting
green returns  by Pástor et. al (2022) applies the lens of the investor through examining how
well environmental scores can predict future stock returns, while  ESG  controversies and
controversial ESG: about silent saints and small sinners  by Dorfleitner et. al (2020) instead
explains the relationship between  Corporate Financial Performance  and  Corporate Social
Performance  from a firm perspective, suggesting the importance of how companies are
presented in the light of ESG engagement. These two articles reflect the widespread differences
that compose the current gaps in literature. Despite the similarities in applied methodology for
the two articles, as both studies apply the Fama and French five factor model, the starting point
and fundamental approaches cause divergence.
       Similar to the approach by Pástor et. al (2022), Ardia, Bluteau, Boudt, and Inghelbrecht
(2020) examines the effect of increasing climate concerns on green stock performance, by both
portfolio-analysis and individual-level fixed effects regression.  The main difference between
the studies is the construction of the greenness measure, as  greenness  is defined as greenhouse
gas emission scaled by firm revenue  in the study by Ardia et.  al (2020).
        Thus, consistency of methodology in literature is limited to the extent that studies on
ESG stock performance often apply different procedures while focusing on different explaining
factors  to  justify their results.  We contribute to this existing gap in literature through  applying
a different ESG  database (Refinitiv Eikon), while  replicating  the  procedure  by Pástor et. al
(2022),  thus withstanding our stance on consistency in the subject of ESG stock performance.
Further, the MCCC index used in Pástor et. al (2022) has since been updated so that the index
covers a larger scope of newspapers. We will thus use this more extensive sample in our
analysis with the aim to contribute through as accurate and up-to-date results as possible with
regards to current available data.

1.2  Geographic and regulatory factors effect on the stock market
Few  studies  have examined  sample sets  that are limited to stock markets connected to
geographically smaller countries.  However,  a study that  focuses  on  the stock market in a
smaller country was conducted in 2020 by Fiskerstrand, Fjeldavli, Leirvik,  Antoniuk, and
Nenadić  (2020).  The main conclusion and accordingly the contribution of the paper is that  an
abnormal risk-adjusted return should not be expected by investors that decide to invest in
portfolios with high ESG scores (Fiskerstrand, Fjeldavli et al. 2020).
        Further, a study by Bermejo Climent, Figuerola-Ferretti Garrigues, Paraskevopoulos,
and Santos (2021) uses a two step-regression according to Fama and McBeth (1973) on
monthly stock returns from a sample of 6211 European firms. From analyzing the ESG
disclosure effect on returns, they find evidence for a significant governmental effect on returns,
suggesting that firms are more likely to report transparent information with governmental
character.  However,  it should be noted that  they find no significant effect of the  environmental
pillar or the social pillar.
       The European market consists of a broad range of companies characterized by strategies
aligning with ESG as well as  legal regulation  by the European Non-financial reporting
directive.  As mentioned before, a sample  of  the European market is seldomly used when
examining ESG stock performance, however there are several cultural factors interfering with

                                     6
the prerequisites of this market in relation to the US market.  For instance, Norway  is a country
where the energy sector (mostly oil and gas) accounts for high financial performance,  which
demonstrates  geographically conditioned prerequisites.  To prevent few economically stronger
companies from creating skewed results, Fiskerstrand  et. al (2020) adjust for these through
using a logarithmic market capitalization methodology for value-weighting.
       The results from a study by Schultz (2002) also reflect that there are significant
differences between Europe and the United States with regards to the collective stance on
sustainability.  The findings suggest that citizens of the United States  overall, have less concern
with regards to climate change in comparison to the other regions investigated (Europe,
amongst others).  The study also explains the reasoning behind this to stem from differences in
cultures, where the United  States  are said to have a more  individualistic culture, in comparison
to for example Europe that is said to foster a biospheric attitude, where the collectivistic culture
encourages social relationships.
       The studies presented, indicate the importance of realizing the impact that the
geographical position with regards to governmental,  regulatory,  and cultural  effects have on
stock markets, and further ESG stock performance. Thus, taking the different findings above
into consideration, narrowing the sample down to this particular market  could possibly give
results that vary from previous studies. By focusing on the European market as a sample, a
further extension inspired by Fiskerstrand et. al (2020) contributes to current gaps in literature.

1.3 Industry-adjustment in ESG data
The view  on rating agencies' choice to constrain ESG scores to either industry-adjusted or
industry-unadjusted is dispersed. Some claim that industry-relative scores provide a more
accurate picture as they rely on industry averages, while some prefer the raw scores to be
reflected. This also poses  yet  another factor contributing to the heterogeneity in the debate on
the widespread differences in procedures that problematize the rating agency industry.
       As Larcker, Pomorski,  Tayan and Watts  (2022) propose, industry-adjustment of ESG
scores mitigates the risk of industry-biases as it narrows the perspective to industry levels,
which could be more efficient when comparing within-industry scores.  On the other hand,
Halbritter and Dorfleitner (2015) argues that companies within a brown or dirty industry could
still be viewed as appropriate for a  green or clean  portfolio as a repercussion of industry-
adjusted scores.  Consequently, the industry-adjusted scores could be misleading, which in  turn
expose investors towards the risk of firms exploiting scores with the incentive to appear more
appropriate, hence there is an increased risk of greenwashing.
        Empirical findings regarding industry-adjustment in ESG scores are also disparate.
Ilhan, Sautner, and Vilkov  (2020) find that a  greenness  measure only capturing industry-
emissions can explain variation in asset prices in the option market due to unexpected climate
concerns.  A study by Ardia et. al (2020) concludes that industry  greenness  is a good predictor
of firm exposure against unanticipated increases in climate concerns and that a within-industry
effect is only observed for few industries, such as machinery, business suppliers, computers,
and construction materials (Ardia, Bluteau et al. 2020).
       Through   combining   an   acknowledged   methodology   with   an   ESG   database
characterized by industry-adjusted scores, we  can  compare our findings with the results from
Pástor et. al (2022) that use industry-unadjusted ESG data. Hence, we contribute to the existing
body of literature through providing evidence on how well industry-adjusted ESG data can be
used to examine green stock performance and thus provide valuable insights for investors.

                                     7
                   II.    Data & Methodology

This section introduces which databases are used in the study and explains the nature of the
data used. First, initial data and screening is explained by factors such as time and geographic
area. Furthermore, the construction of variables as well as the data needed for the variables are
explained. This includes greenness score, portfolio factors, GMB stock returns, GMB alphas
and unexpected climate concern.

2.1 Initial Data and Screening
Sample data for the European stock return analysis and US stock return analysis were collected
from the database Refinitiv Eikon, Kenneth French Data Library and MCCC index. We classify
European firms as those having headquarters in Europe and US firms as those having
headquarters in the US.
       After having removed firms for which there are any missing values, the  European
sample contains 723  firms,  and the US sample contains 674 firms for the period 30 November
2012 to 31 December 2020.  For the European sample, we have data for a total of 24  countries
since Refinitiv Eikon does not present ESG data for all European countries.  These countries
are presented in table  2. These samples are the ones used for the aggregated portfolio-level
analysis.
       In further screening, the previous two samples were matched with industry averages of
environmental score from  Pástor et. al (2022)  through GICS industry and sub-industry which
further decreased the sample size. This led to the European sample containing 670 firms and
the US sample containing 604 firms during the  period November 2012 to June 2018. The
sample sizes throughout the analysis are presented in table  1.

Table 1:  The table shows the number of firms for each  region, and where  in the  analysis the
sample  sizes  are  applied.

       From the  summarizing tables of the number of companies and their respective origin
country, we can also identify that there is a skewed distribution in how much each country is
represented in our sample  (table 2).  For example, there are 194 companies that origins from
the United Kingdom, in contrast to the 2 companies that have their headquarter in Cyprus.
Further, regulations such as the non-Financial disclosure directive from the European
Commission is applicable to all member states of the EU, which in turn is applicable to roughly
96%  of our sample.  Since only 4% of the firms  in the sample are European firms, but not in
the EU or  EEA,  we argue that these few  countries still have  similar culture and  business
conduct  due to  their  geographic location  and history. Thus, we argue that the companies can

                                     8
be equated as similarities in culture and trading patterns are applicable in this region.  On the
                                                                                   st
same note, the United Kingdom left the European Union on the 31  of December 2020. As our
sample period extends from 30 November 2012 to 31 December 2020, the impact of this is
neither relevant  nor applicable and as such disregarded from the analysis.

Table  2:  The table shows the countries represented in the European sample, as well as how
many firms are included for  each country.

2.2 Construction of variables

Greenness score
For the environmental score, ESG  data from Refinitiv Eikon was used, specifically the annual
environmental pillar score.  Refinitiv Eikon provides industry-adjusted ESG scores, leading to

                                     9
its score reflecting  within-industry greenness.  Refinitiv Eikon is a world class provider of
financial ESG data containing information about  companies  all over the world.  Since 2021
Refinitiv Eikon has been part of London Stock Exchange Group (LSEG), which has enabled a
broader capacity of delivery (Eikon Refinitiv,  2021). Refinitiv Eikon has also been used as an
ESG data source for several previous studies (Demers, Hendrikse et al. 2021), (Dorfleitner,
Kreuzer et al. 2020, Sassen, Hinze et al. 2016, Ciciretti, Dalò et al. 2023).
        The data is mostly updated (at least) once a year and Refinitiv has committed to not re-
calculating any scores older than 5 years (i.e. in 2023 ESG scores later in time than 2018 can
still be updated).  The ESG data which is the basis of the ESG scores are collected from several
sources, such as annual reports, company websites, NGO websites, stock exchange filings,
CSR reports and news sources. Refinitiv captures 630 company ESG measures which are later
grouped into 10 categories which are used to calculate the three ESG scores (environmental,
social, and governmental).   For the environmental pillar score, the three subcategories are
resource use, emissions, and innovation. The ESG scores are based on relative performance in
either the company's sector (environmental or social) or  the country (governmental). Hence,
the scores are industry-adjusted for the environmental pillar score and industry-  and country
adjusted for the combined ESG pillar score.  The pillar scores are in the range 0.00-100
(Refinitiv: ESG company scores, 2023).
        For across-industry greenness, the industry-average of MSCI environmental score is
collected from  Pástor et. al (2022)  which presents this data for 2019. Environmental scores at
industry level (GICS sub-industry classification) were collected from Pástor et. al (2022) which
present their g-score for 62 industries at the end of 2019. These are manually merged with the
GICS classifications from Refinitiv by following the MSCI industry classification definitions
(MSCI,   2023).   The   data   is   merged   either   by   industry-classification   or   sub-industry
classification as the data from the two data sources were  inconsistent  in which of the ones they
provided. In the regressions where both across-industry and within-industry greenness is used
at the same time, the g-scores are normalized using the scale() function in R.

Portfolio factors
For the portfolio factors that are used in the portfolios regressions to estimate GMB returns,
we collect factors from the Kenneth French Data Library.  Portfolio factors used are the
Fama-French  three  factors,  and  five  factors  and Carhart momentum factor.  For the European
sample, we use the European factors and for the US sample, we use the US factors. All
factors are the monthly factors.

GMB stock returns
The monthly stock returns are collected from Refinitiv Eikon, using the 1 month return on the
last day of each month period 30 November 2012 to 31 December 2020. To calculate green-
minus-brown (GMB) stock returns, the portfolios for the green-minus-brown factor time
series regressions are constructed according to the methodology in  Pástor et. al (2022). This
means the brown portfolios contain firms with the ⅓ lowest environmental pillar scores,
while the green portfolios contain the firms with the ⅓ highest environmental pillar scores as
collected from Refinitiv Eikon. In other words, only the high and low portfolio are used to
create the GMB portfolio returns, while the neutral portfolio is not used at all. The portfolios
are value weighted with the market capitalization for each firm and they are created in June
each year. The GMB portfolio return is the difference between the green portfolio returns and
the brown portfolio returns.  The green and brown portfolio returns are presented in figure  1.

                                     10
Figure  1:  The figure shows the cumulative brown and green returns of European firms in the
period November 2012-December 2020.  Returns are in percentages.

GMB alphas
The green-minus-brown alphas are an estimate of the GMB factors. GMB alphas are
estimated as the  sum of intercept and the residuals received from the Fama French 3 factor
regression.

Unexpected climate concern
For  climate sentiment, we use the daily Media Climate Change Concerns (MCCC) index from
                      2
Ardia et al (2020) .  The monthly climate concern is calculated as the average of all the daily
average within the month. For the main analysis, we use  the updated  version from 2022 This
dataset is based on news from 10 different US newspapers and 2 newswires for the period of
January 2010  -  June 2018. The index can be used to capture unanticipated changes in climate
concerns. We also use  the older version from 2020 which is based on news from 8 different
US newspapers (Ardia, Bluteau et al. 2020). This is the same dataset as the one used in  Pástor
et. al (2022)  and can be used for climate sentiment in analyses regarding US firms.  We use  the
older version for a closer comparison with  Pástor et. al (2022), with the results presented in the
appendix, but use the updated version for the main analysis. The figure below shows the climate
concerns over time, from the updated MCCC index.

2
  Ardia, D., Bluteau, K., Boudt, K. & Inghelbrecht, K. (2022). Climate change concerns and the performance of green versus brown stocks.
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3717722.

The MCCC index is from this website:  https://sentometrics-research.com. We only aim to use the data provided by Ardia et al for research
purposes.

                                     11
Figure  2:  The figure shows climate concerns monthly over time.

To estimate the unexpected climate concern, we use a rolling autoregressive  model  with an
estimation window of 36 months.  Here, the unexpected climate concern is estimated as the
prediction error, 𝜀!  , from the rolling AR model.  We use two different specifications; an AR(1)
model, as seen in equation  1,  where the climate concern is predicted from the previous month
climate concern and an AR(2), as seen in equation 2,  model where the climate concern is
predicted from the previous month climate concern and the climate concern the month before
that.

               𝐶𝐶!  =  𝜍  × 𝐶𝐶!"#  +  𝜀!                                (1)

               𝐶𝐶!  =  𝜍#  × 𝐶𝐶!"#  +  𝜍$  × 𝐶𝐶!"$  +  𝜀!                  (2)

The digitalization era has enabled a quicker and broader flow of news,  as well as  opened  the
media landscape to new and stronger news delivery actors.  The restructuring of the media
landscape has also facilitated a more international scenery where regional news can become
global issues overnight. A study made by Rabitz, Telešienė and  Zolubienė  (2020) uses topic
modeling to investigate the influences behind the Lithuanian regional news regarding climate
change. Through their analysis they find clear evidence of international media presence within
roughly a third of  their corpus, which consequently leads to the conclusion that there in fact is
strong global influence on climate change news reflected in Lithuanian media (Rabitz,
Telešienė et al. 2020). The takeaway from this article proposes that the division between
regional and global news with regards to climate change is not that distinct. Hence, we argue
that it is possible to use climate sentiment in the US as a proxy for climate sentiment in Europe
and therefore use the MCCC index for analyses regarding the European sample as well.

                                     12
                  III.    Main Empirical Analysis

In this section, we present the main results from our analysis and interpret these results further.
First,  time series regressions are performed with five different model specifications to  analyze
GMB  performance of European firms.  Furthermore, we do monthly time series regressions
including same and previous month change in climate concern with both GMB returns and
GMB alphas as dependent variables. Last, fixed effects panel regressions are used to further
examine within and between-industry  greenness  as well as interaction effects with change in
climate concerns. The findings from our results are further analyzed in the last part of this
section where we relate these findings to US firms as well as  to  previous literature.

3.1 European Market Returns and GMB Performance
Cumulative returns obtained from the portfolio construction for the green and brown portfolios,
respectively, were plotted against time. As can be seen in the figure showing cumulative returns
(figure  1), the cumulative return of each portfolio varies in which one is the highest and it is
not possible to discern any clear pattern from observation.  Monthly time series regressions
were performed. The dependent variable was the difference in stock returns between green and
brown stock portfolios, where the green and brown portfolios are created based on the simple
g-score. The independent variables were the CAPM factor, Fama French 3 factor, Fama French
3  factor,  and momentum factor, and lastly the Fama French 5 factors.  The returns  were  in
percent per month and standard deviations are in parentheses.  This  was  repeated  for a smaller
sample, only covering the period November 2012 to June 2018,  to  receive a closer comparison
to the  regressions presented in 3.2 and 3.3.

                                     13
Table  3:  Regression results for the European sample when using the within-industry g-score.
The constant is the estimate of the GMB factor.

For all regressions the GMB factor estimate is negative and insignificant. The factor estimates
are also smaller than  for the US sample in our study which are negative and significant.  They
are also smaller in magnitude than in  Pástor et. al (2022),  in  which the  factor estimates are
positive and significant.  Further analyses are motivated by investigating the cause of the EU
GMB estimate as to why it differs from other studies as well as from the corresponding
regression for US stock returns.

                                     14
Table  4:  Regression results for the European sample when using the within-industry g-score
for the years 2012-2018. The constant is the estimate of the GMB factor. For the years 2012–
2018.

The GMB constant estimates  in table  4  are  in general  of less magnitude  than in table  3, while
also being negative and  insignificant.  The factor estimates are also smaller than for the US
sample in our study which are negative and significant.  They are also smaller in magnitude
than in  Pástor et al.  (2022)  in  which the  factor estimates are positive and  significant.

3.2 Sources of GMB Performance
Monthly time-series regressions were performed with data from November 2012 through June
2018. The dependent variables are GMB returns and GMB alphas in column 1 and 2,
respectively. According to the methodology of Pástor et. al (2022), changes in climate concerns
(𝛥  𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒  𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑟𝑛) were estimated as the prediction error from a rolling AR(1) model of
the MCCC index with a time-period of three years. The updated version of the MCCC index
was used here. Furthermore, GMB alphas were estimated from the previous Fama French three

                                     15
factor regression where the alphas were estimated as the regression’s intercept plus residual.
Returns are in percent and standard deviations are presented in parentheses below  coefficient
estimates.

Table  5:  Regression results for the European sample when using the within-industry g-score
when including unexpected change in climate concerns for the same month and previous
month.

Previously, all estimates of GMB returns were negative and insignificant for European firms
(table  3  and  4).  When including unanticipated climate concern shocks,  𝛥𝐶𝐶!"#  and  𝛥𝐶𝐶!, the
constant estimates of GMB returns and GMB alphas  are  still  negative and insignificant.  This
gives no incentive to believe there is an  equity greenium for European firms.  𝛥𝐶𝐶!  is positive
for both regressions, as in the study by Pástor et. al (2022). The 𝛥𝐶𝐶!"#  the estimate is negative
and insignificant, which contradicts the results  found  in  Pástor et. al (2022). It should also be
noted that the corresponding regression for US stock returns  are similar  to  the European stock
returns, with  negative  𝛥𝐶𝐶!"#  and  positive  𝛥𝐶𝐶!  with both being insignificant.  However,  the
US  GMB returns and GMB  alphas  constant estimates are  both negative and significant.
        Lastly, it should be noted that the results do not differ substantially regarding if the
original MCCC index (presented in appendix  A) or updated MCCC index is used as a proxy
for climate sentiment.

                                     16
3.3  Greenness and individual stock returns: Effects within and across
industries
Panel regressions were performed with data from November 2012 through June 2018.  The
dependent  variables  are  monthly  stock  returns  for  individual  firms.  According  to  the
methodology of  Pástor et. al (2022),  changes in climate concern  (𝛥  𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒  𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑟𝑛)  were
estimated as the prediction error,  𝜀!  ,  from a rolling AR(1) model of the MCCC index with a
time-period of three years. The updated version of the MCCC index was used here. Four
different model specifications were examined. The first  model only includes the within-
industry  greenness, as presented in column 1. The second model only includes within and
between industry-greenness, as presented in column 2. The third model includes only data
gathered from Refinitiv Eikon/MCCC index and therefore only contains within-industry
metrics, as presented in column 3. The fourth column presents the regression for both within
and across industry-greenness, as well as  greenness  interaction effect with change in climate
concern (current and previous month). All models include time fixed effects, cluster by month
and include robust standard errors. Returns are in percent and standard deviations are presented
in parentheses below coefficient estimates.

                                     17
Table  6:  Regression results for the European sample when using both within-industry and
across-industry greenness score. All regressions include unexpected change in climate
concerns for the same month and previous month.

        Firstly, the regression only  including the within g-score is positive and  insignificant.
The regression including only within-industry  and across-industry  greenness  without any
interaction effects gives almost identical estimates of opposite signs for within and across
greenness, as seen in regression column (2). This is the opposite result of  Pástor et. al (2022),
where a similar fixed effect panel regression results in positive estimate of across-greenness
and negative estimate of within-greenness. It should be mentioned though that  the results from
our US regression  are  in line with the results of  Pástor et. al (2022), indicating that any
difference stems from differences in sample and not method.  Furthermore, we do not place
much importance in this reversal, as neither estimate in  column 2 of table  6  are  significant  and
it is more likely to be a consequence of a non-specific estimate.
       The opposite signs of within and across greenness could explain why table 4:s constant
estimates are all insignificant, as it is expected that a g-score only capturing within-industry

                                     18
greenness would have difficulty in predicting higher returns stemming from an equity greenium
due to variation from the uncaptured across-industry  greenness.  This is supported from the
results from column (3) where  the within g-score is  zero and insignificant  by itself, but its
interaction effect with  𝛥𝐶𝐶!  is  positive and significant at the 10% level.
        In contrast from table  5  where interaction effects with  𝛥𝐶𝐶!  are positive while
interaction effects with  𝛥𝐶𝐶!"#  are negative, all interaction effects for all four model
specifications here are positive, although not all of them are statistically significant.  This is  in
line with the results of  Pástor et. al (2022), where both  𝛥𝐶𝐶!"#  and  𝛥𝐶𝐶!  are positive.  Similar
results are also observed for US stock returns (appendix) with roughly the same magnitude and
significance level.
       It should also be noted that the estimates relating to across-industry  greenness  are
consistently of larger magnitude than the estimates relating to within-industry  greenness.  This
is consistent with  Pástor et. al (2022)  where across-industry  greenness  repeatedly was shown
to be of higher economic significance than within-greenness.
        Lastly, it should be noted that the results do not differ substantially regarding if the
original MCCC index (presented in appendix  A) or updated MCCC index is used as a proxy
for climate sentiment.

3.4  Using an AR(2) Model to account for unexpected climate concern
The two different data of unexpected climate concern is presented in the figure below. As can
be observed in the figure, the results obtained are different based upon if calculated through a
rolling AR(1) or AR(2) model. Since this data is the input in further regressions, our belief is
that the differences can impact the end results substantially. Therefore, we  redo the results
from 3.2 and 3.3 based on the  unexpected climate concern calculated by the rolling AR(2)
model.  These results are presented below  in figure 3.

                                     19
Figure 3:  The figure shows the unexpected climate concern when calculated through a
rolling AR(1) model vs a rolling AR(2) model.

       Monthly time-series regressions were performed with data from November 2012
through June 2018.  The dependent variables are GMB returns  and GMB alphas in column 1
and 2, respectively.  The changes in climate concerns (𝛥  𝐶𝑙𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒  𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑟𝑛) were estimated
as the prediction error,  𝜀!  , from a rolling AR(2) model of the MCCC index with a time-
period of three years.  By using this  methodology, the climate concern is always predicted
from the previous two months climate concerns. The updated version of the MCCC index
was used here. Furthermore, GMB alphas were estimated from the previous Fama French
three factor regression where the  alphas were estimated as the regression’s intercept plus
residual.

                                     20
Table  7:  Regression results for the European sample when using the within-industry g-score
when including unexpected change in climate concerns for the same month and previous two
months. Here the unexpected climate concern is calculated through a rolling AR(2) model.

        In contrast  to table  5,  the constant terms for both GMB returns and alphas are
positive, while still being statistically insignificant.  We do not place much importance in this
reversal, as neither estimate is significant for any of the  regressions,  and it is more likely to
be a consequence of a non-specific estimate.  It can also be observed that using different data
for unexpected climate concerns changes the  signs of the climate concerns estimates. Here,
the sign is negative for  same month, previous month, and 2 months back for both columns.
This is a difference to the results of  Pástor et. al (2022),  which receive positive estimates for
all  month’s  climate concerns which are included in their regression.

Panel regressions were also performed with data from November 2012 through June 2018.
Four different model specifications were examined. The first model only includes the within-
industry  greenness, as presented in column 1. The second model only includes within and
between industry-greenness, as presented in column 2. The third model includes only data
gathered from Refinitiv Eikon/MCCC index and therefore only contains within-industry
metrics, as presented in column 3. The fourth column presents the regression for both within
and across industry-greenness, as well as  greenness  interaction effect with change in climate

                                     21
concern (current and the previous 2 months). All fixed effects models include time fixed
effects, cluster by month and include robust standard errors.

Table  8:  Regression results for the European sample when using both within-industry and
across-industry greenness score. All regressions include unexpected change in climate
concerns for the same month and previous two months.

                                     22
        For the results from table  8, it can be observed that the within-industry g-score alone is
positive for all four model specifications  while the significance level differs.  However, its
interaction effect with  𝛥𝐶𝐶!  ,  𝛥𝐶𝐶!"#  and  𝛥𝐶𝐶!"$  are  all  negative, as can be seen in column 3
and 4.  These interaction effects are also larger in magnitude than the  magnitude of  within-
industry g-score alone. It should also be mentioned that  the within-industry g-score alone
before (table 5) varied in both  magnitude and  sign, which differs from the results here.  This
could  be  seen  as a  ‘re-allocation’ of the negative correlation to the interaction effects, which
all had positive  estimates  when using the  unexpected climate concerns from the AR(1) model.
       The  interaction effects from two months ago  are  negative for both  within-industry and
across-industry greenness for all model specifications when these variables are included.  This
differs from the previous analysis of within and across-industry greenness where  all interaction
effects were positive  (table  6), as in the article  by Pástor et. al (2022).  Furthermore, the  effects
of the across-industry greenness alone  are  negative and similar in both sign and  magnitude as
the previous estimates (table  6).

                                     23
          IV.  Interpretation of Empirical Findings

By comparing the regression results from the EU sample with the US sample,  the  GMB  factor
estimates are negative and significant for the US. For European stocks, the GMB factor
estimates are still negative, but smaller in magnitude and insignificant. Furthermore,  when
including climate concerns, the  estimate for GMB returns and alphas are negative and
significant for the US, while negative and insignificant for the European samples. Furthermore,
these estimates are much smaller in magnitude  than  for the US sample. In total, we argue these
differences  provide evidence for a  negative equity greenium for US stocks while it seems the
equity greenium is close to zero for European stocks.
       When controlling for  unexpected  climate  concerns in  Pástor et. al (2022),  the equity
greenium estimate has a slight fluctuation between negative and positive  values, hence a small
magnitude, where none of the regression results in economic significance.  In the study by
Pástor et. al (2021),  unexpected climate shocks and other  sources of increased demand for
green assets  is said to be the single factor explaining the outperformance of green returns,
according to the PST model.  The  result  from this study supports this  for European firms,  for
which  we find  the  equity greenium  to be close to zero. However, for the US sample, we find
the equity greenium to be negative, indicating that brown stocks outperform green stocks.
       It is thus reasonable to suggest that the  underlying  cause of  the difference in equity
greenium  is due to what has previously been shown in studies to have a significant effect,
namely the geographical regulatory differences, and thus the legislations imposed by the
European Commission (Directive  2014/95/EU  of the European Parliament and of the Council,
2014) as well as local legislations imposed by the individual countries.
        Additionally, the differences in culture as discussed by Schultz (2002) could partially
explain the divergence seen on magnitude between the European and US market. Since the
results indicate ESG investing has an economically larger significance in the European market,
it is viable to assume in accordance with Auer and Schuhmacher (2016), that  the European
market is suitable for  investors  wanting  to  participate in  socially responsible investing.

As previously mentioned, across-industry  greenness  has a consistently larger effect on
individual stock performance of green firms than within-industry  greenness.  For example, in
table  6, column 4, all  estimates including across-industry greenness are larger than estimates
containing within-industry greenness. Also,  when using  the  AR(2)  model for unexpected
climate  concerns,  the interaction effects for same and previous month are negative for  within-
industry  greenness  and  positive  for  across-industry  greenness.  Furthermore,  when  not
including unexpected change in climate concerns, all estimates of the GMB factor are negative
and insignificant when using the g-score only accounting for within-industry  greenness.  This
indicates that within-industry alone does not have the capacity to capture stock return variations
to explain any green outperformance, while a mixed score containing both within and across-
industry greenness can explain green outperformance for certain periods. It is also possible that
using only  across-industry  greenness  measure might be enough to predict stock returns, as
suggested by the authors of  Carbon Tail Risk  (Ilhan, Sautner et al. 2020).
       Investors aiming to use ESG data for stock prediction should be aware of this
difference, as only ESG data capturing across-industry  greenness  can be expected to predict
green outperformance. At the same time, there is a high risk of greenwashing with regards to
using within-industry ESG data as it is possible to profile a ‘better than average’ firm in a

                                     24
brown  industry  as green despite it receiving no equity greenium. Both NGOs and investors
should pay attention to this, as various agents such as firm managers, brokers and fund
managers have incentives in participating in such greenwashing. Therefore, the choice of rating
agency as well as knowledge regarding the rating system is of utmost importance.
        Further studies could focus on both examining which industries, if any, where within-
industry greenness can explain green stock outperformance, as motivated by the study by Ardia
et. al (2020) where within-industry  greenness  was found important in some industries.  This
could also guide investors regarding which industries where within-industry  greenness  is an
important metric in predicting stock performance.

The PST model states that unexpected climate concerns can explain outperformance of green
stocks (Pástor, Stambaugh et al. 2021) during shorter periods.  Figure  2  shows that there are
periods where  there  is a  trend in climate concern over  time, such as  the trend  of  decreasing
climate concerns  in  2018.  We call this a  prolonged shock period  and argue that when the
climate shock is near constant over a period, this is actually anticipated  climate shocks and not
unexpected climate shock. According to the PST model, only unexpected climate shocks can
explain green stock outperformance, since asset prices react immediately to new information
(Pástor, Stambaugh et al. 2021). A prolonged shock  period indicates that despite high climate
concerns, investors and consumers have already reacted from previous positive unanticipated
climate shocks and the increase in climate concerns is already reflected in asset prices.
Therefore, they are less sensitive to current climate shocks leading to no increased demands
for green assets from either consumers or investors.
       According to the PST model, agents tilt their portfolios based on ESG preferences and
this tilt is larger in times of higher climate concerns (Pástor, Stambaugh et al. 2021). Investors
and consumers having reacted to previous month climate shocks might therefore be less
inclined to react to a further increase in climate concerns as they already have adjusted their
portfolio in reaction to previous climate shocks.
        As previously stated, a proxy for unexpected climate concern is important for investors
aiming for sustainable investing. However, the evidence of prolonged shock periods where
change in climate concerns is anticipated, and thus irrelevant for investors, leads to question if
there is a better way to proxy for this. Pástor, Stambaugh et. al (2022) states that “The AR(1)
model’s intercept absorbs the recent level and trend in the climate index”, meaning that current
trends should be captured by the rolling AR(1) model. However, since the rolling AR(1) model
is based on data from 36 months, it is possible that the trends very close to next month being
predicted are not captured enough. We propose either changing the model to place more weight
on months  close in time or increasing the number of lags in the AR model.
       When testing the AR(2) model as a method for estimating unexpected climate concern,
figure 3 shows that there are differences in unexpected climate concern to the ones estimated
through an AR(1) model.  Furthermore, the regression results show that  especially the within-
industry greenness effects change based on usage of AR(1) or AR(2) model.  For example,  in
the  most  extensive  model, the within-industry greenness alone changes signs  from negative
from positive, while the  within-industry greenness interaction effects changes sign from
positive to negative.  This indicates that there is a re-allocation of  the negative effect from
within-industry alone to interaction effects.  Also,  when using the AR(2) model, the difference
in magnitude  between within-industry and across-industry greenness  decreases.  Consequently,
there  are substantial differences  in how within-industry greenness effects stock performance
based upon which of the models are used for unexpected climate concern. However,  at this
point, it is  unclear which one of the model  specifications  captures  the  effect of greenness and

                                     25
unexpected climate concern best. Thus,  further  studies are  required  to  determine  how to  depict
the effect of unexpected climate concerns most accurately.

                                     26
                      V.   Conclusion

This study  investigates whether  green stock returns  outperform  brown  stock returns  in the
European market.  Environmental  scores  are  collected from the Refinitv Eikon database
which provide industry-adjusted ESG data.  Firstly, we  address the  research question through
examining the green minus brown  factor and  performing a  portfolio  analysis.
       Here, we  find  no evidence  of  a positive GMB factor  for European firms  indicating
that  green portfolio returns are not higher than brown portfolio returns.  Furthermore,  our
findings are not coherent with  Dissecting green returns  by Pástor et. al  (2022). After
including  the effects of unexpected increase in climate concerns, we find  no significant
results.  The lack of  consistent results  motivates  an examination of greenness and individual
stock returns. Panel  time-fixed effects  regressions  are  used to  examine within-industry and
across-industry greenness,  after including the  interaction effect with  unexpected climate
concerns.  This is done  by  applying a rolling AR (1) model.  The results suggests that only
across-industry ESG data can be expected to capture green outperformance on its own. This
highlights the challenge in using within-industry greenness  alone as a predictor for stock
performance.  Thus,  we  call attention to  the importance for investors to  carefully  select rating
agency as well as  an overall risk of greenwashing.
       We also  introduce the subject of  prolonged shock periods  and thus  propose  looking
into a rolling AR  (2) model  as a  method for estimating unexpected climate concerns.  In a
further analysis, we  investigate this by using this new data for  unexpected  climate concern  to
both  examine climate concerns and GMB performance, as well as within-industry and across-
industry greenness at an individual  level.  The findings  indicate substantial differences in the
result based upon  which model is used to  calculate unexpected climate concerns.  We suggest
future studies should analyze this further.
       Regarding limitations of the study, we consider the choice of MCCC index as a proxy
for climate sentiment to be a potential  limitation.  It is assumed that  US  sentiment can be
applied to Europe. However,  the  geographical differences previously mentioned, cannot be
fully disregarded. For example,  the risk of  potential political influence  should  be  emphasized
since  there are fundamental differences  between the US and EU with regards to  elections and
presidential campaigns  (Sampugnaro, Montemagno 2021).
       Furthermore, the distribution of companies within Europe  is considered as a potential
limitation.  Refinitiv Eikon  does not report ESG data for all European companies, which could
be an issue if there are systematic differences  regarding  which countries  ESG data is reported
for.  For  example,  if more brown countries  are excluded. Furthermore,  when  the firms are
mapped based upon  GICS sub-industry and industry classification, the sample size decreases
due to  some firms not having matches.  Here, it is also a possibility that this leads to a more
skewed distribution.

                                     27
                         References

ARDIA, D., BLUTEAU, K., BOUDT, K. and INGHELBRECHT, K., 2020.  Climate change
concerns and the performance of green versus brown stocks.
AUER, B.R. and SCHUHMACHER, F., 2016. Do socially (ir)responsible investments pay?
New evidence from international ESG data.  The Quarterly Review of Economics and
Finance,  59, pp. 51-62.
BAKER, B., 2023. ESG Investing Statistics 2023.
Available:  https://www.bankrate.com/investing/esg-investing-statistics/ [Apr  14, 2023]
BALDAUF, M., GARLAPPI, L. and YANNELIS, C., 2020. Does Climate Change Affect
Real Estate Prices? Only If You Believe In It.  The Review of Financial Studies,  33(3), pp.
1256-1295.
BERG, F., KOLBEL F., J. and RIGOBON, R., 2022. Aggregate Confusion: The Divergence
of ESG Ratings.  Review of Finance.
BERMEJO CLIMENT, R., FIGUEROLA-FERRETTI GARRIGUES, I.,
PARASKEVOPOULOS, L. and SANTOS, A., 2021. Risks | ESG Disclosure and Portfolio
Performance.  Risks.
BLACKROCK, 2023. What is ESG (ESG (Environmental, Social and Governance).
Available:  https://www.blackrock.com/ch/individual/en/themes/sustainable-investing  [Apr 3,
2023]
CARHART, M.M., 1997. On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance.  Journal of
Finance,  52,  (1)
CHATTERJI, A.K., DURAND, R., LEVINE, D.I. and TOUBOUL, S., 2016. Do ratings of
firms converge? Implications for managers, investors and strategy researchers.  Strategic
Management.
CICIRETTI, R., DALÒ, A. and DAM, L., 2023. The contributions of betas versus
characteristics to the ESG premium.  Journal of Empirical Finance,  71, pp. 104-124.
DEMERS, E., HENDRIKSE, J., JOOS, P. and LEV, B., 2021. ESG did not immunize stocks
during the COVID 19 crisis, but investments in intangible assets did.
DORFLEITNER, G., HALBRITTER, G. and NGUYEN, M., 2015. Measuring the level and
risk of corporate responsibility  –  An empirical comparison of different ESG rating
approaches.
DORFLEITNER, G., KREUZER, C. and SPARRER, C., 2020. ESG controversies and
controversial ESG: about silent saints and small sinners,  Journal of Asset Management
EIKON REFINITIV, 2021. About us: We are Refinitiv.
Available:  https://www.refinitiv.com/en/about-us [Apr  3, 2023]
FAMA, E.F. and FRENCH, K.R., 2015. A five-factor asset pricing model.  Journal of
Financial Economics,  116(1), pp. 1-22.

                                     28
FAMA, E.F. and FRENCH, K.R., 1992. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
bonds.  Journal of Financial Economics.
FRENCH, K., 2023. Kenneth French Data Library.
Available:  https://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html  [Apr 8,
2023]
FRIEDE, G., BUSCH, T. and BASSEN, A., 2015. ESG and financial performance:
aggregated evidence from more than 2000 empirical studies.  Journal of Sustainable Finance
& Investment,  5(4), pp. 210-233.
FRIEDMAN, M., 1970. A Friedman doctrine‐-  The Social Responsibility Of Business Is to
Increase Its Profits  -  The New York Times.
HALBRITTER, G. and DORFLEITNER, G., 2015. The wages of social responsibility —
where are they? A critical review of ESG investing  -  Review of Financial Economics
ILHAN, E., SAUTNER, Z. and VILKOV, G., 2020. Carbon Tail Risk.  The Review of
Financial Studies,  34(3), pp. 1540-1571.
LARCKER, D.F., POMORSKI, L., TAYAN, B. and WATTS, E.M., 2022.  ESG Ratings: A
Compass Without Direction.
LIANG, H. and RENNEBOOG, L., 2017. On the Foundations of Corporate Social
Responsibility.  The Journal of Finance.
MSCI, 2023.  Global Industry Classification Standars (GICS) Methodology: Guiding
principles and methodology for GICS
PÁSTOR, Ľ, STAMBAUGH, R.F. and TAYLOR, L.A., 2022. Dissecting green
returns.  Journal of Financial Economics,  146(2), pp. 403-424.
PÁSTOR, Ľ, STAMBAUGH, R.F. and TAYLOR, L.A., 2021. Sustainable investing in
equilibrium.  Journal of Financial Economics,  142(2), pp. 550-571.
RABITZ, F., TELEŠIENĖ, A.  and ZOLUBIENĖ, E., 2020. Topic modelling the news media
representation of climate change.
REZAEE, Z., HOMAYOUN, S., POURSOLEYMAN, E. and REZAEE, N.J., 2023.
Comparative analysis of environmental, social, and governance disclosures  -
ScienceDirect.  Global  Finance Journal.
REFINITIV,  2023. Refinitiv: ESG company scores.
Available:  https://www.refinitiv.com/en/sustainable-finance/esg-scores [Apr  3, 2023]
SAMPUGNARO, R. and MONTEMAGNO, F., 2021.  In Search of the Americanization:
Candidates and  Political Campaigns in European General Election.  Journal of Political
Marketing,  20(1), pp. 34-49.
SASSEN, R., HINZE, A. and HARDECK, I., 2016. Impact of ESG factors on firm risk in
Europe | SpringerLink.
SCHULTZ, P.W., 2002. Environmental Attitudes and Behaviors Across Cultures.

                                     29
THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION,
2014.  Directive 2014/95/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council.
UZOKI, D., 2020.  Sustainable Investing: Shaping the future of finance.
ZERBIB, O.D., 2019. The effect of pro-environmental preferences on bond prices: Evidence
from green bonds.  Journal of Banking & Finance,  98, pp. 39-60.

                                     30
     Appendix  A: Climate Concern and GMB Performance

Figure  A1:  The figure shows climate concern (note; not change in climate concerns) and
GMB returns over time, specifically November 2012  -  June 2018. Both climate concerns and
GMB returns are normalized using the R function scale() in order to receive a comparable
magnitude.

                                     31
Figure  A2:  The figure shows climate concern (note; not change in climate concerns) and
GMB  alphas over time, specifically November 2012  -  June 2018. Both climate concerns and
GMB alphas are normalized using the R function scale() in order to receive a comparable
magnitude.

                                     32
Table A1:  Regression results for the European sample when using the within-industry g-
score when including unexpected change in climate concerns for the same month and
previous month. Here the unexpected climate concern is calculated through a rolling AR(1)
model and the 2020 version of the MCCC index is used as a proxy for climate sentiment.

                                     33
Table A2:  Regression results for the European sample when using the within-industry g-score
and the across-industry g-score, when including unexpected change in climate concerns for the
same month and previous month. Here the unexpected climate concern is calculated through a
rolling AR(1) model and the 2020 version of the MCCC index is used as a proxy for climate
sentiment.

                                     34
    Appendix B: US firms, GMB performance and greenness

Figure B1:  The figure shows the cumulative brown and green returns of European firms in
the time period November 2012-December 2020. Returns are in percentages.

                                     35
Table B1:  Regression results for the US sample when using the within-industry g-score.  The
constant is the estimate of the GMB factor.

                                     36
Table B2:  Regression results for the US sample when using the within-industry g-score when
including unexpected change in climate concerns for the same month and previous month. Here
the unexpected climate concern is calculated through a rolling AR(1) model and the  2020
version of the MCCC index is used as a proxy for climate sentiment.

                                     37
Table  B3:  Regression results for the US sample when using the within-industry g-score and
the across-industry g-score, when including unexpected change in climate concerns for the
same month and previous month.  Here the unexpected climate concern is calculated through
a rolling AR(1) model and the 2020 version of the MCCC index is used as a proxy for
climate sentiment.

                                     38