BEYOND BORDERS: EXPLORING
INVESTOR SENTIMENT AND CCEF
PRICES

ANALYSIS OF COUNTRY POPULARITY AMONG AMERICANS AND ITS
IMPLICATION ON CLOSED-END COUNTRY FUND SECURITY PRICES

YE SONG KIM
ROUAA KAL OMAR

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2023
Beyond Borders: Exploring Investor Sentiment and CCEF Prices

Abstract:
   We test the relationship between closed-end country funds (CCEFs) and their relationship with
   American investors’ sentiments toward the respective home country of the funds during the
   years 2009 to 2021 which were met with adversaries such as COVID-19. Previous research
   regarding closed-end country funds was done in the 1990s and in the early 2000s, where the
   research discovered a positive relationship between CCEF price premiums and positive
   perception of a country. As we considered these studies to not reflect the present-day society
   that has seen drastic social, economic, and technological changes, we have tested this
   relationship with a more recent time period. In contrast to existing literature, we find that CCEFs
   from countries with higher country popularity among American investors are generally traded
   at a discount.

Keywords:
   Closed-end country fund (CCEF), Investor Sentiment, Country Popularity

Authors:
   Ye Song Kim (25158)
   Rouaa Kal Omar (25052)

Tutor:
   Paula Roth, Postdoctoral Fellow, Swedish House of Finance

Examiner:
   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Acknowledgements:
   We would like to thank our supervisor Paula Roth for providing constant support, valuable
   insights, and helpful feedback during the entire work process of this thesis.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Ye Song Kim and Rouaa Kal Omar, 2023
   1. Introduction
Closed-end funds have consistently been an investment instrument of interest to researchers given
their long-observed, anomalous qualities in comparison to other securities. The most widely
recognized element being the prevalence of mispricing, often referred to as the “closed-end fund
puzzle”. There have been numerous attempts to explain this phenomena, including connecting it
to investor sentiment which led to the conclusion that there is indeed a connection between the two
and that the closed-end funds’ discount rates could be utilized as a proxy for shifts in individual
investor sentiment (Lee, Shleifer, & Thaler, 1991). As an increasing amount of research provides
evidence that investor sentiment affects the stock market in a significant, meaningful, and recurrent
manner, methods to measure and quantify investor sentiment are introduced (Baker & Wurgler,
2007). This turns researchers to a unique investment instrument in the stock market – closed-end
country funds.
Among several investment instruments that enable investments in diversified portfolios of
securities in specific countries, one of the most well-known are closed-end country funds (CCEFs)
which are usually used for securities in emerging markets that tend to show more volatility
compared to developed markets. Although the investment opportunities the two instruments offer
are similar, the mechanisms that underpin the fund prices of CCEFs and Country ETFs are
completely different. CCEFs have a fixed number of shares that are solely traded on the stock
market which makes the share price traded at a discount or a premium. Mispricing is rather
prevalent as the share price is strongly impacted by the supply and demand in the stock market.
This characteristic also increases the (price) volatility of CCEFs and is therefore better suited for
investors that pursue long-term investments. On the other hand, Country ETFs and open-end
mutual funds redeem and create new shares constantly which makes the share value more closely
follow the NAV (net asset value) and rarely trade at a premium or discount (Ruffy, 2007).
A connection between investor sentiments toward specific countries and CCEFs being traded at a
premium or discount was found in a US study (Hwang, 2011). Since then, there has been a plethora
of research papers that examine investor sentiment, but only a few that have explored this concept
in the context of CCEFs and country-specific sentiments. Therefore, this paper aims to investigate
whether the results in Hwang’s paper are consistent over a decade after its publication by
replicating and writing an extension of it. This will add value to the existing literature as there has
been a lack of recent studies about investor sentiment in relation to CCEFs. As the world has
become increasingly interconnected, the definition and existence of borders has been questioned
and redefined. However, simultaneously, political radicalization has been on the rise on national
levels in numerous countries, leading us to find our question to be highly relevant and interesting
in our current socio-political climate. Given the severe turbulence and market inefficiencies
COVID-19 caused in the societies and stock markets around the world (Harjoto, Rossi, & Paglia,
2021) (Ozkan, 2021), we think exploring the impacts of COVID-19 on the country-specific
investor sentiment and its implications on CCEF prices would be meaningful to not only our study,
but also to the existing research.
As we are writing an extension on his paper, we closely follow the data and methods used by
Hwang (Hwang, 2011). Investor sentiment is represented by a variable called Country Popularity
Score which is based on data from surveys asking Americans their opinions about specific
countries provided by Gallup (Gallup, 2023). The survey participants can answer with the answers
Very Favorable, Mostly Favorable, Mostly Unfavorable, Very Unfavorable, and No Opinion.
Americans’ investor sentiment toward specific countries is quantified into a score which is
calculated by the sum of the percentage of survey participants that answered Very Favorable by
four, Mostly Favorable by three, Mostly Unfavorable by two, and Very Unfavorable by one. The
percentage of survey participants that answered No Opinion was excluded. To test whether it is a
relevant variable to use in the main analysis, we run a correlation between the Country Popularity
Score of 15 countries (Appendix 1) and four categories of variables that we assume to determine
Americans’ sentiment towards a country. In addition to the variables and categories suggested by
Hwang (Hwang, 2011), we add new ones to better reflect the current conditions in the world. From
this we identify the categories and variables that are more relevant than others in determining the
variation in country-specific sentiments among American investors.
After examining the individual countries’ Country Popularity Score, we observe that China
experiences an above average change in Country Popularity Score between the years 2020 and
2021 which are the years affected by COVID-19 which was an extraordinary event both socially
and in stock markets. As we preliminarily assume that this unprecedented Country Popularity
Score development is connected to the occurrence of COVID-19, we closely examine the Chinese
CCEFs’ price premium (discount) around the occurrence of COVID-19 to confirm or deny these
assumptions. From plotting time series graphs of the premium (discount) levels of the Chinese
CCEF prices, we observe that there are sizeable, sharp negative shocks in the CCEF premium
(discount) levels when COVID-19 and other remarkable external events, such as the US-China
trade war, coincides. This means that the variation in country popularity among Americans and
thereby Americans’ sentiment could be explained by various events.
As the effects of different variables and external events on a country’s popularity among
Americans are confirmed, we subsequently test the relationship between CCEF price premium
(discount) and Country Popularity Score which is our main empirical analysis. We do this by
running fixed effects regressions and first-differencing regressions with CCEF premium (discount)
as the dependent variable and Country Popularity Score as the independent variable. Control
variables that are used in Hwang’s study are included to improve the quality of the regressions by
capturing the relationship between the CCEF premium (discount) and other relevant variables.
Due to data constraints, we run two sets of regressions with different time periods and control
variables. The first set of regressions includes data of 15 CCEFs from 10 countries between 2009
and 2021 without the control variables Home Market Valuation Ratio and US Market Valuation
Ratio. The second set of regressions includes data from 15 CCEFs from 10 countries between 2013
and 2021 with all control variables.
To further analyze the data, we run the different regressions in two sets of panels. The first panel,
Panel A, includes the percentage of survey participants that have a Very Favorable or Mostly
Favorable opinion of a sample country. The second panel, Panel B, includes the percentage of
survey participants that have a Very Unfavorable or Mostly Favorable opinion of a sample country.
Fixed effects regressions and first-differencing regressions are run with CCEF premium (discount)
as the dependent variable, the percentage of survey participants as the dependent variable in each
panel, and with relevant control variables. Due to data constraints, we run two sets of regressions
with different time periods and control variables. The first set of regressions includes data of 15
CCEFs from 10 countries between 2009 and 2021 without the control variables Home Market
Valuation Ratio and US Market Valuation Ratio. The second set of regressions includes data from
15 CCEFs from 10 countries between 2013 and 2021 with all control variables.
The main empirical analyses produce results that contradict Hwang’s study. The fixed effects
regressions show a significant, negative relationship between the dependent variable and the
independent variable, regardless of the time period used. This implies that CCEFs that invest in
securities from countries that are perceived favorably among Americans are traded at a discount.
The first-differencing regressions, on the other hand, produce different results depending on the
time period used. In the regression that uses data between 2009 and 2021, the relationship between
the dependent variable and the independent variable is insignificant and negative. However, when
data between 2013 and 2021 is used, the relationship between the dependent variable and the
independent variable is insignificant and positive. This suggests that CCEFs that invest in
securities from countries that are perceived positively among Americans trades at a discount with
a longer time period, and at a premium with a shorter time period.
The regressions with the panel data produced consistent results across the different time periods.
The survey participants in Panel A showed a negative association with the CCEF premium, and
the survey participants in Panel B showed a positive association with the CCEF premium. These
results imply that CCEFs that invest in securities of countries that Americans generally have
positive perceptions about are traded at a discount, whereas CCEFs that invest in securities of
countries that Americans generally have negative perceptions about are traded at a premium.
Consistently, the fixed effects regressions generated estimates that were of higher significance
compared to that of the first-differencing regressions.
As the results from our empirical analyses are ambiguous and in contrast to previous studies, we
run two additional sets of regressions to widen the scope of the discussion around our results. The
first set of regressions uses data that excludes China and Chinese CCEFs, the fixed effects
regressions produced results consistent with the original data for both sets of time periods. The
first-differencing regressions generated an insignificant, positive relationship between the
dependent variable and the independent variable in both sets of time periods. Hence, the fixed
effects regressions confirmed the outcomes of our regressions with the original dataset. The first-
differencing regressions confirmed the outcomes of the initial first-differencing regression using
the shorter time period. This might be due to the data from China and the Chinese CCEFs
containing consecutive observations that are quite stable.
Based on the impact on stock markets caused by COVID-19, we decided to run a second set of
regressions without data from 2020. This resulted in both regressions producing negative
relationships between the dependent variable and the independent variable, even though the overall
significance level was higher for the fixed effects regression. This implies that, excluding 2020,
the CCEFs that invest in securities of countries that are more popular among Americans are traded
at a discount. This increased consistency in outcome compared to the original regressions might
be due to 2020 containing consecutive observations that are volatile.
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 covers existing studies and literature that are
relevant to our study. Section 3 provides detailed descriptions and analyses of our data. Section 4
describes the empirical analysis used in our study. Section 5 reports the results of the empirical
analysis and Section 6 provides a discussion around the findings in Section 5. The final section
contains the conclusion, the limitations of our paper, and suggestions for future studies.
   2. Related Literature
Recent related literature in the field of investor sentiment is largely based on Baker’s Investor
Sentiment Index and are mainly aligned with the associated findings (Baker & Wurgler, 2006). A
study that examines investor sentiment considering several different markets in a simultaneous,
concurrent perspective has found a negative relationship between stock market connectedness and
high investor sentiment. Another finding is that low investor sentiment has a greater impact on the
volatility connectedness, particularly during a time of market decline (Bissoondoyal-Bheenick,
Do, Hu, & Zhong, 2022). Another paper suggests that high investor sentiment will lead to higher
stock returns in the short term, but to price reversals in the long term. This study has not been able
to find other factors to explain this relationship other than the investors’ sentiment. Since high
investor sentiment and retail investors play a significant role in the relationship mentioned above,
the authors reemphasize the importance of understanding individual investors’ sentiments and
behaviors when analyzing the stock market (Dong & Gil-Bazo, 2020). A different study concludes
that investors’ sentiment toward foreign markets and the home market are strong contrarian
predictors of stock returns. This further suggests that the high sentiments among investors will
ultimately produce low stock returns in the long run. The authors proved that high investor
sentiments affect the stocks in the French market in a statistically meaningful way (Aissia, 2016).
More specifically regarding CCEFs, it has been previously proven that high popularity of a country
among Americans impacts the demand and, thus, the mispricing of securities from that specific
country. This study has found that a high level of positive perception of a country among
Americans has a positive association with low levels of trading price discount of CCEFs from that
country. The author has investigated the potential causes for this association from a firm
perspective and a society perspective by investigating the relationship between country popularity
and a plethora of measures that shows the effect of Americans’ investment behavior toward foreign
securities. From the firm perspective, the author found that country popularity influences security
prices and ultimately firms’ investment policies by examining variables such as institutional
holdings and US cross-border M&A activity. From the society perspective, it is found that
perceptions of countries are affected by the societal norms surrounding other countries’ political
decisions and the political, legal, and economic system that underpins them (Hwang, 2011).
Our paper explores the effect of country-specific investor sentiment, and outlines and analyzes the
factors that influence the popularity of a country in more detail. We offer analyses on existing and
new societal factors that might influence Americans’ sentiment toward different countries, along
with how American investors’ sentiment affects the market price of CCEFs. As the data used for
this study is very recent, this will provide insights about country-specific foreign investment
behavior of American investors at present. This is valuable as we live in an increasingly politically
polarizing and rapidly changing world where interconnectivity between different countries is
crucial. Our research could provide insights into what factors affect investor sentiment and how
investors should incorporate them. Although our results might not be universal, it could be
reasonably argued that the general conclusions drawn from our research could explain investor
sentiment of investors in other countries as well. Since our study observes and analyzes
Americans’ foreign investing behavior during the years that were met with unprecedented
abnormality in the stock market due to COVID-19 (Harjoto, Rossi, & Paglia, 2021), this would
meaningfully contribute to the existing literature, given the increased polarization of Americans’
sentiments toward certain ethnicities and countries during these times (Addo, 2020).
   3. Data
3.1 Country Popularity Score
As we viewed Hwang’s metric for country popularity displayed a high level of accuracy due to
being directly based on the actual opinions extracted from a set of telephone interviews, we used
the same method for our study. Similarly to Hwang’s method, we use surveys performed by a
random sample of Americans to produce a metric that reflects how popular a country is among
Americans. The survey conducted by Gallup and iPoll DataBank by calling randomly selected
Americans via phone and asking them to evaluate their perception of certain countries into four
categories: Very Favorable, Mostly Favorable, Mostly Unfavorable, and Very Unfavorable. There
was also a category called No Opinion if the respondents think they do not have enough
information or no particular opinion about a country. The responses have been expressed in
percentages of the total interviewees (Gallup, 2023). Our country popularity metric, Country
Popularity Score, is the sum of the multiplying the Very Favorable percentage by four, the Mostly
Favorable percentage by three, the Mostly Unfavorable percentage by two, and the Very
Unfavorable percentage by one. No Opinions were dropped, as they would not produce meaningful
insights. One metric is produced for one country every year where we have data. The mean of the
Country Popularity Score from the sample surveys that we use is 2.74, which suggests that
Americans think, on average, mostly favorably of countries included in our sample; the standard
deviation is 0.41. The average Country Popularity Score for each country included in our sample
between 2009 to 2021 is reported in Appendix 1.
Given the main aim of this study, we have chosen as many countries as possible among the
countries that were included in the survey conducted by Gallup and iPoll for the entirety or
majority of the years from 2009 to 2021. However, apart from a select few countries, the majority
of these countries are not surveyed about every year. To minimize the errors that could be produced
from using infrequent, lagged data but simultaneously maintain a statistically meaningful sample
size that would lead to generalizable results, we follow the criteria suggested by Hwang (Hwang,
2011). The first criterion is that the most recent survey must be conducted within the last two years.
The second criterion is that the difference in Country Popularity Score between the two scores
should not be greater than 0.2 if the observations are more than two years apart. The surveys are
mainly conducted on a yearly basis (an interval of 12 months is the median in our sample), but for
some countries the interval between two surveys is longer than 36 months. Since many of the
                                                                                                  1
CCEFs were liquidated early in the time period between 2009 and 2021 or even before that, and
having to exclude the countries that are not included in the surveys each 12 months will severely
decrease our sample size and it would also influence the main analysis related to the CCEFs
included. Using the criteria above, we have been able to include countries such as Australia which
has one of the few CCEFs that have complete data from 2009 to 2021, as the interval of the surveys
where Australia was included is longer than 12 months, but it satisfies the criteria of a difference
in Country Popularity Score that is not bigger than 0.2.

1
 The Brazilian Equity Fund went out of business in 2005. The France Growth Fund went out of business in 2004.
The Indonesia Fund was merged into Aberdeen Chile Fund, Inc. in 2018. The Fidelity Advisor Korea Fund went out
of business in 2007. The Korean Investment Fund went out of business an unknown year. The First Philippine Fund
went out of business in 2003. The Spain Fund went out of business in 2011. The United Kingdom Fund went out of
business in 1999.
Source: Capital IQ
The frequency of the survey covered in our sample is reported in Appendix 2. In order to make
our data and analysis more easily comparable to similar studies, we have attempted to include as
many of the same countries in our sample as Hwang had done in his (Hwang, 2011). Ultimately,
our sample contains 15 countries over the period 2009 to 2021. The sample countries are Australia,
Canada, China, France, Germany, India, Israel, Japan, South Korea, Mexico, Russia, Taiwan,
Turkey, the United Kingdom, and Venezuela. For the main analysis, the countries that did not have
an active CCEF for the majority or entirety of the time between the years 2009 to 2021 were
excluded. This resulted in us using 15 CCEFs from 10 countries for the main empirical analysis:
Australia, China, Germany, India, Israel, Japan, Korea, Mexico, Russia, and Taiwan (Appendix
3).
Nonetheless, there are clear differences that can be seen in the country popularity across countries
and over time. An example of a drastic change in country popularity over a short period of time is
China, as 24% of Americans had a Very Unfavorable opinion of China in 2020 before the global
spread of COVID-19 occurred whereas the number increased to 41% the following year. As China
is the country that Americans’ sentiments toward have changed the most, this will be further
explored in the paper in more detail in the following sections.

3.2 Determinants of Country Popularity
Prior to analyzing the relationship between CCEF premium (discount) and country popularity, we
must first observe and analyze country popularity and understand what factors affect it. Hwang
suggests that there are three groups of factors that influence a country’s popularity among
Americans: the cultural similarity between the sample country and the US (cultural similarity-
based view), how familiar Americans are with the sample country (familiarity-based view), and
how Americans perceive the sample country’s legal and political system based on US societal
norms (political and legal system-based view) (Hwang, 2011).
The factors included in the cultural similarity-based view are Same Language (a dummy variable
that equals one if the sample country’s official or primary language is English) (Central
Intelligence Agency [CIA], 2023), Same Religion (a dummy variable that equals one if the sample
country’s most dominant religion is Christianity) (Central Intelligence Agency [CIA], 2023),
Ancestry (percentage of the US citizen population that has ancestry from the sample country)
                                                                                 2
(United States Census Bureau, 2007), and the Hofstede-Cultural Distance  (the average of the
absolute difference between the scores of the US and the sample country regarding power distance,
individualism, masculinity, uncertainty avoidance, and long-term orientation) (Hofstede Insights,
2023). Only five out of six dimensions are used in Hwang’s study (Hwang, 2011) and we use this
same method to calculate the Hofstede-Cultural Distance metric.
The familiarity-based view included factors such as Population (logarithm of sample country’s
population published by the World Bank), Distance (logarithm of the distance in kilometers
between the capital of the sample country and the capital of the US). The data for Distance was

2
 An index developed by Hofstede that measures a country’s culture in a quantifiable manner using the dimensions:
power distance, individualism, masculinity, uncertainty avoidance, long-term orientation, and indulgence. (Hofstede
Insights, 2023)
obtained from Time and Date (Time and Date, 2023). We use the same determinants for our study
as in a similar study (Hwang, 2011).
For the political and legal system-based view, Hwang only included Governance Quality (a
measure of the perceived corruption of countries; Corruption Perceptions Index that is released
through Transparency International is used) (Hwang, 2011). As we viewed the political and legal
system-based view only being represented by a single variable was unbalanced compared to the
other views, we added an additional variable called Legal System (a dummy variable that equals
one if the sample country enforces the common law system) (Central Intelligence Agency [CIA],
2023). Hence, for our study, the political and legal system-based view contains variables that
measure how similar the political and legal system of the sample country and the US are in terms
of societal norms and formal systems in place.
In addition, we have a fourth view that compares the societal development of the sample country
in comparison to the American society (development system-based view). This was due to
international cooperation, sustainability, and common values such as democracy, respect for and
efforts in promoting human rights, gender equality, and freedom of speech have become
increasingly important in 2010s and 2020s for many countries. The variables that are included in
this fourth category are: Gender Inequality (a measure of gender inequality in a country; Gender
Inequality Index) (United Nations Development Programme, 2023), Human Development (a
measure of the average human development in a country in the dimensions of a long and healthy
life, being knowledgeable, and having a decent standard of living; Human Development Index)
(United Nations Development Programme, 2023), Sustainable Development (a measure UN’s
assessment of the progress of each country in terms of achieving the 17 Sustainable Development
Goals; Overall Sustainable Development Goals score) (Sustainable Development Report, 2023),
and Freedom of Expression (a measure of press freedom; World Press Freedom Index) (Reporters
Without Borders [RSF], 2023). Here, all indices except Gender Inequality Index gives a higher
score for a better performance.
Additionally, Hwang takes the percentage of the “No Opinion” answers from the survey and
includes this which we also do.
With these different variables, we plot a correlation matrix to understand what causes Americans
to have positive or negative sentiments of a specific country, like Hwang did (Hwang, 2011). In
the correlation matrices, we use the average value of each variable for each country since some of
the variables are not reported on a yearly basis. This is due to limited amount of variation in
consecutive observations in the variables’ data. Country Popularity Score is the average of the
variables across the time series, as some of the variables are not reported on yearly basis and there
being limited amount of variation in the data.
We construct two different correlation matrices as Gender Inequality, Human Development, and
Sustainable Development data for Taiwan is missing due to its complicated international status
and relation with China – one of the charter members of the UN. Hence, the first correlation matrix
(Table 1) contains the coefficient estimates and p-values obtained from running a correlation
between Country Popularity Score and all variables from the first three categories and only
Freedom of Expression from the fourth category for all the countries. The second correlation
matrix (Table 2) contains the coefficient estimates and p-values obtained from running a
correlation between Country Popularity Score and all variables from the four categories for all
countries in our sample excluding Taiwan. The countries included in constructing these correlation
matrices are listed in Appendix 1.

Table 1

This table provides coefficient estimates for correlation with Country Popularity Score (how popular a country is among
Americans) and various variables that we predict are determinants of the Country Popularity Score that can be divided into four
different categories: how similar the cultures of the sample country and the US are, how familiar Americans are with the sample
country, how similar the political and legal systems of the sample country and the US are, and similar the level of societal
development is between the sample country and the US. There are 15 countries in the sample. The data used in this correlation
matrix is from 2009 to 2021. Country Popularity Score is the sum of four multiplied by the percentage of the US survey participants
that have a Very Favorable opinion, three multiplied by the percentage that have a Mostly Favorable opinion, two multiplied by
the percentage that have a Mostly Unfavorable opinion, and one multiplied by the percentage that have a Very Unfavorable opinion
of the sample country. Population is the logarithm of the sample country’s population. Distance is the logarithm of the distance
between the sample country’s capital city and the US capital reported in kilometers. Fraction with no Opinion is the percentage of
survey participants that do not have a specific opinion about the sample country. Same Language is a dummy variable that equals
one if the sample country’s official or primary language is English, otherwise it equals zero. Same Religion is a dummy variable
that equals one if Christianity is the sample country’s predominant religion, otherwise it equals zero. Ancestry is the fraction of US
citizens with ancestors from the sample country. Hofstede-Cultural Distance is the average of the absolute difference between the
scores of the US and the sample country regarding power distance, individualism, masculinity, uncertainty avoidance, and long-
term orientation. Legal system is a dummy variable that equals one if a country’s legal system is common low. Governance Quality
is the sample country’s Corruption Perceptions Index according to Transparency International. Freedom of Expression is the sample
country’s World Press Freedom Index according to Reporters Without Borders. The p-values are reported in parentheses.

                       Country                            Fraction                                     Hofstede-
                                                                Same      Same                         Legal   Governance   Freedom of
                     Popularity   Population Distance with no                          Ancestry Cultural
                                                                  Language Religion                      System Quality Expression
                       Score                     Opinion                                    Distance
      Country
       Popularity
      Score
                         -0.339
      Population
                           (.217)

                        -0.170        0.184
      Distance
                         (.544) (.512)

       Fraction with     -0.483       -0.053      0.350
      no Opinion (.068) (.851) (.202)

      Same             0.618        0.073      -0.201     -0.114
      Language (.014) (.796) (.472) (.687)

                         0.190        -0.228     -0.556      -0.191       0.262
      Same Religion
                         (.497) (.415) (.031) (.496) (.346)

                        0.263        0.062      -0.116     -0.266       0.007      0.454
      Ancestry
                         (.344) (.826) (.682) (.338) (.981) (.089)
       Hofstede-
                        -0.731        0.237      0.333      0.213       -0.807      -0.465     -0.274
       Cultural
                        (.002) (.395) (.226) (.446) (<.001) (.081) (.324)
       Distance
                         0.614        -0.169     -0.129      -0.123       0.853      0.094     -0.074      -0.789
      Legal System
                        (.015) (.547) (.647) (.662) (<.001) (.738) (.794) (<.001)

      Governance       0.932       -0.366     -0.025     -0.487       0.389      0.118     0.327      -0.572      0.397
       Quality (<.001) (.180) (.930) (.066) (.152) (.674) (.235) (.026) (.143)

      Freedom of       0.824       -0.618     -0.162     -0.163       0.349      0.310     0.308      -0.488      0.344       0.804
      Expression (<.001) (.014) (.565) (.561) (.202) (.261) (.265) (.065) (.209) (<.001)
                                                                                                          Computed correlation used pearson-method with listwise-deletion.

The familiarity-based view has no empirical support as neither Population nor Distance has a
reliable correlation coefficient with Country Popularity Score. The same reasoning goes for
Fraction with No Opinion. While cultural similarity-based has empirical support, since Country
Popularity Score is positively correlated with Same Language and negatively correlated with
Hofstede-Cultural Distance, where the coefficient is significant and statistically meaningful. These
results are similar to the results produced in a previous study. In his study, he found little empirical
evidence for the familiarity-based view (Hwang, 2011). Except for Hofstede-Cultural Distance
that generated a relatively economically meaningful, negative relationship with the Country
Popularity Score, all other variables in the cultural similarity view generated positive relationships
with the Country Popularity Score. Country Popularity Score is also positively correlated with the
political and legal system-based view where a high positive and significant correlation is observed
with Governance Quality and a positive, significant correlation with Legal System. Aligned with
our findings, Hwang’s study had also found the political and legal system-based view to have the
strongest effect on the Country Popularity Score (Hwang, 2011). Also, Country Popularity Score
has a highly positive, statistically significant and meaningful correlation with Freedom of
Expression, and hence the development-based view.
The result from Table 2 is consistent with Table 1, where there are some minor changes in
magnitude for some variables. The correlation between Country Popularity Score and the variables
associated with the familiarity-based view has no empirical support, but there is a strong positive
correlation between Country Popularity Score and both cultural similarity-based view and legal-
based view. The development-based view has a strong empirical support as there are positive and
significant relationships between Country Popularity Score and Freedom of Expression, Human
Development, and Sustainable Development. There is a negative, significant relationship between
Country Popularity Score and Gender Inequality (where a high score indicates high gender
inequality). Hence, we can further confirm our assumption that a country’s popularity among
Americans can be explained with the variables related to the development-based view.
Both Table 1 and 2 generate results that give consistent results in terms of the size of the variables’
effects, meaning the magnitude of the coefficient estimates. Overall, the coefficient estimate
magnitude is larger for our study compared to Hwang’s, except for Distance, Same Religion, and
Hofstede-Cultural Distance. Interestingly, these are the variables that are rather unlikely to have
changed over time which might indicate that the size of these variables’ effect on the Country
Popularity Score decreases further into the future.
Overall, we can draw the conclusion that our results mostly align and are consistent with the results
produced by Hwang (Hwang, 2011) as the political and legal system-based view is proven to have
the strongest positive and significant relationship with Country Popularity Score. Select variables
from the cultural similarity-based view and all variables from the development-based view can
also explain a country’s popularity among Americans, especially the latter which we have
empirically proven. However, it is still quite difficult to know the precise reasons behind why
Americans think more favorably about a specific country over another with these results alone. In
our sample, a country’s Country Popularity Score changes minorly over time, which makes it
difficult to investigate and connect the measure of popularity to a specific reason or event.
However, in our dataset, the biggest difference in Country Popularity Score for certain countries
coincides with the period characterized by the prevalence of the COVID-19 pandemic. This
observation suggests that Americans’ perception of a specific country is affected by various
external situations and a country’s decisions surrounding those circumstances. This aspect will be
further examined in subsequent sections of the paper.
Table 2

This table provides coefficient estimates for correlation with Country Popularity Score (how popular a country is among
Americans) and various variables that we predict are determinants of the Country Popularity Score that can be divided into four
different categories: how similar the cultures of the sample country and the US are, how familiar Americans are with the sample
country, how similar the political and legal systems of the sample country and the US are, and similar the level of societal
development is between the sample country and the US. There are 14 countries in the sample (Taiwan is excluded). The data used
in this correlation matrix is from 2009 to 2021. Country Popularity Score is the sum of four multiplied by the percentage of the US
survey participants that have a Very Favorable opinion, three multiplied by the percentage that have a Mostly Favorable opinion,
two multiplied by the percentage that have a Mostly Unfavorable opinion, and one multiplied by the percentage that have a Very
Unfavorable opinion of the sample country. Population is the logarithm of the sample country’s population. Distance is the
logarithm of the distance between the sample country’s capital city and the US capital reported in kilometers. Fraction with no
Opinion is the percentage of survey participants that do not have a specific opinion about the sample country. Same Language is a
dummy variable that equals one if the sample country’s official or primary language is English, otherwise it equals zero. Same
Religion is a dummy variable that equals one if Christianity is the sample country’s predominant religion, otherwise it equals zero.
Ancestry is the fraction of US citizens with ancestors from the sample country. Hofstede-Cultural Distance is the average of the
absolute difference between the scores of the US and the sample country regarding power distance, individualism, masculinity,
uncertainty avoidance, and long-term orientation. Legal system is a dummy variable that equals one if a country’s legal system is
common low. Governance Quality is the sample country’s Corruption Perceptions Index according to Transparency International.
Freedom of Expression is the sample country’s World Press Freedom Index according to Reporters Without Borders. The p-values
are reported in parentheses. Gender Inequality is the sample country’s Gender Inequality Index according to the United Nations.
Human Development is the sample country’s Human Development Index according to the United Nations. Sustainable
Development is the sample country’s Overall Sustainable Development Goals score according to the United Nations. The p-values
are reported in parentheses.

                   Country                         Fraction                                Hofstede-                        Freedom
                                                           Same     Same                       Legal  Governance              Gender     Human     Sustainable
                   Popularity  Population Distance   with no                       Ancestry   Cultural                            of
                                                             Language  Religion                    System    Quality                Inequality  Development  Development
                     Score                           Opinion                                 Distance                        Expression
     Country
      Popularity
     Score
                     -0.352
     Population
                       (.217)

                     -0.172       0.249
     Distance
                       (.556)       (.390)
      Fraction
                     -0.489      -0.011      0.325
     with no
                       (.076)       (.969)      (.258)
     Opinion
     Same          0.624       0.035      -0.173    -0.088
      Language      (.017)       (.905)      (.554)     (.765)

      Same          0.196      -0.320     -0.529    -0.150     0.228
      Religion        (.503)       (.265)      (.052)     (.610)      (.433)

                     0.264       0.027      -0.087    -0.247     -0.017     0.435
     Ancestry
                       (.361)       (.926)      (.768)     (.395)      (.953)      (.120)
      Hofstede-
                     -0.749       0.311      0.298     0.180     -0.801     -0.427    -0.249
      Cultural
                       (.002)       (.278)      (.302)     (.538)      (.001)      (.128)     (.391)
      Distance
      Legal          0.624       -0.226     -0.092    -0.093     0.849     0.043     -0.104     -0.781
      System          (.017)       (.438)      (.754)     (.751)     (<.001)     (.884)     (.722)     (.001)

      Governance    0.935      -0.359     -0.042    -0.509     0.408     0.147     0.343     -0.608    0.420
      Quality        (<.001)      (.207)      (.885)     (.063)      (.148)     (.617)     (.231)     (.021)     (.135)

      Freedom of     0.834      -0.607     -0.200    -0.194     0.382     0.371     0.336     -0.543    0.383      0.804
      Expression     (<.001)      (.021)      (.493)     (.507)      (.178)     (.192)     (.240)     (.045)     (.177)      (.001)

      Gender        -0.647       0.437      -0.028     0.657      0.013     -0.103    -0.244     0.209    -0.093     -0.823       -0.587
      Inequality       (.012)       (.119)      (.924)     (.011)      (.964)     (.727)     (.400)     (.474)     (.753)     (<.001)       (.027)

      Human         0.675      -0.697     -0.096    -0.466     0.036     0.280     0.281     -0.318    0.134      0.814       0.765      -0.915
      Development    (.008)       (.006)      (.745)     (.093)     (.902)     (.333)     (.331)     (.268)    (.647)     (<.001)       (.001)      (<.001)

      Sustainable     0.616       -0.434     -0.099    -0.603     -0.047     0.297     0.432     -0.199    -0.060     0.801        0.654      -0.928       0.926
      Development    (.019)       (.121)      (.737)     (.023)     (.874)     (.302)     (.123)     (.495)    (.838)      (.001)        (.011)      (<.001)      (<.001)
                                                                                                                                  Computed correlation used pearson-method with listwise-deletion.
3.3 CCEF Data
3.3.1 Dependent Variable
To test the relationship between a country’s perception by American investors and a closed-end
country fund (i.e., CCEF) from that country, we run several regressions. The dependent variable
is the CCEF premium (discount) which is calculated with the following formula: [(Price –
NAV)/NAV] as in previous studies (Hwang, 2011). The data used is monthly security data
downloaded from Compustat – Capital IQ via WRDS. The data from the six months after the
sample funds’ IPOs and the month before the liquidation or open-ending announcement were left
out to mitigate data distortions that these events might cause. This data modification was done by
previous studies (Chan, Jain, & Xia, 2008), including the paper we are extending on (Hwang,
2011) which we, therefore, follow.

3.3.2 Control Variables
Other independent variables that are used as control variables include Inverse Security Price (Price
< NAV), Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV), Dividend Yield (Price < NAV), Dividend Yield
(Price > NAV), Expense Ratio, Turnover Ratio, US Market Valuation Ratio, and the Home Market
Valuation Ratio. As Hwang uses these specific control variables in his empirical analysis and since
we thought the theoretical significance of each of these control variables are valid, relevant, and
well-defined, we use the same set of control variables for our study (Hwang, 2011).
The control variable Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV) is calculated by dividing one by the
CCEFs’ lagged price (one month) when the price is at a premium (Price > NAV), and otherwise
zero. The control variable Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) is calculated by dividing one by
the CCEFs’ lagged price (one month) when the price is at a discount (Price < NAV), and otherwise
zero. Based on previous research, stocks with lower (higher) price levels have higher (lower)
transaction costs, which makes it more difficult (easier) to arbitrage (Pontiff, 1996). Hence, Inverse
Security Price is included in this study to capture the arbitrage costs of the different CCEFs
(Pontiff, 1996).
Dividend Yield is calculated by dividing the monthly dividend paid per share paid by the CCEF
over the fund’s lagged net asset value (one month) with data obtained from Compustat – Capital
IQ via WRDS. Dividend Yield (Price < NAV) is calculated if the price is at a premium, and zero
otherwise. Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) is calculated if the price is at a discount, and zero
otherwise. As paying out dividends decreases the holding costs, it increases the arbitrage profits
which implies that securities that have larger dividend payouts are less likely to be mispriced
(Pontiff, 1996). Hence, Dividend Yield is a control variable that captures the mispricing of the
CCEFs. This implies that when CCEFs that are traded for premium (discount) market prices, the
magnitude of the premium (discount) will be lower for securities with low (high) costs of arbitrage,
which often are securities with low (high) Inverse Security Price and high (low) Dividend Yield.
Although there are multiple credit agencies and financial institutions that provide expense ratio
data, we did not have access to them. Hence, we use data from Capital IQ to calculate the annual
expense ratio for each fund. The control variable Expense Ratio is calculated by dividing the total
operating expenses of a fund by the net assets, which is calculated through the difference between
a fund’s total assets and total liabilities. Since increasing expenses that increases the Expense Ratio
leaves less cash available to potentially distribute to investors, a high Expense Ratio would increase
the discount of the security (Ross, 2005). Hence, Expense Ratio is included to capture rather fund-
specific characteristics such as the fund manager’s managerial capabilities that will impact the
CCEF premium (discount).
The control variable Turnover Ratio is calculated through dividing the total trading volume of all
stocks in a specific country by the total shares outstanding in a market. This formula was based on
the share turnover formula for companies which we expanded to cover the entire economy of a
                  3
specific country. This data is obtained from Compustat – Capital IQ and is reported with daily
frequency. The median turnover of each year and each country is used as the annual turnover ratio
metric for each country. Given the specific characteristics of a CCEF – that its underlying asset’s
value is determined in the fund’s home market whereas the price of the fund is set in the US market
- Turnover Ratio is included to capture the liquidity differences in the US market and the CCEF’s
respective home market.
The control variables Home Market Valuation Ratio and US Market Valuation Ratio are calculated
by extracting the mispricing component in the market-to-book ratio of the CCEF’s home market
or the US market. More specifically, this is done by running a first-stage regression with the return
of the future six months of all stocks in the specific market as the dependent variable and the
market-to-book ratio as the independent variable (Baker, Foley, & Wurgler, 2009). The fitted
values from these regressions are used as the mispricing component values. Although there are
multiple formulas for return, we use the formula of the current adjusted close price multiplied by
the current total return factor divided by last period’s adjusted close price multiplied by last
period’s total return factor. This expression is then subtracted by one and multiplied by 100
                                             4
(Wharton Research Data Services, 2020).  This data is on an annual basis and is obtained from
Compustat – Capital IQ via WRDS. These control variables are included in this empirical study to
capture overall market sentiment (i.e., the overall demand) in the respective home market and the
US market. Due to data constraints regarding the market-to-book ratio, (which is later used to
calculate Home Market Valuation Ratio and US Market Valuation Ratio,), we run separate two
separate sets of regressions. The first has the time series of 2009 to 2021 without the control
variables Home Market Valuation Ratio and US Market Valuation Ratio. The second has the time
series of 2013 to 2021 and includes all control variables. In order to check the robustness of the
mispricing component, we also run a third regression with the time series of 2013 to 2021, but by
replacing the Home Market Valuation Ratio and the US Market Valuation Ratio with the market-
to-book ratio of each country. The market-to-book ratios of the different countries are downloaded
from Professor Damodaran’s dataset at NYU Stern (Damodaran, 2023).

3.4 COVID-19
In accordance with the COVID-19 pandemic, country popularity among Americans witnessed a
substantial change for some countries in our sample, specifically for China. The effects of these
series of events on Americans’ growing negative sentiments toward China are reflected in China’s
Country Popularity Score for the years 2020 and 2021. The biggest change of Country Popularity
Score for China is between 2020-2021 as it decreased with 0.31 points (2.14 in 2020 to 1.83 in
2021) whereas the average change in Country Popularity Score between 2020 and 2021 for all

3
 Share Turnover = Trading Volume / Average Shares Outstanding. Source: Investopedia
4
 ([{((PRCCD/AJEXDI)*TRFD)/((PRCCD(PRIOR)/AJEXDI(PRIOR))*TRFD(PRIOR))} -1]* 100)
Source: WRDS
countries in our sample was approximately 0.06. Given that the country with the second largest
change in Country Popularity Score, Russia, has seen a 0.15 change (from 2.04 in 2020 to 1.89 in
2021) which is less than half of the change China has experienced. China’s Country Popularity
Score development can be seen as extraordinary and abnormal when compared to other sample
countries. Therefore, we dedicate this separate section to investigate the relationship between
China’s country popularity among Americans and CCEF premium (discount) by plotting time
series of the price premia (discounts) of the two Chinese CCEFs.
Figure 1 shows that the China Fund’s price premium (discount) it its lowest peak where it was
traded at a 38% discount around June 2018. Around this time, the China’s Country Popularity
Score decreased by 0.16. A notable event that could be linked to this market event is the US-China
trade war that started in 2018 which stirred up various political conflicts which led to negative
economic implications between these two major economic trading partners (Bissoondoyal-
Bheenick, Do, Hu, & Zhong, 2022). After that, the fund’s price recovers to a lower discount rate,
but hits another low point in the beginning of 2020 where it traded at 15% discount approximately.
The World Health Organization declaring COVID-19 as a pandemic in March 2020 can be linked
to this negative price fluctuation.
As shown in Figure 2, the Templeton Dragon Fund had the biggest drop in 2019 toward the end
of the year, trading at approximately 14% discount. This could be associated with the identification
of the first case of COVID-19 in China. Later between 2020 and 2021, the CCEF had its biggest
drop where it traded at 20% discount during 2020 which coincided with the outbreak in China’s
capital Beijing. This extreme negative effect on the CCEF premium (discount) around this time is
consistent with China’s Country Popularity Score dropping during the same period (decreasing
from 2.14 in 2020 to 1.83 in 2021), mainly reflecting the news related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Both Chinese CCEFs witnessed a positive peak during 2021 (China Fund traded at 0% premium
or discount, and Templeton Dragon Fund traded at 5% discount) which could be due to the global
economy somewhat recovering from COVID-19. From these two time series plots, we have found
evidence that political and macroenvironmental events that take place inside and outside of the
CCEF’s home market affect the CCEFs’ price premia (discounts).
Figure 1

Time series of the China Fund’s (NYSE: CHN) price premium (discount) from 2018 to 2021.

                 0

              −10

              −20
                                                               March 2020:
             Discount/ Premium (%)
                                                             COVID-19 declared
                                         June 2018:                as pandemic

              −30
                                         Outbreak of trade
                                       war

              −40
                   2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
                                     Time

Figure 2

Time series of the Templeton Dragon Fund’s (NYSE: TDF) price premium (discount) from 2018 to 2021.

                                                                                          June 2020:
                                       December 2019:
                                                                                          Covid-19 outbreak in
                                       First reported COVID-19                               Beijing
                                                    case.
   4. Empirical Analysis
A study conducted in 2011 that aimed to test the relationship between country popularity and the
market price of CCEFs runs a fixed effects regression, a first-differencing regression, and a Fama-
McBeth regression using data from 1993 to 2008. The dependent variable is CCEF premium
(discount) and the independent variable is Country Popularity Score. The control variables used
in this study are Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV), Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV),
Dividend Yield (Price > NAV), Dividend Yield (Price < NAV), Expense Ratio, Turnover Ratio,
Home Market Valuation Ratio, and US Market Valuation Ratio (Hwang, 2011).
Similarly, we run fixed effects regressions and first-differencing regressions in order to control for
unobserved heterogeneity and omitted variable bias, as well as estimate the associations between
the variables. By including both, this study will be able to generate results that are robust and
meaningful since the characteristic of the independent variable of main interest (Country
Popularity Score) can be seen as both a long-term trend but also short-term changes, as country
popularity usually maintains a similar level over time but can also drastically change due to
extraordinary macroenvironmental changes. As this study takes place surrounding the occurrence
of COVID-19 which was one of the most socioeconomically impactful events during the last
decade, it would be meaningful to showcase both regressions that might reflect different
perspectives on country popularity – whether it is an aggregation of short-term changes or a long-
term trend.
However, we do not run a Fama-McBeth regression which is often preferred from an empirical
analysis standpoint given its superiority in robustness and being able to test more complex
relationships between the variables. Due to data constraints, our data would not be able to yield
meaningful and reliable results as the coefficient estimates of Fama-McBeth regressions run with
insufficient data often result in statistical errors such as endogeneity and omitted variable bias.
Rather than risking generating results that are statistically erroneous, we think it is more
advantageous to run fixed effects regressions and first-differencing regressions that could produce
more statistically robust results given the data we have and combining the results and insights that
we can obtain from these. As Hwang did, we adjust for clusters in the standard errors (by year-
month and fund) (White, 1980) as a remedy for heteroscedasticity that exists in our data along with
underlying autocorrelation that might exist in the data (Hwang, 2011).
We run a fixed effects regression and first-differencing model with data from 2009 to 2021. In this
dataset, the dependent variable is the CCEF premium (discount) and the independent variable of
main interest is Country Popularity Score. The control variables are Inverse Security Price (Price
> NAV), Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV), Dividend Yield (Price > NAV), Dividend Yield
(Price < NAV), Expense Ratio, and Turnover Ratio (Equation 1). Due to data constraints, we could
not calculate the Home Market Valuation Ratio and US Market Valuation Ratio for the years 2009
to 2012. Hence, they are excluded from the regressions run with this time period. Leaving out two
control variables that could be argued as the more important variables – since they directly
represent and explain market sentiments – could have negative implications on the overall
goodness-of-fit of the regression model and the accuracy of the parameter estimates.

 (Equation 1) Premium (Discount) ~β0 + β1 Country Popularity Score + β2 Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV) +
 β3 Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) + β4 Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) + β5 Dividend Yield (Price < NAV) +
                                   β6 Expense Ratio + β7 Turnover Ratio + ε
Although there is the risk of the data not providing statistically strong evidence due to a short time
period, we run a fixed effects regression and first-differencing regression with the data between
the years 2013 and 2020. In this dataset, we use the same dependent variable, independent variable,
and control variables as we did for the time period from 2009 and 2021, we include Home Market
Valuation Ratio and US Market Valuation Ratio as control variables (Equation 2). This is done to
include all variables that were in a similar study but with a different time period (Hwang, 2011).
When we compare the outcomes between our study and Hwang’s study – as it is the study that has
produced the conclusion that has led to us forming a hypothesis that there would be a positive
relationship between Country Popularity Score and CCEF premium – it would be appropriate to
include all variables that are included in Hwang’s study in order to make comparisons and draw
reasonable conclusions. For completeness, we also run a fixed effects regression and first-
differencing regression with data from 2013 to 2021, but with Home Market-to-Book Ratio and
US Market-to-Book Ratio instead of Home Market Valuation Ratio and US Market Valuation
Ratio. We do this to observe whether there are significant differences in the regression outputs
when using raw market-to-book ratios compared to the mispricing components, and hence see
whether using the mispricing components yields robust results. Although this set of regressions
will perhaps have a higher level of goodness of fit and more accurate parameter estimates as all
necessary control variables according to the benchmark study are included, other problems such
as limited statistical power and limited generalizability might occur, given the short time period.

 (Equation 2) Premium (Discount) ~β0 + β1 Country Popularity Score + β2 Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV) +
 β3 Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) + β4 Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) + β5 Dividend Yield (Price < NAV) +
   β6 Expense Ratio + β7 Turnover Ratio + β8 Home Market Valuation Ratio + β9 US Market Valuation Ratio + ε

   5. Results

Prior to the empirical studies, we hypothesized that there would be a positive relationship between
country popularity and the CCEF premium (discount) based on previous studies that have
empirically shown this (Hwang, 2011). However, this hypothesis has been contradicted overall in
our empirical analyses.

As reported in Table 3, the fixed effects regression with the data from 2009 to 2021 produces a
significant negative relationship between Country Popularity Score and the CCEF premium
(discount). Other control variables that have resulted in significant negative relationships (p<0.01)
with the dependent variable are Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) and Turnover Ratio. There
is a significant positive relationship between Expense Ratio and the dependent variable, and the
coefficient estimate generated by Expense Ratio has the largest magnitude. All other control
variables resulted in insignificant positive relationships with the dependent variable. In both our
and Hwang’s study, Expense Ratio has the largest coefficient estimate magnitude which is
economically meaningful in comparison with other independent variables. This is a very strong
effect as the coefficient estimates produced in our study were overall smaller in magnitude
compared to the ones produced in Hwang’s study except for Expense Ratio (2.546 in Hwang’s
study). Except for Dividend Yield (Price > NAV), Dividend Yield (Price < NAV), and Expense
Ratio, the control variables have coefficient estimates with opposite signs when comparing our
study to a similar study conducted by Hwang (Hwang, 2011). This similarity might exist due to
these control variables being relatively more directly associated with the CCEFs’ cash flows and
therefore show more consistent relationships with the dependent variable throughout time.

The adjusted R-squared metric is very low and indicates that the proportion of variance in the
dependent variable (CCEF premium (discount)) that can be explained by the independent variables
are very low and that, therefore, the explanatory power of the model is low. The adjusted R-squared
generated in our regression (0.362) is nearly half of that of Hwang’s (0.60) despite having similar
numbers of observations (2150 in our study, 2155 in Hwang’s) which means that our model fits
the data poorly in comparison to Hwang’s.

Given that the coefficient estimate of Country Popularity Score is –0.080 and the t-statistic is -
4.85, one standard deviation increase in Country Popularity Score would result in a 3.28%
decrease in CCEF discount. Compared to Hwang’s study (0.116 coefficient estimate for Country
Popularity Score; 2.9% increase in discount when one standard deviation decrease) that produced
a positive relationship between CCEF premium (discount) and Country Popularity Score, the
effect of Country Popularity Score on the dependent variable is stronger in Hwang’s study.
Overall, the magnitude of the coefficient estimates being larger in Hwang’s study indicates a
stronger size or strength of the relationships of the independent variables with the dependent
variable. All of the coefficient estimates are positive except for Inverse Security Price (Price <
NAV) in Hwang’s study (excluding US Market Valuation Ratio since it is not included in this
regression with data from 2009 to 2021). Given that all variables that are used in the regressions
should have the same theoretical significance and explanation, our model being inadequately
specified would be of low possibility. Overall, we can draw the conclusion from the fixed effects
regression that country popularity shows a significant negative relationship with the CCEF
premium (discount). The variables that are more directly associated to the cash flows of the fund
(Dividend Yield (Price > NAV), Dividend Yield (Price < NAV), and Expense Ratio) that are
positively associated with the CCEF premium (discount). In Hwang’s study, other variables that
are less directly linked to the fund’s cash flows showed positive relationships with the CCEF
premium (discount). This difference could potentially signify a change in investor behavior.

The first differencing regression results in a negative relationship between Country Popularity
Score and the dependent variable. All relationships are insignificant except for the relationship
between the dependent variable and Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) which is also the independent
variable that has generated the largest coefficient estimate magnitude in our regression. In
Hwang’s study, all independent variables except Dividend Yield (Price < NAV) generated positive
relationships with the dependent variable. In our study, all independent variables except Country
Popularity Score, Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV), and Dividend Yield (Price > NAV)
generates a positive relationship with the dependent variable. What is worth noting is that the
control variables that generate a negative relationship with the dependent variable are all control
variables for when the fund trades at a premium. As the coefficient estimate of Country Popularity
Score is -0.004 and the t-statistic is -0.299, one increase in Country Popularity Score’s standard
deviation leads to a 0.164% decrease in CCEF discount. Compared to the outputs in Hwang’s
study, this is a very weak effect (coefficient estimate of Country Popularity Score is 0.083; one
standard deviation decrease in Country Popularity Score leads to a 2.08% increase in the CCEF
discount).
The adjusted R squared metric is 0.023 which is nearly one fourth of the adjusted R-squared metric
generated in Hwang’s first-differencing model, despite having nearly the same number of
observations (2135 observations in our study; 2136 observations in Hwang’s study). This means
that, much like the fixed effects model, this model has a weak explanatory power and fits our data
poorly. The goodness-of-fit represented by the adjusted R-squared metric is much lower than the
fixed effects model. The intercept generated from this first differencing regression has a coefficient
estimate of -0.001, t-statistic of -0.874, is insignificant, and therefore does not meaningfully
contribute to explaining the variation in the dependent variable. Overall, the first-differencing
model produced a result that is consistent with the fixed effects regression, but with much less
statistical significance. None of the coefficients were economically meaningful. The majority of
the independent variables showed insignificant relationships with the dependent variable which
could be due to the model capturing short-term changes that might not yield significant findings
given that CCEFs are highly volatile.

As mentioned earlier, the above process will be repeated for the dataset that has data from 2013 to
2021 including the control variables Home Market Valuation Ratio and US Market Valuation
Ratio, since we only have market-to-book ratio data accessible from 2013 and onwards. The
coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values from the regressions are reported in Table 4. Our
data constraint regarding calculating the Home Market Valuation Ratio and the US Market
Valuation Ratio has led us to using market-to-book ratios that were not value-weighted. For the
completeness of our study, we have conducted a fixed effects regression and first-differencing
regression using market-to-book ratios instead of the Home Market Valuation Ratio and the US
Market Valuation Ratio with data between 2013 and 2021. These regressions produce fairly similar
results as the regressions using the mispricing components which attest to the fact that regressions
using the mispricing components are robust.

As seen in Table 4, the fixed effects regression, we can observe that there is a statistically
significant negative relationship between Country Popularity Score and the CCEF premium
(discount). Since the coefficient estimate is -0.077 and the t-statistic is -3.33, one standard
deviation increase in Country Popularity Score will lead to a 3.16% decrease in CCEF discount.
Similar to the previous fixed effects regression, the effect on the dependent variable is stronger in
Hwang’s study given the overall larger coefficient estimate magnitude.

The adjusted R-squared metrics are very low (0.222) which is lower in comparison to the fixed
effects regression run with the data from 2009 to 2021, and is nonetheless much lower compared
to the adjusted R-squared metric in Hwang’s study (0.6). This could be due to the number of
observations being significantly lower (1445 observations in this regression, 2150 observations in
fixed effects regression with dataset from 2009 to 2021, and 2155 observations in Hwang’s study).
However, the goodness-of-fit was a problem for the regression containing the data from 2009 to
2021 despite having similar numbers of observations. Therefore, this most likely is not a problem
particularly pertaining to this regression model.
Table 3
This table reports the coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values from the output from a fixed effects regression and a first-
differencing regression with CCEF premium (discount) as the dependent variable, Country Popularity Score as the independent
variable, and Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV), Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV), Dividend Yield (Price > NAV), Dividend
Yield (Price < NAV), Expense Ratio, and Turnover Ratio as the control variables. CCEF premium (discount) is calculated with this
formula: (Price-NAV)/NAV. Country Popularity Score is the sum of four multiplied by the percentage of the US survey participants
that have a Very Favorable opinion, three multiplied by the percentage that have a Mostly Favorable opinion, two multiplied by
the percentage that have a Mostly Unfavorable opinion, and one multiplied by the percentage that have a Very Unfavorable opinion
of the sample country. Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV) is one over the lagged CCEF’s price by one month when the CCEF
trades at a premium. Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) is one over the lagged CCEF’s price by one month when the CCEF
trades at a discount. Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) is the monthly dividend paid per share of each CCEF over the fund’s lagged
NAV when the CCEF trades at a premium. Dividend Yield (Price < NAV) is the monthly dividend paid per share of each CCEF
over the fund’s lagged NAV when the CCEF trades at a discount. Expense Ratio is the CCEF’s total operating expenses over the
net assets, which is the difference between the fund’s total assets and total liabilities. Turnover Ratio is the total trading volume of
all stocks in a specific country by the total shares outstanding in the same market. The data comprises 15 CCEFs from 10 countries
between 2009 and 2021. The t-statistics are in brackets. The p-values are represented through the number of stars next to the
coefficient estimates. To produce more accurate coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values, standard errors from the regressions
are adjusted for clustering by year-month and fund (White, 1980). p<0.1(*); p<0.05(**); p<0.01(***)

                                                                      Coefficient [t-statistic]
Variable Fixed Effects First Differencing
Country Popularity Score -0.08*** -0.004
                                                       [-4.85] [-0.229]
Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV) 0.058 -0.295
                                                     [0.289] [-0.899]
Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) -0.63*** 0.053
                                                     [-5.24] [0.182]
Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) 0.066 -0.587**
                                                    [0.154] [-2.25]
Dividend Yield (Price < NAV) 0.027 0.024
                                                    [0.522] [0.695]
Expense Ratio 3.174*** 0.249
                                                     [3.42] [0.848]
Turnover Ratio -0.008*** 0.003
                                                       [-4.88] [1.22]

Number of observations 2150 2135
Adjusted R-squared 0.362 0.023

Control variables that have generated significant relationships with the dependent variable are
Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV), Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV), Expense Ratio,
Turnover Ratio, and US Market Valuation Ratio. Consistent with the fixed effects regression with
the data from 2009 to 2021, Expense Ratio has the largest coefficient estimate magnitude which is
also significant. Also, similarly to the fixed effects regression with data from 2009 to 2021,
Dividend Yield (Price > NAV), Dividend Yield (Price < NAV), and Expense Ratio have positive
relationships with the dependent variable, where Expense Ratio is the only control variable with a
statistically significant relationship. In this regression, Home Market Valuation Ratio also has a
positive relationship with the dependent variable. This further supports our findings from the
previous fixed effects regression control variables that have a more direct association to the fund’s
cash flow that have positive relationships with the CCEF premium (discount) when examining for
long-term trends.

The first differencing regression resulted in a statistically insignificant positive relationship
between Country Popularity Score and CCEF premium (discount). This contrasts with the
previous first differencing regression run with data from 2009 to 2021 that generated a negative
insignificant relationship between Country Popularity Score and CCEF premium (discount) as
well as results found in Hwang’s study. As the coefficient estimate is 0.035 and the t-statistic is
1.44 for Country Popularity Score, one standard deviation decrease in Country Popularity will
lead to a 1.44% increase in CCEF premium (discount). This is a weaker effect on the dependent
variable compared to Hwang’s study.

Similar to the previous first differencing model run with data from 2009 to 2021, Dividend Yield
(Price > NAV) produced a statistically significant, negative relationship with the dependent
variable. Home Market Valuation Ratio and US Market Valuation Ratio also have significant
relationships with the dependent variable. Nearly half of the independent variables have opposite
coefficient estimate signs compared to ones produced in Hwang’s study. As in the previous first
differencing regression with using data from 2009 to 2021, the control variables Inverse Security
Price (Price < NAV) and Turnover Ratio produce the same coefficient estimate signs (positive) as
in Hwang’s paper. Additionally for this output, Country Popularity Score and Home Market
Valuation in this first-differencing regression shares the same coefficient estimate sign (positive)
as in Hwang’s study. The intercept generated in this first differencing model has the same
coefficient estimate magnitude (-0.001) and a t-statistic of -1.65, which makes the intercept in this
regression not very useful in explaining the variation of the dependent variable.

The adjusted R-squared metric is 0.024 which is very low but still very similar to the adjusted R-
squared metric in the previous first-differencing regression. The regressions run with market-to-
book ratios instead of the mispricing components (Appendix 8) produce similar results as the fixed
effects regression shows a significant negative relationship between the CCEF premium (discount)
and the Country Popularity Score. Dividend Yield (Price > NAV), Dividend Yield (Price < NAV),
and Expense Ratio are positively associated with the dependent variable. Expense Ratio has the
coefficient estimate with the largest magnitude. The first-differencing regression shows an
insignificant, positive relationship between the CCEF premium (discount) and the Country
Popularity Score. As in the regressions reported in Table 4, Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) had a
significant, negative relationship with the dependent variable and had the largest coefficient
estimate magnitude. For both regressions, the coefficient estimate signs of Home Market Valuation
Ratio (positive) and US Market Valuation Ratio (negative) were the opposite for Home Market-
to-Book Ratio (negative) and US Market-to-Book Ratio (negative). Hence, we can conclude that
using the mispricing component of the market-to-book ratio does not generate any meaningfully
different results and is, therefore, robust.
Table 4
This table reports the coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values from the output from a fixed effects regression and a first-
differencing regression with CCEF premium (discount) as the dependent variable, Country Popularity Score as the independent
variable, and Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV), Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV), Dividend Yield (Price > NAV), Dividend
Yield (Price < NAV), Expense Ratio, and Turnover Ratio as the control variables. CCEF premium (discount) is calculated with this
formula: (Price-NAV)/NAV. Country Popularity Score is the sum of four multiplied by the percentage of the US survey participants
that have a Very Favorable opinion, three multiplied by the percentage that have a Mostly Favorable opinion, two multiplied by
the percentage that have a Mostly Unfavorable opinion, and one multiplied by the percentage that have a Very Unfavorable opinion
of the sample country. Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV) is one over the lagged CCEF’s price by one month when the CCEF
trades at a premium. Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) is one over the lagged CCEF’s price by one month when the CCEF
trades at a discount. Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) is the monthly dividend paid per share of each CCEF over the fund’s lagged
NAV when the CCEF trades at a premium. Dividend Yield (Price < NAV) is the monthly dividend paid per share of each CCEF
over the fund’s lagged NAV when the CCEF trades at a discount. Expense Ratio is the CCEF’s total operating expenses over the
net assets, which is the difference between the fund’s total assets and total liabilities. Turnover Ratio is the total trading volume of
all stocks in a specific country by the total shares outstanding in the same market. Home Market Valuation Ratio is the mispricing
component of the market-to-book ratio of the CCEF’s home market. US Market Valuation Ratio is the mispricing component of
the market-to-book ratio of the US market. The data comprises 15 CCEFs from 10 countries between 2013 and 2021. The t-statistics
are in brackets. The p-values are represented through the number of stars next to the coefficient estimates. To produce more accurate
coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values, standard errors from the regressions are adjusted for clustering by year-month and
fund (White, 1980). p<0.1(*); p<0.05(**); p<0.01(***)

                                                                      Coefficient [t-statistic]
Variable Fixed Effects First Differencing
Country Popularity Score -0.077*** 0.035
                                                       [-3.33] [1.44]
Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV) -0.38* -0.042
                                                     [-1.93] [-0.106]
Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) -0.874*** 0.295
                                                       [-5.02] [0.823]
Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) 0.487 -0.848***
                                                      [1.16] [-3.08]
Dividend Yield (Price < NAV) 0.017 0.021
                                                   [0.252] [0.417]
Expense Ratio 1.266*** -0.35
                                                      [4.22] [-1.38]
Turnover Ratio -0.005*** 0.004
                                                       [-4.14] [1.41]
Home Market Valuation Ratio 0.001 0.001***
                                                     [1.25] [2.72]
US Market Valuation Ratio -0.008*** -0.01***
                                                        [-2.63] [-3.59]

Number of observations 1445 1430
Adjusted R-squared 0.222 0.024

As the results from the regressions have produced results that contradict our hypothesis, and since
the regressions using data from 2013 to 2021 produced different results, we investigate this further
by examining the country popularity survey data in a different way. Similar to how Hwang
(Hwang, 2011) did his study, we use the portion of surveys with the answers Very Favorable or
Mostly Favorable of a country (Panel A) and the portion of surveys with the answers Very
Unfavorable or Mostly Unfavorable of a country (Panel B), instead of Country Popularity Score.
After aggregating the survey data in this alternate way, a fixed effects regression and a first
differencing regression are run for each Panel A and Panel B. The results are reported in Tables 5
and 6 where Table 5 contains the data from 2009 to 2021 and Table 6 contains the data from 2013
to 2021.

In both Table 5 and 6, for Panel A, the CCEF premium (discount) has a negative association with
the portion of survey participants that answered very or mostly favorably of a country for both
fixed effects and first-differencing regressions. While for Panel B, the CCEF premium (discount)
has a positive association with the portion of surveys participants that answered very or mostly
unfavorably of a country for both fixed effects and first-differencing regressions. The results are
in accordance with the regressions run with Country Popularity Score as the independent variable,
since we get the opposite signs compared to the study done by Hwang (Hwang, 2011). In his study,
Panel A showed a positive association with the CCEF premium (discount), and Panel B showed a
negative association with the CCEF premium (discount), which is aligned with the result from his
regression with Country Popularity Score as the independent variable (Hwang, 2011). We also did
this using market-to-book ratios instead of Home Market Valuation Ratio and US Market
Valuation Ratio (Appendix 11) which produced similar results.
This consistent result indicates that CCEFs with securities from countries that are positively
perceived among Americans are trades at a discount, and CCEFs with securities from countries
that are negatively perceived among Americans are traded at a premium. However, the magnitude
of the coefficient estimates for Panel B (Very Unfavorable or Mostly Unfavorable) is larger than
the coefficient estimates for Panel A (Very Favorable or Mostly Favorable). The significance level
of the outputs from fixed effects regressions is consistently higher than the outputs from the first-
differencing regressions.
Table 5
This table reports the coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values from the output from a fixed effects regression and a first-
differencing regression for each panel (Panel A and Panel B) with CCEF premium (discount) as the dependent variable, % Survey
Participants as the independent variable, and Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV), Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV), Dividend
Yield (Price > NAV), Dividend Yield (Price < NAV), Expense Ratio, and Turnover Ratio as the control variables. CCEF premium
(discount) is calculated with this formula: (Price-NAV)/NAV. In Panel A, % Survey Participants is the percentage of the total US
survey participants that has a Very Favorable opinion or Mostly Favorable opinion of the sample country. In Panel B, % Survey
Participants is the percentage of the total US survey participants that has a Very Unfavorable opinion or Mostly Unfavorable
opinion of the sample country. Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV) is one over the lagged CCEF’s price by one month when the
CCEF trades at a premium. Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) is one over the lagged CCEF’s price by one month when the
CCEF trades at a discount. Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) is the monthly dividend paid per share of each CCEF over the fund’s
lagged NAV when the CCEF trades at a premium. Dividend Yield (Price < NAV) is the monthly dividend paid per share of each
CCEF over the fund’s lagged NAV when the CCEF trades at a discount. Expense Ratio is the CCEF’s total operating expenses
over the net assets, which is the difference between the fund’s total assets and total liabilities. Turnover Ratio is the total trading
volume of all stocks in a specific country by the total shares outstanding in the same market. The data comprises 15 CCEFs from
10 countries between 2009 and 2021. The t-statistics are in brackets. The p-values are represented through the number of stars next
to the coefficient estimates. To produce more accurate coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values, standard errors from the
regressions are adjusted for clustering by year-month and fund (White, 1980). p<0.1(*); p<0.05(**); p<0.01(***)

                                                                           Coefficient [t-statistics]

 Variable Fixed effects First-differencing

 Panel A: Very favorably or mostly favorably -0.007*** [-5.53] -0.001 [-1.14]

 % Survey Participants

 Panel B: Very unfavorably or mostly unfavorably 0.025*** [3.5] 0.003 [1.11]

 % Survey Participants

   6. Discussion

As our empirical analyses have generated results that contradicted our hypothesis, we decided
running the same regressions but excluding data from China and 2020 each, which we think may
contain extreme outliers or extraordinary data that might affect the regression outputs given the
remarkable changes in Americans’ sentiments toward China and COVID-19 taking place during
2020.

The regressions excluding China and Chinese CCEFs resulted in overall consistent results
regardless of what time periods we use. The fixed effects regressions showed a significant,
negative association between CCEF premium (discount) and Country Popularity Score.
Regardless of the time period, the adjusted R-squared increased slightly when China and Chinese
CCEFs were excluded from the dataset. The first-differencing regressions that excluded China and
Chinese CCEFs showed an insignificant, positive relationship between the CCEF premium
(discount) and Country Popularity Score. The adjusted R-squared shows barely any differences
when China and Chinese CCEFs are excluded from the dataset. This means that excluding China
and Chinese CCEFs altered the data to become more like the original first-differencing regression
using data between 2013 to 2021, meaning a shorter time period. This could imply that the data
related to China is consistent and showed stable differences between consecutive observations.
This could be the explanation to why removing China and Chinese CCEFs from the data produces
first-differencing regression results that contradict the fixed effects regressions that control for
more long-term, time-invariant trends in the data. Hence, in both fixed effects regressions and first-
differencing regressions, excluding China and Chinese CCEFs generates similar results to the
original dataset with the time period 2013 to 2021. Hence, Americans’ sentiment toward China
changing drastically in 2020 along with our study including China when Hwang’s study does not,
is not a likely explanation for the different results that were produced.

Table 6
This table reports the coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values from the output from a fixed effects regression and a first-
differencing regression for each panel (Panel A and Panel B) with CCEF premium (discount) as the dependent variable, % Survey
Participants as the independent variable, and Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV), Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV), Dividend
Yield (Price > NAV), Dividend Yield (Price < NAV), Expense Ratio, Turnover Ratio, Home Market Valuation Ratio, and US Market
Valuation Ratio as the control variables. CCEF premium (discount) is calculated with this formula: (Price-NAV)/NAV. In Panel
A, % Survey Participants is the percentage of the total US survey participants that has a Very Favorable opinion or Mostly
Favorable opinion of the sample country. In Panel B, % Survey Participants is the percentage of the total US survey participants
that has a Very Unfavorable opinion or Mostly Unfavorable opinion of the sample country. Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV)
is one over the lagged CCEF’s price by one month when the CCEF trades at a premium. Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) is
one over the lagged CCEF’s price by one month when the CCEF trades at a discount. Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) is the monthly
dividend paid per share of each CCEF over the fund’s lagged NAV when the CCEF trades at a premium. Dividend Yield (Price <
NAV) is the monthly dividend paid per share of each CCEF over the fund’s lagged NAV when the CCEF trades at a discount.
Expense Ratio is the CCEF’s total operating expenses over the net assets, which is the difference between the fund’s total assets
and total liabilities. Turnover Ratio is the total trading volume of all stocks in a specific country by the total shares outstanding in
the same market. Home Market Valuation Ratio is the mispricing component of the market-to-book ratio of the CCEF’s home
market. US Market Valuation Ratio is the mispricing component of the market-to-book ratio of the US market. The data comprises
15 CCEFs from 10 countries between 2013 and 2021. The t-statistics are in brackets. The p-values are represented through the
number of stars next to the coefficient estimates. To produce more accurate coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values, standard
errors from the regressions are adjusted for clustering by year-month and fund (White, 1980). p<0.1(*); p<0.05(**); p<0.01(***)

                                                                       Coefficient [t-statistics]

 Variable Fixed effects First-differencing

 Panel A: Very favorably or mostly favorably -0.005*** [-3.78] -0.001 [-1.55]

 % Survey Participants

 Panel B: Very unfavorably or mostly unfavorably 0.016** [2.16] 0.006 [1.42]

 % Survey Participants

When 2020 is excluded from the dataset, the fixed effects regression outputs result in rather similar
outputs as with the original data. The significant, negative relationship between the CCEF
premium (discount) and the Country Popularity Score that was produced from the original datasets
is unchanged when 2020 is excluded. The first differencing regressions excluding 2020 show that
there is an insignificant, negative relationship between the CCEF premium (discount) and Country
Popularity Score which is consistent with the outcome of the first differencing regression run with
data from 2009 to 2021 (the relatively longer time period in our study). This could imply that the
data from 2020 was overall quite volatile and showed inconsistent consecutive observations.
Therefore, excluding them produces results that are more similar to the outcomes of the fixed
effects regressions that control for more long-term, time-invariant trends and the first differencing
regression that used data from 2009 to 2021. For the regressions that exclude 2020 with data from
2013 to 2021, the adjusted R-squared improves very little compared to the original first-
differencing regressions. However, there are barely any differences when comparing the
regressions that use data from 2009 to 2021. This implies that the goodness-of-fit of the model
shows very little improvement when 2020 is excluded from the dataset, and barely any when the
time period in the dataset is longer. Hence, even if the extraordinary circumstances in 2020 resulted
in the data from that year being relatively more volatile compared to other years, removing the
observations from this year does not change the initial conclusion that that Country Popularity
Score is negatively associated with the CCEF premium (discount).

Regardless of the time periods and the control variables, there are some common observations in
the regressions in our study. For the fixed effects regressions, Expense Ratio is significantly
positively associated with the dependent variable and has the largest coefficient estimate
magnitude. The significance of Expense Ratio is aligned with previous empirical evidence that
ETFs showed higher mean returns than CCEFs due to lower expense ratios (Harper, Madura, &
Schnusenberg, 2006). Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) shows a significant relationship with the
CCEF price premium (discount). The first-differencing regressions show an insignificant, positive
relationship between CCEF premium (discount) and Country Popularity. Dividend Yield (Price >
NAV) produces a significant, negative relationship with the dependent variable. Apart from this,
the results generated in the first differencing regressions are relatively irregular and, therefore,
more difficult to find similarities in the control variables that persist despite the alterations in the
dataset. Although the magnitudes of the effects are small for both and the level of significance
varies, the coefficient estimates of US Market Valuation Ratio (US Market-to-Book Ratio) are
larger than Home Market Valuation Ratio (Home Market-to-Book Ratio) for both fixed effects and
first differencing regressions. This could be due to the US market, where the CCEFs are traded,
directly affecting the CCEFs’ prices whereas the home markets are more indirectly associated with
the CCEF market prices.

Overall, we observe that there is a negative relationship between the CCEF premium (discount)
and the Country Popularity Score. This outcome is statistically significant, and the results are
consistent over different lengths of time periods when using the fixed effects regression. However,
this outcome is not reached when using the first differencing regression, as the relationship shows
no statistical significance regardless of the length of the time series. The sign and the magnitude
of the coefficient estimates are rather inconsistent and highly dependent on the dataset chosen.
From the regressions in Table 3 and Table 4, we could reason that the first differencing regressions
yield results that are more aligned with the fixed effects regression if it includes an increased
number of observations over a longer period of time. As excluding data from 2020 (Appendix 5,
7, and 10) also generated results similar to the results from Table 3 that contained data from 2009
to 2021, we can arrive at the preliminary conclusion that the data from 2020 was volatile, especially
regarding the differences between consecutive observations. On the other hand, as removing China
produced results (Appendix 4, 6, and 9) that are aligned with the regressions run with shorter time
periods (Table 4 and Appendix 8) this could imply that the data from China and Chinese CCEFs
were consistent in terms of the differences between consecutive observations.

The coefficient estimate is negative for the first-differencing regression run from 2009 to 2021
which is consistent with the results produced from the fixed effects regressions. From a statistical
perspective, these outcomes could be due to first-differencing regressions using changes between
consecutive time periods which makes it relatively more prone to errors and less precise estimates
due to data constraints. For completeness, we have run regressions that each excludes China and
Chinese CCEFs and 2020 with the dataset that uses market-to-book ratios (Appendix 9 and 10)
which gave us results very similar to the ones using the dataset with Home Market Valuation Ratio
and US Market Valuation Ratio (that excludes China and 2020). Fixed effects regressions control
for time-invariant individual-specific factors, which can help address endogeneity to some extent.
However, in the first differencing regression, differencing eliminates time-invariant individual-
specific factors but may introduce endogeneity if there are omitted time-varying variables that are
correlated with the independent variables. Endogeneity can lead to inconsistent coefficient
estimates and conflicting signs across different regression models, which could be what we are
observing in our study.

When comparing the average Country Popularity Score (Appendix 1) with the average Country
Popularity Score of the sample countries in Hwang’s study from 1992 to 2008 (Hwang, 2011),
there is a 0.1 decrease on average from the 1992 to 2008 time period to the 2009 to 2021 time
period among the countries that were included in both studies (the countries listed in Appendix 1
except Canada). Russia is the country that showed the greatest difference with a 0.47 decrease on
average between the two time periods, followed by Mexico that shows a 0.25 average decrease.
As this change in country popularity is not drastic, it is rather unlikely that we have arrived at
contrasting conclusions regarding the relationship between CCEF premium (discount) and
Country Popularity compared to Hwang’ study because of changes in the Country Popularity
Score data.

Previous research has empirically proven that perceptions of a country can permeate into the social
norms of a country and affect how decisions by specific countries are perceived and influence the
investment policies of a firm (Hwang, 2011). In other words, American investors have a higher
(lower) level of demand for securities from countries they have a positive (negative) perception of
which results in the CCEF trading at a premium (discount). Our study has generated an overall
weaker effect (magnitude of coefficient estimates) of Country Popularity Score on CCEF premium
(discount) as well as a completely different directions (slope of coefficient estimates), compared
to the previous study (Hwang, 2011). As discussed in previous sections of this paper, this
discrepancy between the results of the two studies might be due to incompleteness of data that has
led to us not being able to account for all underlying effects.

However, this could also demonstrate actual change in investor behavior where country popularity
has become less important in comparison to variables that are more directly associated with the
cash flows of the funds (such as Expense Ratio and Dividend Yield) for American investors. Further
research in the future would be meaningful in providing additional support for this reasoning. With
this perspective, the importance of this study increases as this could be an indicator of a changing
socioeconomic landscape in the US where investors have a rather equal level of optimism
regarding foreign securities, independent of their home markets. This could be explained by
increased information exchange which might have decreased country-specific biases. Similarly,
American investors might simply be more interested in increasing their profits by making
financially sound investments in funds that have a strong or positive cash flows, rather than making
investment decisions based on what country the securities originate from.

Another possible explanation to the differences between our study and Hwang’s could be CCEFs
becoming less popular in general, as there has been previous empirical evidence that ETFs have a
better performance than CCEFs on average (Harper, Madura, & Schnusenberg, 2006). CCEFs
require long-term commitment, long-term risk exposure, and higher tolerance for volatility
compared to similar investments like country ETFs which might not make CCEFs attractive
investment vehicles anymore. It is reasonable to assume that CCEFs are becoming less popular,
as more than half of the CCEFs that were listed on the New York Stock Exchange have become
liquidated or merged with other CCEFs in order to be able to invest in securities with a larger
regional scope. In 1993, there were 32 single country closed end funds (Diwan, Errunza, & Senbet,
1993) whereas there were 15 in 2022 (Stock Market MBA, 2022). This might have occurred due
to technological advancements and heightened levels of globalization that have enabled easier
access to investment in foreign securities. Based on our study, it is reasonable to assume that
investor sentiment and behavior toward foreign investment are different now compared to in the
late 1990s to early 2000s which is the time period used in Hwang’s study. As access to data and
investing has been significantly easier during recent compared to the 1990s, CCEFs might be seen
as lacking in risk diversification (regional risk) and has hence not been as popular as before.

   7. Conclusion

In this paper, our objective is to empirically test the relationship between CCEF premium
(discount) and Country Popularity Score – a measure of Americans’ investor sentiment – which
we find to be ambiguous. Contrary to previous studies that we have extended upon, we cannot find
strong empirical evidence that how popular a country is among Americans causes CCEF
mispricing to occur. Rather, we find that there is a significant, negative association between
country popularity and CCEF premium (discount) when considering time-invariant factors, such
as fund-specific characteristics. Generally, when considering changes between consecutive time
periods, there is an insignificant, negative association between country popularity and CCEF
premium (discount). However, with a shorter time period and when controlling for overall market
sentiments in the home market as well as the US market, there is an insignificant positive
association between country popularity and CCEF premium (discount).

Some limitations of this study might be related to the data used. When it comes to Country
Popularity Score, for some countries there are annual survey data but for other countries the
surveys are conducted with >3 years intervals. This could have had an effect when running the
regressions considering that the dependent variable is reported with monthly data, where we had
to convert country popularity yearly data to monthly data (by repeating the value for one year once
for each month). This could have had a non-negligible effect in regard to the coefficient estimates
obtained from the first-differencing model. We have also calculated most of the control variables
(Expense Ratio, Turnover Ratio, Home Market Valuation Ratio, and US Market Valuation Ratio)
manually rather than using values provided by credit agencies or financial institutions which could
have used different methods or more specific data that we do not have access to. The same can be
said for the variables Home Market-to-Book Ratio, US Market-to-Book, and Dividend Yield that
have been calculated differently than the ways suggested by Hwang due to data constraints
(Hwang, 2011). The formulas we used were highly theoretical, which might be different from data
produced by financial institutions since they could have proprietary methods to prepare their data.
Also, as we did not have access to data for the control variables Home Market Valuation Ratio and
US Market Valuation Ratio from 2009 to 2012, we ran regressions for the time period between
2009 to 2021 and the time period between 2013 to 2021 with different control variables. This could
be the cause to the discrepancy between the results from the fixed effects regression and the first-
differencing regression, particularly in the regressions using the time periods 2013 to 2021, when
Home Market Valuation Ratio and US Market Valuation Ratio are included. Additionally, we have
fewer CCEFs, fewer countries, and fewer years in our sample which could have generated less
precise estimates since it does not capture the needed variation in the data.

Further extensions to this study would be to examine country popularity effect using data that
includes a longer time series from the 1990s up until 2020s, for example. This could provide
variation in the data to a greater degree, as it would include more CCEFs and more countries in
the sample and, thus, generate more generalizable results. Also, when running the regressions, one
could account for additional fixed effects, related to the sectors that the CCEFs invest in, to account
for fixed effects that are not limited to the fund. As suggested in the previous section, future studies
providing empirical evidence that CCEFs have become less popular and the reasons behind it
would be interesting.
   8. References
Papers Published in Periodicals
Addo, I. Y. (2020). Double pandemic: racial discrimination amid coronavirus disease 2019.
       Social Sciences & Humanities Open, 100074.
Aissia, D. B. (2016). Home and foreign investor sentiment and the stock returns. The Quarterly
       Review of Economics and Finance, 71-77.
Baker, M., & Wurgler, J. (2006). Investor Sentiment and the Cross-Section of Stock Returns.
       The Journal of Finance, 1645-1680.
Baker, M., & Wurgler, J. (2007). Investor sentiment in the stock market. Journal of economic
       perspectives, 129-151.
Baker, M., Foley, C. F., & Wurgler, J. (2009). Multinationals as arbitrageurs? The effect of stock
       market valuations on foreign direct investment. Review of Financial Studies, 337-369.
Bissoondoyal-Bheenick, E., Do, H., Hu, X., & Zhong, A. (2022). Sentiment and stock market
       connectedness: Evidence from the U.S. – China trade war. International Review of
       Financial Analysis, 102031.
Chan, J. S., Jain, R., & Xia, Y. (2008). Market segmentation, liquidity spillover, and closed-end
       country fund discounts. Journal of Financial Markets, 377-399.
Diwan, I., Errunza, V., & Senbet, L. W. (1993). Empirical perspectives on national index funds.
         World Bank Publications.
Dong, H., & Gil-Bazo, J. (2020). Sentiment stocks. International Review of Financial Analysis,
       101573.
Harjoto, M. A., Rossi, F., & Paglia, J. K. (2021). COVID-19: Stock market reactions to the
       shock and the stimulus. Applied Economics Letters, 795-801.
Harper, J. T., Madura, J., & Schnusenberg, O. (2006). Performance comparison between
       exchange-traded funds and closed-end country funds. Journal of International Financial
        Markets, Institutions and Money, 104-122.
Hwang, B. H. (2011). Country-specific sentiment and security prices. Journal of Financial
        Economics.
Lee, C. M., Shleifer, A., & Thaler, R. H. (1991). Investor sentiment and the closed‐end fund
        puzzle. The Journal of Finance, 75-109.
Ozkan, O. (2021). Impact of COVID-19 on stock market efficiency: Evidence from developed
       countries. Research in International Business and Finance, 101445.
Pontiff, J. (1996). Costly Arbitrage: Evidence from Closed-End Funds. The Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 1135-1151.
Ross, S. A. (2005). Neoclassical finance. Princeton University Press.
White, H. (1980). A heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance matrix estimator and a direct test
       for heteroskedasticity. Econometica 48, 817-838.
Websites
Central Intelligence Agency [CIA]. (2023). The World Factbook. Retrieved from CIA World
        Factbook: https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/
Damodaran, A. (2023). Data: Archives. Retrieved from Damodaran Online:
       https://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~adamodar/New_Home_Page/dataarchived.html
Gallup. (2023). Country Ratings. Retrieved from Gallup:
        https://news.gallup.com/poll/1624/perceptions-foreign-countries.aspx
Hofstede Insights. (2023). Country Comparison Tool. Retrieved from Hofstede Insights:
        https://www.hofstede-insights.com/country-comparison-tool
Reporters Without Borders [RSF]. (2023). Index. Retrieved from Reports Without Borders:
        https://rsf.org/en/index
Ruffy, F. (2007, April 24). INDEX INTELLIGENCE: The Ins and Outs of Closed End Country
       Funds. Retrieved from Forbes:
       https://www.forbes.com/feeds/options/2007/04/24/options17136.html
Stock Market MBA. (2022). List of Closed-End Funds. Retrieved from Stock Market MBA:
       https://stockmarketmba.com/listofclosedendfunds.php
Sustainable Development Report. (2023). Data Explorer. Retrieved from Sustainable
       Development Report: https://dashboards.sdgindex.org/explorer
Time and Date. (2023). Distance Calculator - How far is it? Retrieved from Time and Date AS:
       https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/distance.html
United Nations Development Programme. (2023). Gender Inequality Index (GII). Retrieved from
       Human Development Reports: https://hdr.undp.org/data-center/thematic-composite-
        indices/gender-inequality-index#/indicies/GII
United Nations Development Programme. (2023). Human Development Index (HDI). Retrieved
        from Human Development Reports: https://hdr.undp.org/data-center/human-
       development-index#/indicies/HDI
United States Census Bureau. (2007, January 22). First, Second, and Total Responses to the
       Ancestry Question by Detailed Ancestry Code: 2000. Retrieved from United States
        Census Bureau: https://www.census.gov/data/tables/2000/dec/phc-t-43.html
Wharton Research Data Services. (2020, April). Compustat Global: The Basics. Retrieved from
        Wharton Research Data Services: https://wrds-www.wharton.upenn.edu/pages/grid-
        items/compustat-global-wrds-basics/
   9. Appendix
Appendix 1
This table lists the 15 countries that were used in our study to examine the factors that affect a country’s Country Popularity Score.
The second column is each country’s average Country Popularity Score from 2009 to 2021. Country Popularity Score is the sum
of four multiplied by the percentage of the US survey participants that have a Very Favorable opinion, three multiplied by the
percentage that have a Mostly Favorable opinion, two multiplied by the percentage that have a Mostly Unfavorable opinion, and
one multiplied by the percentage that have a Very Unfavorable opinion of the sample country.

                  Country Country Popularity Score

                   Australia 3.23

                   Canada 3.36

                   China 2.23

                   France 2.88

                  Germany 2.95

                   India 2.67

                    Israel 2.81

                   Japan 2.97

                   Korea 2.71

                   Mexico 2.49

                   Russia 2.09

                   Taiwan 2.70

                   Turkey 2.35

                 UK 3.20

                   Venezuela 2.08

Appendix 2
This table provides the year and month of each survey used in this study to calculate Country Popularity Score.

 Country Year Month Country Year Month Country Year Month

 Australia 2019 February Germany 2012 February Mexico 2018 February

 Australia 2012 February Germany 2011 February Mexico 2017 February

 Canada 2021 February Germany 2010 February Mexico 2016 February

 Canada 2020 February Germany 2009 February Mexico 2015 February

 Canada 2019 February India 2021 February Mexico 2014 February

 Canada 2018 February India 2020 February Mexico 2013 February
Canada 2017 February India 2019 February Mexico 2012 February

Canada 2016 February India 2018 February Mexico 2011 February

Canada 2015 February India 2017 February Mexico 2010 February

Canada 2014 February India 2016 February Mexico 2009 February

Canada 2013 February India 2015 February Russia 2021 February

Canada 2012 February India 2014 February Russia 2020 February

Canada 2011 February India 2013 February Russia 2019 February

Canada 2010 February India 2012 February Russia 2018 February

Canada 2009 February India 2011 February Russia 2017 February

China 2021 February India 2010 February Russia 2016 February

China 2020 February India 2009 February Russia 2015 February

China 2019 February Israel 2021 February Russia 2014 February

China 2018 February Israel 2020 February Russia 2013 February

China 2017 February Israel 2019 February Russia 2012 February

China 2016 February Israel 2018 February Russia 2011 February

China 2015 February Israel 2017 February Russia 2010 February

China 2014 February Israel 2016 February Russia 2009 February

China 2013 February Israel 2015 February Taiwan 2021 February

China 2012 February Israel 2014 February Taiwan 2017 February

China 2011 February Israel 2013 February Turkey 2020 February

China 2010 February Israel 2012 February Turkey 2019 February

China 2009 February Israel 2011 February Turkey 2012 September

France 2021 February Israel 2010 February Turkey 2011 April

France 2020 February Israel 2009 February Turkey 2009 April

France 2019 February Japan 2021 February UK 2021 February

France 2018 February Japan 2020 February UK 2020 February

France 2017 February Japan 2019 February UK 2019 February

France 2016 February Japan 2018 February UK 2018 February

France 2015 February Japan 2017 February UK 2017 February
 France 2014 February Japan 2016 February UK 2016 February

 France 2013 February Japan 2015 February UK 2015 February

 France 2012 February Japan 2014 February UK 2014 February

 France 2011 February Japan 2013 February UK 2013 February

 France 2010 February Japan 2012 February UK 2012 February

 France 2009 February Japan 2011 February UK 2011 February

 Germany 2021 February Japan 2010 February UK 2010 February

 Germany 2020 February Japan 2009 February UK 2009 February

 Germany 2019 February Korea 2019 February Venezuela 2019 February

 Germany 2018 February Korea 2018 February Venezuela 2013 February

 Germany 2017 February Korea 2014 February Venezuela 2011 August

 Germany 2016 February Korea 2011 February Venezuela 2009 April

 Germany 2015 February Mexico 2021 February

 Germany 2014 February Mexico 2020 February

 Germany 2013 February Mexico 2019 February

Appendix 3
This table presents the single country closed-end funds (CCEFs) that were used in this study and their respective home countries.

                  Country Closed End-Fund Country

                   Abrdn Australia Equity Fund (14672) Australia

                 China Fund Inc (25524) China

                 Templeton Dragon Fund Inc (30683) China

                New Germany Fund Inc (20190) Germany

                   India Fund Inc (29724) India

                  Morgan Stan India Invt Fund (29744) India

                   Aberdeen Israel Fund Inc (25855) Israel

                  Abrdn Japan Equity Fund Inc (25659) Japan

                  Japan Small Cap Fund Inc (21065) Japan

                 Korea Equity Fund Inc (29289) Korea

                 Korea Fund (14728) Korea
                 Mexico Equity & Income Fund (23048) Mexico

                 Mexico Fund Inc (14740) Mexico

                  Templeton Russia & E Euro Fund (61298) Russia

                 Taiwan Fund Inc (14694) Taiwan

Appendix 4
This table reports the coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values from the output from a fixed effects regression and a first-
differencing regression with CCEF premium (discount) as the dependent variable, Country Popularity Score as the independent
variable, and Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV), Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV), Dividend Yield (Price > NAV), Dividend
Yield (Price < NAV), Expense Ratio, and Turnover Ratio as the control variables. CCEF premium (discount) is calculated with this
formula: (Price-NAV)/NAV. Country Popularity Score is the sum of four multiplied by the percentage of the US survey participants
that have a Very Favorable opinion, three multiplied by the percentage that have a Mostly Favorable opinion, two multiplied by
the percentage that have a Mostly Unfavorable opinion, and one multiplied by the percentage that have a Very Unfavorable opinion
of the sample country. Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV) is one over the lagged CCEF’s price by one month when the CCEF
trades at a premium. Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) is one over the lagged CCEF’s price by one month when the CCEF
trades at a discount. Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) is the monthly dividend paid per share of each CCEF over the fund’s lagged
NAV when the CCEF trades at a premium. Dividend Yield (Price < NAV) is the monthly dividend paid per share of each CCEF
over the fund’s lagged NAV when the CCEF trades at a discount. Expense Ratio is the CCEF’s total operating expenses over the
net assets, which is the difference between the fund’s total assets and total liabilities. Turnover Ratio is the total trading volume of
all stocks in a specific country by the total shares outstanding in the same market. The data comprises 15 CCEFs from 10 countries
between 2009 and 2021. The t-statistics are in brackets. The p-values are represented through the number of stars next to the
coefficient estimates. To produce more accurate coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values, standard errors from the regressions
are adjusted for clustering by year-month and fund (White, 1980). This data excludes China and Chinese CCEFs. p<0.1(*);
p<0.05(**); p<0.01(***)

                                                                     Coefficient [t-statistic]
Variable Fixed Effects First Differencing
Country Popularity Score -0.09*** 0.004
                                                     [-4.32] [0,0973]
Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV) 0.073 -0.296
                                                       [0.35] [-1,7498]
Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) -0.63*** 0.038
                                                     [-5.21] [0,2466]
Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) 0.035 -0.591**
                                                      [0.081] [-2,8857]
Dividend Yield (Price < NAV) -0.0005 0.008
                                                 [-0.00696] [0,2225]
Expense Ratio 3.234*** 0.308
                                                    [3.48] [0,6444]
Turnover Ratio -0.008*** 0.003
                                                     [-4.52] [1,0367]

Number of observations 1840 1827
Adjusted R-squared 0.384 0.024
Appendix 5
This table reports the coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values from the output from a fixed effects regression and a first-
differencing regression with CCEF premium (discount) as the dependent variable, Country Popularity Score as the independent
variable, and Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV), Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV), Dividend Yield (Price > NAV), Dividend
Yield (Price < NAV), Expense Ratio, and Turnover Ratio as the control variables. CCEF premium (discount) is calculated with this
formula: (Price-NAV)/NAV. Country Popularity Score is the sum of four multiplied by the percentage of the US survey participants
that have a Very Favorable opinion, three multiplied by the percentage that have a Mostly Favorable opinion, two multiplied by
the percentage that have a Mostly Unfavorable opinion, and one multiplied by the percentage that have a Very Unfavorable opinion
of the sample country. Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV) is one over the lagged CCEF’s price by one month when the CCEF
trades at a premium. Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) is one over the lagged CCEF’s price by one month when the CCEF
trades at a discount. Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) is the monthly dividend paid per share of each CCEF over the fund’s lagged
NAV when the CCEF trades at a premium. Dividend Yield (Price < NAV) is the monthly dividend paid per share of each CCEF
over the fund’s lagged NAV when the CCEF trades at a discount. Expense Ratio is the CCEF’s total operating expenses over the
net assets, which is the difference between the fund’s total assets and total liabilities. Turnover Ratio is the total trading volume of
all stocks in a specific country by the total shares outstanding in the same market. The data comprises 15 CCEFs from 10 countries
between 2009 and 2021. The t-statistics are in brackets. The p-values are represented through the number of stars next to the
coefficient estimates. To produce more accurate coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values, standard errors from the regressions
are adjusted for clustering by year-month and fund (White, 1980). This data excludes data from 2020. p<0.1(*); p<0.05(**);
p<0.01(***)

                                                                     Coefficient [t-statistic]
Variable Fixed Effects First Differencing
Country Popularity Score -0.071*** -0.036*
                                                        [-4.52] [-1.91]
Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV) 0.013 -0.251
                                                    [0.0699] [-0.685]
Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) -0.612*** 0.097
                                                      [-5.04] [0.285]
Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) 0.167 -0.588**
                                                     [0.386] [-2.19]
Dividend Yield (Price < NAV) 0.01 0.029
                                                    [0.179] [0.801]
Expense Ratio 3.958*** 0.329
                                                       [6.71] [1.1]
Turnover Ratio -0.008*** -0.002
                                                       [-5.36] [-0.364]

Number of observations 2006 1991
Adjusted R-squared 0.36 0.024
Appendix 6
This table reports the coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values from the output from a fixed effects regression and a first-
differencing regression with CCEF premium (discount) as the dependent variable, Country Popularity Score as the independent
variable, and Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV), Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV), Dividend Yield (Price > NAV), Dividend
Yield (Price < NAV), Expense Ratio, and Turnover Ratio as the control variables. CCEF premium (discount) is calculated with this
formula: (Price-NAV)/NAV. Country Popularity Score is the sum of four multiplied by the percentage of the US survey participants
that have a Very Favorable opinion, three multiplied by the percentage that have a Mostly Favorable opinion, two multiplied by
the percentage that have a Mostly Unfavorable opinion, and one multiplied by the percentage that have a Very Unfavorable opinion
of the sample country. Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV) is one over the lagged CCEF’s price by one month when the CCEF
trades at a premium. Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) is one over the lagged CCEF’s price by one month when the CCEF
trades at a discount. Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) is the monthly dividend paid per share of each CCEF over the fund’s lagged
NAV when the CCEF trades at a premium. Dividend Yield (Price < NAV) is the monthly dividend paid per share of each CCEF
over the fund’s lagged NAV when the CCEF trades at a discount. Expense Ratio is the CCEF’s total operating expenses over the
net assets, which is the difference between the fund’s total assets and total liabilities. Turnover Ratio is the total trading volume of
all stocks in a specific country by the total shares outstanding in the same market. Home Market Valuation Ratio is the mispricing
component of the market-to-book ratio of the CCEF’s home market. US Market Valuation Ratio is the mispricing component of
the market-to-book ratio of the US market. The data comprises 15 CCEFs from 10 countries between 2013 and 2021. The t-statistics
are in brackets. The p-values are represented through the number of stars next to the coefficient estimates. To produce more accurate
coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values, standard errors from the regressions are adjusted for clustering by year-month and
fund (White, 1980). This data excludes China and Chinese CCEFs. p<0.1(*); p<0.05(**); p<0.01(***)

                                                                      Coefficient [t-statistic]
Variable Fixed Effects First Differencing
Country Popularity Score -0.112*** 0.029
                                                      [-4.22] [0.688]
Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV) -0.469** -0.013
                                                        [-2.36] [-0.0316]
Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) -0.963*** 0.304
                                                       [-5.81] [0.809]
Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) 0.372 -0.857***
                                                     [0.991] [-3.07]
Dividend Yield (Price < NAV) -0.015 0.004
                                                      [-0.173] [0.0638]
Expense Ratio 1.282*** -0.198
                                                        [5.42] [-1.3]
Turnover Ratio -0.004*** 0.004
                                                      [-3.69] [1.44]
Home Market Valuation Ratio 0.002*** 0.001*
                                                      [4.03] [1.75]
US Market Valuation Ratio -0.009** -0.01***
                                                         [-2.52] [-3.0]

Number of observations 1229 1216
Adjusted R-squared 0.257 0.024
Appendix 7
This table reports the coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values from the output from a fixed effects regression and a first-
differencing regression with CCEF premium (discount) as the dependent variable, Country Popularity Score as the independent
variable, and Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV), Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV), Dividend Yield (Price > NAV), Dividend
Yield (Price < NAV), Expense Ratio, and Turnover Ratio as the control variables. CCEF premium (discount) is calculated with this
formula: (Price-NAV)/NAV. Country Popularity Score is the sum of four multiplied by the percentage of the US survey participants
that have a Very Favorable opinion, three multiplied by the percentage that have a Mostly Favorable opinion, two multiplied by
the percentage that have a Mostly Unfavorable opinion, and one multiplied by the percentage that have a Very Unfavorable opinion
of the sample country. Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV) is one over the lagged CCEF’s price by one month when the CCEF
trades at a premium. Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) is one over the lagged CCEF’s price by one month when the CCEF
trades at a discount. Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) is the monthly dividend paid per share of each CCEF over the fund’s lagged
NAV when the CCEF trades at a premium. Dividend Yield (Price < NAV) is the monthly dividend paid per share of each CCEF
over the fund’s lagged NAV when the CCEF trades at a discount. Expense Ratio is the CCEF’s total operating expenses over the
net assets, which is the difference between the fund’s total assets and total liabilities. Turnover Ratio is the total trading volume of
all stocks in a specific country by the total shares outstanding in the same market. Home Market Valuation Ratio is the mispricing
component of the market-to-book ratio of the CCEF’s home market. US Market Valuation Ratio is the mispricing component of
the market-to-book ratio of the US market. The data comprises 15 CCEFs from 10 countries between 2013 and 2021. The t-statistics
are in brackets. The p-values are represented through the number of stars next to the coefficient estimates. To produce more accurate
coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values, standard errors from the regressions are adjusted for clustering by year-month and
fund (White, 1980). This data excludes data from 2020. p<0.1(*); p<0.05(**); p<0.01(***)

                                                                      Coefficient [t-statistic]
Variable Fixed Effects First Differencing
Country Popularity Score -0.073*** -0.026
                                                      [-3.34] [-0.919]
Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV) -0.314 0.129
                                                      [-1.19] [0.234]
Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) -0.799*** 0.47
                                                       [-3.36] [0.887]
Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) 0.546 -0.852***
                                                        [1.26] [-2.91]
Dividend Yield (Price < NAV) 0.0002 0.026
                                                    [0.00258] [0.502]
Expense Ratio 1.44** -1.084
                                                     [2.08] [-1.26]
Turnover Ratio -0.004*** -0.001
                                                        [-3.81] [-0.293]
Home Market Valuation Ratio 0.0004 0.001**
                                                       [1.3] [2.38]
US Market Valuation Ratio -0.007** -0.01***
                                                        [-2.37] [-2.78]

Number of observations 1301 1286
Adjusted R-squared 0,173 0.027
Appendix 8
This table reports the coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values from the output from a fixed effects regression and a first-
differencing regression with CCEF premium (discount) as the dependent variable, Country Popularity Score as the independent
variable, and Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV), Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV), Dividend Yield (Price > NAV), Dividend
Yield (Price < NAV), Expense Ratio, and Turnover Ratio as the control variables. CCEF premium (discount) is calculated with this
formula: (Price-NAV)/NAV. Country Popularity Score is the sum of four multiplied by the percentage of the US survey participants
that have a Very Favorable opinion, three multiplied by the percentage that have a Mostly Favorable opinion, two multiplied by
the percentage that have a Mostly Unfavorable opinion, and one multiplied by the percentage that have a Very Unfavorable opinion
of the sample country. Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV) is one over the lagged CCEF’s price by one month when the CCEF
trades at a premium. Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) is one over the lagged CCEF’s price by one month when the CCEF
trades at a discount. Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) is the monthly dividend paid per share of each CCEF over the fund’s lagged
NAV when the CCEF trades at a premium. Dividend Yield (Price < NAV) is the monthly dividend paid per share of each CCEF
over the fund’s lagged NAV when the CCEF trades at a discount. Expense Ratio is the CCEF’s total operating expenses over the
net assets, which is the difference between the fund’s total assets and total liabilities. Turnover Ratio is the total trading volume of
all stocks in a specific country by the total shares outstanding in the same market. Home Market-to-Book Ratio is the market-to-
book ratio of the CCEF’s home market. US Market-to-Book Ratio is the market-to-book ratio of the US market. The data comprises
15 CCEFs from 10 countries between 2013 and 2021. The t-statistics are in brackets. The p-values are represented through the
number of stars next to the coefficient estimates. To produce more accurate coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values, standard
errors from the regressions are adjusted for clustering by year-month and fund (White, 1980). p<0.1(*); p<0.05(**); p<0.01(***)

                                                                      Coefficient [t-statistic]
Variable Fixed Effects First Differencing
Country Popularity Score -0.081*** 0.03
                                                      [-3.63] [1.24]
Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV) -0.355* -0.033
                                                      [-1.81] [-0.0838]
Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) -0.857*** 0.303
                                                     [-4.91] [0.847]
Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) 0.479 -0.855***
                                                      [1.17] [-3.04]
Dividend Yield (Price < NAV) 0.017 0.024
                                                   [0.25] [0.484]
Expense Ratio 1.233*** -0.333
                                                       [4.56] [-1.46]
Turnover Ratio -0.005*** 0.004
                                                      [-4.03] [1.34]
Home Market-to-Book Ratio -0.00002 -0.00002*
                                                       [-0.385] [-1.65]
US Market-to-Book Ratio 0.0004** 0.0004***
                                                       [2.06] [3.38]

Number of observations 1445 1430
Adjusted R-squared 0.22 0.024
Appendix 9
This table reports the coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values from the output from a fixed effects regression and a first-
differencing regression with CCEF premium (discount) as the dependent variable, Country Popularity Score as the independent
variable, and Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV), Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV), Dividend Yield (Price > NAV), Dividend
Yield (Price < NAV), Expense Ratio, and Turnover Ratio as the control variables. CCEF premium (discount) is calculated with this
formula: (Price-NAV)/NAV. Country Popularity Score is the sum of four multiplied by the percentage of the US survey participants
that have a Very Favorable opinion, three multiplied by the percentage that have a Mostly Favorable opinion, two multiplied by
the percentage that have a Mostly Unfavorable opinion, and one multiplied by the percentage that have a Very Unfavorable opinion
of the sample country. Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV) is one over the lagged CCEF’s price by one month when the CCEF
trades at a premium. Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) is one over the lagged CCEF’s price by one month when the CCEF
trades at a discount. Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) is the monthly dividend paid per share of each CCEF over the fund’s lagged
NAV when the CCEF trades at a premium. Dividend Yield (Price < NAV) is the monthly dividend paid per share of each CCEF
over the fund’s lagged NAV when the CCEF trades at a discount. Expense Ratio is the CCEF’s total operating expenses over the
net assets, which is the difference between the fund’s total assets and total liabilities. Turnover Ratio is the total trading volume of
all stocks in a specific country by the total shares outstanding in the same market. Home Market-to-Book Ratio is the market-to-
book ratio of the CCEF’s home market. US Market-to-Book Ratio is the market-to-book ratio of the US market. The data comprises
15 CCEFs from 10 countries between 2013 and 2021. The t-statistics are in brackets. The p-values are represented through the
number of stars next to the coefficient estimates. To produce more accurate coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values, standard
errors from the regressions are adjusted for clustering by year-month and fund (White, 1980). This data excludes China and Chinese
CCEFs. p<0.1(*); p<0.05(**); p<0.01(***)

                                                                      Coefficient [t-statistic]
Variable Fixed Effects First Differencing
Country Popularity Score -0.112*** 0.029
                                                       [-4.32] [0.694]
Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV) -0.376* -0.002
                                                      [-1.73] [-0.0037]
Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) -0.887*** 0.314
                                                     [-4.85] [0.838]
Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) 0.397 -0.865***
                                                      [1.05] [-3.05]
Dividend Yield (Price < NAV) -0.02 0.008
                                                     [-0.23] [0.119]
Expense Ratio 1.185*** -0.253
                                                       [5.9] [-1.33]
Turnover Ratio -0.004*** 0.004
                                                      [-3.63] [1.38]
Home Market-to-Book Ratio -0.00002 -0.00001
                                                       [-0.415] [-1.13]
US Market-to-Book Ratio 0.0003 0.0004***
                                                       [1.42] [2.65]

Number of observations 1229 1216
Adjusted R-squared 0.246 0.024
Appendix 10
This table reports the coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values from the output from a fixed effects regression and a first-
differencing regression with CCEF premium (discount) as the dependent variable, Country Popularity Score as the independent
variable, and Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV), Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV), Dividend Yield (Price > NAV), Dividend
Yield (Price < NAV), Expense Ratio, and Turnover Ratio as the control variables. CCEF premium (discount) is calculated with this
formula: (Price-NAV)/NAV. Country Popularity Score is the sum of four multiplied by the percentage of the US survey participants
that have a Very Favorable opinion, three multiplied by the percentage that have a Mostly Favorable opinion, two multiplied by
the percentage that have a Mostly Unfavorable opinion, and one multiplied by the percentage that have a Very Unfavorable opinion
of the sample country. Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV) is one over the lagged CCEF’s price by one month when the CCEF
trades at a premium. Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) is one over the lagged CCEF’s price by one month when the CCEF
trades at a discount. Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) is the monthly dividend paid per share of each CCEF over the fund’s lagged
NAV when the CCEF trades at a premium. Dividend Yield (Price < NAV) is the monthly dividend paid per share of each CCEF
over the fund’s lagged NAV when the CCEF trades at a discount. Expense Ratio is the CCEF’s total operating expenses over the
net assets, which is the difference between the fund’s total assets and total liabilities. Turnover Ratio is the total trading volume of
all stocks in a specific country by the total shares outstanding in the same market. Home Market-to-Book Ratio is the market-to-
book ratio of the CCEF’s home market. US Market-to-Book Ratio is the market-to-book ratio of the US market. The data comprises
15 CCEFs from 10 countries between 2013 and 2021. The t-statistics are in brackets. The p-values are represented through the
number of stars next to the coefficient estimates. To produce more accurate coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values, standard
errors from the regressions are adjusted for clustering by year-month and fund (White, 1980). This data excludes data from 2020.
p<0.1(*); p<0.05(**); p<0.01(***)

                                                                      Coefficient [t-statistic]
Variable Fixed Effects First Differencing
Country Popularity Score -0.076*** -0.029
                                                       [-3.78] [-1.0]
Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV) -0.281 0.138
                                                     [-1.09] [0.254]
Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) -0.774*** 0.483*
                                                     [-3.29] [0.918]
Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) 0.54 -0.857***
                                                    [1.27] [-2.86]
Dividend Yield (Price < NAV) -0.0002 0.029
                                                   [-0.0036] [0.561]
Expense Ratio 1.346* -1.051
                                                       [1.96] [-1.57]
Turnover Ratio -0.004*** -0.002
                                                     [-3.83] [-0.404]
Home Market-to-Book Ratio -0.00002 -0.00002
                                                       [-0.553] [-1.88]
US Market-to-Book Ratio 0.0003* 0.0005*
                                                       [1.9] [-2.76]

Number of observations 1301 1286
Adjusted R-squared 0.172 0.027
Appendix 11
This table reports the coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values from the output from a fixed effects regression and a first-
differencing regression for each panel (Panel A and Panel B) with CCEF premium (discount) as the dependent variable, % Survey
Participants as the independent variable, and Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV), Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV), Dividend
Yield (Price > NAV), Dividend Yield (Price < NAV), Expense Ratio, Turnover Ratio, Home Market-to-Book Ratio, and US Market-
to-Book Ratio as the control variables. CCEF premium (discount) is calculated with this formula: (Price-NAV)/NAV. In Panel A,
% Survey Participants is the percentage of the total US survey participants that has a Very Favorable opinion or Mostly Favorable
opinion of the sample country. In Panel B, % Survey Participants is the percentage of the total US survey participants that has a
Very Unfavorable opinion or Mostly Unfavorable opinion of the sample country. Inverse Security Price (Price > NAV) is one over
the lagged CCEF’s price by one month when the CCEF trades at a premium. Inverse Security Price (Price < NAV) is one over the
lagged CCEF’s price by one month when the CCEF trades at a discount. Dividend Yield (Price > NAV) is the monthly dividend
paid per share of each CCEF over the fund’s lagged NAV when the CCEF trades at a premium. Dividend Yield (Price < NAV) is
the monthly dividend paid per share of each CCEF over the fund’s lagged NAV when the CCEF trades at a discount. Expense Ratio
is the CCEF’s total operating expenses over the net assets, which is the difference between the fund’s total assets and total liabilities.
Turnover Ratio is the total trading volume of all stocks in a specific country by the total shares outstanding in the same market.
Home Market-to-Book Ratio is the market-to-book ratio of the CCEF’s home market. US Market-to-Book Ratio is the market-to-
book ratio of the US market. The data comprises 15 CCEFs from 10 countries between 2013 and 2021. The t-statistics are in
brackets. The p-values are represented through the number of stars next to the coefficient estimates. To produce more accurate
coefficient estimates, t-statistics, and p-values, standard errors from the regressions are adjusted for clustering by year-month and
fund (White, 1980). p<0.1(*); p<0.05(**); p<0.01(***)

                                                                 Coefficient [t-statistics]

 Variable Fixed effects First-differencing

 Panel A: Very favorably or mostly favorably -0.006*** [-4.29] -0.001 [-1.49]

 % Survey Participants

 Panel B: Very unfavorably or mostly unfavorably 0.021*** [3.75] 0.006 [1.42]

 % Survey Participants