SUSTAINABLE INVESTMENTS IN
TIMES OF CRISIS

THE IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON GREEN AND BROWN FUNDS IN THE
SWEDISH PREMIUM PENSION SYSTEM

ANTON JOHANSON

TOBIAS PERSSON

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2023
Sustainable Investments in Times of Crisis: The Impact of Covid-19 on Green and
Brown Funds in the Swedish Premium Pension System

Abstract:

   This paper examines the effect of Covid-19 on green and brown funds in the Swedish
   Premium Pension System (PPS). We apply the methodology derived in Berk and van
   Binsbergen (2015) in a difference-in-difference model with time-fixed effects to estimate
   the average effect of Covid-19 on green funds for both value added and conventional alpha
   measures. We find that, prior to the pandemic, green funds managed more money relative to
   brown funds, but green fund managers were compensated less compared to their
   conventional counterparts because of lower fees. After the pandemic, the relative difference
   in assets under management grew, and managerial compensation for green funds increased
   accordingly. Our results, obtained using three benchmarking methods to calculate abnormal
   return, suggest a relative decrease in gross alpha for green funds after the outbreak of Covid-
   19, primarily due to substantial inflows of capital. However, the effect on gross alpha is not
   statistically significant. We document a relative increase in value added for green funds
   during the pandemic, which is primarily attributable to larger cross-sectional differences in
   assets under management. Our findings contribute to a diverse body of literature on
   sustainable investments in crisis and provide Swedish pension savers with novel insights.

Keywords:

   Funds’ value added, Gross and net alpha, Covid-19, ESG, Green and brown funds

Authors:

   Anton Johanson (24956)
   Tobias Persson (25183)

Tutor:

   Mehran Ebrahimian, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Acknowledgements:

   We would like to express our gratitude to Mehran Ebrahimian for guidance and clarifications
   throughout the research process. We would also like to thank Dan Frankkila at the Swedish
   Pension Agency for assisting us in the data collection process.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Anton Johanson and Tobias Persson, 2023

                                     2
1 Introduction

In recent years, there has been a gradual rise in environmental consciousness worldwide, leading to
noticeable shifts in human consumption, production, and investment behavior. The integration of ESG-
reporting into investment practices by a diversified range of mutual funds has brought sustainable finance
to the forefront of nascent research. Following the outbreak of Covid-19 in the beginning of 2020, there
has been a notable surge in ESG preferences. Early research indicates that, while most active funds
underperform passive benchmarks, green funds perform better relative to their traditional counterparts
(P´astor and Vorsatz, 2020). The fact that investors maintain their emphasis on sustainability during a
worldwide crisis suggests that they perceive sustainability as a prerequisite rather than a luxury. The
upward trend of sustainable finance, coupled with the ongoing debate on the performance of ESG funds,
highlights the pivotal importance of understanding the dynamics of socially responsible investing.
   Given prior research on the financial performance of sustainable investments, we want to further
investigate to what extent the greenness of a fund impacts the ability of a fund manager to generate
value during periods of financial turbulence. In doing so, we synthesize previous literature that has
primarily focused on measuring the skill of actively and passively managed equity funds with a diverse
body of research that examines the tradeoff between sustainability and the financial performance of ESG
funds. On the one hand, as green funds seem more attractive to the public, they can potentially charge
higher fees for less value added. On the other hand, due to self-imposed restrictions, green funds are
more limited in the set of investments they can make. Exploring the dynamics of these competing forces,
ex-post an exogenous shock to the economy, introduces a more profound dimension to the analysis of
sustainable investments in times of crisis.
   This study estimates the value added of green and brown funds pre and post Covid-19 to examine the
ex-post effect of the pandemic on the value green and brown fund managers can extract from financial
markets. To estimate the average effect of the pandemic on value added of green funds, we construct a
difference-in-difference model with time-fixed effects. This enables us to observe and control for unob-
served heterogeneity that may vary over time but is constant across funds, which allows for time-varying
factors that influence the value added of green and brown funds. We compare the difference in value
added before the outbreak of Covid-19 with the relative increase or decrease after the pandemic for
green and brown funds to test whether there is a significant effect on the value fund managers generate.
Consequently, this paper aims to answer the following research question:

     Does the value fund managers generate differ between green and brown funds during periods
      of financial distress?

   Our model extends the work conducted by Berk and van Binsbergen (2015) by examining how the
value that actively managed equity funds generate differs between green and brown funds during periods
of financial distress. In their paper, Berk and van Binsbergen define managerial skill as the product
of assets under management (AUM) and the excess return. The authors calculate the excess return by
benchmarking the funds against the net return of 10 index funds and against the risk-adjusted Fama-
French-Carhart four-factor model. We extend their work by using the state-default fund, the AP7 Equity
Fund, in addition to the tradeable and theoretical benchmarks, to compute the abnormal return for green
and brown funds in a comparison pre and post Covid-19.
   The main contribution of our paper is to apply the same methodology to calculate the value added
of actively managed equity funds pre and post Covid-19 to capture the treatment effect on green funds.
More specifically, we calculate value added and value added net of managerial compensation, relative to
the benchmarks, pre and post Covid-19. To form a more robust analysis to understand the dynamics that
govern value added, we also investigate the treatment effect on AUM and managerial compensation, which

                                             3
is defined as the product of AUM and the percentage fee that the fund charges. We use our difference-in-
difference model to divide value added into the part that is taken out by fund managers as compensation
and the part that is generated to investors, which we call value added net of managerial compensation.
The analysis is further nuanced by estimating the ex-post effect of Covid-19 on the conventional measures
of skill; gross and net alpha. When comparing these results, several insightful conclusions can be drawn
in relation to Berk and van Binsbergen (2015).
    Most prior literature on the relative performance of socially responsible funds, as well as the study by
Berk and van Binsbergen (2015), have been concentrated on US mutual fund returns. We will, however,
in line with Anderson and Robinson (2022), use data from the Swedish Pension Agency. The data set
provided in the Swedish Premium Pension System (PPS) is feasible to conduct this study on since it
contains a fixed component where 2,5% of participants’ pensionable income is invested in mutual funds.
Furthermore, the PPS contains pension savings data on 6,3 million working citizens in Sweden, and it
includes a total of 482 funds (Pensionsmyndigheten, 2023).
   We motivate our choice to use Swedish pension data based on its high representativeness and lack of
industry bias, which increase the robustness of our results and contributes to the originality of this study.
Moreover, the Swedish Pension System has been under public scrutiny in recent years after multiple
pension funds have been caught gambling with investors’ money and defrauding Swedish pension savers
(Sveriges Radio, 2017; Lindeberg, 2023). Thus, our research on the relative performance of green and
brown funds amidst the pandemic, seeks to increase the financial literacy and awareness among current
and future pension savers.
   We find that green funds exhibited higher assets under management in comparison to brown funds
prior to the onset of the pandemic. However, our analysis reveals that managers of green funds received
comparatively lower compensation in relation to their traditional counterparts. Following the outbreak
of Covid-19, there was a notable increase in the relative disparity in assets under management between
green and brown funds. We find that managerial compensation for green funds exhibited a relative rise
compared to that of brown funds, indicating that compensation for green fund managers increased in
line with the accumulation of more assets under management during the pandemic. The conventional
measures of skill, gross and net alpha, saw a relative decline for green funds relative to brown funds
following the pandemic. When employing three benchmarking methods, our findings suggest a relative
increase in value added for green funds after the pandemic, thus contradicting the estimates for gross
alpha. However, this effect lacks statistical significance. With the escalation of Covid-19, the increasing
cross-sectional differences in AUM between green and brown funds coincided with a relative decline in
value added net of managerial compensation for green funds, which is consistent with the trend observed
for net alpha. Again, there is mutual consensus among the three benchmarking methods, but neither the
pre-treatment difference, nor the interaction term, is statistically significant.
    The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we chronicle previous literature on
mutual fund performance during periods of financial distress and develop our hypotheses for this paper.
In Section 3, we describe the data collection and give an overview of the Swedish premium pension
system. In Section 4, we outline the methodology Berk and van Binsbergen (2015) use to calculate
the value added of a mutual fund and motivate our three benchmarking approaches. We also carefully
explain why value added, according to Berk and van Binsbergen (2015), is a more accurate measure of
skill than any conventional alpha measure, as previous literature has relied upon. Moreover, we construct
our difference-difference model and test whether the parallel trends assumption holds. In Section 5, we
present our empirical results and in Sections 6 and 7, we discuss our findings and provide concluding
remarks.

                                             4
2 Literature Review

2.1 Related Literature

The performance of socially responsible investments (SRI) during periods of financial distress is a heavily
researched topic. In one of the first studies on the financial performance of green funds, White (1995)
compares the performance of green funds in the US and Germany to the overall market. The paper
finds that US green funds underperform the overall stock market while, in Germany, the performance
of green funds does not significantly differ from the overall market. In a more recent paper, Climent
and Soriano (2011) adopt a CAPM-based methodology to examine the performance of US green funds
relative to their traditional counterparts. They find that green funds generated lower returns compared
to their conventional peers from 1987-2001. However, during the period 2001-2009, green funds did not
perform significantly different from conventional mutual funds. This is relevant to our paper since we
investigate the value generated by green and brown funds during the pandemic with the same theoretical
benchmark.
   Adler and Kritzman (2008) examine the impact of socially responsible investing on portfolio perfor-
mance. They argue that SRI involves a tradeoff between social responsibility and financial performance,
and they seek to quantify this tradeoff by analyzing the costs associated with implementing SRI strate-
gies. Using Monte Carlo simulation, the authors estimate the cost of investing in SRI to be between
0,08% and 2,71% in annual returns due to the self-imposed restrictions of such funds.
   Another influential paper on this subject is written by Nofsinger and Varma (2014). Using data on US
equity funds for the period 2000-2011, they test whether socially responsible funds lower downside risk for
investors during periods of financial turbulence. The paper concludes that SRI funds tend to outperform
conventional mutual funds during poor market conditions. However, they caution that this downside
risk reduction comes at the expense of lower expected returns during normal times. Evidence from
this paper bears a striking resemblance to the findings in Glode (2011), which postulates that increased
demand for actively managed funds among investors could be attributed to the active managers’ capacity
to outperform during adverse market conditions, as opposed to favorable ones. We contribute to these
findings by measuring the performance of green and brown funds in absolute terms, i.e. abnormal return
times AUM, rather than as alpha measures, thus adding an additional layer to the debate between social
responsibility and financial performance during periods of financial distress.
   A similar study, conducted by Albuquerque, Koskinen, Yang, and Zhang (2020), reveals that U.S.
stocks with high environmental and social ratings earn higher returns during the first quarter of 2020
relative to the overall market. The authors attribute this resiliency to increased investor loyalty for
sustainable firms during times of crisis. These findings are in line with the fund-level data collected in
P´astor and Vorsatz (2020), where the authors reaffirm that green assets can outperform brown assets
during periods in which investors’ preferences shift towards sustainable investments. Both the study
by Albuquerque et al. (2020) and the research conducted by P´astor and Vorsatz (2020) indicate that
this shift in preferences became more pronounced during the pandemic. Our research contributes to
the existing literature by examining the evolution of investors’ demand for sustainable investments in the
post-Covid-19 period. We analyze data spanning from 2018 to 2023 to gain insights into this phenomenon.
   The key paper for our analysis is Berk and van Binsbergen (2015) and our work extends their model.
They contend that managerial skill should be estimated as the value fund managers generate, rather
than gross or net alpha. This argument, initially put forward by Berk and Green (2004), suggests that
managerial skill is a scarce resource and that managers face decreasing returns to scale in terms of positive
net present value (NPV) investment opportunities. The authors quantify managerial skill as the product
of gross alpha and AUM, and they show that the average mutual fund manager has been able to use this

                                             5
skill to generate approximately $3,2 million per year. They find that large cross-sectional differences in
value added is primarily attributable to the size of the fund and not gross alpha.
   We adopt the same methodology of calculating funds’ value added and introduce an additional bench-
mark to obtain the excess return of the funds in our sample. In addition to the linear projection and
theoretical risk-adjusted return, we benchmark the return of green and brown funds in the PPS against
the state-default fund available to all Swedish investors in the pension system. Furthermore, we calculate
the value added and value added net of managerial compensation for green and brown funds pre and post
Covid-19 to capture the ex-post effect on the managerial compensation of green funds and the respective
value generated to investors. To the best of our knowledge, no literature on this topic has applied the
value added measure in a difference-in-difference model to uncover the ex-post effect of an exogenous
shock on green and brown funds. In addition, Berk and van Binsbergen (2015) solely focus on measur-
ing value added, whereas we also decompose value added into value added gross and net of managerial
compensation. The findings in this paper will not only offer valuable insights to industry professionals,
but also be of importance to the millions of Swedish working citizens who are, or soon will be, registered
in the PPS.

2.2 Hypothesis Development

In light of previous findings on the performance of green and brown funds during financial distress, we
formulate the following hypotheses:

   i. Given the rise in SRI post Covid-19, we hypothesize that there will be a greater inflow of capital to
      green funds relative to brown funds following the pandemic.

   This hypothesis is based on the findings by Nofsinger and Varma (2014). The paper postulates that
one explanation for the recent increase in the number, and AUM, of green funds is that socially responsible
companies have a lower risk profile under turbulent market conditions, which, according to Glode (2011),
compensates for underperformance in normal times. The paper by by Albuquerque et al. (2020), as well
as the findings in P´astor and Vorsatz (2020), reveal that investors tend to favour sustainability in their
capital allocation choices during times of financial distress. We expect to identify a similar surge in the
relative size of green funds in the PPS following the outbreak of Covid-19.

  ii. Accordingly, we hypothesize that there will be a reduction in expected abnormal return for green
      funds after the outbreak of Covid-19.

   This prediction is based on the paper by Berk and van Binsbergen (2015). Given the predicted
inflows in green funds relative to brown funds after the pandemic, we speculate that fund managers, as
also discussed in Berk and Green (2004), will face decreasing returns to scale in terms of NPV positive
investment opportunities. Accordingly, we may see a reduction in expected gross and net alpha. However,
from a realized return perspective, we may identify a rise in abnormal return measured because a large
body of literature suggests that green funds outperform their traditional counterparts during times of
distress, see Nofsinger and Varma (2014); Albuquerque et al. (2020); P´astor and Vorsatz (2020). Given
that a fund’s value added is defined as the product of abnormal return and AUM, the following study will
investigate which force dominates; either decreasing returns to scale or inflow of capital into the green
funds. While Berk and van Binsbergen (2015) primarily attribute cross-sectional differences in value
added to differences in AUM rather than in gross alpha, we will explore which force dominates in this
context.

                                             6
3 Data Collection

The Swedish Pension Agency has been the primary source of information and data collection for our study.
This is primarily because the Swedish pension system contains a mandatory component where 2,5% of
people’s pensionable earnings is converted into fund units that can subsequently be invested into the
Premium Pension System. Investors who do not make an active decision have their money automatically
invested in the state-default fund called “AP7 S˚afa” (Pensionsmyndigheten, 2023). By using Swedish
pension data, we obtain a nationally representative sample without any risk of self-selection issues related
to wealth, which could be the case if examining stock-market data. The characteristics of the Swedish
pension system has been outlined in Engstr¨om and Westerberg (2003), Cronqvist and Thaler (2004),
and in Palme, Sunden, and S¨oderlind (2007). In a recent study, Anderson and Robinson (2022) also
use premium pension data to explore the relationship between financial literacy and green investment
behavior by testing whether pro-environmental households are more likely to hold pro-environmental
investments. We will now provide a brief description of the Swedish Premium Pension system to help
explain our methodology.

3.1 The Swedish Premium Pension System

Following a nation-wide reform in 1999, the Swedish pension system today consists of three different
components; general pension from the state of Sweden, which is administered by the Swedish Pension
Agency, service pension through former employer(s), and personal retirement savings. The premium
pension is part of the general pension where earned money is invested in funds. Each year, all registered
working citizens may invest 2,5% of their individual pension account in up to five funds from a pool of
482 funds available as of January 2023. There are approximately 6,3 million participants in the PPS as
of January 2023 (Pensionsmyndigheten, 2023).
    Once a participant has chosen an allocation of funds, all future contributions are invested according to
that allocation until the participant reallocates the selection of funds. The state default fund, AP7 S˚afa,
is the most popular fund among investors (Pensionsmyndigheten, 2023). This is a well-diversified fund
that is a combination of two funds: AP7 Equity Fund and AP7 Fixed Income Fund. The distribution
between the equity and fixed-income funds is adjusted for each individual investor’s age. Up until the
age of 55, the entire pension is invested into the equity fund. At the age of 56, the proportion invested in
the AP7 Fixed Income Fund gradually increases while the proportion invested in the AP7 Equity Fund
decreases until reaching an allocation of 67% fixed income and 33% equity at the age of 75 (AP7, 2023).
The purpose of this transition is to enable high returns early in life and then subsequently lower the risk
profile once the investor is approaching retirement (Pensionsmyndigheten, 2023).
   In 2019, the Swedish Parliament imposed new requirements and contractual terms for fund companies
that want to establish or maintain funds on the premium pension fund market (Sveriges Riksdag, 2018).
The new requirements for fund companies include, among other things, more than 500 MSEK in AUM
per fund outside the PPS, at least three years of operating history, and new minimum requirements for
sustainability reporting. Since green and brown funds are subject to the same criteria, a comparative
study between the two is feasible.

3.2 Data set

Monthly statistics on AUM, along with other relevant data such as Morningstar ESG-ratings, fees gross
of discount, and fund categories, have been sourced from spreadsheets provided by the Swedish Pension
Agency. Moreover, the geographical scope of a fund, that is, whether it invests in domestic or foreign
equities, has also been collected from the Swedish Pension Agency. To ensure more precise estimations,

                                             7
the monthly net return for each fund was extracted from Refinitiv Eikon, which provides net returns
with two decimal places. Although the Swedish Pension Agency also provides information on monthly
net returns, this data was rounded to integers. Furthermore, the funds’ market betas and the daily bid
yield of the 10-year Swedish government bond, which has been used to estimate the risk-free rate, were
also extracted from Refinitiv Eikon. All data is collected for the relevant period of our study, that is,
from January of 2018 to January 2023.
                        st
   The data set on 31  January 2023 includes 482 mutual funds, in addition to the AP7 default funds.
After removing funds with insufficient data, we are left with a total of 478 funds. The Swedish Pension
Agency has already assigned categories to each fund. See Figure 1 for a summary of the asset categories
for these funds.

    Figure 1: Distribution of Funds across Asset Categories in the Premium Pension System (PPS)

                                   Generational Funds

                                     Mixed Funds

                                 Fixed Income Funds

                                        Equity Funds

                                         0           100          200          300

The figure illustrates the distribution of funds across asset categories. The 478 funds available in the PPS as of
January 2023 consist of 341 Equity Funds, 77 Fixed Income Funds, 32 Mixed Funds, and 28 Generational Funds.

3.3 Data Cleaning

The first step in the data cleaning process is to exclude all funds investing in fixed-income securities.
There are a total of 77 funds investing in domestic and foreign short and long-term bonds that we
remove. There are also 32 mixed funds that invest in multiple asset classes, which we exclude for the
same reason. Generational funds are designed according to the age group of investors. They mostly
contain shares in equity when there is a long time left until retirement. As an investor is approach
retirement age, the money is gradually transferred from equities to interest-bearing securities to reduce
the risk profile of the portfolio. The state-default fund AP7 S˚afa is one example of a generational fund
(Pensionsmyndigheten, 2023).
   The Swedish Pension Agency has divided all generational funds into two subgroups; if the pension
occurs in less than 10 years or if the pension occurs in more than 10 years (Pensionsmyndigheten, 2023).
We remove all generational funds that mature in less than 10 years since they mainly contain fixed-
income securities to form a lower risk profile. We do, however, include generational funds for people that
retire in more than 10 years because they have yet to begin the process of transferring equity holdings
to interest-bearing securities. This leaves us with a total of 355 equity funds.
   The second step in the data cleaning process is to separate actively managed equity funds from passive
index funds. To facilitate this process, we consulted a data analyst at the Swedish Pension Agency who

                                             8
provided us with a full list of the passively and actively managed equity funds in the PPS. When removing
45 passive equity funds, we are left with 310 actively managed equity funds. We also exclude four Russian
equity funds as these were closed for trading on February 28, 2022, in the premium pension fund market
following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine (Pensionsmyndigheten, 2022).
    The third, and final step, is to create a balanced panel data set that allows us to test for the ex-post
effect of Covid-19 on value added for green and brown funds. This is done by limiting our sample to
active equity funds that have existed in the PPS for the entire five-year period we are examining, that is,
from January 2018 to January 2023. As such, we remove all funds that are added or excluded from the
PPS during this period as well as those funds that do not posit an ESG-Moringstar rating. Although this
may lead to concerns about survivorship bias, we construct a balanced data set because it allows for an
observation of the same unit in every time period, which reduces the noise inferred by unit heterogeneity
in the case of unbalanced panels (Aptech, 2019). One could question why we have not complemented our
data set from the Swedish Pension Agency to address this concern. The reason for this is that it proved
very difficult to manually extract data on the approximately 300 funds that were removed from the PPS
in 2019. Furthermore, ESG-Morningstar ratings were introduced to the PPS in 2020, which would make
it impossible to categorize these funds into a treatment and control group for our study. Additionally,
one could argue that, following the updated requirements on fund companies in the PPS, all funds listed
on the premium pension market are subject to an inherent selection bias. Since both green and brown
funds are subject to the same criteria, however, a comparative study remains feasible.
   For the remainder of our study, we have 231 actively managed equity funds across 61 months in our
sample. Based on the median ESG-Morningstar rating, these are divided into 110 green funds and 121
brown funds. See Table 12 and Table 13 for a list of the funds in each group, (see Appendix).

                                             9
                             Table 1: Summary Statistics Green Funds

 Variables Mean Median Std p10 p90 Observations
 Assets Under Management 3.218,03 881,55 7.075,50 16,04 7.990,47 6710
 Gross Alpha
 Linear Projection 1,29% 1,08% 2,10% -0,43% 3,30% 6710
 CAPM 1,31% 1,12% 3,17% -1,70% 4,62% 6710
 AP7 Equity Fund 1,08% 0,92% 3,32% -2,15% 4,66% 6710
 Percentage Fee 1,30% 1,40% 0,61% 0,41% 1,82% 6710
 Net Alpha
 Linear Projection -0,01% -0,03% 2,00% -1,77% 1,73% 6710
 CAPM 0,01% 0,01% 3,11% -3,07% 3,08% 6710
 AP7 Equity Fund -0,22% -0,28% 3,27% -3,53% 3,15% 6710
 Value Added
 Linear Projection 26,62 5,02 113,59 -2,52 68,93 6600
 CAPM 29,37 3,02 205,08 -17,20 93,15 6600
 AP7 Equity Fund 22,16 1,44 206,30 -29,34 87,22 6600
 Managerial Compensation 26,16 8,08 63,62 0,18 64,49 6600
 Value Added Net of Managerial Compensation
 Linear Projection 0,46 -0,02 92,14 -23,71 25,72 6600
 CAPM 3,21 0,01 189,70 -44,39 52,02 6600
 AP7 Equity Fund -4,00 -0,15 196,37 -60,90 50,16 6600

The table reports summary statistics for green funds of the variables Assets Under Management (AUM), Gross
Alpha, Percentage Fee, Net Alpha, Value Added, Managerial Compensation (MC), and Value Added Net of
Managerial Compensation from January 2018 to January 2023 across all three benchmarking methods. AUM,
Value Added, and MC are calculated in MSEK. Gross Alpha, Percentage Fee, and Net Alpha are calculated in
percentages. The data covers 110 green funds over 61 months.

                                             10
                            Table 2: Summary Statistics Brown Funds

 Variables Mean Median Std p10 p90 Observations
 Assets Under Management 1.284,33 293,26 3.294,04 231,31 2.957,00 7381
 Gross Alpha
 Linear Projection 1,67% 1,64% 2,53% -0,85% 4,28% 7381
 CAPM 1,59% 1,56% 4,04% -2,73% 6,05% 7381
 AP7 Equity Fund 1,37% 1,39% 4,16% -3,21% 6,05% 7381
 Percentage Fee 1,71% 1,69% 0,39% 1,29% 2,15% 7381
 Net Alpha
 Linear Projection -0,05% -0,07% 2,51% -2,55% 2,48% 7381
 CAPM -0,12% -0,15% 4,03% -4,45% 4,31% 7381
 AP7 Equity Fund -0,35% -0,34% 4,16% -4,90% 4,36% 7381
 Value Added
 Linear Projection 17,60 2,51 68,91 -1,76 44,27 7260
 CAPM 16,84 3,02 205,08 -10,63 54,22 7260
 AP7 Equity Fund 13,83 1,19 125,01 -15,04 51,88 7260
 Managerial Compensation 19,20 4,14 48,58 0,43 45,51 7260
 Value Added Net of Managerial Compensation
 Linear Projection -1,60 -0,04 92,14 -1,61 14,82 7260
 CAPM -2,36 -0,08 109,16 -29,49 28,10 7260
 AP7 Equity Fund -5,36 -0,18 122,55 -35,09 26,29 7260

The table reports summary statistics for brown funds of the variables Assets Under Management (AUM), Gross
Alpha, Percentage Fee, Net Alpha, Value Added, Managerial Compensation (MC), and Value Added Net of
Managerial Compensation from January 2018 to January 2023 across all three benchmarking methods. AUM,
Value Added, and MC are calculated in MSEK. Gross Alpha, Percentage Fee, and Net Alpha are calculated in
percentages. The data covers 121 brown funds over 61 months.

                                             11
4 Methodology

In this section, we illustrate the methodology used to derive our empirical results. The first section
motivates the underlying reasoning for using value added to measure the skill of fund managers. The
second section details the methods we used to calculate a funds’ value added. The third section presents
our choice of benchmarks, and the fourth section presents our difference-in-difference model.

4.1 Why alpha is not an accurate measure of skill

While previous literature has used gross and net alpha to measure skill, Berk and van Binsbergen (2015)
claim that managerial talent should be estimated as an absolute measure rather than a ratio. This
proposition builds on the theory proposed by Berk and Green (2004), which suggests that managerial
skill is a limited resource and fund managers experience diminishing returns as the fund size becomes
larger.

                                                  ∗
                                        αi = ai − biq (1)

   This equation demonstrates the alpha that manager i generates from active management where ai > 0
is the alpha on the first cent that the manager invests and bi > 0 captures the decreasing returns of
scale the manager faces. The extent of these decreasing returns to scale is dependent on the value of
q, which denotes the fund size. Berk and Green (2004) show that, as a mutual fund grows in size, it
becomes increasingly difficult for fund managers to generate net alpha. Any non-zero net alpha investment
opportunities available to managers will eventually be eliminated, leading to an aggregate net alpha of
zero for all managers. If skill is a scarce resource, then the net alpha will be determined by competition
between investors, and not necessarily the skill of managers. Hence, as Berk and Green (2004) argues,
net alpha alone can not be used to measure the skill of fund managers.
   Based on this insight, some papers have proposed that gross alpha is a correct measure of skill.
Expanding on eq. (1), Berk and van Binsbergen (2015), however, demonstrate that gross alpha only
measures skill under the condition that all fund managers set their fees so that all funds have the same
AUM, thus making the size of the fund unimportant. Assuming that investors are rational and markets
are competitive, this will lead to an aggregate gross alpha that is equal to the fee charged.
   The main argument for using an absolute measure to quantify skill rather than a return measure
is that the latter does not assess the amount of money a mutual fund is able to extract from financial
markets (Berk and van Binsbergen, 2015). For example, according to conventional alpha measures, a
fund with 10 MSEK in AUM that generates 10% in gross or net alpha would outperform a fund with
1 000 MSEK that generates a gross or net alpha of 1%. However, when measuring skill based on the
amount fund managers extract from financial markets, it becomes evident that the first fund only adds
1 MSEK in absolute value, whereas the second fund, despite a lower alpha measure, adds 10 MSEK in
absolute value.

4.2 Measuring Managerial Skill

We extend the methodology introduced by Berk and van Binsbergen (2015) to answer our research
questions. We calculate value added for green and brown pre and post Covid-19 and divide value added
into the part that is taken out by managers as compensation and the part that ends up in the pockets
of investors to capture the treatment effect ex-post Covid-19. We obtain the excess return for green
and brown funds by employing a tradeable benchmark and a risk factor model similar to Berk and van
Binsbergen (2015), while also comparing the funds’ performance relative to that of the state-default fund,
the AP7 Equity Fund, as a third benchmarking method.

                                             12
                         n
   To begin with, we let Rit denote the net return earned by investors for the ith fund in the PPS at
time t, without subtracting the risk-free rate. In our case, t ranges from 1 to 61 and every t represents
one month in our five-year data set, while i represents each individual fund in our sample. The net return
 n                                                                           B
Rit can be divided into the benchmark return of the investor’s next best investment alternative, Rit , and
the difference between the realized return and this benchmark, which we call ϵit.

                                     n    B
                                      Rit = Rit + ϵit (2)

   The gross return for every fund, that is, the return to investors before a percentage fee is taken out
by fund managers, is obtained by adding back the fee (before discount), fi,t−1, to the net return earned
by investors. Since funds in the PPS rarely adjust the percentage fees, we assume the fees for all funds
to remain constant for the entire duration of our sample period (Pensionsmyndigheten, 2023).

                               g     n            B
                            Rit = Rit + fi,t−1 = Rit + fi,t−1 + ϵit (3)

    We estimate the realized gross alpha for every fund by subtracting the gross return with the net return
of the next best investment opportunity. This can be estimated as a product of ϵit and fi,t−1, where T
is the number of months that the funds appear in the data set. Since we have a balanced panel data
set, T is equal 61 for all funds. This will provide the average gross alpha that a fund generates for the
entire duration of our sample period, and the cross-sectional differences in gross alpha between green and
brown funds are summarized in Tables 1 and 2 respectively.

                 XT        XT
                             g   1      g     B    1
                           αˆi =      (Rit − Rit ) =      (fi,t−1 + ϵit) (4)
                           T              T
                                          t=1                  t=1
    Following this line of reasoning, the value that fund managers add to investors is equal to the product
                                            g
of the realized gross alpha at time t, ˆαit, and the size of the ith fund at the end of the previous period,
qi,t−1, as measured by AUM. This is what Berk and van Binsbergen (2015) refer to as the value added
              g
of a fund (Vit   ).

                                       g           g
                              V it ≡ qi,t−1 αˆit = qi,t−1fi,t−1 + qi,t−1ϵit (5)

                                                                     g
   We calculate the time series expectation of value added, Si , for green and brown funds pre and post
Covid-19 to capture the ex-post effect of the aforementioned exogenous shock on the economy. This
is what Berk and van Binsbergen (2015) refer to as managerial skill, and we use this to estimate the
treatment effect in our difference-in-difference model.

                                                      g        g
                                          Si ≡ E[Vit   ] (6)

    The second equality in eq. (5) highlights that value added consists of two parts. First, the amount fund
managers take as compensation for active management, which is referred to as managerial compensation.
Second, the value that is generated for investors. We differentiate between these two components of value
added and subsequently calculate value added net of managerial compensation for all funds at each point
in time.
    In this process, we obtain the realized net alpha for every fund, that is, the alpha earned by investors
after fees and expenses are deducted. This can be estimated as a product of ϵit. This will provide the
average net alpha that a fund generates for the entire duration of our sample period, and the cross-
sectional differences in net alpha between green and brown funds are summarized in Tables 1 and 2
respectively.

                                             13
                    XT        XT
                               n   1      n    B    1
                               αˆi =      (Rit − Rit ) =      ϵit (7)
                               T              T
                                               t=1                  t=1
   Consequently, the value that fund managers add to investors, after fund managers are compensated,
                                                     n
is equal to the product of the realized net alpha at time t, ˆαit, and the size of the ith fund at the end of
the previous period, qi,t−1. We refer to this as value added net of managerial compensation.

                                     n         n
                                    V it ≡ qi,t−1 αˆit = qi,t−1ϵit (8)

   We calculate the cross-sectional mean of value added net of managerial compensation for green and
brown funds respectively before and after the pandemic to estimate the ex-post effect of Covid-19 on
managerial skill.

                                          n       n
                                          Si ≡ E[Vit   ] (9)

   Managerial compensation, as defined by Berk and van Binsbergen (2015), is quantified as the product
of AUM and the percentage fee the fund charges for active management. This, per definition, is equal to
the difference between value added and value added net of managerial compensation. By calculating the
difference in managerial compensation for green and brown funds pre and post Covid-19, we can compare
the ex-post effect on investors’ value added and fund managers’ renumeration.

                                              g     n
                                MCit = V it − V it = qi,t−1fi,t−1 (10)

4.3 Choice of Benchmarks

When estimating the value a mutual fund adds to investors, it is imperative to compare the return of the
fund to the next best investment opportunity available at the time, which is referred to as the benchmark.
Berk and van Binsbergen (2015) present two distinct methods of measuring the return of the next best
investment alternative. We adopt the same methods as previous literature to estimate the return of the
next best investment alternative while simultaneously providing a third benchmark that is relevant for
the case of our premium pension data set.

4.3.1 Linear Projection Using 10 Index Funds

By using a set of 10 index funds, we create an alternative investment opportunity set. Similarly, to Berk
and van Binsbergen (2015), we depart from the existing literature by ensuring that all 10 index funds
were marketed and tradable for the time span of our study, that is from January 2018 to January 2023.
By ensuring that all index funds were tradable at the time of our sample, we can be certain that investors
had the opportunity to invest in these index funds for the entirety of our sample period.

   The 10 index funds that form the alternative investment opportunity are all available in the Premium
Pension System. We fully acknowledge that there is a certain degree of arbitrariness in picking such
a benchmarking set. We choose these respective index funds based on three primary criterias. First,
we wanted each index fund to cover a unique asset class and market segment to create a representative
portfolio of index funds for the entire set of equity funds in the Premium Pension System. Thus, none of
the index funds track the same index. Second, we wanted to select a set of robust index funds that have
a market-leading position in the index fund space in Sweden. Finally, all 10 index funds had to have been
tradeable for the entire duration of our sample period, from January 2018 to January 2023.

                                             14
                                 Table 3: Overview of Index Funds

 Index Fund Name Asset Class Inception date
   1 L¨ansf¨ors¨akringar Global Index Developed Market Equities 11/06/2013
   2 L¨ansf¨ors¨akringar Sverige Index Swedish Large-Cap Blend 17/11/2008
   3 L¨ansf¨ors¨akringar USA Index USA Large-Cap Blend 10/06/2009
   4 L¨ansf¨ors¨akringar Europa Index European Large-Cap Blend 19/05/2009
   5 L¨ansf¨ors¨akringar Tillv¨axtmarknad Index A Emerging Market Equities 13/06/2014
   6 L¨ansf¨ors¨akringar Japan Index Japan Large-Cap Blend 03/01/1996
   7 PLUS Sm˚abolag Sverige Index Swedish Small-Cap/Mid-Cap Blend 29/09/2017
   8 Avanza Zero Swedish Large-Cap Blend 22/05/2006
   9 Swedbank Robur Access Asien A Asian Market Equities ex. Japan 23/09/2015
   10 Swedbank Robur Access Global A Developing Countries Equities 12/10/2015
The table reports the set of index funds we use to calculate the Linear Projection Benchmark and to estimate the
expected market return in the CAPM benchmark. Note that the index is the number we have assigned to each
index fund.

   Moving forward, we define the benchmark as the closest portfolio in that set to the mutual fund. Here,
it is imperative to acknowledge that all weights of the 10 index funds must add up to 1 to represent the
                               B
total investment. As previously detailed, Rit denotes the net return of the tradeable benchmark at time
               j
t. We let βi represent the weight of the jth index fund, where j = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10} according to
                                                                                  j
the numbering of the index funds in Table 1. Furthermore, Rt corresponds to the net return of the jth
                                                       B
index fund at time t. The benchmark net return for a given mutual fund (Rit ) at time t is given by the
following linear projection.

                        X10
                                                B         j  j
                                      Rit =    βi Rt (11)
                                                     j=1
   The linear regression model is iterated 231 times, for all 231 mutual funds in the data set. For each
iteration of the loop, the code creates a constraint matrix ‘A’ and a constraint vector ‘B’ to impose the
restriction that the coefficients of the independent variables, i.e the weights of each index fund, add up
                                                         j
to 1. We also impose the condition that βi can take on both positive and negative values to allow for
                                                                                             j
short sales. Correspondingly, the constraint and condition set up for βi can be summarized as follows:

                   X10
                                                           j                   j
                                     βi = 1 and βi ∈ R (12)
                                         j=1
   The weights for each index fund that are retrieved to mimic the return for each mutual fund are
multiplied with the corresponding net return of that index fund for each month. The sum of the return
                                                                      B
for these index funds, with their respective weights, corresponds to the benchmark return Rit . An
example of a linear projection is provided in Figure 4 (see Appendix).

4.3.2 Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM)

The second benchmarking method employed is the traditional risk-return approach given by the Cap-
ital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM). This one-factor model establishes a linear relationship between the
expected return of the mutual fund and its risk exposure to the market (Berk and DeMarzo, 2020).

                           B               mkt
                            Rit = E[Ri] = rf + βi (E[Rmkt] − rf ) (13)

                                                                                           mkt
   In the equation above, rf is the risk-free rate, E[Rmkt] is the expected return of the market and βi
is the correlation of the ith fund with the market. We collected the daily 10-year treasury rate in Sweden
from January 2018 to January 2023. By calculating the arithmetic average of the daily risk-free rate

                                             15
for every month, we arrive at the monthly risk-free rate. The 5-year market betas, for each fund, are
retrieved from Refinitiv Eikon by scanning their respective ISIN code. When estimating the expected
return of the market, we use the average monthly net return from the 10 index funds in Table 3 as a
proxy for the market portfolio.
   While previous literature has criticized CAPM for its simplifying assumptions, it remains widely used
by practitioners to estimate the cost of capital and to evaluate managed portfolios (Fama and French,
2004). For example, Graham and Harvey (2001) found that 73,5% of the 392 surveyed CFOs always or
almost always use CAPM to calculate the cost of equity when evaluating projects. Moreover, Climent
and Soriano (2011) and Nofsinger and Varma (2014) have used CAPM to calculate the excess return for
green and brown funds over time.
   We depart from Berk and van Binsbergen (2015) by using CAPM as a theoretical representation of
the next best investment alternative instead of the multiple risk factors identified by Fama and French
(1992) and Carhart (1997), known as the Fama-French-Carhart four-factor model (FFC). We were forced
to divert from the FFC risk model since the Swedish House of Finance only provides FFC factors up
until 2019 and no alternative source proved to have the same consistency, robustness, universe, and
methodology as that of the Swedish House of Finance. The work required to derive new FFC factors is
thus out of the scope of this thesis.
   Moving forward, we are aware of the inherent limitations of CAPM. However, given that we use two
other benchmark techniques to extend previous research on value added, we deem CAPM to constitute
a valuable benchmark when estimating the funds’ excess return gross and net of fees.

4.3.3 AP7 Equity Fund

Using the AP7 Equity Fund, the state’s default equity fund, as the next best investment alternative is
an appropriate extension to the benchmarking methods that we provide in this paper as it will yield
insight into how the mutual funds available in the Premium Pension System have performed relative to
                     B
the state’s default option. Rit is thus determined as the net return of the AP7 Equity Fund in a given
month.

                                      B    n
                                      Rit = RAP 7,t (14)

   As the most popular fund within the Premium Pension System, the AP7 Equity Fund serves as a
valuable benchmark to other available options for investors. The use of AP7 Equity Fund as a bench-
marking method enables us to explore whether other funds within the Premium Pension System possess
the necessary skills to surpass the performance of the state-default option. In such a scenario, our find-
ings would suggest that investors should consider exploring other funds available in the PPS, rather than
allocating their premium pension in AP7 S˚afa and the AP7 Equity Fund.

4.4 Difference-in-Difference Model

To observe the difference in the outcome variables between green and brown funds pre and post Covid-19,
we employ a difference-in-difference model with time-fixed effects because we introduce dummy variables
in the time series dimension. In addition, we incorporate a control variable to capture the geographical
scope of a fund’s investments. This variable takes on the value 1 if the fund solely invests in Swedish
equities and 0 if the fund also invests in foreign equities. We control for the geographical reach of a fund
because it is in line with the findings in Coval and Moskowitz (2001), which is discussed in Berk and
van Binsbergen (2015). Coval and Moskowitz (2001) find that funds investing a greater portion of their
assets locally perform better. The model can be summarized as follows.

                                             16
                    Yit = a0 + β1[Greeni] + St + β2[Greeni × Post] + σXi + ϵit (15)

    In this model, [Greeni] is a treatment dummy variable that takes on the value 1 if the fund belongs
to the treatment group, i.e if the fund is green, and the value 0 if the fund belongs to the control group,
i.e if the fund is brown. The coefficient β1 measures the difference in the outcome variable between the
treatment and control group before the outbreak of Covid-19. The variable St is a vector with time-fixed
effects. Note that we exclude the base period, i.e the first month, to avoid the dummy variable trap. The
variable [Post] is a time dummy variable that takes on the value 1 in the post Covid-19 period and the
value 0 in the pre Covid-19 period. Subsequently, the coefficient β2 is the interaction term of the model.
In addition, Xi is a vector with the control variable and a0 is the intercept of the regression model.

4.4.1 Treatment- and Control group

To identify the treatment group in our sample, we observe the median Morningstar ESG-rating in our
sample. The Morningstar ESG-rating is a scale from 1 to 100 where a lower value corresponds to a more
cautious ESG profile, implying that the fund is more considerate of ESG factors. As such, we define
the treatment group, i.e the green funds in our sample, as the group of funds that have a Morningstar
ESG-rating below the median (Pensionsmyndigheten, 2023). The control group constitutes the rest of
the sample, and these funds are considered to be brown funds since they are less considerate of ESG
factors according to their rating.

4.4.2 Pre- and Post-period

The World Health Organization (WHO) declared Covid-19 as pandemic in March of 2020 (World Health
Organization, 2020). Thus, we consider the period after March of 2020 as the post period in our sample,
and the period before March of 2020 as the pre-period. March of 2020 is removed from the data set. By
removing the period in which Covid-19 was announced as a global pandemic, we can reduce the likelihood
that any pre-existing differences between the treatment and control groups will confound the estimates
of the interaction term. This is because we can assume that any differences in outcomes between the two
groups prior to Covid-19 are due to random variation, rather than systematic differences related to the
period in which Covid-19 was announced as a pandemic.

4.4.3 Analyzing Violations of the Parallel Trends Assumption

The difference-in-difference model relies on the parallel trends assumption, implying that before the ex-
ogenous shock to the economy, both the treatment and control groups should have the same trend. If this
assumption is violated, the difference-in-difference model will produce biased estimates. Consequently,
in the counterfactual case that no exogenous shock strikes the economy, the treatment and control group
would develop on a similar trajectory. The parallel trends assumption is thus pivotal in establishing a
causal effect of the pandemic.
   Testing if the parallel trends assumption holds can be done through visual inspection and by con-
ducting a t-test on the difference between the trend lines of green and brown funds pre Covid-19. We
test if the parallel trend assumption holds for the net return and assets under management since these
are the two key components that influence all other outcome variables. The conclusions drawn from this
analysis are used to assume that the parallel trends assumption holds. In addition, it is important to con-
sider the conceptual reasons why the parallel trends assumption might be valid. The Covid-19 pandemic
led to turbulence in financial markets, which, according to Ortmann, Pelster, and Wengerek (2020), led
to noticeable changes in investment behavior. Furthermore, there are well-documented discrepancies in

                                             17
performance between green and brown funds under uncertain market conditions (Climent and Soriano,
2011; Nofsinger and Varma, 2014). This argument would further suggest that Covid-19 would impact
the relative performance of green and brown funds more significantly than in the counterfactual case.

                       Figure 2: Average Net Return Pre and Post Covid-19

               0.10

               0.05


             0.00                                                               Group
                                                                              Brown
                                                                                      Green
            Net Return
             −0.05

             −0.10

                  0               20              40              60
                                      Month
The figure illustrates the average net return of green and brown funds by month pre and post Covid-19. The red
line shows the net return of green funds and the black line shows the net return for brown funds. Note that the
dashed line marks the outbreak of Covid-19 in March 2020.

   By observing Figure 2, it appears that the net returns for green and brown funds appear stationary,
and they seem to develop on a similar trajectory. To test if the parallel trends assumption holds, we
conduct a t-test on the difference in trends between green and brown funds before the outbreak of Covid-
19. Here, the null hypothesis constitutes the existence of parallel trends and a result that is statistically
significant from zero would imply a rejection of the null hypothesis.

                   Table 4: Testing the Parallel Trends Assumption for Net Return

 Net Return
 Difference in trends pre Covid-19 -0,0001
 Standard Error (0,0002)
 t-statistic -0,8419
 p-value 0,3993
The table reports the t-statistic from testing the null hypothesis that there is not a significant difference in trends
between green and brown funds before the outbreak of Covid-19. Consequently, the null hypothesis can not be
          ***                 **                 *
rejected.   p-value < 0.01,   p-value < 0.05,  p-value < 0.1.

   Moving forward, we also test if the parallel trends assumption holds for assets under management.
However, the trends of the green and brown funds appear to be a bit more ambiguous, and it is hard to
tell whether they followed the same trend before Covid-19 or not (see Figure 3). As with net returns, we,
therefore, conduct a t-test on the difference in trends between green and brown funds pre Covid-19.

                                             18
                    Figure 3: Assets Under Management Pre and Post Covid-19

            4e+09

            3e+09                                                          Group
                                                                              Brown
                                                                                      Green

            2e+09
           Assets Under Management

            1e+09

                   0              20              40              60
                                       Month
The figure illustrates the average size of green and brown funds by month pre and post Covid-19. The orange
line shows the assets under management of green funds and the black line shows the assets under management
for brown funds. Note that the dashed line marks the outbreak of Covid-19 in March 2020.

   By observing Table 5, it is apparent that, when we observe the entire sample period before the
outbreak of Covid-19, the parallel trends assumption appears to be violated. However, testing if the
parallel trends assumption holds or not is heavily reliant upon the number of periods in the sample
period. Thus, we conduct a sensitivity analysis by removing the first months in our data set to see if the
parallel trends assumption holds closer to Covid-19. We find that, by removing the first 5 months of the
sample period, we can not reject the null hypothesis, which implies that the parallel trends assumption
holds (see Table 5). In conjunction with the conceptual reasons for why the parallel trends assumption
holds, we thus conclude that the parallel trends assumption holds for net returns and AUM.

            Table 5: Testing the Parallel Trend Assumption for Assets Under Management

 Assets Under Management (MSEK)
                                                                                                            ∗∗
 Difference in trends pre Covid-19 29, 48
 Standard Error (14,91)
 t-statistic 1,9778
 p-value 0,04805
 Difference in trends pre Covid-19 by removing the first 5 months 30,50
 Standard Error (20,96)
 t-statistic 1,4552
 p-value 0,1457
The table reports the t-statistic from testing the null hypothesis that there is not a significant difference in trends
between green and brown funds before the outbreak of Covid-19. We reject the null hypothesis. However, when
                                                                 ***                 **                 *
removing the first five months, we can not reject the null.   p-value < 0.01,   p-value < 0.05,  p-value < 0.1.

                                             19
4.4.4 Outcome variables

We employ the difference-in-difference model on a set of outcome variables to observe the difference in
the evolution of green and brown funds for our sample period. In addition to regressing value added,
value added net of managerial compensation, assets under management, and managerial compensation,
we also regress conventional metrics of measuring skill, i.e gross and net alpha. This is to provide a more
comprehensive analysis in our discussion. Note that the number of observations for value added, value
added net of managerial compensation, and managerial compensation amounts to 13,629 whereas the
number of observations for assets under management, gross alpha, and net alpha amounts to 13,860. The
apparent difference in the number of observations stems from the fact that we can not calculate value
added, value added net of managerial compensation, and managerial compensation, for the first month
in our data set, that is January of 2018.

                   Table 6: Outcome Variables in the Difference-in-Difference Model

                                        Outcome Variables (Yit)
 Assets Under Management (AUM)
 Managerial Compensation (MC)
 Gross Alpha
 Net Alpha
 Value Added
 Value Added Net of Managerial Compensation
The table reports the outcome variables that are regressed in the following section. Note that Gross and Net
Alpha, as well as Value Added and Value Added Net of Managerial Compensation, are regressed for each individual
benchmarking method.

5 Empirical Results

In this section, we present the results from our difference-in-difference model pre and post Covid-19.
Table 7 is the regression of assets under management and managerial compensation. Tables 8 and 9 is
the regression of gross and net alpha for the three different benchmarking methods. Finally, Tables 10 and
11 illustrate the regression of value added and value added net of managerial compensation for the three
different benchmarking methods. Note that we first regress the outcome variables without incorporating
the control variable in our model. This is done to observe the effect of having the control variable in
our more robust model. Conclusions are based on the model that incorporates a control variable. In
addition, the number of observations for value added and value added net of managerial compensation
amounts to 13,629, whereas the number of observations for assets under management, gross alpha, and
net alpha amounts to 13,860. The apparent difference in the number of observations stems from the fact
that we can not calculate value added gross and net of managerial compensation, as well as managerial
compensation, for the first month in our data set.

                                             20
Table 7: Output from regressing Assets Under Management (q) and Managerial Compensation (M C).
All values are denoted in MSEK.

 Output Assets Under Management Managerial Compensation
                                                 ∗∗     ∗∗∗
 Pre-treatment difference (β1) 1.503,64                       4,31
                                         (140,54) (1,48)
                                                ∗∗∗     ∗
 Interaction term (β2) 767,71                         4,61
                                         (186,71) (1,95)
 Control Variable × ×
                                                ∗∗∗       ∗
 Pre-treatment difference (β1) 685,33                      −2,95
                                         (135,19) (1,45)
                                                ∗∗∗     ∗
 Interaction term (β2) 767,71                         4,61
                                         (177,38) (1,88)
 Control Variable ✓ ✓
 Number of observations 13.860 13.629
             2
 Adjusted R                           0,13 0,08

The table reports the pre-treatment difference in assets under management (AUM) and managerial compensation
(MC) between green and brown funds and the average treatment effect in AUM and MC for green funds compared
to brown funds after the outbreak of Covid-19. There are 13860 observations for AUM and 13629 observations
                                                        2                     ***                **
for MC. Standard errors are in parenthesis. Adjusted R ranges from 8-13%.   p-value < 0.01,   p-value < 0.05,
*
 p-value < 0.1

   From Table 7, it can be inferred that the difference in assets under management between green and
brown funds was positive, and statistically significant at a 1% level, before the outbreak of Covid-19.
According to the first model, the average green fund in the PPS managed 1.503,64 MSEK more in assets
compared to the average brown fund. When controlling for the geographical scope of the fund, it is evident
that the pre-treatment difference is reduced. This, in turn, implies that much of the cross-sectional
variation in AUM between green and brown funds pre Covid-19 is captured by the domestic control
variable. In the second model, which includes the control variable, it is observable that green funds in the
PPS, on average, had 685,33 MSEK more in AUM compared to their conventional counterparts before the
exogenous shock. In a similar fashion, the pre-treatment difference in managerial compensation between
green and brown funds decreases when the control variable is included. The pre-treatment difference in
managerial compensation is negative and statistically significant at a 10% level in the second model. This
must stem from the fact that, in our data set, brown funds charge higher fees relative to green funds
(see Table 1 and 2). Given that managerial compensation is a function of assets under management and
fees, and green funds posits more assets under management relative to brown funds before Covid-19, the
relative difference in fees appears to be greater than the relative difference in capital, thus leading to the
presumption that brown funds were retrieving 2,95 MSEK more in managerial compensation than green
funds before the outbreak of Covid-19.
   The positive, and statistically significant, interaction term for assets under management suggests
that green funds saw a greater increase of 767,71 MSEK in AUM after Covid-19, relative to brown
funds. Similarly, we can observe that the interaction term for managerial compensation is positive and
statistically significant at a 10% level in the robust model, implying that compensation for green fund
managers, on average, increased by 4,61 MSEK more relative to that of brown fund managers. Since
fees are kept constant for the entire duration of our sample period, the positive interaction term for
managerial compensation must be attributed to the influx of assets that green funds experienced after
Covid-19, as illustrated in Table 7. The influx of capital appears to have made the difference in assets
under management between green and brown funds greater relative to the difference in fees charged.

                                             21
                                                         g
Table 8: Output from regressing Gross Alpha (αit) using the three different benchmarking methods:
Linear Projection, CAPM, and AP7 Equity Fund. All values appear in percentages.

 Output Linear Projection CAPM AP7 Equity Fund
                                           ∗∗∗       ∗       ∗∗
 Pre-treatment difference (β1) −0,30         −0,23        −0,24
                                      (0,06) (0,09) (0,09)
 Interaction term (β2) -0,12 -0,14 -0,14
                                      (0,08) (0,12) (0,12)
 Control Variable × × ×
                                          ∗∗
 Pre-treatment difference (β1) −0,18          -0,15 -0,15
                                      (0,06) (0,09) (0,09)
 Interaction term (β2) -0,12 -0,14 -0,14
                                      (0,08) (0,12) (0,12)
 Control Variable ✓ ✓ ✓
 Number of observations 13.860 13.860 13.860
             2
 Adjusted R                       0,04 0,03 0,11

                                                                     g
The table reports the pre-treatment difference in gross alpha (αit) between green and brown funds and the average
treatment effect in gross alpha for green funds compared to brown funds after the outbreak of Covid-19. There
                                                                                                                           2
are 13860 observations across all three benchmarking methods. Standard errors are in parenthesis. Adjusted R
                      ***                 **                 *
ranges from 3-11%.   p-value < 0.01,   p-value < 0.05,  p-value < 0.1

   From Table 8, when controlling for the geographical coverage of a fund, it is apparent that the pre-
treatment difference in gross alpha is negative for all respective benchmarking methods in both models
and statistically significant at a 5% level for the linear projection benchmark. In the second model, we
can observe a reduction in the size effect of the pre-treatment difference in gross alpha for green and
brown funds. This must be attributed to the fact that the domestic control variable explains part of
the cross-sectional variation in gross alpha before the outbreak of Covid-19. Based on our second model,
these findings implicitly suggests that brown funds generated approximately 0,15% to 0,18% more in gross
alpha before the outbreak of Covid-19 relative to green funds. If we compare these results with Table
7, we can conclude that green funds managed more assets prior to the pandemic, thus facing decreasing
returns to scale in NPV positive investment opportunities. It is not self-evident, but brown funds may
posit superior stock-picking skills, market timing ability, and differential information, all of which may
have contributed to the negative pre-treatment difference in gross alpha. However, these aspects are most
likely captured by the higher fees that brown funds charge.
   The interaction term is negative, but not statistically significant, for all respective benchmarking
methods in both models, which would suggest that gross alpha decreased for green funds relative to
brown funds after the pandemic. Since fees are kept constant, the reason for the negative interaction
term can be two-fold. First, the fact that green funds experienced an influx of assets under management
after Covid-19 would imply that they have even more capital than they had before the pandemic relative
to brown funds. Building on the concept that larger funds face diminishing returns to scale in relation
to NPV positive investment opportunities, the greater increase in capital could have made it even more
difficult for green funds to find undervalued securities after Covid-19 in comparison to brown funds. What
also may have contributed to the negative interaction term for gross alpha is the fact that green funds are
limited by their self-imposed restrictions, which forces them to only invest in equities that comply with
their ESG standards. This factor may also have contributed to the inability of green funds to produce a
higher gross alpha than brown funds.

                                             22
                                         n
Table 9: Output from regressing Net Alpha (αit) using the three different benchmarking methods; Linear
Projection, CAPM, and AP7 Equity Fund. All values appear in percentages.

 Output Linear Projection CAPM AP7 Equity Fund
                                                        ∗
 Pre-treatment difference (β1) 0,11 0,18           0,17
                                      (0,06) (0,09) (0,09)
 Interaction term (β2) -0,12 -0,14 -0,14
                                      (0,08) (0,12) (0,12)
 Control Variable × × ×
 Pre-treatment difference (β1) 0,11 0,14 0,14
                                      (0,06) (0,06) (0,09)
 Interaction term (β2) -0,12 -0,14 -0,14
                                      (0,08) (0,12) (0,12)
 Control Variable ✓ ✓ ✓
 Number of observations 13.860 13.860 13.860
             2
 Adjusted R                       0,02 0,02 0,11

                                                      n
The table reports the pre-treatment difference in net alpha (αit) between green and brown funds and the average
treatment effect in net alpha for green funds compared to brown funds after the outbreak of Covid-19. There
                                                                                                                           2
are 13860 observations across all three benchmarking methods. Standard errors are in parenthesis. Adjusted R
                      ***                 **                 *
ranges from 2-11%.   p-value < 0.01,   p-value < 0.05,  p-value < 0.1

   From Table 9, we can expand on the conclusions drawn from the previous tables. When applying
the difference-in-difference model on net alpha, we observe that the pre-treatment difference, although
not statistically significant, is positive for all respective benchmarking methods. Comparing the two
models, it is apparent that the domestic control variable captures some of the cross-sectional variation
in the CAPM and the AP7 Equity Fund benchmarks pre Covid-19. The positive coefficients of the pre-
treatment difference implies that the negative pre-treatment difference in gross alpha, (see Table 8), does
not stem from the fact that green funds manage more capital, thus facing decreasing returns to scale
in NPV positive investment opportunities, but rather because green funds charge lower fees than brown
funds. It remains likely that the superior stock-picking skills, market-timing ability, and asymmetry of
information of brown funds is captured by the high fee they charge. Thus, when we neglect the fee with
net alpha, it is apparent that the green funds generated a higher net alpha than brown funds before the
outbreak of Covid-19.
    Similarly to Table 8, the interaction term, although not statistically significant, appears to be negative
for all respective benchmarking methods. Since fees are kept constant for the entire duration of our sample
period, this must stem from the fact that green funds experienced an influx of assets in the aftermath
of Covid-19 (see Table 7) and that brown funds were thus more capable of finding and investing their
capital in undervalued securities.

                                             23
                                                          g
Table 10: Output from regressing Value Added (V it ) using the three different benchmarking methods;
Linear Projection, CAPM, and AP7 Equity Fund. All values are denoted in MSEK.

 Output Linear Projection CAPM AP7 Equity Fund
                                         ∗∗     ∗
 Pre-treatment difference (β1) 7,71           9,55           7,76
                                      (2,44) (4,25) (4,24)
 Interaction term (β2) 2,39 4,21 -1,88
                                      (3,21) (5,60) (5,58)
 Control Variable × × ×
 Pre-treatment difference (β1) 0,76 2,02 2,55
                                      (2,44) (4,28) (4,28)
 Interaction term (β2) 2,39 4,21 -1,88
                                      (3,18) (5,57) (5,57)
 Control Variable ✓ ✓ ✓
 Number of observations 13.629 13.629 13.629
             2
 Adjusted R                       0,03 0,02 0,04

                                                                      g
The table reports the pre-treatment difference in value added (Vit   ) between green and brown funds and the average
treatment effect in value added for green funds compared to brown funds after the outbreak of Covid-19. There
                                                                                                                           2
are 13629 observations across all three benchmarking methods. Standard errors are in parenthesis. Adjusted R
                     ***                 **                 *
ranges from 2-4%.   p-value < 0.01,   p-value < 0.05,  p-value < 0.1

   From Table 10, the three benchmarking methods in the second model suggests that, although not
highly significant, the pre-treatment difference in value added is positive. This suggests that green funds
were able to extract more capital from financial markets than brown funds before the outbreak of Covid-
19. Recall that value added is the product of gross alpha and AUM. We have previously concluded,
from Table 8, that the pre-treatment difference for gross alpha was negative. This must imply that the
positive pre-treatment difference observed in Table 10 is compensated for by the statistically significant
and positive pre-treatment difference in assets under management inferred from Table 7. If one uses
conventional methods of measuring managerial skill, such as gross alpha, one would conclude that brown
funds performed better than green funds before Covid-19 (see Table 8). However, by looking at value
added in Table 10, we get a conclusion that contradicts that of the conventional skill measure. This ties
back to Berk and van Binsbergen (2015), and their argument as to why an absolute measure, as opposed
to a ratio, is preferred when measuring managerial skill. Recall from Table 7 that, since green funds had
considerably higher assets under management compared to brown funds, they are more inclined to face
diminishing returns to scale in relation to NPV positive investment opportunities. To account for this
natural consequence of becoming a large fund, Berk and van Binsbergen (2015) applies the value added
measure to make funds of different sizes more comparable to one another. By applying the difference-in-
differnce model on value added, we thus arrive at a different conclusion regarding whether green or brown
funds were more skilled before Covid-19. Judging from the pre-treatment difference in value added, we
can conclude that green funds appears to have been more capable of extracting capital from financial
markets than brown funds in the pre-treatment period. Green funds are thus, according to Berk and
van Binsbergen (2015), considered more skilled in the pre-treatment period. Note that the pre-treatment
difference is not statistically significant for any of the benchmarking methods, but the argument for using
value added as a measure of skill still holds.
   The contradictory results in measuring managerial skill using a ratio or an absolute measure are
further reinforced by examining the interaction term. From Table 8, we could observe that the interaction
term for gross alpha was negative for all three benchmarking methods, thus suggesting that green funds
underperformed relative to brown funds following the Covid-19 outbreak. However, when taking the size

                                             24
of the fund into account (see Table 10), we can draw a contradicting conclusion. Although not statistically
significant, the linear projection benchmark suggests that green funds have been able to generate 2,39
MSEK in excess of brown funds and we obtain even more economically significant results when using
CAPM to calculate gross alpha, i.e. a value added of 4,21 MSEK after Covid-19. However, green funds
generate a negative value added of 1,88 MSEK compared to brown funds when using the AP7 Equity
Fund as a benchmark.

                                                                            n
Table 11: Output from regressing Value Added Net of Managerial Compensation (Vit   ) using the three
different benchmarking methods; Linear Projection, CAPM, and AP7 Equity Fund. All values are
denoted in MSEK.

 Output Linear Projection CAPM AP7 Equity Fund
 Pre-treatment difference (β1) 3,40 5,24 3,45
                                      (1.98) (3,95) (4,07)
 Interaction term (β2) -2,23 -0,41 -6,50
                                      (2,61) (5,20) (5,36)
 Control Variable × × ×
 Pre-treatment difference (β1) 3,71 4,97 5,50
                                      (2,00) (4,00) (4,20)
 Interaction term (β2) -2,23 -0,41 -6,50
                                      (2,23) (5,20) (5,36)
 Control Variable ✓ ✓ ✓
 Number of observations 13,629 13,629 13,629
             2
 Adjusted R                       0,01 0,02 0,04

                                                                                         n
The table reports the pre-treatment difference in value added net of managerial compensation (V it ) between
green and brown funds and the average treatment effect in value added net of managerial compensation for green
funds compared to brown funds after the outbreak of Covid-19. There are 13629 observations across all three
                                                                                                        ***
benchmarking methods. Standard errors are in parenthesis. Adjusted R2 ranges from 1-4%.   p-value < 0.01,
**                 *
  p-value < 0.05,  p-value < 0.1

   From Table 11, the pre-treatment difference in value added net of managerial compensation is positive
for all respective benchmarking methods, both including and excluding the control variable. Judging
from the more robust model, the pre-treatment difference in value added net of managerial compensation
appears to range from 3,71 to 5,50 MSEK. Value added net of managerial compensation denotes the capital
that the fund is able to extract from financial markets and deliver to its investors after fund managers
are reimbursed for active management. Consequently, recall from eq. (10) that the relationship between
managerial compensation and value added gross and net of managerial compensation can be established
as follows:

                                              g     n
                                M Cit = V it − V it = qi,t−1fi,t−1 (16)

   By subtracting the pre-treatment difference in value added with the pre-treatment difference in value
added net of managerial compensation for each respective benchmark, one will obtain the pre-treatment
difference in managerial compensation that can be observed in Table 7. The same relationship holds for
the interaction term. The positive pre-treatment difference in value added net of managerial compensation
suggests that green funds extracted more capital for their investors relative to their peers before Covid-
19. By comparing the pre-treatment difference in value added in Table 11, one can observe that the
pre-treatment difference in value added net of managerial compensation is larger than that of value
added. This must stem from the fact that brown funds charge higher fees, and although green funds
posit more capital before the outbreak of Covid-19, brown funds appear to retrieve more managerial

                                             25
compensation (see Table 7). Once fees are neglected, the pre-treatment difference in value added net of
managerial compensation increases, implying that green funds generate more value to investors relative
to brown funds.
    The interaction term, although not statistically significant, is negative for all respective benchmarks,
which suggests that value added net of managerial compensation decreased for green funds relative to
brown funds in the wake of Covid-19. This relates to our previous discussion, that green funds experienced
an influx of assets under management after Covid-19 (see Table 7), which presumably reduced their ability
to find NPV positive investment opportunities ex-post Covid-19. Consequently, brown funds’ ability to
find undervalued securities after Covid-19 seemed to have produced more value to their investors relative
to the green funds.

6 Discussion

6.1 Analysis of Results

By comparing our results with previous literature and our hypotheses, a number of insightful conclusions
can drawn. From Table 7, it could be inferred that green funds manage more capital relative to brown
funds prior to the outbreak of Covid-19. The relative difference in AUM between green funds and brown
funds increases following the pandemic, thus implying that there is a significant increase in assets under
management in green funds during periods of financial crisis. The substantial inflows in green funds
available in the PPS is in line with the argumentation by Nofsinger and Varma (2014) and it reaffirms
the findings in Albuquerque et al. (2020) and P´astor and Vorsatz (2020) that investors’ demand for
sustainable responsible investing increases during periods of financial distress. Given the statistically
significant interaction term, we find support for our first hypothesis.
   Despite large cross-sectional differences in AUM between green and brown funds before and after the
outbreak of Covid-19, the same pattern is not applicable to managerial compensation. As illustrated in
Table 7, when controlling for the geographical scope of the fund, green funds, on average, generate less
compensation for fund managers relative to brown funds before the outbreak of Covid-19. Given that
brown funds charge higher fees compared to green funds in the PPS, and managerial compensation is a
function of fees and AUM, the positive difference in size between green and brown funds does not appear to
compensate for the difference in percentage fees. These results also contend previous literature suggesting
that investors are willing to pay a higher price for SRI (Nofsinger and Varma, 2014). However, we caution
that a larger sample size might lead to different conclusions. Following the pandemic, we can observe a
significant increase in managerial compensation, which is line with previous discussion on the substantial
increase in inflows to green funds relative to brown funds. This suggests that green compensation in the
PPS has soared in the wake of Covid-19.
   When examining the difference in gross alpha for green and brown funds pre and post Covid-19, we
observe that green funds generated a lower gross alpha relative to brown funds before the outbreak of
Covid-19, which is in line with the findings on the opportunity costs of investing in green funds outlined
by Adler and Kritzman (2008). The negative difference in gross alpha also persists after the pandemic
across all three benchmarking methods. This following from the decreasing returns to scale managers of
green funds face as inflows in SRI spike during the pandemic, as discussed in Berk and van Binsbergen
(2015). The fact that green funds generate a smaller gross alpha pre and post Covid-19 could also be
attributable to the superior stock-picking, market-timing ability, and asymmetry of information of brown
funds since brown funds do not have self-imposed restrictions. However, such superior attributes are
probably captured by the high fees that brown funds charge. The results are not statistically significant
for gross alpha, so we can not confirm our second hypothesis. Nonetheless, the negative coefficients

                                             26
support our second hypothesis since it entails that, although not highly significant, brown funds are
capable of generating a higher gross alpha than green funds in unfavorable market conditions.
   By neglecting the fees using net alpha, we can see from Table 9 that green funds generated higher net
alpha relative to brown funds before the outbreak of Covid-19, while brown funds experienced a greater
increase in net alpha relative to green funds after the pandemic. Contrary to the findings in Nofsinger
and Varma (2014) green funds seem to have outperformed brown funds under normal market conditions.
While Nofsinger and Varma (2008) found evidence of positive alphas for sustainable funds relative to
their conventional counterparts in tougher market conditions, we find no such support. Based on the
reasoning in Berk and van Binsbergen (2015), one could argue that the reduction in net alpha for green
funds relative to brown funds after Covid-19 is attributable to the diminishing returns to scale fund
managers face as the size of the fund increases, which could be observed in Table 7. The fact that the
pre-treatment difference in net alpha is positive, across all benchmarks, implies that brown funds’ ability
to generate a higher gross alpha stems from the higher fees they charge. Thus, the superior stock-picking
skills, market-timing ability, and asymmetry of information must be captured by the higher fees brown
funds charge. We also observe that the high fees brown funds charge does not generate a higher net alpha
than that of green funds, suggesting that the high fees are not justifiable. Given that the results, although
not statistically significant, indicate that net alpha decreased more rapidly for green funds relative to
brown funds after Covid-19, we find support for our second hypothesis. Altogether, our results, although
statistically significant, suggest that both gross and net alpha decreased for green funds relative to brown
funds as the inflows in SRI during the pandemic surged.
   Quantifying the performance of green and brown funds as an absolute value rather than a ratio leads
to novel insights. As seen in Table 10 value added is higher for green funds relative to brown funds
before the outbreak of Covid-19. This, according to Berk and van Binsbergen (2015), suggests that fund
managers of green funds are more skilled compared to managers of conventional funds under normal
market conditions. The relative difference in value added between green and brown funds increases after
the pandemic for the tradeable and theoretical benchmarks. Since the interaction term for gross alpha
is negative for green funds, this suggests that it must be attributable by the increase in AUM that
green funds experienced after the outbreak. Interestingly enough, brown funds seem to have extracted
more money from financial markets compared to green funds when benchmarking the excess return using
the AP7 Equity Fund. The reason for this is rather ambiguous, but a possible explanation is that the
state-default fund, in contrast to our other benchmarks, which were computed using index funds, is
actively managed and thus able to rebalance the portfolio in direct response to stock market fluctuations.
Nevertheless, the results from the linear projection and CAPM benchmarks, although not statistically
significant, indicate that the increase in size for green funds following the onset of Covid-19 dominates
the ex-post effect on value added.
   When excluding the compensation fund managers receive in return for active management, value
added net of managerial compensation is higher for green funds relative to brown funds prior to the
outbreak of Covid-19. This, although not highly significant, implies that green funds generated more
value to investors than brown funds prior to the pandemic. These results are also consistent with the
pre-pandemic estimates for net alpha. Despite the significant increase in assets under management for
green funds after Covid-19, growth in value added net of managerial compensation is lower for green funds
relative to brown funds following the crisis. Following the line of reasoning in Berk and van Binsbergen
(2015), the decrease in value added net managerial compensation following the outbreak is attributable
to the fact that the interaction term for net alpha, for all benchmarks, is negative which stems from the
fact that larger funds face a challenge in investing their capital in NPV positive investment opportunities.
The negative interaction term for value added net of managerial compensation can thus be attributed to
cross-sectional differences in AUM ex-post Covid-19, previously described in Table 7. These findings are

                                             27
not statistically significant, but they indicate that diminishing returns to scale has a more substantial
impact on the value green fund managers generate to investors compared to the increase in AUM.

6.2 Limitations

The most apparent issue at hand is the sample size of our data set. Given that our panel includes 231
funds over 61 months, it may not be large enough to suffice that the t-statistic of the pre-treatment and
interaction estimates follow a t-distribution. To address this concern, we have analyzed other databases,
besides the Swedish Pension Agency, to investigate if our data set can be complemented. However, when
retrieving a Nordic sample of mutual funds from Refinitiv Eikon, we ended up with an even smaller data
set of actively managed funds after cleaning and filtering the data. The five-year study period might also
not be long enough to capture the permanent effect of Covid-19 on green and brown funds, but future
studies will be able to expand this research further. By using mutual fund data from the Swedish Pension
Agency, we are able to analyze green and brown funds two years prior and two years after the outbreak
of Covid-19. The decision to use Swedish pension data is further guided by the generalizability of using
mutual fund data from a database that includes all working citizens in Sweden.
   Although the sample of green and brown funds we have chosen is representative of all actively managed
green and brown mutual funds in the pension system, all funds in the PPS are subject to a sample selection
bias since these comply with financial and regulatory criteria required for a fund company to be listed
on the premium pension fund market. Given that we compare value added for green and brown funds
within the PPS, this selection bias does not significantly affect the comparability between our treatment
and control group. For this reason, we deem our difference-in-difference methodology to still be of high
relevance.
   Furthermore, we are aware of the the possibility of survivorship bias in our data. This arises from
removing funds that have been added or removed from the PPS between January 2018 and January
2023. This was done, however, to create a balanced sample of green and brown funds over time to
test for the ex-post effect of Covid-19. When faced with this dilemma, we found support in existing
literature for constructing a balanced panel data set, referencing to the reduction in noise inferred by
unit heterogeneity in unbalanced panels (Aptech, 2019). Since mutual funds in the PPS were not assigned
an ESG-Morningstar rating prior to 2020, we would not have been able to categorize these funds into a
treatment and control group. This is, however, an apparent limitation in our study and it is something
that future research can account for.
    When trying to obtain the counterfactual to estimate a causal effect, there is a risk of omitted variable
bias. In our case, there might be factors we have not controlled for that influence both the choice of
investment in green or brown funds and the subsequent returns that these funds generate. This could
make it difficult to attribute any differences in value added solely to the green or brown investment
strategy of these funds. To reduce the risk of omitted variable bias associated with value added for green
and brown funds, we incorporate a vector with a control variable for the geographical scope of the fund.
While we could have controlled for the specific social and environmental aspects each fund considers or
the perceived risk profile of the fund, these characteristics are presumably already captured by the ESG-
Morningstar ratings and the market betas in CAPM. Consequently, we opted to use only one control
variable, the geographical scope of the fund, as discussed extensively in Berk and van Binsbergen (2015).
   Lastly, as evident from the Breusch-Pagan test (see Table 14 in Appendix), a challenge we encounter
is the prevalence of heteroskedasticity in our regression models. Our tests show that we can reject the null
hypothesis of homoskedasticity for all our models. The issue of heteroskedasticity is a common concern
in cross-sectional regressions and the matter arises due to the substantial differences in assets under
management and monthly returns across the green and brown funds we are studying. Consequently,

                                             28
future research may take such fund characteristics into consideration.

7 Conclusion

This paper studies the ex-post effect of Covid-19 on the value green and brown funds generate. This is
referred to as a fund’s value added. We empirically document that, prior to the outbreak of Covid-19,
green funds in the Swedish Premium Pension System (PPS) managed more money relative to brown funds.
Managers of green funds, on the other hand, were being compensated less compared to their conventional
counterparts. Our findings tie back to the argument put forward by Berk and van Binsbergen (2015),
regarding the reasoning as to why an absolute measure of managerial skill is more accurate compared
to conventional skill measures such as gross and net alpha. We find that, although not statistically
significant, the pre-treatment difference in gross alpha between green and brown funds was negative.
Using conventional measures of skill, the results thus point to the conclusion that brown funds are more
skilled in favorable market conditions. However, by accounting for the size of the fund using value added,
we arrive at contradicting results because the pre-treatment difference in value added was positive, yet not
statistically significant. The contradicting conclusions can be drawn from observing the interaction term
for gross alpha and value added as well. Our empirical findings, in line with Berk and van Binsbergen
(2015), suggest that value added is a more comprehensive measure of managerial skill.
   To analyze the ex-post effect of Covid-19 on the outcome variables, we extend the concept of value
added developed by Berk and van Binsbergen (2015). More specifically, we introduce the AP7 Equity
Fund as a third benchmarking method in addition to the theoretical risk-factor model and tradeable
benchmark obtained when projecting the net returns of 10 index funds against the mutual funds available
in the PPS. Furthermore, we divide value added into the part that is generated to investors and the
part that fund managers take out as compensation to examine the changing dynamics that follow from
the growing demand for green investments. Lastly, our findings are further nuanced by comparing the
estimates for value added pre and post Covid-19 with the results using gross and net alpha, thus adding
another dimension to the debate on why conventional measures do not accurately measure managerial
skill.
   We show that the value fund managers generate for investors does not differ between green and
brown funds during periods of financial distress since our results are not statistically significant. Yet,
the robustness inferred from using three benchmarking methods and their mutual consensus implies that
value added increased for green funds relative to brown funds after the outbreak of Covid-19. As explained
in Berk and van Binsbergen (2015), the ex-post difference in value added is primarily attributable to the
fact that the value added measure, in contrast to conventional alpha measures, takes the size of the fund
into account. While gross alpha decreases for green funds relative to brown funds during the pandemic,
our findings indicate a relative increase in the value managers of green funds generates. By accounting for
decreasing returns to scale as a fund accumulates more assets, managers of green funds can be considered
more skilled.
    Fruitful avenues for future research on this topic could also entail investigating the effect of the Russo-
Ukrainian war on value added for green and brown funds. This would allow for further analysis of the
trade-off between sustainability and financial performance following a macroeconomic crisis. While this
study found green funds in the Swedish pension system to generate more value relative to brown funds
in response to the pandemic, an examination of Russia’s war on Ukraine might provide more insights
into the dynamics that govern value added. Another option would be to conduct the same methodology
but by using a larger sample size so that one may be able to find statistically significant results for the
pre-treatment difference and interaction term of value added. It would also be of interest to examine the
same research questions using data from a country where environmental consciousness is not as prevalent

                                             29
in the public eye as in Sweden. As evidenced in this report, mutual fund performance is a broad subject
and there are many areas in which it can be applied.

                                             30
References

Adler, T., & Kritzman, M. (2008). The cost of socially responsible investing. Journal of Portfolio
Management, 35 (1), 52-56.

Albuquerque, R., Koskinen, Y., Yang, S., Zhang, C. (2020). Resiliency of environmental and social stocks:
An analysis of the exogenous COVID-19 market crash. The Review of Corporate Finance Studies, 9 (3),
593-621.

Anderson, A., & Robinson, D. T. (2022). Financial literacy in the age of green investment. Review of
Finance, 26 (6), 1551-1584.

AP7 S˚afa. AP7. https://www.ap7.se/english/ap7-safa/

AP7 S˚afa - det statliga f¨orvalsalternativet i premiepensionen. (2023). Pensionsmyndigheten. https:
//www.pensionsmyndigheten.se/forsta-din-pension/valj-och-byt-fonder/forvalet-ap7safa

Avgifter och rabatter inom premiepensionen. (2023). Pensionsmyndigheten.
https://www.pensionsmyndigheten.se/forsta-din-pension/valj-och-byt-fonder/
avgifter-och-rabatter-inom-premiepensionen

Berk, J. B., & Green, R. C. (2004). Mutual fund flows and performance in rational markets. Journal of
Political Economy, 112 (6), 1269-1295.

Berk, J. B, & DeMarzo, P. (2019). Corporate Finance (Fifth Global Edition ed.). Pearson Education
Limited.

Berk, J. B., & van Binsbergen, J. H. (2015). Measuring skill in the mutual fund industry. Journal of
Financial Economics, 118 (1), 1-20.

Carhart, M. M. (1997). On persistence in mutual fund performance. The Journal of Finance, 52 (1),
57-82.

Climent, F., & Soriano, P. (2011). Green and good? The investment performance of US environmental
mutual funds. Journal of Business Ethics, 103 (2), 275-287.

Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. (2023). World Health Organization.
https://www.who.int/europe/emergencies/situations/covid-19

Coval, J. D., & Moskowitz, T. J. (2001). The geography of investment: Informed trading and asset
prices. Journal of Political Economy, 109 (4), 811-841.

Cronqvist, H., & Thaler, R. H. (2004). Design choices in privatized social-security systems: Learning
from the Swedish experience. The American Economic Review, 94 (2), 424–428.

Engstr¨om, S., & Westerberg, A. (2003). Which individuals make active investment decisions in the new
Swedish pension system? Journal of Pension Economics & Finance, 2 (3), 225-245.

Ett upphandlat fondtorg f¨or premiepension. (2018). Sveriges riksdag.
https://www.riksdagen.se/sv/dokument-lagar/dokument/kommittedirektiv/
ett-upphandlat-fondtorg-for-premiepension_H6B157

Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (2004). The capital asset pricing model: Theory and evidence. Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 18 (3), 25-46.

Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (1992). The cross-section of expected stock returns. The Journal of
Finance, 47 (2), 427-465.

                                             31
Glode, V. (2011). Why mutual funds “underperform”. Journal of Financial Economics, 99 (3), 546-559.

Graham, J. R., & Harvey, C. R. (2001). The theory and practice of corporate finance: Evidence from
the field. Journal of Financial Economics, 60 (2-3), 187-243.

Introduction to the Fundamentals of Panel Data. (2021). Aptech.
https://www.aptech.com/blog/introduction-to-the-fundamentals-of-panel-data/

Korta pensionsfakta. (2023). Pensionsmyndigheten.
https://www.pensionsmyndigheten.se/nyheter-och-press/pressrum/kortapensionsfakta

Lindeberg, R. (2023). Sweden’s Biggest Pension Fund Ousts CEO After $2 Billion Losses on US Banks.
Bloomberg. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-04-11/
alecta-s-ceo-magnus-billing-to-leave-post-after-svb-losses#xj4y7vzkg

New accusations against scandal-hit pension provider Allra. (2017). Sveriges Radio.
https://sverigesradio.se/artikel/6663105

Nofsinger, J., & Varma, A. (2014). Socially responsible funds and market crises. Journal of Banking &
Finance, 48, 180-193.

Ortmann, R., Pelster, M., & Wengerek, S. T. (2020). COVID-19 and investor behavior. Finance
Research Letters, 37, 101717.

Palme, M., Sund´en, A., & S¨oderlind, P. (2007). How do individual accounts work in the Swedish
pension system?. Journal of the European Economic Association, 5 (2-3), 636-646.

P´astor, L’., & Vorsatz, M. B. (2020). Mutual fund performance and flows during the COVID-19 crisis.
The Review of Asset Pricing Studies, 10(4), 791-833.

Pensionens alla delar. (2023). Pensionsmyndigheten. https://www.pensionsmyndigheten.se/
forsta-din-pension/sa-fungerar-pensionen/pensionens-alla-delar

Rysslandsfonder avregistreras fr˚an premiepensionen. (2022). Pensionsmyndigheten.
https://www.pensionsmyndigheten.se/nyheter-och-press/pressrum/
rysslandsfonder-avregistreras-fran-premiepensionen

White, M.A. (1995). The performance of environmental mutual funds in the United States and
Germany: Is there economic hope for green investors. Research in Corporate Social Performance and
Policy, 1, 323-344.

WHO Director-General’s opening remarks at the media briefing on COVID-19 - 11 March 2020. (2020).
World Health Organization. https://www.who.int/director-general/speeches/detail/
who-director-generals-opening-remarks-at-media-briefing-on-covid-19-11-march-2020

                                             32
Appendix

List of Funds

                                   Table 12: List of Green Funds

Fund Number Fund Name Fund Number Fund Name

   118000 BL - Equities Dividend B 520759 SEB Dynamisk Aktiefond
   122432 SEB Europafond 521104 ˚Alandsbanken Norden Aktie S Placeringsfond
   123679 Handelsbanken Global Tema A1 523050 NN (L) Global Equity Impact Opportunities P
   152835 L¨ararfond 21-44 ˚ar 528133 L¨ansf¨ors¨akringar Sverige Vision A
   158261 SEB Sverige Expanderad 538462 AMF Aktiefond Europa
   167643 Pareto Global B 538751 Allianz Europe Small Cap Equity AT
   170423 Enter Sverige A 541235 Didner & Gerge Global
   182584 Aktia Capital Placeringsfond B 563965 L¨ansf¨ors¨akringar Global Vision A
   184119 Storebrand Global Solutions A 564849 Nordea European Stars
   189258 Pictet Water R 570044 Evli Finland Select Placeringsfonden B
   191676 DNB Teknologi A 570630 Ohman Marknad Europa A¨
   194092 SEB Teknologifond 596429 Nordea Generationsfond 90-tal
   203067 Nordea Swedish Stars 635623 L¨ansf¨ors¨akringar Sparm˚al 2040
   215996 Nordea Generationsfond 80-tal 642298 Ohman Marknad Pacific A¨
   220244 Celina Sverige Aktiv H˚allbarhet A 645952 AMF Aktiefond V¨arlden
   237834 Fondita Nordic Small Cap Placeringsfond B 666495 Templeton European Opportunities Fund A
   238832 ˚Alandsbanken Europa Aktie B Placeringsfond 671453 L¨ansf¨ors¨akringar Sparm˚al 2035
   243022 Handelsbanken Pension 80 A12 678128 Ohman Marknad USA A¨
   278853 Handelsbanken Pension 70 A12 681783 AMF Aktiefond Sverige
   280867 Odin Europa C 690693 Pictet Global Megatrend Selection R
   282517 Nordea Global 721035 C WorldWide Sweden Small Cap 1A
   283408 Swedbank Robur Technology A 747899 Swedbank Robur Transfer 80
   286294 Nordea Sm˚abolagsfond Norden 755033 Pictet Timber R
   287656 Nordea Generationsfond 70-tal 755090 S-Banken Europa Aktie A
   300996 BL - Equities America B 771030 Lannebo Teknik
   301580 SEB Aktiesparfond 783720 Swedbank Robur Transfer 70
   309492 CB European Quality Fund A Cap 785022 Swedbank Robur Aktiefond Pension
   313742 L¨ansf¨ors¨akringar Fastighetsfond A 792697 C WorldWide Sweden 1A
   320176 Carnegie Fastighetsfond Norden A 793109 Evli Global Placeringsfonden B
   320358 BL - Global Equities B 810465 Pictet Quest Europe Sustainable Equities R
   320762 Swedbank Robur Transfer 90 811117 Handelsbanken Norden Tema A1
   324665 S-Banken Fenno Aktie A 820852 Swedbank Robur Nordenfond
   336826 BL - Equities Europe B 832360 L¨ansf¨ors¨akringar Sparm˚al 2045
   339184 Spiltan Aktiefond Stabil 840033 Handelsbanken Amerika Tema A1
   344739 Aktie-Ansvar Sverige A 844522 SPP Generation 80-tal
   350512 Handelsbanken Pension 60 A12 848770 NN (L) EURO Equity P
   367698 Aberdeen Standard SICAV I - European Sustainable        861757 Nordea Nordic
                 Equity Fund A
   384107 Franklin U.S. Opportunities Fund A 865063 Aberdeen Global - European Equity (Ex UK) Fund
   393314 Carnegie Sverigefond A 887497 Pictet Clean Energy R
   401695 NN (L) Smart Connectivity P 887901 UB Global REIT Placeringsfond A
   422709 Coeli - Global Select Fund R 899773 NN (L) European Equity P
   439471 Skandia Time Global 904904 Ohman Sverige A¨
   446088 BlackRock - World Technology A2 908277 AMF Aktiefond Global
   450981 Odin Sverige C 912220 Storebrand Global Low Volatility A
   456475 L¨ansf¨ors¨akringar USA Aktiv A 916122 BlackRock - Euro Markets A2
   475301 Skandia V¨arlden 916189 Handelsbanken Sverige Tema A1
   479550 Seligson & Co Global Top 25 Brands A 923383 Pictet Premium Brands R
   484923 SEB Nordenfond 941096 Folksam LO V¨arlden
   484980 Simplicity Norden 968420 Swedbank Robur Fastighet A
   487108 Prior & Nilsson Realinvest A 968891 Pictet Security R
   492306 L¨ansf¨ors¨akringar Europa Aktiv A 973263 Danske Invest SICAV - Sverige SI
   498972 SPP Generation 70-tal 976506 CB Save Earth Fund RC
   511139 Skandia USA 976928 Folksam LO Sverige
   515676 L¨ansf¨ors¨akringar Sm˚abolag Sverige Vision A 984187 SKAGEN Global E
   520692 AMF Aktiefond Nordamerika 989491 ˚Alandsbanken Global Aktie B Placeringsfond
The table reports all 110 green funds that form the treatment group in the study. The fund number is the number
each fund is assigned in the PPS.

                                             33
                                   Table 13: List of Brown Funds

Fund Number Fund Name Fund Number Fund Name

   103606 Skandia Sm˚abolag Sverige 502922 Allianz Global Metals and Mining A
   140491 Didner & Gerge Sm˚abolag 504100 Handelsbanken Asien Tema A1
   147348 Alfred Berg Aktiv C 505586 Carnegie Indienfond A
   152181 Spiltan Sm˚abolagsfond 517748 BlackRock - World Energy A2
   159442 BlackRock - Japan Small & MidCap A2 553578 BlackRock - Sustainable Energy A2
   170894 Franklin India Fund A 556589 SEB Europafond Sm˚abolag
   174490 Amundi Funds Japan Equity Value A2 562421 Odin Global C
   183178 Alfred Berg Norge C 562728 Odin Norge C
   184416 Celina Sm˚abolagsfond A 571695 Delphi Europe Acc
   191080 Baring Global Emerging Markets A 571695 Delphi Europe Acc
   192146 Aberdeen Standard SICAV I - Japanese Smaller            584912 Carnegie Sm˚abolagsfond A
                Companies Fund A
   202002 Fondita Global Megatrends Placeringsfond B 598557 Odin Norden C
   206250 L¨ansf¨ors¨akringar Tillv¨axtmarknad Aktiv A 616797 AXA IM US Equity QI B
   229922 SEB L¨akemedelsfond 617670 Handelsbanken Kina Tema A1
   231100 BlackRock - Emerging Markets A2 625236 BlackRock - US Mid-Cap Value Fund A2
   233585 JPMorgan China A 644005 Handelsbanken H¨alsov˚ard Tema A1
   235291 Baring Latin America A 652628 Axa Rosenberg Japan Small Cap Alpha Fund B
   242495 DNB Fund - Nordic Equities Retail A 653097 Nordea Kinafond
   250878 Allianz Emerging Asia Equity A 661066 BlackRock - Latin American A2
   260919 Pictet Biotech R 666370 NN (L) Greater China Equity P
   262741 Baring Global Resources A 668269 Evli Nordic Placeringsfonden B
   269357 AMF Aktiefond Sm˚abolag 670091 S-Banken Emerging Markets ESG Aktie A
   271478 Indecap Guide 2 C 679837 Handelsbanken Latinamerika Impact Tema A1
   272898 Spiltan Aktiefond Sm˚aland 687442 DNB SMB A
   282632 Holberg Global A 687509 Handelsbanken H˚allbar Energi A1
   291906 Didner & Gerge Aktiefond 688986 Pictet Health R
   294322 AXA IM Globlal Equity QI B 694539 Ohman Sm˚¨       abolagsfond A
   295857 Ohman Emerging Markets A¨                     696898 BlackRock - European Value A2
   296749 Pictet Digital R 717496 Franklin Mutual Global Discovery Fund A
   305243 JPMorgan Emerging Markets Equity A 751495 Handelsbanken Nordiska Sm˚abolag A1
   318469 Holberg Norge 753731 Allianz China Equity A
   328021 Prior & Nilsson Sverige Aktiv A 757575 Aberdeen Standard SICAV I - Japanese Sustainable
                                                                                     Equity Fund A
   334409 Baring Hong Kong China A 764951 Evli Europa Placeringsfonden B
   338590 BlackRock - World Gold A2 768499 BlackRock - India A2
   339473 Aktia Nordic Small Cap Placeringsfond B 768556 BlackRock - US Basic Value A2
   341362 Carnegie Listed Private Equity A 780411 UB Infra Placeringsfond A
   354290 Holberg Norden 785493 Fondita Nordic Micro Cap Placeringsfond B
   356063 Fondita European Small Cap Placeringsfond B 804385 BlackRock - US Flexible Equity A2
   360495 S-Banken USA Aktie A 806869 Lannebo Sverige
   362327 DNB Fund - Asian Mid Cap Retail A 825109 Swedbank Robur Osteuropafond A¨
   374421 BlackRock - World Healthscience A2 834788 East Capital Russian A SEK
   385401 L¨ansf¨ors¨akringar Asienfond A 838383 Carnegie Asia A
   388298 Delphi Nordic Acc 842690 Lannebo Sm˚abolag
   391896 BlackRock - China A2 848069 Aberdeen Standard SICAV I - Global Innovation
                                                                                     Equity Fund A
   395434 Allianz Thailand Equity A 856682 Swedbank Robur Sm˚abolagsfond Sverige A
   401810 AXA IM Pacific Ex-Japan Equity QI B 874271 Pictet Indian Equities R
   404236 Pictet Emerging Markets R 882126 Pictet China Equities R
   407775 Aberdeen Standard - American Focused Equity Fund        896761 Swedbank Robur Sm˚abolagsfond Europa A
            A
   410258 BlackRock - World Financials A2 910109 Pictet Japanese Equity Opportunities R
   416867 Ohman Sweden Micro Cap¨                    914945 SEB Asienfond ex Japan
   416982 Seligson & Co Global Top 25 Pharmaceuticals A 917955 Pictet Asian Equities Ex Japan R
   419101 Odin Emerging Markets C 920439 NN (L) Japan Equity P
   420463 Evli Sverige Sm˚abolag 928341 Swedbank Robur Healthcare A
   442483 East Capital Eastern Europe A SEK 950774 SEB Emerging Marketsfond
   449090 SEB Osteuropafond¨           952010 Handelsbanken Svenska Sm˚abolag A1
   469692 Nordea Indienfond 964767 Ohman Global A¨
   477729 Baring Asia Growth A 987784 BlackRock - Emerging Europe A2
   481911 BlackRock - World Mining A2 987842 Handelsbanken Tillv¨axtmarknad Tema A1
   490292 Lannebo Sverige Plus 992099 NN (L) Asia Income P
   494427 Nordea Asian Stars 995571 Nordea Globala Tillv¨axtmarknader
   501981 SKAGEN Kon-Tiki F – —
The table reports all 121 brown funds that form the control group in the study. The fund number is the number
each fund is assigned in the PPS.

                                             34
Example Linear Projection

                       Figure 4: Linear Projection of Skandia Sm˚abolag Sverige

                10

                 0
                                                                                      Skandia Småbolag Sverige

                                                                                              Linear Projection
            Monthly Return

              −10

                 2018     2019     2020     2021     2022     2023
                                     Year

The figure compares the net return of Skandia Sm˚abolag with its linear benchmark. The set of 10 index funds
mimic the net return of Skandia Sm˚abolag for each month.

                                             35
Heteroskedasticity Results

                                  Table 14: Breusch-Pagan Test

                     Variable Test Score
                                                                                    ∗∗∗
                     Assets Under Management 587, 91

                                                                                    ∗∗∗
                     Managerial Compensation 213, 04
                    Gross Alpha
                                                                                    ∗∗
                     Linear Projection 90, 55
                                                                                    ∗∗∗
                   CAPM 144, 69
                                                                                    ∗∗∗
                     AP7 Equity Fund 146, 77
                   Net Alpha
                                                                                   ∗∗∗
                     Linear Projection 93, 85
                                                                                    ∗∗∗
                   CAPM 149, 76
                                                                                    ∗∗∗
                     AP7 Equity Fund 152, 00
                   Value Added
                                                                                    ∗∗∗
                     Linear Projection 101, 10
                                                                                    ∗∗∗
                   CAPM 140, 66
                                                                                    ∗∗∗
                     AP7 Equity Fund 195, 81
                    Value Added Net of Managerial Compensation
                                                                                   ∗∗∗
                     Linear Projection 98, 98
                                                                                    ∗∗∗
                   CAPM 167, 65
                                                                                    ∗∗∗
                     AP7 Equity Fund 243, 08

The table reports the Breusch-Pagan heteroskedasticity results for all regressions with three benchmarking meth-
ods. Significant results indicate that we can reject the null hypothesis of homoskedasticity.

                                             36