PROFIT WARNINGS AND THE
FOLLOWING STOCK MARKET
REACTION

Understanding the effect of issuing profit warnings  under different
circumstances  in the Nordics

WILDA AGER
SOPHIE BLADIN

Bachelor Thesis  in Finance
Stockholm School of Economics
2023
                                  Sophie Bladin & Wilda Ager

Profit Warnings and the Following Stock Market Reaction in the Nordics – Understanding the
effect of issuing profit warnings  under different circumstances

Abstract:
             Our study  examines  the stock market reaction to profit warnings on the Nordic
            stock  exchange.  The results reveal  a  cumulative abnormal return of  -7.09%  and
             6.09%  associated  with  negative  and  positive  profit  warnings  respectively,
            spanning from the day before the issuance to the day after. Stock market reactions
              are asymmetric under different circumstances,  including  business  cycles, the
             quality and quantity of  profit warnings,  geographies,  and company-specific data.
             Our study suggests a pattern of increased  quantity but decreased quality of profit
             warnings during recessions. Furthermore, profit warnings exhibit dampened stock
             market reactions during  recessions compared to booms. The  conflicting  forces of
             the  surprise-factor  effect, increasing  market reaction  to unexpected news, and
             observed  stability of  larger  companies,  generate an insignificance of  company
              size  to  determine the reaction of a profit warning. However,  distinct  investment
             cultures and regulations  across the Nordic countries, create  a dampened  effect  of
             profit warnings issued by Finish companies compared to Swedish.

Key words:
       Profit  warning, business cycle,  disclosing quantitative  information,  market
        capitalization,  geographical  dependencies

Authors:
       Wilda Ager (25318)
       Sophie Bladin (25501)

Tutor:
       Riccardo Sabbatucci, Associate Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:
      Adrien D’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Acknowledgements:
       We wish to express our sincerest gratitude to Riccardo Sabbatucci  for engagement  and
       useful guidance throughout the research  process.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of  Economics
 © Wilda Ager & Sophie Bladin, 2023

                                     1
                                Stockholm School of Economics

   1.  Introduction

A  company’s  board of directors and  management has more information about the expected
revenue and margins of the company than its shareholders.  As  a result, public companies  are
subject to certain regulations to ensure  and protect  the  interests  of the shareholders.  In the
Nordics, these regulations vary  across countries and  industries. However, they  always  include
the  publication of annual and interim reports  incorporating  the three financial statements.  In
addition, if the  company  acknowledges that the earnings will be far below or over consensus of
analysts’ expectations, they can  independently decide to  issue a profit warning, published
through a  public release by the company  two or more  weeks before the formal earnings
announcement. As the issuance  and  formulation  of a profit warning is voluntary,  the company
must consider whether  openness  to  the  market will be rewarded or  punished.

Kearns  &  Whitley (2002), Clare (2001) and  Cox, Dayanandan, Donker  &  Nofsiger (2017)
found that  negative profit warnings are followed  by a consistent decline in profit margins,
representing a larger decline than companies also experiencing negative earnings surprises
without warning about it, which contradicts the Efficient Market Hypothesis. One may question
why  companies  decide to  issue profit warnings  in the first place  considering the severe effects
of it, and the unspecified and vague regulations.  Elayan & Pukthuangthong (2009) demonstrate
three reasons: management  is  trying to  control  the  market reaction, avoid shareholder lawsuits
and decrease information asymmetry. Additionally, Teoh & Hwang (1991) and Skinner  (1994)
outline the positive reputational and quality  effect on the  company  when disclosing bad news.

However, the  market reaction  following  the profit warning differs  depending on the business
cycle,  the  specificity  of the profit warning and company-specific data.  The regime model by
Veronesi (1999) concludes that the market reacts  more  strongly  to a  negative  profit warning in
boom  cycles  than in recessions.  The profit warning can  either  consist of  a  numerical  revised
earnings  forecast or only contain  qualitative  descriptions  of  future  earnings. According  to
Diamond & Verrecchia (1991)  and  Botosan  (1997)  giving a more  specific and quantitative
forecast will  reduce  information  asymmetry  consequently  decreasing  the equity cost of capital
and thus reducing the market reaction. In addition, size, profitability, frequency of warnings and
volume traded  are  according to Cox et al. (2017) and Church & Donker  (2010)  factors
impacting the risk of the  company, which  in turn  affect  the  market reaction  when the profit
warning  is issued.  Furthermore,  as investment cultures and regulations  regarding profit
warnings differ  across geographies  Spohr (2014) and Alves, Pope & Young  (2009)  conclude
that  this should  result in  different market reactions to profit warnings.

Proceeding  to our research question, which  aims  to determine the relationship between  the
issuance of a profit warning and the following stock market reaction, considering different
circumstances  in the Nordics.  We  endeavor  to reach quantitative as well as qualitative
conclusions to the question researched.

What impact does issuing profit warnings in the Nordics have on the stock market reaction
under different circumstances including: content and frequency of the warnings, business cycle,
geographies,  and company-specific data?

We consider our contributions of this  study  to be threefold.  Firstly, many studies have covered
profit  warnings'  effect on  abnormal returns,  especially  on the US  stock  market,  in contrast, we
have conducted this study on the Nordic countries.  This  enables us  to  observe  the  actions of
both Nordic companies in terms of the disclosure level of the profit warnings and  Nordic

                                     2
                                  Sophie Bladin & Wilda Ager

shareholders’  market reaction  as well  as  research possible differences between the Nordic
countries.  Secondly,  to the best of our knowledge,  we have conducted a larger set of
observations as well as control variables  than  most  research made on the  subject, especially
considering the limit to the Nordic stock exchange,  to  be able to  generate  as objective results
as possible. Thirdly,  as  we  research several circumstances  that  might affect the market reaction
to profit warnings,  we do seek to research whether  there  are  synergies between them.  Thereby,
contributing by  researching whether there is a correlation between the  companies'  level of
specificity  in the profit warnings and the business cycle  they are in  as well as company-specific
data and geographies.

We have conducted an event-study methodology to investigate the effect of profit warnings on
the stock market.  The  scope of the  study has been limited to 288 both positive and negative
profit warnings  by Nordic listed companies. In addition, we have controlled for  company-
specific data  for the  companies issuing  profit warnings  and  business cycle  data on the  Nordic
countries respectively  to analyze the stock market reactions over different business cycles  and
to ensure exogeneity. Our sample period ranges from 1996-2020.  We  have  not extended  our
sample period to before 1996  as profit warnings  were  infrequently published in newspapers
before then,  according to  Cox  et al.  (2017)  as well as limited coverage of newspapers on
databases.

Our results reveal that the issuance of a negative and positive profit warning generates a
cumulative abnormal return of -7.09% and 6.09% respectively from the day before the issuance
to the day after.  The stock market reaction is dampened and insignificant in the longer event
windows for positive warnings, while the reaction increases over time for  negative warnings.
Negative profit warnings issued in a boom  generate  a stronger negative  stock market  reaction
and negative profit warnings  consisting  of an explicit earnings forecast  demonstrate  a  more
negative  stock market reaction than those who do not.  A tendency for increased quantity but
decreased quality of profit warnings in recessions has been observed.  Furthermore, size was
proven to be an insignificant control variable. However, geographies  influenced  market
reactions to profit warnings,  highlighting  differences  between Finland and Sweden, found in
regulations  and  investment cultures.

The remainder of this thesis is divided into eight sections. Section  2  covers  background
including Nordic regulation  on profit warnings and  a  literature review on research  pertinent to
the  thesis.  Thereafter, Section  3  covers our data, presenting our data sources,  method  and
adjustments.  Followed by  Section  4  where  our  empirical  results  and analysis of these  are
presented  and Section 5 with  robustness  analysis.  Lastly,  Section  6  covers  our  concluding
findings  whereafter our  references  and  appendix  can be  found.

                                     3
                                Stockholm School of Economics

   2.  Background

2.1  Nordic  Regulation  on Issuance of Profit Warnings

While all countries in the Nordics have regulations that aim to ensure transparency in financial
markets, there can be differences in the specific requirements and approaches concerning profit
warnings issued by  companies.  However, as  most  Nordic  countries are  EU  member states they
must obey under  EU-law, which includes the Market Abuse Regulation  (MAR). Article 17 of
MAR “Disclosure  of Insider information” states that insider information  is: (1) non-public, (2)
precise and (3) if it were made public would be likely to have a significant  impact  on the price
of the issuer’s financial instruments or related financial instruments. Profit warnings should
thus be in the scope of insider information. In addition,  Article  17  states that "An issuer  shall
inform the public as soon as possible of  inside information which directly concerns that issuer”.
Simultaneously, Article 17(4) allows  companies to delay announcements as long as it does not
mislead the  investors.  However, MAR does not explicitly state any quantitative criteria as to
define when and how earnings forecast revisions should be issued.

In Sweden, the regulations  for the stock market  are  primarily  controlled by the Securities
Market  Act  (2007:528),  stating the requirements for  public  Swedish  companies’ disclosure
level, chapter  16  of the regulation  “Consistent  financial  information”  requires  publishment  of
annual and half-year  reports  as well as  actions when violations to the regulation is made. The
Swedish  Financial Supervisory Authority, in its directive  FFFS 2007:17  titled "Regulations
Governing Operations  on  Marketplaces," specifies  in  chapter 5:  7  §,  that issuers  listed  on  a
stock  exchange  are required to adhere to the regulations of  that  particular  exchange  in addition
to complying with  the Securities Market Act.  Nasdaq Stockholm, which is the main securities
exchange in Sweden, has published “Rulebook for issuers of Exchange Traded” where they
refer to  the regulations above and in the notes they state:  “In the event that the financial result
or position of a company deviates in a significant way from what could reasonably be expected
based on financial information previously disclosed by the company, information on such
deviation may constitute inside information and as such must be disclosed as soon as possible.”
However, this statement does not  state any quantitative  requirements for when a company is
obliged to issue a profit warning and its expected content.

The Securites Market Acts of the remaining Nordic countries presents similar regulations to the
Swedish.  In addition, all countries are listed on Nasdaq Nordic,  which has one  harmonized
Rulebook,  which in turn  refers  to  EU-regulation MAR article 17  in terms of insider trading.
However,  it is only Nasdaq Helsinki  that  adds supplementary  requirements  to the issuance  of
information to the  terms for insider  information.  These  supplementary  rules state that  attention
should be drawn to  the  completeness of information  and  the  investors should be able to assess
the financial effects of the news. In addition, information disclosed by the company itself is
decisive on whether an earnings revision is needed, which should be evaluated based on the last
known financial performance, forecast and forward-looking statements, thus if these  deviates
“enough” a profit warning shall be issued. Hence,  even though  both the harmonized Nasdaq
regulations as well as the  supplementary  ones  by  Nasdaq Helsinki  do not state any  quantitative
criteria  to define a profit warning  or requirements  for  when and how this should be issued, the
Helsinki exchange does provide more detail to this.  Spohr  (2014) and Alves  et al.  (2009)  have
stated that Finish  companies  present more frequently  publish profit warnings  and with higher
quality  profit warnings. The more explicit regulation regarding this matter might be the reason

                                     4
                                  Sophie Bladin & Wilda Ager

behind this deviation between the countries. Overall, in the absence of distinct guidelines, the
issuance of profit warnings remains a decision subjective to  the beliefs of the  board of directors
of  a  company  together with its  management  team  following the  guidelines  described.  More
specifically,  is the deviation in earnings  sufficiently far off for a profit warning to be necessary
not to be lawfully wrong and  what nature and specificity  the profit warning should  be of  is up
to the company  to decide.

2.2  Literature review

The effect of profit warnings on stock prices has been researched in several studies. Based on
the Efficient Market Hypothesis  by  Fama (1970), the market will respond rapidly to new
information, thus a profit warning should mean a direct movement in the stock price, whereafter
the stock price will reflect all information  available  to the market. Berk & DeMarzo (2019)
states that the stock price will fluctuate immediately after new information on future earnings
is disclosed, as competition eliminates NPV-positive trades.  Complementary  to the  Efficient
Market  Hypothesis  is  Behavioral Finance,  which  explains market participants’ actions from a
physiological point of view  and  can  thus  introduce additional explanations  for  market
anomalies.

In contrast, prior studies  by  Spohr  (2014) of profit warnings on the Nordic market,  by Cox et
al. (2017) of  the US and  by Clare (2001) of the  UK market, collectively  demonstrate that the
abnormal returns of negative profit warnings accelerate over time after the issuance of the profit
warning, observing  substantially stronger reactions as opposed to  companies  who experience
negative earnings surprises but did not warn about  it.  In addition,  Clare  (2001) found that
negative profit warnings represented a more  dramatic  price fall than the  corresponding price
increase  followed by  a positive profit warning, in line with the  representativeness heuristics
theory by  De  Bondt  & Thaler (1985),  stating that  people  overreact to bad news and underreact
to good news.  Teoh & Hwang (1991) found that higher-quality  companies  are  likelier  to
voluntarily disclose bad news than  companies  of lower quality. In addition,  Skinner (1994)
demonstrates  that  companies  can improve their reputation by voluntarily disclosing bad news
and he suggests that this is the reason why companies issue profit warnings despite evidence of
falling stock prices.

Several  company-specific variables  can  help  explain the variance in  the  market reaction to
profit warnings  and by controlling for  company-specific  characteristics we can ensure
exogeneity of the abnormal return generated by the profit warning.  While previous research,
such as that by Church & Donker (2010) and  Spohr  (2014), employs similar control variables
and debates the correlation between market size and reaction to negative  profit warnings, a
broader perspective emerges.  Given the freedom of company boards when conducting  profit
warning announcements there emerges a  question  of  whether  the competence of  these  might
impact the quality and content of the press release and whether the profit warnings are published
at all,  implying differences in market reaction.  Thus, the study finds that companies issuing
frequent profit warnings generally experience less significant market reactions, a phenomenon
that could be attributed to both the nature of the warnings and the strategic approach of the
company in communicating them.

Cox et al. (2017)  conclude that stock market reactions  to bad news have greater magnitude in
good times than in bad.  In recessions,  the  direct  abnormal return  in reaction to a negative profit

                                     5
                                Stockholm School of Economics

warning is  -10.72%  while  -14.02%  in booms,  and  this  relationship was  upheld  in the longer
event windows.  This gap  is explained by  the notion that  investors do not expect negative news
during periods of  expansion  and have  accordingly  a  stronger response.  Veronesi’s (1999)
regime model explains that when times are good, investors assign a high probability to the good
state and a bad piece of news then makes investors increase the discount for expected future
returns to bear the risk of high uncertainty. Consequently, this “hedging-like behavior” creates
a greater market reaction to a bad piece of news in booms than in recessions. Furthermore, Chen
& Mohan (1994) concluded that when  companies  issue profit warnings they strive to do so at a
time  that generates  the smallest market reaction. In addition, they stated that  companies
presenting negative news are more prone to changing the announcement date and time of
issuance than  companies  with positive news.

Bulkley & Herrerias (2005) observed that negative market performance was more severe where
the warnings were less explicit and did not include a revised quantitative forecast. Furthermore,
Botosan (1997) provides evidence that a higher disclosure level decreases the cost of capital for
smaller  companies  for which the  forecast  information is the most important  information.  In
contrast, for  larger  companies,  there was no significant relationship between  the  cost of equity
capital and the disclosure level that  could be observed.  In addition,  Diamond & Verrecchia
(1991) found that reduced information asymmetry will increase the liquidity  of a  company’s
shares  and  reduce  the volatility of future order imbalances, increasing market returns.

Brennan, Edgar & Power (2022)  found that  in  times  of extreme uncertainty,  50%  of  companies
are  more prone to silence  and  avoid  providing  guidance  on  future earnings. Furthermore, they
found that  profit warnings were more  frequently  disclosed during the  corona  crisis  but  the
quality of those warnings  was  lower. Many warnings included mixed  and unclear messages  to
create an impression that everything was in order.  Hence, they  argue  that  a  stricter  regulatory
system for disclosure of information for investors  is  necessary, to foster investments.  Similarly,
Krause,  Sellhorn  &  Ahmed  (2017)  found higher  disclosure  quantity in forward-looking
statements  for listed German companies  during the financial  crises  2008-2009  but with poorer
quality disclosure than in the pre-crisis period.

                                     6
                                  Sophie Bladin & Wilda Ager

   3.  Data

3.1  Sample selection and  Methodology

To  investigate the effect  of profit warnings on the stock market  we employ an  event-study
methodology.  Our sample  consists of 288 profit warnings, both positive and negative,  issued
by Nordic  companies  listed on the stock exchange  between  1996  and  2020.  We identified
announcement dates within this  period  through the Retriever: Research database and by
reviewing articles in  Dagens Industri  and  Svenska Dagbladet.  Specifically, we searched for the
term “vinstvarn*,” a Swedish keyword for "profit warning" that accounts for variations in word
endings, to ascertain the dates on which Nordic companies issued such warnings.  The
announcement date procured from the Retriever database was designated as the event date (t=0)
for each  profit warning. Any quantitative disclosures accompanying these warnings and if the
warning was positive or negative were duly cataloged.  In addition, we  found profit warnings,
their  day of issuance  and  whether  it disclosed  numbers  on  NASDAQ,  using the  search  world
“profit warn*”  on public releases by companies listed on  the Nordic Stock Exchange.  Relevant
data on stock valuations and relevant financial metrics were sourced from the Refinitiv Eikon
database,  which  combines  financial  datasets  from  Reuters  and  forecast  data  from  the
Institutional Brokers’ Estimate System (IBES).  National statistics and economic instruments,
such as the Organisation of Economic Development (OECD),  and statistics from  Statistiska
Centralbyrån,   Statistics   Denmark,   Statistik   Sentralbyrå,   Statistikcentralen,     provided
information of business cycles in respective economy.

                                Figure 1: Frequency of Profit Warnings

The figure  reports the frequency of  profit  warnings, by quarter,  in the Nordics  (1995-2020). The shaded areas
represent economic downturns  defined based on the  Organisation  of Economic  Development’s  definition of a
recession and on Nordic data.  The shaded areas represent time-periods  of recessions consistent across all Nordic
countries, more specifically  Q3 2000  –  Q2 2002, Q4 2007  –  Q4 2009, Q3 2011  –  Q3 2013 and  Q1 2018  –  Q3
2020.

Figure  1  shows  the frequency of profit warnings, grouped by quarter,  from  1996  to 2020.  The
shaded areas  are the contraction periods in the Nordic market  with respect to  OECD’s
definition. Note that these time periods coincide with the terror attacks in 2001  as well as the

                                     7
                                Stockholm School of Economics

dot-com bubble  crash  in 2000-2002, the financial  crisis in 2008, the  euro crisis in 2014 as well
as the covid-19 pandemic in  late  2019  (early 2020). During these time periods the frequency of
profit warnings  increased.

                        Figure 2: Frequency of Profit Warnings and GDP Growth

Plots the frequency of profit warnings against  GDP growth in the Nordic counties. GDP growth is  defined as the
average growth across the Nordic countries. The plot  suggests that there might be a potential mild negative
relationship between the frequency of profit warnings and GDP growth rates, with  GDP growth trends  possibly
preceding  profit warning  frequency.

An examination of the data on profit warning frequency in conjunction with GDP growth
indicates a  potentially  subdued negative correlation between these two metrics. The response
in terms of heightened profit warnings appears to manifest with a slight delay following a
downturn in GDP growth. This lag in reaction is consistent with the expectation that companies
would typically issue profit warnings after observing a sustained decline in profits over an
extended duration, particularly during economic recessions,  in line with Fama &  Gibbons
(1982) research.

The  profit warning  announcement dates  set  t  =  0  in the event study to measure the abnormal
returns. Daily stock returns  are  used to estimate the abnormal returns associated with the
profit warning, as  Brown & Warner  (1985)  conducted their study.  Expected returns  for each
security at each event date  are found through the  Fama-French  four-factor model  following
Fama & French  (1993). Following  Campbell, Lo  & MacKinlay  (2012)  we  set  the estimation
period  for the expected return  to  t =  -160  to  t =  -40  to  find  the  correlation of each stock  to
market risk  factors  in accordance with the Fama French model.  The abnormal return  for each
security  i  is calculated as follows:

                        Equation 1:  Fama-French four-factor model

  𝐴𝑅!,#  =  𝑅!,#  −  (𝛼(!  +  𝛽+!,$%&,𝑅$,#  −  𝑟',#.  +  𝛽+!,($)𝑆𝑀𝐵#  +  𝛽+!,+$,𝐻𝑀𝐿#  +  𝛽+!,$-$𝑀𝑂𝑀#)

The business cycle information is collected through national statistics on economic activity.
Studies by  DeStefano  (2004),  Cox et al.  (2017),  use the National Bureau of Economic
Research’s (NBER) definitions of the turning points of the business cycles in the economy.
According to NBER a recession is defined as a significant decline in economic activity spread
across the economy, lasting more than a few months. On the contrary, economic expansion is
considered  the normal state of the economy. A similar  approach is applied by the Organisation
of Economic Development, OECD, who identifies business  cycles and  turning points  as a
deviation-from-trend series by collecting data across multiple  functions  in the economy  and

                                     8
                                  Sophie Bladin & Wilda Ager

uses GDP growth as a reference. The application of this definition of business cycles on national
data from the Nordic countries defined the business cycle variable (BC) that  takes on the value
one during a recession and zero during economic expansion. The OECD data is cross-
referenced with national statistics accounts to ensure reliability. The literature provides a second
definition of business  cycles,  where the level of the stock  market  index  indicates good-  and bad
times.  This definition is used by  Conrad, Cornell & Landsman  (2002), however it is not
employed in this case  since it would  neglect other vital components of economic activity.  By
applying the NBER  and OECD  definition of a business cycle on the Nordic markets we have
defined the business cycle variable  BC taking on the value one  in a contraction and zero in an
expansion.  In addition to accounting for business cycle data, we introduce a dummy variable,
NUM. This variable takes a value of one when  companies  disclose quantitative measures in
their profit warning press releases. Our aim is to examine the psychological dimensions of
finance in market responses to profit warnings  with respect to openness.

To determine the abnormal return resulting from the profit warning, we control for lagged
company-specific variables to ensure an exogenous impact.  Following  the framework defined
by Cox et al. (2017) we gather data on factors such as market capitalization, leverage, return  on
assets, trading volume, and  analysts' forecast  dispersion  and  market to book ratio  to accurately
assess the genuine influence of the profit warning. We expect large  companies  to be more
diversified and  have greater financial stability  and  thus  are better able to sustain  profitability
even through tough times  like  profit warning announcements and  contraction periods.  The
expected  market response  to profit warnings for large-cap  companies  is expected to be less
compared to smaller-cap  companies. The control variable  for  company  size (SIZE)  is a discrete
variable based on the company’s market capitalization due to the large spread in company sizes
on the Nordic Stock Exchange.  The variable ranges for 1-4 with each integer representing
micro-cap, small-cap, medium-cap,  and large-cap  companies,  respectively,  based on the
companies’ reported market capitalization  in the  period  before  the profit warning.  The cut-off
values are determined  in accordance with  Nasdaq Nordic Stock Exchange  where  micro-cap
companies have a market capitalization of less than €300 million, small-cap are valued between
€300 million and €2 billion, medium-cap between € 2billion and €10 billion and large-cap have
a market capitalization of more than €10 billion.

To ensure an exogenous effect, it is imperative to control for profitability, as it underpins a
company's capacity to weather adverse conditions.  By controlling for return on assets  (ROA)
we expect the effect to be smaller for companies with high profitability. Also, financial risk may
have an impact on the market response  to  profit warnings.  Companies  with elevated leverage
may face a more pronounced effect from the press release than those with lower leverage due
to the market's perception of the  company's stability.  The variable  leverage (LEV)  is the  total
debt as a percentage of assets reported in the period before the profit warning. Concurrently, we
control for growth patterns of the companies  by including the variable market-to-book ratio
(MTB), defined  as the market capitalization over the total assets  in the reporting period  before
the profit warning announcement. A profit warning should reflect a negative sign for companies
with a  steep  growth trajectory, evident  from  a high market-to-book ratio.

Further,  we control for variations in earnings  by  including variables for the analyst forecast
dispersion  (DISP), defined as the standard deviation of the  forecasted earnings by the
International Brokers’ Estimate System (IBES). Also, we control for the trading volume (VOL),
defined as the  trading volume at the event day  divided  by the average trading volume during
the 100 previous days.  By comparing the event day's trading volume to the average trading
volume over the past 100 days, we can quantify the magnitude of the market's reaction and

                                     9
                                Stockholm School of Economics

                                      Table 1:  Descriptive Statistics

This table reports  descriptive statistics for the  cross-sectional  dataset  of control  variables included in  our profit
warning analysis.  The sample consists of profit warnings issued by  companies  listed on the Nordic Stock
Exchanges,  Stockholm Stock Exchange, Oslo Stock Exchange, Copenhagen Stock Exchange, Helsinki Stock
Exchange,  and Iceland Stock Exchange. Data on market capitalization, return on assets, variable leverage,  trading
volume  and market-to-book ratio is retrieved from Reuters database. Analyst  forecast standard deviation (DISP)
is  collected  from  IBES.  Size  (SIZE)  is a discrete variable indicating the size of the  company  where large-cap
companies take on the value 4, 3 represent medium-cap companies, 2 small-cap and 1 micro-cap defined by Nasdaq
Nordics. Return on assets  (ROA)  is defined as  earnings before  interest tax over the book value of assets. The
leverage variable (LEV) is the total debt over total assets and market-to-book value (MTB) is defined as the market
cap over book value of equity.  All the above variables are reported  for the period before the profit warning
announcement to assure exogeneity. Lastly, the trading volume variable (VOL) is defined as the trading volume at
the announcement day (t=0) over the average trading volume  for the previous 100 days.

ensure that observed effects are not merely driven by  unnormal  trading activity or other
unrelated factors. Lastly, we include a dummy variable for companies issuing multiple profit
warnings within the same year (MULTI). If the  company  had issued a profit warning within
one year the variable takes on the value one and otherwise, zero.

Table 1 provides an overview of the parameters included in the cross section of the Profit
Warning sample. There's considerable variation in profitability (ROA) and trading volume
(VOL) among  companies. A  considerable  number of  companies  tend to have low leverage,
MTB ratios, and DISP values, but outliers or a minority of  companies  with high values in these
metrics are influencing the average. Further, the variables MTB, VOL, and DISP are notably
rightly  skewed, given  that their medians are significantly lower than their means.

                                     10
                                  Sophie Bladin & Wilda Ager

   4.  Empirical Results  & Analysis

The issuance of a profit warning culminates in a negative abnormal return of 5.72%.  Table 2
reports the effect of issuing a profit warning on the stock market  and remarkably, of  the 288
announcements analyzed, a substantial 73% conveyed negative sentiments. This pattern
resonates with findings from established research, exemplified by  Brennan et al.  (2022) and
Jackson & Madura  (2007).  The T-statistic and P-value indicate that abnormal returns are both
statistically significant at the 0.1% level and economically substantial for the examined event
windows. This implies that the  issuance of a  profit warning  has a substantial market reaction.
Further, we find that  the abnormal returns are statistically significantly different from what
would have been expected by the  Fama French  four-factor model according to the Generalized
Z sign for all event windows.  Implying that the market reaction  to  the profit warning is not
consistent with  the  expectations of the market  according to financial models.

The results reveal a dual-directional impact of profit warnings in the long term.  On the one
hand,  a few  companies  recover  fast from the initial negative market reaction to the profit
warning, comparing a share of 73% of the companies experiencing a negative direct effect with
66% of  companies  reporting negative abnormal returns a month from the event.  On the other
hand,  the results  demonstrate  a notable negative abnormal return  of 8.56%  within the [-30,30]
day  event window, followed closely by the protracted [-5,5] window, with an abnormal return
of  -8.22%. Such trends could be indicative of a domino effect, where initial reactions to the
profit warning might trigger further market adjustments as more information becomes
available.  This  is supported by  the general timing of profit  warnings  being issued a couple of
weeks before annual  or  interim reports.  In addition,  one might suggest that further negative
news might arise from the issuance of the profit warning in the following news reports
triggering a negative market reaction.  Alternatively, one could argue that it might take some
time for individuals  and funds to assimilate the information into actions and to adjust their
funds.  Hence, our results are not in line with the Efficient Market Hypothesis as the stock price
reaction  accelerates after the profit warning is issued. The  new information is not reflected in
the stock price  immediately,  but over time. The slow adjustment of  stock price can according
to Berk & DeMarzo (2019) be a result of the fact that  the information is  hard to interpret.
Another important note may be the day of the week of the profit warning announcement, since
the event study looks at the exact dates and does not account for weekdays when the stock
exchange might have been closed, such as holidays or weekends, which may explain some of
the increased reaction of the [-5,5] event window.

In Equation 2 we use an OLS regression of the Fama-French four-factor model abnormal returns
to analyze the  exogenous abnormal  return as a response to profit warnings, controlling for

        Table 2: Cumulative Average Abnormal Returns as response to Profit Warnings for selected event windows

This table reports the  cumulative abnormal returns for the selected event windows  using the  Fama-French  four-factor model
(Fama & French, 1993).  The generalized Z sign test, tests weather the abnormal returns are  different from what could have
been expected according to the  Fama French model. The significance implies that the profit warning event had an impact on
stock returns at  the 0.1 % significance level. The sample contains 288 profit warnings.

                                      11
                                Stockholm School of Economics

company-specific and announcement-day specific control variables to find the exogenous effect
of the issuance of a profit warning, using descriptive statistics from Table 1.  Full regression
output is found in Appendix 1.  The compiled regression, characterized by its derived
coefficients, is:

                                Equation 2:  Regression analysis

      𝐶𝐴𝑅!,#  =  −0.040  +  0.007𝑆𝐼𝑍𝐸!,#  −  0.002𝑅𝑂𝐴!,#  −  0.005𝐿𝐸𝑉!,#  −  0.001𝐷𝐼𝑆𝑃!,#
                            ∗∗                              ∗∗∗              ∗∗
                (0.016)   (0.006)        (0.0004)       (0.016)       (0.001)

                 −0.015𝑁𝑈𝑀!,#  +  0.130𝑃𝑂𝑆!,#  +  0.001𝐵𝐶!,#  −  0.001𝑉𝑂𝐿!,#
                                                  ∗∗∗                                  ∗∗∗
                 (0.011)         (0.018)        (0.011)       (0.0002)

                 −0.003𝑀𝑇𝐵!,#  −  0.007𝑀𝑈𝐿𝑇𝐼!,#
                 (0.003)         (0.014)

We find that the variables Return on Assets  (ROA), Leverage  (LEV), Quantitative  (NUM),
Positive  (POS)  and Trading Volume  (VOL)  are statistically significant in explaining the
abnormal return generated by the profit warning.  In contrast  to  Cox et al.’s  (2017)  study  on the
US stock market, we find a negative relationship between high profitability (ROA) and
abnormal return. However,  our  findings are in line with studies of the Dutch market  by  Church
&  Donker (2010), and could be explained by shareholders being more surprised when return-
on-assets is high in the year prior to the  negative  profit warning. We also found the volume
traded variable to be statistically significant indicating that the profit warning increased trading
volumes, similarly to what is found in a sample from the US  by  Cox et al. (2017).  Higher
leverage  increases the company’s  risk, thereby increasing its cost of capital, creating a stronger
market reaction to negative news, which  is in line with  the study  of the US market.  However,
as opposed to Cox et al.’s findings the average dispersion between analysts’ forecasts is not a
significant factor, which could be explained by the fact that several companies are only covered
by a few or no analysts.  As opposed to Church & Donker (2010) and Spohr (2014) the variable
controlling for multiple profit warnings within 12 months (MULTI),  Business Cycle (BC) and
whether the warning  consists  of  numerical earnings  forecast (NUM),  was insignificant.
However, this could be explained by a small dataset of  companies  issuing multiple profit
warnings within a year  and is further investigated in the paper.

The coefficient for positive warnings (POS), as indicated in Equation 2, is 0.130, which
corresponds to an abnormal return of 13.0%. Given the predominantly negative trend in our
dataset, where 73% of the profit warnings are negative, this positive coefficient is particularly
significant from an economic standpoint. This discrepancy between the majority of negative
profit warnings and the substantial positive abnormal return emphasizes the complex dynamics
of the market and the significant implications for  value that can arise from these disclosures.

4.1  Market reaction in response  to  Positive  & Negative  Profit Warnings

Issuing a positive profit warning generates a positive  and statistically significant  abnormal
return of 6.09 % in the short-term event window, [-1,1], compared to the long-run event window
[-30,30],  displaying low economic and no statistical significance.  Looking into the effect of
issuing a positive profit warning we subset the dataset to only examine positive profit warnings.

                                     12
                                  Sophie Bladin & Wilda Ager

           Table 3: Cumulative Average Abnormal Returns as Response to Positive Profit Warnings

This table reports the cumulative abnormal returns for the selected event windows generated by issuing a positive profit warning
in the Nordics during 1996-2020  using the Fama-French  four-factor model (Fama & French, 1993).  *  Implies  statistical
significance at the  5  % significance level, ** implies statistical significance at the  1 % significance level and *** implies
statistical significance at the  0,1% significance level  generated by conducting a T-test and extracting the  P-value. Full results
in Appendix 2. “All Positives” displays the cumulative abnormal returns of a sample of 19 observations of companies issuing
a positive profit warning in the Nordics during the time-period 1995-2020. “Quantitative” displays cumulative abnormal returns
generated by issuing a profit warning and disclosing quantitative measures. The sample contains 19 positive  profit warnings
disclosing quantitative measures. “No Quantitative” shows the results of a sample of 11 observations of positive profit warnings
not disclosing quantitative measures in the profit warning press release. “Recession”  shows cumulative average abnormal
returns generated by issuing a profit warning in a recession. The sample contains 13  positive  profit warnings issued in
recessions.  Lastly, “Boom” displays the cumulative average abnormal return  of  companies  issuing positive profit warnings
during booms and is based on a sample of 17 observations.

Table 3 reports the cumulative average abnormal return for only positive profit warnings and
full regression results can be found in Appendix 2.

Furthermore, the effect of disclosing  numbers  in the  earnings forecast  of the profit warning
generates a  dampened  insignificant  direct abnormal return of 5.74%,  compared to  a significant
6.70% when not disclosing numbers. Comparing the market reaction in the [-5,5] event window
we observe a dampened  insignificant  positive reaction of 2.03% when disclosing quantitative
measures in the profit warning compared to  a  significant  8.40%  reaction  when not disclosing.
These results, demonstrated in Table 3,  contradict  previous findings  by Church & Donker
(2010)  who found that disclosing quantitative measures  increases the  positive market reaction.

Investigating the effect of the business cycle on our sample of positive profit warnings
demonstrates that the positive effect is dampened in booms and insignificantly strengthened in
recessions. Building on Cox et al.’s methodology, applied to positive warnings, these results
could be explained by that good news is expected in booms and consequently generates a
dampened market reaction, while they are not expected in recessions, generating a strengthened
reaction. However, the business cycle variable (BC)  is not statistically significant in our OLS
regression in equation 2, partially due to the low sample size.

Issuing a negative profit warning demonstrates  a direct both economic and statistically
significant negative market reaction of  7.09%. Such observations align well with the findings
of other notable studies, including those by Clare (2001) for the UK market, with  -7.13%
abnormal return and Spohr (2014) for the Nordics, with -6.10% abnormal return. In comparison
to the US-centric analysis by Cox et al. (2017), with  -14.27% abnormal return, the magnitude
of the abnormal return observed in the Nordic  and  UK  market is more restrained. Compared
with positive profit warnings the  negative market reaction generated by a negative profit
warning is more persistent over time with statistically negative abnormal returns over all the
studied  periods.

                                     13
                                Stockholm School of Economics

Negative profit warnings that disclose quantitative measures generate a direct negative effect
in the event window [-1,1] of  -8.04% compared with the negative effect of not disclosing
quantitative measures of  -5.66% in the same period.  Thus, in contrast to Berk & DeMarzo’s
(2019) arguments for the Efficient Market Hypothesis, more informative profit warnings do not
generate rational behavior of the stock market, which is also contrary to the findings of Church
& Donker (2010). In the long run, it is notable in Table 4 that the effect of disclosing quantitative
measures and not  disclosing  generates  approximately  the same abnormal return looking at the
[-30,30] event window. This could be explained by the market eventually  correcting  any initial
overreaction, leading to similar long-term reactions to profit warnings, regardless of the degree
of openness in the announcement.

Furthermore, Table 4 demonstrates that market responses to negative news in  recessions  are
dampened and  strengthened  booms, generating  a direct  market reaction of  -6.48% and  -7.62%
respectively.  In the event window  [-30,30] this spread is enhanced, with the reaction in
recessions of -6.25% and -12.75% in booms. This differential response underscores the market's
sensitivity to unfavorable financial  disclosures depending on the prevailing economic climate.
Research on  the US market  by  Cox et al. (2017)  and the regime-switching theory by Verionesi
(1999), later examined by Conrad et al. (2002), have reached similar conclusions. Furthermore,
one could assume that the “surprise factor”,  examined by  Church & Donker (2010),  also plays
a role in the enhanced market reaction. In contrast to these findings, the control variable BC is
not significant in the  OLS  regression. One could discuss whether this has to do  with the fact
that Nordic  investors  are more risk-averse, and therefore are more responsive to bad news no
matter whether in recession or boom. However, these results could also have to do with a too
small data sample.

It's imperative to highlight that our dataset indicates a relatively symmetrical immediate market
response to positive profit warnings, evidenced by returns of  -7.09% versus 6.09%,  in
contradiction  to  prior studies such as  Spohr  (2014) and Clare (2001).  Nevertheless, over an
extended duration, the market reactions exhibit  inconsistency, negative abnormal returns
demonstrating greater persistence compared to positive profit warnings which market reaction
decline in magnitude  and statistical significance  over time.  Furthermore, it is only the  direct
event window [-1,1] that proves to be statistically significantly different from what would have
been expected according to the Fama French Four-factor model  for  positive profit warnings,
compared to negative profit warnings with high significance of the results in all event windows.
Supporting  the evidence found by  Spohr  (2014) and Clare (2001) implying  that positive profit
warnings do not have a proportionate market reaction. The contradiction to the Efficient Market
Hypothesis  can be attributable  to  Behavioral theories,  such as  representative  heuristics by  De
Bondt  & Thaler (1985),  alongside the  familiarity bias and overconfidence bias,  disrupting
investors’ rational diversification.

                                     14
                                  Sophie Bladin & Wilda Ager

           Table 4: Cumulative Average Abnormal Return as response to Negative Profit Warnings

This table reports the cumulative abnormal returns for the selected event windows generated by issuing a positive profit warning
in the Nordics during 1996-2020 using the Fama-French four-factor model  (Fama & French, 1993). *  Implies  statistical
significance at the 5% significance level, ** implies statistical significance at the 1% significance level and *** implies
statistical significance at the 0,1% significance level generated by conducting a T-test and extracting the P-value. Full results
in Appendix 3. “All Negatives” displays the cumulative abnormal returns of a sample of 258 observations of companies issuing
a  negative  profit warning in the Nordics during the time-period 1995-2020. “Quantitative” displays cumulative abnormal
returns generated by issuing a profit warning and disclosing quantitative measures. The sample contains  155 negative  profit
warnings disclosing quantitative measures. “No Quantitative” shows the results of a sample of 103  observations of  negative
profit warnings not disclosing quantitative measures in the profit warning press release. “Recession” shows cumulative average
abnormal returns generated by issuing a profit warning in a recession. The sample contains 121 negative profit warnings issued
in recessions. Lastly, “Boom” displays the cumulative average abnormal return of  companies issuing positive profit warnings
during booms and is based on a sample of 137 observations.

Investigating the  relationship  between the tendency of disclosing quantitative measures in the
profit warning announcement and the state of the  economy,  a positive correlation can be
observed.  Thus,  companies  are more likely to be vaguer in their profit warnings during
recessions. Hence, in recessions,  the number of negative profit warnings increases but they
decrease in quality. These results confirm  conclusions reached in other studies of profit
warnings during the Covid-2019  crisis  by Brennan et al. (2022) and  the  financial  crisis  of 2008
by Krause et al. (2017). In times of  crisis,  future earnings are harder to predict, limiting
companies’ ability to give investors an explicit forecast. In addition, the market reactions to bad
news during recessions are dampened and enhanced in booms.  Additionally, a psychological
factor might influence a company's decision to be less specific when disclosing negative
information, especially during a crisis.  Profit  warnings are issued when a company anticipates
its  results but before the official report is released. The tendency to be vague in negative  profit
warnings could be attributed to the discomfort associated with delivering clear bad news, in
contrast to the ease of communicating positive news.  The correlation  between  not providing
explicit earnings forecast and recession could give color to the results found above. Providing
more explicit earnings forecasts in negative profit warnings are correlated with “good times”
and bad news during these times generate a  stronger market reaction.  Figure 3 displays these
findings, where a positive correlation can be observed, disregarding  the years  2011-2013.

                                     15
                                Stockholm School of Economics

    Figure 3: Frequency of disclosing profit warnings with quantitative measures in relation to GDP growth

This figure displays the percentage of profit warning announcements disclosing quantitative information in relation to the GDP
growth in the Nordic countries  between 1999-2019.  The plot suggests a  positive correlation  between  the factors. Such that
when GDP growth increases,  the percentage of profit warnings disclosing quantitative profit warnings increases. The positive
correlation is evident during for example the financial crisis 2008.

4.2  Profit  Warning reaction  depending on market capitalization

When studying the effect across company sizes the result  shows  that  when  large-  mid-  and
small-cap companies issue a negative profit warning the market reacts with a similar magnitude,
comparing the negative reaction of  -7.81%,  -7.72% and  -7.95% respectively in the short-term
event window [-1,1], while micro-cap  demonstrates  a lower magnitude of reaction  of  -5.22%,
which is  demonstrated  in  Table  5.  These results do not  imply  a  correlation  between  size and a
dampened stock market reaction, which is in line with our results of  Equation 2  as well as
research by Jackson & Madura (2007) and  Spohr  (2014).  The  results  for micro-cap  could be
explained by smaller news coverage of smaller companies, which may lead to fewer investors
acknowledging the news and thus not acting upon them.  In addition, the higher volatility of
smaller  companies  may already be priced into the cost of capital affecting the stock price,
generating a smaller reaction when bad news is realized as compared to larger and assumed less
volatile companies.  On the other hand, we can conclude that, in the long term, micro-cap
companies  underperform and demonstrate the  most negative abnormal return in the [-30,30]
event window out of all the size categories.

Conducting a regression  across  company  sizes,  the regression model is statistically significant
in predicting the cumulative average abnormal return for large-, mid- and small-cap companies.
However, it does not prove to be significant in the prediction of the abnormal return as response
to profit warnings for micro-cap  companies.  Appendix  5  demonstrates the  OLS  regression
output controlling for  company-specific characteristics, applying the same mathematical and
theoretical framework as Equation 2,  to investigate the reason for the differences in market
reaction across  company  sizes  by controlling for  company-specific characteristics.  The
inconsistency with previous findings and certain financial theories could be indicative of unique
dynamics at play in micro-cap companies. One hypothesis, based on investor behavior theories,
suggests  that  micro-cap  investors  may  be  more  prone  to  emotional  trading  and  an
overconfidence bias. A study by Ekholm  &  Pasternack (2007) on the Finnish stock market
supports this, finding a negative correlation between investor size and rational reaction
following negative news, with smaller investors' performance generally  impacted negatively  in

                                     16
                                  Sophie Bladin & Wilda Ager

       Table 5: Cumulative Average Abnormal Returns in Response to Profit Warnings by company size

This table reports the cumulative abnormal returns for the selected event windows generated by  issuing a negative profit
warning in the Nordics during 1996-2020 using the Fama  French four-factor model  (Fama & French, 1993),  divided by
company-size. * Implies statistical significance at the 5 % significance level, ** implies statistical significance at the 1 %
significance level and *** implies statistical significance at the 0,1% significance level generated by conducting a T-test and
extracting the P-value. Full results in Appendix 4. The sizes are based on Nasdaq Nordic’s definition of  company-sizes based
on the company’s market capitalization, where large-cap  companies  have a market capitalization above  EUR 10 billion,
medium-cap  companies  have a market capitalization below  EUR 10 billion but above  EUR 2 billion, small-cap  companies
have a market capitalization between EUR 300 million and EUR 2 billion and micro-cap below EUR 300 million.

The Large-Cap company sample contains 35 negative profit warnings issued by large-cap companies in the Nordics from 1995-
2020. The “Medium” column displays cumulative abnormal returns generated by issuing a negative warning by medium-cap
companies. The sample contains 60 negative profit warnings. Small-cap company’s cumulative abnormal return in response to
negative profit warnings are displayed in column “Small” and contains 79 observations. Lastly, the “Micro” column shows the
result of a sample of 93 negative profit warnings issued by micro-cap  companies.

the long run due to overconfident behaviors. Therefore, the underreaction to micro-cap negative
profit warnings might be attributed to a larger proportion of individual investors in these
companies, who might act irrationally in the immediate event window due to low news
coverage or overconfidence in their stocks. These behavioral aspects, prominent among micro-
cap investors, might also help explain  why the model for explaining the abnormal return,
controlling for  company-specific characteristics, is not statistically significant. Future research
could explore these behavioral factors in more depth or consider other variables that might
influence the market reaction in micro-cap  companies.

It is essential to consider the  company-specific circumstances and market conditions for each
company to understand the nuances of their respective stock market reactions following a profit
warning. Other research,  such as Church & Donker (2010) and  Collett  (2004) suggests that
larger  companies  should be less  volatile and therefore demonstrate a smaller stock market
reaction to profit warnings. In addition, research by Banz (1981) suggests that smaller
companies  are significantly riskier, not only considering their average earnings variance but
also regarding the information they are providing to the public, resulting in insufficient
information. Investors  could  thus  be  less keen on holding smaller stocks because of estimation
risk. Furthermore, larger  companies  might have more consistent contact with analysts.
Consequently, the analysts' forecast should  be closer in line with actual performance in the
period leading up to the issuance of the profit warning. The same methodology would generate
a strengthened “surprise factor” if a larger company issued a negative profit warning, enhancing
market reactions. With the larger resources of big companies, investors could be more surprised
by their sudden revised earnings forecast than that of smaller companies. In addition, larger-cap
companies  often have a larger part  of intuitional investors or funds compared to small and
micro-cap companies, who may react more strongly to negative news with their larger holdings
and  thereby cause a more substantial stock market movement. The investment base of large
companies  may be more risk-averse, while micro-cap investors tend to be more risk-tolerant,
given that micro-cap stocks are inherently more volatile. These contradicting forces could be
the reason behind our insignificant result.

                                     17
                                Stockholm School of Economics

4.3  Market reaction to  Profit Warnings in the Nordics

Valuable results can be observed as we divide our data  into subsets by country, displayed in
Table 6.  We find that Nordic  countries  react differently in response to negative profit warnings,
where Denmark  displays the greatest direct reaction  of  -10.53%  but recovers quickly. On the
contrary Swedish  companies  experience a high  direct reaction of  -7.85%, which is  sustained
over time while the direct market reaction in Finland is -5.74%. Accordingly, in the [-5,5] event
window the Danish cumulative average abnormal return is  -8.96%,  while  Swedish  companies
generate a stock market reaction of  -11.12% and Finnish  companies  generate a reaction of  -
7.14%. One could thus observe that the reaction evolves in two directions when comparing the
countries.  For Sweden and Finland, there is a slower, long-term, reaction to the profit warning
compared to  the Danish market which  reacts  strongly in the direct event window and less in the
long term. Important to note is  the  insignificance of the long-term results of Danish  companies
and Norwegian  companies,  which could be explained by limited data.  Iceland is excluded in
the country analysis due to only three reported profit warnings by listed  companies  over the
sample period, all of which were positive. To account for the differences in sample size and the
differences in the share of positive to negative profit warnings in the country samples we only
study the cumulative  average abnormal returns for negative profit warnings.

Spohr (2014) and Alves  et al.  (2009) present  that Finland is  the country  in  Europe where profit
warnings are published  the second  most frequently and with a more extensive outlook. Given
the observations that heightened frequency of warnings often correlates with subdued market
reactions, as substantiated by Church & Donker (2010) and Spohr (2014), it can be deduced
that markets with regular exposures to such warnings, like Finland would manifest more muted
reactions. Also, Finish regulation covering profit  warnings  are  more explicit than that for other
Nordic countries, which might be a reason why Finish  companies  issue warnings more
frequently.  Furthermore, UK is according to Alves  et al.  (2009) the country  in  Europe  where
profit warnings are the most common  while the UK's regulatory framework mandates the
issuance of profit warnings under circumstances where anticipated results significantly deviate
from analyst expectations. Drawing from a parallel  methodology, Clare (2001) further
underscores a more tempered market reaction by British companies compared to US companies,
presumably influenced by the regulatory mandate. The subdued market reaction in our study
attributable to Finland is fostered both by cultural nuances and regulatory frameworks.

          Table 6: Cumulative Average Abnormal Returns to Negative Profit Warnings by Country

This table reports the cumulative abnormal returns for the selected event windows generated by issuing a  negative  profit
warning in the Nordics during 1996-2020 using the Fama French four-factor model (Fama & French, 1993). * Implies statistical
significance at the 5 % significance level, ** implies statistical significance at the 1 % significance level and *** implies
statistical significance at the 0,1% significance level generated by conducting a T-test and extracting the P-value. Full results
in Appendix  6. “Sweden” displays the cumulative abnormal returns of a sample of  166  observations of  companies  issuing a
negative profit warning in the  Sweden  during  the time-period 1995-2020. “Finland” displays cumulative abnormal returns
generated by issuing a profit warning and disclosing quantitative measures. The sample contains  98  negative profit warnings.
“Denmark” shows the results of a sample of 12 observations of negative profit warnings by companies listed on the Copenhagen
Stock Exchange. “Norway” shows cumulative average abnormal returns generated by issuing a profit warning in Norway, the
sample contains  9 observations.

                                     18
                                  Sophie Bladin & Wilda Ager

This  contrasts with  the Swedish and US markets, where the absence of stringent regulations
surrounding profit warnings often leads to unforeseen announcements, which consequently
intensifies the market's response, as  illustrated  by Spohr (2014). The distinct investment
cultures  prevailing in the respective markets may suggest a heightened risk aversion for
Swedish and  American investors,  leading them to divest stocks  of companies  issuing profit
warnings, thereby catalyzing a more pronounced market response.

When investigating the Swedish  and Finnish market reactions  further we find that  Swedish
investors react  more  strongly  to profit warnings,  which could be explained by the differences
in profit warning frequency, the impact of the business cycle on investor behavior  and investor
risk-aversion. We conduct an OLS regression on Finland and Sweden’s negative profit warnings
respectively,   controlling   for   company-specific   and   announcement-day-specific   control
variables, revealing new possible reasons for the variability of stock market reactions.  Table  7
displays the regression output, with similar theoretical and mathematical  applications  as
Equation 2.  Again, focusing on negative profit warnings due to lack  of  data to ensure reliable
results.  Return on Assets  is only significantly negative for Swedish  companies, in line with
Church & Donker’s (2010) theory of the surprise effect, when  companies  have higher
profitability a negative profit warning comes as  more of a surprise, generating a stronger
reaction. Simultaneously, Finish  companies  seem more risk-averse, with  a stronger reaction to
Leverage, Trading Volume  and  Market to Book value,  implying enhanced market reaction to
believed  overvaluation of the stock.

In  Table  8,  it is evident that  Finish  companies  present a significantly  more  negative reaction
when in  recessions  compared to booms, in contrast to the results of the whole data set. In
recessions,  the stock market reaction to  Finnish profit warnings  is  thus stronger, which could
be a consequence of higher risk aversion  when  times are bad.  However, in the longer event
window [-30,30] finish  companies  react in line with  the  results  for the whole dataset,  a
significantly  stronger market reaction in booms  than  in  recessions.  In  line with our prior
analysis of Finish and Swedish  regulation, Swedish  companies  react significantly negatively to
more information disclosed  in the profit warning  while it is insignificant for Finland, which we
earlier explained by that  Finish investors are more frequently exposed to profit  warnings
containing more information  and should consequently have a more dampened reaction.

                                     19
                                Stockholm School of Economics

  Table 7: OLS Regression controlling for company-specific characteristics for Swedish and Finish companies
                                               (Equation 2)

The table reports the regression results  from  the OLS regression defined by Equation 2 for Swedish and Finnish  companies.
Return on Assets, Leverage, Trading Volume  and  Quantitative are statistically significant in explaining the abnormal return
generated on the stock market at the event of the profit warning  for Swedish  companies.  Simultaneously, Leverage, Trading
Volume, Business Cycle, and Market to Book Value are statistically significant for Finnish  companies.  The return on Assets,
Leverage and Trading Volume variables all supports our hypotheses that larger companies, with higher profitability and lower
leverage experience less negative impact when issuing profit warnings. The regression also indicated that trading volumes
increase when companies issue profit warnings.

 Table 8: Cumulative Average Abnormal Returns to Negative Profit Warnings for Swedish and Finish companies

This table reports the cumulative abnormal returns for the selected event windows generated by issuing a  negative  profit
warning in the Nordics during 1996-2020 using the Fama French four-factor model (Fama & French, 1993). * Implies statistical
significance at the 5 % significance level, ** implies statistical significance at the 1 % significance level and *** implies
statistical significance at the 0,1% significance level generated by  conducting a  T-test and extracting  the P-value. Full results
in Appendix 6. “Sweden” displays the cumulative abnormal returns of a sample of 166 observations of  companies  issuing a
negative profit warning in the Sweden during the time-period 1995-2020. “Finland” displays cumulative abnormal returns
generated by issuing a profit warning and disclosing quantitative measures. The sample contains 98 negative profit warnings.

.

                                     20
                                  Sophie Bladin & Wilda Ager

     Table 9: Cumulative Average Abnormal Returns to Negative Profit Warnings for Swedish and Finnish
                                     companies, by company size

This table reports the cumulative abnormal returns for the selected event windows generated by issuing a  negative  profit
warning in the Nordics during 1996-2020 using the Fama French four-factor model (Fama & French, 1993). * Implies statistical
significance at the 5 % significance level, ** implies statistical significance at the 1 % significance level and *** implies
statistical significance at the 0,1% significance level generated by conducting a T-test and extracting the  P-value.  The table
displays the  cumulative abnormal return for Swedish and Finnish  companies  divided by  company-size defined according to
Nasdaq Nordics definition of large- mid- small- and micro-cap companies.

As stated in section 4.2, the market capitalization variable has contradictory effects on the stock
market reaction in the respective countries, even though insignificant, Finland reveals a
negative effect of market capitalization while the effect is positive in Sweden. Comparing  the
long-term reaction of Swedish and Finnish  company-size reactions, displayed in Table  9, we
find that  for Sweden  the market reaction is the largest for micro-cap  companies  issuing profit
warnings of  -14.18% and the smallest for  large-cap  companies  of  -4.43% in the [-30,30] event
window. On the other hand, Finnish large-cap  companies  experience the greatest market
reaction of -19.42% and micro-cap companies the smallest market reaction of -6.35%. Financial
studies and theories offer various explanations for the differences studied between the countries.
The reaction pattern for Swedish  companies  could be explained by research by Banz (1981)
who argue that smaller companies are riskier and that larger companies might have more contact
with analysts. This implies that it is expected that small-  and micro-cap  companies  are more
volatile while larger  company’s earnings should be more in line with the actual performance of
the  company  in the period leading up to the warning, compared to Finnish  companies  which
display a greater  market  reaction for large-  and mid-cap  companies  compared to small-  and
micro-cap  companies.

4.4  Multiple profit warnings

Lastly, we investigate the effect of issuing multiple profit warnings within 12 months  of  the
first earnings announcement.  The results show that the market reaction  to  the second profit
warning within a 12-month period  has a  lower magnitude for both positive and negative profit
warnings.  In Table 3 we find that the cumulative average abnormal return for positive profit
warnings is 6.09%, compared with the cumulative average abnormal return reported for the
second positive profit warning generating a market  reaction of 3.25% reported in Table  10,
Panel A.  Similarly, for negative profit warnings we find a negative market reaction of  -7.09%
in Table 4, compared with the reaction of the second negative earnings announcement reported
in Table  10, Panel B of  -6.77%.

Our findings  regarding  the reaction to the second profit warning are in line with financial
models and previous studies.  When a  company issues multiple earnings announcements one
could expect the first profit warning to generate the greatest surprise on the market. Subsequent
announcements may provide additional  details,  but the market shall already have  adapted  to
new earnings expectations  and the market reaction to subsequent announcements therefore
tends to be smaller.  Similar findings are made when  studying  multiple  contemporaneous
earnings signals by Atiase, Li & Supattarakul (2005). The findings support the Efficient Market

                                     21
                                 Stockholm School of Economics

            Table  10:  Cumulative Average Abnormal Return  in response  to multiple Profit  Warnings within 12 months

 This table reports the cumulative abnormal returns for the selected  event windows using the Fama  French four-factor model
 (Fama & French, 1993). The generalized Z sign test, tests weather the abnormal returns are different from what could have
 been expected according to the Fama French model. The significance implies that the profit warning event had an impact on
 stock returns at the 0.1 % significance level. Panel A represents the sample is of profit warnings in which are the second positive
 profit  warning  issued by a Nordic  company  within  12 months  from the first warning  and  contains  3  observations. Panel B
 represents a sample of 48 negative profit warnings which issued within 12 months after another profit warning.

Hypothesis implying that the market quickly assimilates  new  information  such that, once the
initial earnings  announcement is made, the market integrates this information, leaving less
“new” information  for subsequent announcements to impact. Behavioral finance suggests that
investors  may become less sensitive to information that is repeated or similar to what they have
already processed. This desensitization can lead to smaller reactions to subsequent earnings
announcements, especially if they are similar in nature to the first.

4.5  Limitations

 The study presents an insightful exploration of the link between profit warnings and market
 reactions, yet it is essential to consider that such market reactions could also be  influenced by
 factors not fully captured within the current analysis. When comparing this study with that of
 Cox et al. (2017), we notice the  difference in sample sizes; the Nordic dataset comprises 288
 observations, while the US dataset encompasses 1961 observations. This significant difference
 in sample size may lead to an increased  risk of Type II errors, suggesting that we might not
 observe an effect in the Nordic market that is in fact present due to a lack of statistical  power.
 Incorporating a larger  sample would also provide greater  statistical power in our model and
 enable further analysis of factors affecting market reactions.

 Moreover,  the complexity of investor behavior needs  a deeper investigation to examine  the
 drivers  behind market reactions to profit warnings. To understand investor behaviors as a
 response  to  profit  warnings  both  quantitative  data  and  qualitative  insights  could  be
 advantageous  in exploring the behavioral aspects affecting market responses to voluntary
 earnings announcements.  This could include behavioral analysis to decode investor sentiment
 and decision-making processes, especially in the context of different regulatory environments
 and market structures that exist between the  Nordic  countries.  Additionally, expanding the
 analysis to account for macroeconomic indicators, industry trends, and  company-specific news
 contemporaneous   with   profit   warnings   could   yield   a   more   nuanced   understanding.
 Conclusively, while the analysis at hand is robust and forms a solid foundation, these additional
 considerations could serve to fortify the reliability and scope of the research, offering a more
 intricate understanding of  the relationship between profit warnings and market reactions across
 different economic landscapes.

                                     22
                                  Sophie Bladin & Wilda Ager

   5.  Robustness  analysis

To  investigate  the  robustness  and  credibility  of  our  findings  we  conducted  additional
diagnostics  tests  and robustness checks  of our main OLS regression of Equation 2.  The results
reveal no sign of heteroskedasticity, multicollinearity and supports the assumption of normality
across residuals.  To detect any presence of heteroskedasticity within the data  we conduct a
Breusch-Pegan test to test for heteroskedasticity in our dataset. The test generates a p-value of
0.2546 which  reinforces  the assumption of homoskedasticity of the residuals and thereby
supporting equal variance across the observations in the dataset at a  95%  confidence level.

To assess the potential issue of multicollinearity among the independent variables the Variance
Inflation Factor (VIF) test was employed.  All values obtained from the test were below the
threshold of 10, which is generally regarded as an indication that multicollinearity does not
compromise the  reliability of our regression estimates.  Lastly, we  check  for normality of  the
residuals of  our  primary  model (Equation 2). Normality of the residuals is a fundamental
assumption for the validity of many  statistical  models.  The analysis revealed that the residuals
are consistent with a normal distribution which supports the use of pragmatic tests in hypothesis
testing and confidence interval construction.

In conclusion, the diagnostics tests conducted implies a solid foundation for the reliability of
our model.

                                  Table  11:  Additional tests and Robustness check

Panel A  displays results  for the Breusch-Pagan test testing for homoskedasticity. The  reporten p-value of 0.2546 supports the
alternative hypothesis of heteroskedasticity at a 0.1% significance level.  Panel B  displays the results from the  Variance Inflation
Factor  test. All factors are below the  threshold of 10, an indication  that multicollinearity  does not comprise the reliability of the
regression. Panel C plots the normality of the residuals of the model.  The residuals follow the  theoretical quantiles supporting  the
fundamental assumption of pragmatic tests.

                                     23
                                Stockholm School of Economics

   6.  Conclusion

In conclusion,  this event study examines the influence of profit warnings, when coupled with
macroeconomic indicators and  company-specific attributes, on the market's reaction  to such
earnings announcements by Nordic  companies. It presents empirical evidence demonstrating
that business cycles, the disclosure of quantitative earnings forecasts, and distinctive corporate
characteristics significantly impact the Nordic market's response to  profit  warnings.

We contribute to previous studies by investigating the effect of issuing a profit warning during
a recession on the Nordic market and find that there is a correlation between more frequent
profit warnings and a vaguer nature of  the information disclosed. Subsequently the market
reaction to profit warnings issued during recessions is of lower (higher) magnitude for negative
(positive)  profit warnings  compared to  negative (positive)  profit warnings issued in booms,
which is  in line with previous studies.  Building on these findings we conclude that the surprise
factor has a  greater impact on profit warning reactions than previous literature suggests. The
dampened  (greater)  market reaction in recessions  implies that negative (positive) earnings
announcements are expected (not expected) in tougher times.  The surprise factor would help
explain why  investors react more to profit warnings by large firms, as they are expected to be
stable. However,  we find that  the market reacts with  similar magnitude to  profit warnings by
large-, mid- and small-cap firms in the direct event window [-1,1]. Further there is no significant
relationship in the long term  [-30,30]  where the  market reaction is consistent across all firm
sizes.  Furthermore, the significance of the surprise factor in our model and the low statistical
significance in the model’s ability to explain the  cumulative abnormal return for micro-cap
companies  suggest behavioral differences of investors in larger versus smaller  companies.

The study highlights how transparency in profit warning announcements affects stock market
reactions.  It finds  that providing quantitative measures in the  announcement  of the profit
warnings tends to result in a negative stock market response. Given that profit warnings aim to
manage market reactions, minimize the risk of shareholder litigation, and reduce information
asymmetry, as noted by Elayan & Pukthuangthong (2009), the practice of including quantitative
details might seem counterproductive due to its  adverse market effects. However, our research
indicates that in the Finnish market, where profit  warnings are issued more frequently, a greater
level of disclosure is met with positive market reactions, echoing the results of studies by Spohr
(2014) and Clare (2001). This pattern implies that in markets where profit warnings are rare,
companies may benefit from withholding quantitative information, whereas in markets
characterized by higher transparency and frequent disclosures, openness tends to be valued and
rewarded by investors.  Swedish companies are thus rational  when providing less quantitative
information in their profit warning announcements as it generates a lower negative market
reaction.  Furthermore, our findings offer new insights, previously unexplored in  existing
literature,  into  strategic  considerations for boards and managers  when  issuing  profit warnings,
suggesting a nuanced approach that varies with market characteristics and  disclosure  norms,
thereby providing a valuable framework for decision-making  in different market contexts.

To summarize, this study conducts rigorous  tests  on profit warnings and  its  subsequent market
reaction  under different circumstances and provides results contributing to the understanding
of the impact of business  cycles, openness,  company-specific data and geographies,  on the
Nordic markets.  Even though the study  provides significant  evidence,  further  studies  of
behavioral impacts, industry-specific trends  and regulatory requirements and impacts  may be

                                     24
                                  Sophie Bladin & Wilda Ager

beneficial to fully understand the reaction to  different quality and timing of  earnings
announcements.  Since  it has been observed that  negative  profit warnings  increase  in quality,
decrease  in quantity,  and  generate  a  stronger  market reaction  during  booms,  it would be
interesting for further research to study the  openness effect, disregarding the effects of business
cycles.  With all this in mind,  it is evident that profit warnings, the specificity of them,
macroeconomic  situation and investor  behavior  on the market should be carefully considered
when facing unexpected earning-  deviations and  considered  if, or when, issuing a profit
warning.

                                     25
                                Stockholm School of Economics

   7.  References

7.1 Literature

Alves, Paulo, Peter Pope and Steven Young, 2009,  Cross-Border Information Transfers:
Evidence from  Profit Warnings Issued by  European  Companies,  working paper,  Accounting
and Business Research 39, 449-72

Banz, Rolf W., 1981, The  Relationship between Return and Market Value of Common Stocks,
Journal of Financial Economics 9, 3-18

                                                                            th
Berk,  Jonathan and Peter DeMarzo,  2019, Corporate Finance (5  Global Edition), Pearson

Botosan, Christine A., 1997,  Disclosure level and the cost of equity capital, The Accounting
Review 72, 323-349

Brennan, Niamh,  Victoria C. Edgar, and Sean Brandley Power, 2022, COVID-19 profit
warnings: Delivering bad news in a time of crisis, The British Accounting Review 54, 1-24

Brown, Stephen J., and Jerold B. Warner, 1985, Using daily stock returns: The case of event
studies, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 3-31

Bulkley, George and Renata Herrerias, 2005, Does the precision of news affect market
underreaction? Evidence from returns following two classes of profit warnings,  European
Financial Management  11, 603-624

Campbell, John, Andrew W. Lo, and Craig MacKinlay, 2012, The Econometrics of Financial
Markets (Princeton University)

Chen, Carl R., and Nancy J. Mohan, 1994, Timing the Disclosure of Information: Management's
View of Earnings Announcements, Financial Management 23, 63-69

Church, Donker, 2010,  Profit warnings: Will openness be rewarded?, Applied Economics
Letters 17, 633-637

Clare, Andrew, 2001, The information in UK company profit warnings, Bank of England
Quarerly Bulletin: Spring 2001, 104-109

Collett, Nick,  2004, Reactions of the London Stock Exchange to Company Trading Statement
Announcements, Journal of Business Finance & Accounting 31, 3-35

Conrad, Jennifer, Brandford Cornell, and Wayne R. Landsman, 2002, When Is Bad News Really
Bad News?, The Journal of Finance 57, 2507-2532

Cox, Raymond A.K., Ajit Dayanandan, Han Donker, and John Nofsinger, 2017,  The Bad, the
boom and the bust: Profit warnings over the business cycle, Journal of Economics and Business
89, 13-19

Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Avanidhar Subramanyam, 1998, Investor Psychology and
Security Market Under-  and Overreactions, The Journal of Finance 53, 1839-  1885

                                     26
                                  Sophie Bladin & Wilda Ager

De Bondt, Werner F.M.,  and Richard  Thaler,  1985,  Does the Stock Market  Overreact?, The
Journal of Finance  40,  793-805

DeStefano, Michael, 2004, Stock returns and the business cycle,  Financial Review 39, 527-547

Diamond, Douglas, and Robert E. Verrrecchia, 1991, Disclosure, Liquidity, and the Cost of
Capital, The Journal of Finance 46, 1325-1359

Ekholm, Anders and  Daniel  Pasternack,  2007, Overconfidence and Investor  Size,  European
Financial Management  14, 82-98

Elayan, Fayez, and Kuntara Pukthuanthog, 2009, Why warn? The impact of profit warnings on
shareholder's equity, Investment Management and Financial Innovation 6, 164-176

Fama,  Eugene, 1970, Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work,
Journal of Finance 25, 383-417

Fama, Eugene F., and Michael R. Gibbons, 1982, Inflation, real returns and capital investment,
Journal of Economics 9, 297-323

Fama,  Eugene, and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks
and Bons, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56

Jackson, Dave, and Jeff Madura, 2007, Impact  of regulation fair disclosure on the information
flow associated with profit warnings, Journal of Economics and Finance 31, 59-74

Kearns, Allan, and John Whitley, 2002, The balance-sheet information content of UK company
profit warnings, Bank of England Quaterly Bulletin: Autum 2022, 292-298

Krause, Julia, Thorsten Sellhorn, and Kamran Ahmed, 2017, Extreme Uncertainty and
Forward-looking Disclosure Properties, Abacus 53, 240-272

Rowland, Atiase K., Haidan Li, Somchai Supattarakul and Senyou Tse, 2005,  Market Reaction
to Multiple Contemporaneous Earnings Signals: Earnings Announcements and Future Earnings
Guidance, Review of Accounting Studies 10, 497-525

Skinner, D.J. (1994). “Why Companies Voluntarily Disclose Bad News”, Journal of Accounting
Research, 32(1): 38-60

Spohr, Jonas, 2014, The share is down 8% after the profit warning, is it time to buy?, Applied
Economics Letters 21, 556-559

Teoh, Siew Hong and Chuan Yang  Hwang,  1991,  Nondisclosure and Adverse  Disclosure as
Signals of  Company Value, The  Review of Financial Studies  4,  283-313

Veronesi, Pietro, 1999, Stock market overreaction to bad news in good times: A rational
expectations equilibrium model, Review of Financial Studies 12, 975-1007

                                     27
                                Stockholm School of Economics

7.2 Data bases

European Securities and Market Authority, Guidelines on the Market Abuse Regulation  –
market soundings and delay of disclosure of inside information, 13 July 2016,
https://www.esma.europa.eu/sites/default/files/library/2016-
1130_final_report_on_mar_guidelines.pdf

Finansinspektionen, Finansinspektionens författningssamling, 19 July 2007,
https://www.fi.se/contentassets/4235c22463254429a35b937e2c34376b/fffs0717.pdf

FRED Economic Data, 2022, Business Cycle Expansions & Contractions,
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/categories/32262

Nasdaq, Nordic Stock Exchange, https://www.nasdaqomxnordic.com/

Nasdaq,  Nordic Main Market Rulebook for Issuers of Shares, 1 February 2021,
https://www.nasdaq.com/docs/2022/04/22/Nordic-Main-Market-Rulebook-for-Issuers-of-
Shares-harmonized-part-effective-1-February-2021-HEL-update-April-25-2022.pdf

Nasdaq, Nasdaq Stockholm Main Market, 1 July 2023
https://www.nasdaq.com/docs/2023/10/04/Nasdaq_Rulebook_for_Issuers_of_Exchange_Trad
ed_Notes_(FINAL_29-May-2023).pdf

Nasdaq, Issuer of Rules FAQ,
https://www.nasdaq.com/docs/2021/10/07/Issuer-Rules-FAQ-English-(minus-listings-
section)-211006.pdf

National Bureau of Economics (NBER),  https://www.nber.org/

Statistiska Centralbyrån (SCB), 2023, SCB:s konjukturklocka,
https://experience.arcgis.com/experience/594bc505c87a49fbbe9a52655d99a8ef

Statistics Denmark, 2023,  https://www.dst.dk/en

Statistik Sentralbyrå (SSB), 2023,  https://www.ssb.no/

Statistikcentralen, 2023,  https://www2.stat.fi/index_sv.html

Refinitiv Eikon database

Retriver: Research,
https://app-retriever-info-
com.ez.hhs.se/services/archivecanFetchDataOnDateSelectorChange=true&period=30days

Riksdagen, Lag (2007:528) om värdepappersmarknaden, 12 August 2022,
https://www.riksdagen.se/sv/dokument-och-lagar/dokument/svensk-forfattningssamling/lag-
2007528-om-vardepappersmarknaden_sfs-2007-528/

                                     28
                              Sophie Bladin & Wilda Ager

8.  Appendix

                 Appendix 1:  OLS regression output of Equation 2

     The table reports the regression results form the OLS regression defined by Equation 2. Return on Assets, Leverage,
     Quantitative, Positive and Trading Volume are statistically significant in explaining the abnormal return generated
     on the stock market at the event of the profit warning. The return on Assets, Leverage and Trading Volume variables
    all supports our hypotheses that larger  companies, with higher profitability and lower leverage experience less
     negative impact when issuing profit warnings. The  regression also indicated that trading volumes increase when
    companies issue profit warnings. Issuing positive profit warnings on the Nordic market has great economic impact,
     compared to the stage of the business cycle that does not, significantly, affect the market response.

                                  29
                                Stockholm School of Economics

 Appendix  2:  Cumulative Average Abnormal  Returns in response to Positive Profit Warnings

This table reports the cumulative abnormal returns for the selected event windows generated by issuing a positive profit warning
in the Nordics during 1996-2020 using the Fama French four-factor model (Fama & French, 1993).The T-Statistic and P-value
reports if the abnormal return is statistically different from zero. The generalized Z sign test, tests weather the abnormal returns
are different from what could have been expected according to the Fama French model. * implies statistical significance at the
5 % significance level, ** implies statistical significance at the 1 % significance  level and *** implies statistical significance
at the 0,1% significance level for both the P-value and generalized sign Z. Panel A displays the cumulative abnormal returns
from issuing a positive profit warnings. The sample contains 30 positive profit warnings in the Nordics from 1995-2020. Panel
B displays cumulative abnormal returns generated by issuing a profit warning and disclosing quantitative measures. The sample
contains 19 positive profit warnings disclosing quantitative measures. Panel C displays the abnormal returns of issued positive
profit warnings, but  not disclosing quantitative measures. The sample contains  11 observations.  Panel  D  shows cumulative
average abnormal returns generated by issuing a profit warning in a recession. The sample contains 13 positive profit warnings
issued in recessions. Lastly, Panel  E shows the result of a sample of 17 positive profit warnings issued in booms.

                                     30
                                  Sophie Bladin & Wilda Ager

 Appendix  3:  Cumulative Average Abnormal Returns in response to Negative Profit Warnings

This table reports the cumulative abnormal returns for the selected event windows generated by issuing a  negative  profit
warning in the Nordics during 1996-2020 using the Fama  French four-factor model  (Fama & French, 1993).The T-Statistic
and P-value reports if the abnormal return is statistically  different from zero. The generalized Z sign test, tests weather the
abnormal returns are different from what could have been expected according to the Fama French model. * implies statistical
significance at the  5  % significance  level, ** implies statistical significance at the 1 % significance level and *** implies
statistical significance at the 0,1% significance level for both the P-value and generalized sign Z. Panel A displays the
cumulative abnormal returns from issuing a negative profit warnings. The sample contains 258 negative profit warnings in the
Nordics from 1995-2020. Panel B displays cumulative abnormal returns generated by issuing a negative warning and disclosing
quantitative measures. The sample  contains 155  negative  profit warnings disclosing quantitative measures. Panel C  displays
the abnormal returns of issued  negative  profit warnings, but not disclosing quantitative measures. The sample contains 103
observations. Panel D shows cumulative average abnormal returns generated by a sample of 121 negative profit warnings in a
recession. Lastly, Panel E shows the result of a sample of 137 negative profit warnings issued in booms.

                                     31
                                Stockholm School of Economics

    Appendix  4:  Cumulative Average Abnormal Returns in response to Profit Warnings by
                                       company-size

This table reports the cumulative abnormal returns for the selected event windows generated by issuing a  negative  profit
warning in the Nordics during 1996-2020 using the Fama  French four-factor model  (Fama & French, 1993),  divided by
company-size.  The T-Statistic and P-value reports if the abnormal return is statistically different from zero. The generalized Z
sign  test, tests weather the abnormal returns are different from what could have been expected according to the Fama French
model. * implies  statistical significance at the 5 % significance level, ** implies statistical significance at the 1 % significance
level and *** implies statistical significance at the 0,1% significance level for both the P-value and generalized sign Z.  The
sizes are based on Nasdaq Nordic’s definition of  company-sizes based on the company’s market capitalization, where large-
cap companies have a market capitalization above EUR 10 billion, medium-cap companies have a market capitalization below
EUR 10 billion but above  EUR 2 billion, small-cap  companies  have a market capitalization between  EUR 300 million and
EUR 2 billion and micro-cap below EUR 300 million.

Panel A displays the cumulative abnormal returns from issuing a negative profit warning for a Large Cap company. The sample
contains  35  negative profit warnings  issued by large-cap  companies  in the Nordics from 1995-2020. Panel B displays
cumulative abnormal returns generated by issuing a negative warning  by medium-cap  companies. The sample contains  60
negative profit warnings. Panel C displays the abnormal returns of issued negative profit warnings, by small-cap companies in
the Nordics and contains  79 observations.  Lastly, Panel E shows the result of a sample of  93  negative profit warnings issued
by micro-cap  companies.

                                     32
                                  Sophie Bladin & Wilda Ager

 Appendix 5:  OLS Regression controlling for  company-specific characteristics, by  company-
                                       size (Equation 2)

OLS regression  output  defined by Equation 2  divided by  company-size for Nordic  companies.  The model is statistically
significant in predicting the cumulative abnormal return för Large-, Mid- and Small-cap companies provided by the significant
                        2
F-statistic. The Adjusted R  value indicates how well the model is in describing the variance in the data which further indicates
that the model is  not good in explaining the variance in the data for micro-cap  companies.  The model is not statistically
significant in  predicting the cumulative abnormal return for Micro-cap  companies.  Trading Volume  is significant across all
company  sizes.

                                     33
                                Stockholm School of Economics

Appendix 6: Cumulative Average Abnormal Returns as a response to Negative Profit Warnings
in the Nordics

This table reports the cumulative abnormal returns for the selected event  windows generated by issuing a negative profit
warning in the Nordics during 1996-2020 using the Fama French four-factor model (Fama & French, 1993), divided by country.
The T-Statistic and P-value reports if the abnormal return is  statistically different from zero. The generalized Z sign test, tests
weather the abnormal returns are different from what could have been expected according to the Fama French model. * implies
statistical significance at the 5 % significance level, ** implies statistical significance at the 1 % significance level and  ***
implies statistical significance at the 0,1% significance level for both the P-value and generalized sign Z. Panel A displays the
cumulative abnormal returns from issuing a negative profit  warning in Sweden. The sample contains  157  negative profit
warnings in the  Sweden  from 1995-2020. Panel B displays cumulative abnormal returns  generated by issuing a negative
warning in Finland. The sample contains 80 negative profit warnings. Panel C displays the abnormal returns of issued negative
profit warnings  in Denmark.  The sample contains 12  observations. Panel D shows cumulative average abnormal returns
generated by a sample of 9 negative profit warnings in Norway.

                                     34