PAYMENT METHOD AND
PUBLIC ACQUIROR RETURNS

EVIDENCE FROM THE U.S. MARKET FOR CORPORATE
CONTROL

FILIP TONCEV

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2023
Payment Method and Public Acquiror Returns : Evidence from the U.S. Market
for Corporate Control

Abstract:

   This thesis examines the relationship between method of payment, financial stress,
   and acquiror abnormal returns using a sample of 676 acquisitions by NYSE, NYSE
   American, and Nasdaq listed non-financial, non-utility firms. In normal market
   conditions the results are generally consistent with previous findings, with stock
   acquisitions of private targets generating the highest abnormal returns. However,
   acquiring firm shareholders no longer experience significant losses in stock
   acquisitions of public targets. In addition, when the Kansas City Financial Stress
  Index (KCFSI)—a proxy for capital markets uncertainty—exceeds two standard
   deviations above its average, acquisition announcements consistently generate
   negative or insignificant negative abnormal returns regardless of the method of
   payment used. I show that the negative effect of financial stress on acquiror
   abnormal returns is most pronounced for acquisitions of public targets. In such
   acquisitions, a one standard deviation increase in KCFSI is associated with 1.08%
   lower abnormal returns on the day of the announcement. For acquisitions of private
   targets, higher liquidity discounts in periods of financial stress may partly offset the
   costs of issuing more expensive sources of financing. I also find no evidence that the
   effect of financial stress on acquiror abnormal returns differs by payment method.
   The results are consistent with predictions derived from pecking order theory and an
   agency model developed by Jung, Kim & Stulz (1996).

Keywords:

   Mergers & Acquisitions, Public Acquiror, Payment Method, Financial Stress,
  Abnormal Return

Authors:

   Filip Toncev (25363)

Tutors:

   Marieke Bos, Deputy Director, Swedish House of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Filip Toncev, 2023
                                   1
1. Introduction

Over the last 20 years, mergers and acquisitions have become an increasingly important
source of growth for the modern corporation. Largely owing to a highly active and
dynamic market for corporate control, the vast resources under the control of corporate
managers can quickly and efficiently be allocated across borders and into new
industries, allowing firms to access new markets, obtain the latest technologies, and
maximize the value created for shareholders and society. A closer look at the economic
significance of only a small sample of selected major U.S. acquisitions reveals that over
the last 25 years, there has not been a single 3-year period without average monthly deal
values reaching at least several billion dollars. The largest individual deals by non-
financial, non-utility acquirors listed on three major U.S. exchanges—NYSE, NYSE
American, and Nasdaq—reach into the tens of billions (see Figure 1).

Figure 1. Total Monthly Value of Selected Major U.S. Acquisitions
This figure shows the total monthly deal values of selected U.S. acquisitions by NYSE, NYSE American,
and Nasdaq listed non-financial, non-utility firms in millions of constant 2022 dollars. The deal value in
2022 $ is the nominal deal value deflated by the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis GDP price deflator.
The red line is a 3-year moving average of the monthly time series.

The consistent stream of M&A transactions has provided a fruitful testing ground for
the kinds of questions that shareholders, managers, employees, and society at large may
have about the market for corporate control. Most notably, the literature documents that,
on average, acquiring firm shareholders retain only a small share, if any, of the
combined gains available to the acquiror and target firms surrounding an acquisition
announcement (Moeller, Schlingemann & Stulz, 2004). Researchers have also
established that the ex-ante success of an acquisition depends on various deal
characteristics, including the method of payment choice and the target’s public status.
For example, Travlos (1987) and Fuller, Netter & Stegemoller (2002) find that
acquiring firm shareholders experience negative cumulative abnormal returns (CARs)
following the announcement of a stock acquisition and either positive or no abnormal
returns following the announcement of a cash acquisition. On average, the market reacts
                                   2
most positively to announcements of stock acquisitions of private targets and most
negatively to announcements of stock acquisitions of public targets (Chang, 1998;
Fuller et. al., 2002).

In this thesis, I contribute to the literature with a repeated attempt at establishing a
relationship between method of payment and abnormal returns to acquiring firm
shareholders. The baseline results provide a test of the sensitivity of previous findings to
a sample of 676 successful acquisitions by NYSE, NYSE American and Nasdaq listed
non-financial non-utility acquirors, including more than 30 years of data (1989-2022).
Just as in previous studies, acquisitions are grouped by both method of payment and
target public status, with CARs from a symmetric five-day event window surrounding
the acquisition announcement reported for each type of acquisition. In further analysis, I
explore whether the Kansas City Financial Stress Index (KCFSI) — a proxy for capital
markets uncertainty — accounts for differences in CAR overall, by method of payment,
as well as target public status. A unique feature of the more recent sample period is that
there are two periods in which the Kansas City Financial Stress Index exceeds two
standard deviations above its long-term average (see Figure 2). The first, from July
2008 to May 2009, is classified as an extreme left-tail event in the financial markets, in
which the Kansas City Financial Stress Index exceeds four standard deviations above its
mean for several months. The second, in March 2020, is a shorter and less pronounced
period of high financial stress associated with the 2020 stock market crash. A sufficient
number of acquisitions being announced during these two periods of high financial
stress enables me to explore whether the effect of financial stress on acquiror abnormal
returns is stronger for certain methods of payment, and weaker for others.

Figure 2. The Kansas City Financial Stress Index (KCFSI)
This figure shows a monthly time series of the Kansas City Financial Stress Index, a composite measure
of disruption to the normal functioning of financial markets. KCFSI includes the following variables:
several measures of credit spreads (AAA-10Y Treasury, Baa-Aaa); uncertainty about fundamental asset
values (aggregate stock market volatility); and stress in the banking industry (bank stock volatility and
cross-sectional dispersion of returns), among others. Periods of high financial stress, defined as 2-sigma
or higher financial stress events, are highlighted in gray.

                                   3
Specifically, I exploit the familiar notion that the market’s reaction on the days
surrounding an acquisition announcement should reflect the impact of all new
information contained in the announcement on the acquiror’s equity market value.
Grouping the acquisitions by method of payment, target public status, and financial
stress therefore enables me to study the relationship between these defining
characteristics and acquiror abnormal returns. Ideally, to isolate the impact of the
method of payment on the abnormal returns to acquiring firm shareholders, any
extraneous variables (including confounders) that may materially influence the outcome
are held constant, as in a controlled experiment. However, using the traditional event
study methodology, it is not entirely possible to do so, making it difficult to distinguish
between the market reactions to individual components of the newly released
information (Fuller et. al., 2002). An endogeneity problem may also complicate the
estimation of the impact of the method of payment choice on acquiror abnormal returns.
First, a simultaneity bias may arise if there is two-way causality between the method of
payment choice and acquiror abnormal returns. For example, if the acquiror’s method of
payment choice is dependent on past realizations of abnormal returns, then the non-
random nature of the decision introduces causal ambiguity with respect to the
relationship between the two variables (Rigobon & Sack, 2004). Second, omitted
variable bias may arise if both the method of payment and acquiror abnormal returns are
jointly determined by a third variable, such as various unobserved acquiring firm
characteristics. In summary, unresolved issues with estimation suggest that the results
that follow should be interpreted with caution.

My results reinforce the relationship between method of payment and acquiror
abnormal returns found in previous studies. To begin with, the announcement of an
acquisition is associated with significantly positive acquiror abnormal returns of
approximately 2% on average, with the positive market reaction largely concentrated on
the day of the announcement. Interestingly, there are no significant gains or losses
associated with cash or combination acquisitions, with the exception of cash deals
involving private targets, which generate positive gains for acquiring firm shareholders.
In addition, stock acquisitions overall generate significantly positive abnormal returns in
the 5.5% to 8% range. As in Chang (1998), this finding is primarily driven by stock
acquisitions of private targets, which, in contrast to stock acquisitions of public targets,
generate positive and significant acquiror abnormal returns of approximately 7%. At the
same time, stock acquisitions of public targets no longer produce significantly negative
acquiror abnormal returns, which stands in contrast to both previous findings and the
negative drift observed following seasoned equity offerings.

My results also offer new evidence with respect to acquiring firm stock returns
following acquisitions announced in periods of high financial stress. High financial
stress acquisitions generate negative or insignificant negative abnormal returns as
opposed to the positive abnormal returns observed in normal market conditions. By
method of payment, the worst performing deals in periods of high financial stress are
stock deals, with negative and significant abnormal returns on average in the -4% to
-7% range. This is a clear divergence from the performance of stock deals in normal
market conditions when stock deals generate positive abnormal returns on average.
Cash deals and combination deals in periods of high financial stress do not perform
much better, with negative cumulative abnormal returns of -9% and -4% respectively,

                                   4
although there is no evidence that these estimates significantly differ from zero. A
cross-sectional analysis of announcement day acquiror abnormal returns confirms that a
higher level of financial stress is associated with lower acquiror abnormal returns. A one
standard deviation increase in KCFSI is associated with significantly lower abnormal
returns of 1.08% for acquisitions of public targets and insignificantly lower abnormal
returns of 0.45% for acquisitions of private targets. For both public and private targets,
there is no evidence that financial stress has a statistically significant differential impact
on abnormal returns based on the method of payment. However, the signs of the
coefficients make economic sense. For example, in a 2-sigma or higher financial stress
event, acquirors of public targets experience at least 1.52% lower abnormal returns in
cash deals, 2.68% lower abnormal returns in combination deals, and 3% lower abnormal
returns in stock deals. Similarly, acquirors of private targets experience at least 1.52%
higher abnormal returns in cash deals, 1.60% lower abnormal returns in combination
deals, and 3.66% lower abnormal returns in stock deals. The differing market reactions
to acquisitions announced in periods of high financial stress are consistent with two
theoretical models: an agency model developed by Jung, Kim & Stulz (1996) and
standard pecking order theory.

The remainder of my thesis is organized as follows. In the next section, I review the
evidence on acquiror abnormal returns and the method of payment choice. In section 3,
I provide a detailed overview of the data and methodology, showing that grouping
acquisitions by method of payment and target public status produces a more
homogeneous sample. In section 4, I report the event study results and explore the
relationship between method of payment, financial stress, and acquiror abnormal
returns. Finally, section 5 offers some conclusions.

                                   5
2. Literature Review and Predictions

My thesis is primarily related to two strands of literature: the role of payment method in
explaining abnormal returns to acquiring firm shareholders and the determinants of
financing choice in mergers and acquisitions. I also draw on a number of insights from
the literature on financing choice in financial crises to derive predictions for the
abnormal performance of acquisitions in periods of high financial stress.

2.1. The Relationship Between Payment Method and Public
      Acquiror Returns

In mergers and acquisitions, payment method is perhaps the most important strategic
choice for the acquiring firm, with potential capital structure, tax, and corporate
governance implications; besides having to consider the target shareholders’ own
preferences. Unlike other strategic choices available to the acquiror, the choice of
payment method may require that both the acquiror and target make unpleasant
tradeoffs in favor of reaching an agreement (Bruner & Perella, 2004).

Travlos (1987) is the first to study the relationship between method of payment and
acquiror stock returns, finding that acquiring firm shareholders experience abnormal
losses following the announcement of a stock acquisition and normal returns following
the announcement of a cash acquisition. This observation is consistent with the negative
drift seen after seasoned equity issues which, according to the signaling hypothesis,
reveal that the equity in the acquiring firm is overvalued. Chang (1998) examines
acquiror stock returns following announcements of acquisitions of privately held
targets, and finds positive abnormal returns for the acquiring firm in stock deals and no
abnormal returns in cash deals. There are two possible explanations for this result, and
why it stands in stark contrast to the findings in Travlos (1987). First, a highly
concentrated ownership structure among privately held firms results in the transfer of a
large block of shares in stock deals. Chang (1998) argues that these new block
shareholders (blockholders) create value in the acquiring firm by carrying out an
important corporate governance function, monitoring the performance of managers, and
exposing management to a higher level of external market discipline. Second, the
willingness of target shareholders to accept a stock offer may be a positive signal of the
firm’s equity value.

Fuller et. al. (2002) contribute by investigating acquisition-announcement abnormal
returns in a sample of “frequent acquirors”, firms with five or more successful
acquisitions in a short period of time. This approach enables the authors to control for
acquiring firm characteristics. Consistent with the findings in Travlos (1987) and Chang
(1998), Fuller et. al. (2002) report significant variation in cumulative abnormal returns
(CARs) by method of payment. For acquisitions of public targets, acquiring firm
shareholders experience significantly negative CARs in stock deals (-1.92%) and do not
significantly gain in cash deals (0.38%). For acquisitions of private targets, acquiring
firm shareholders significantly gain in both stock deals (1.53%) and cash deals (2.47%).

                                   6
The authors additionally find that for stock deals, as the relative size of the deal
increases, CARs tend to decrease for acquisitions of public targets (larger losses) and
increase for acquisitions of private targets (larger gains). The main explanation offered
by the authors for higher abnormal returns associated with acquisitions of private targets
is a liquidity discount. Fuller et. al. (2002) conclude by offering an additional
explanation for the higher returns for stock acquisitions of private targets than for stock
acquisitions of public targets, namely that there are benefits to making a stock offer in a
transaction when the target has better information about the value of its assets and
investment opportunities than the acquiror.

2.2. The Determinants of Financing Choice in Mergers &
       Acquisitions

An even closer look at the method of payment choice available to acquirors reveals a
much broader range of underlying financing choices than is implied by a simpler
categorization. For example, a cash deal may be financed by internally generated cash-
flows or cash raised from a senior debt issue. It may also be financed by junior debt or
other more information-sensitive forms of payment with more in common with a new
issue of stock than internally generated resources (Bruner & Perella, 2004).
Unfortunately, the strand of literature dealing with the relationship between method of
payment and acquiror abnormal returns offers very little with respect to these more
granular categories, instead focusing on three basic types of acquisitions: cash deals,
                                      1
stock deals, and combination deals. There is, nevertheless, much to be learned from an
analysis of financing choices, especially in the context of acquisitions undertaken in
periods of high financial stress. Martin (1996) makes a unique contribution in this
respect by analyzing the financing choices in 846 U.S. acquisitions as a function of the
investment opportunities available to the acquiror, financing costs under information
asymmetry, and overall business cycle considerations. Empirically, Martin (1996) finds
support for the following relationships: improved investment opportunities increase the
likelihood of a stock acquisition and firms follow a financing hierarchy in which a
higher cash balance relative to deal value increases the likelihood of a cash acquisition.

1
 There are several possible reasons for there being no distinction in the literature between internal and
external financing of cash deals:
    a) The SDC does not report separately the debt or equity financed portions of cash consideration.
    b) Cash deals are signals of undervalued equity except in the rare case they are equity financed.
    c) In accounting terms, debt-financed acquisitions result in identical expected after-tax profitability
        consequences and almost identical financial position consequences relative to internally financed
         cash acquisitions. For example, ROE remains the same to the extent that additional after-tax
          interest expense from taking on new debt is equivalent to the after-tax interest foregone by
         spending the cash (ceteris paribus). The only distinction is that in a debt-financed cash
          acquisition, the acquired portion of the target equity is replaced by acquiror liabilities, while in
         an internally generated cash acquisition, the acquired portion of the target equity is replaced by
         lower cash reserves. The financing choice is therefore likely to result in a differential impact on
         the financial position of the consolidated entity dependent on the relative size of the acquisition.
         As the relative size of the acquisition increases, the negative differential in leverage between
         choosing debt over cash financing grows (Schuster, 2017).
                                   7
The Investment Opportunities Explanation

The investment opportunities explanation is based on an agency model developed by
Jung, Kim & Stulz (1996) in which the optimal amount of firm leverage is a function of
agency costs of managerial discretion and agency costs of debt under information
asymmetry. A firm with debt capacity and more profitable investment opportunities
issues equity to circumvent the higher marginal agency costs of debt relative to an
otherwise equivalent equally leveraged firm with poor investment opportunities. A firm
with debt capacity and poor investment opportunities issues equity to maintain a level of
management discretion allowing management to invest in poor projects, including
potentially value-destroying acquisitions. Absent managerial discretion, a firm without
debt capacity and poor investment opportunities issues debt rather than equity to
maximize shareholder wealth. A debt issue exposes the firm to a higher degree of
debtholder monitoring and requires management to repay debt rather than invest in poor
projects. These agency costs of managerial discretion are reflected in the equity
market’s reaction to new stock offerings. The abnormal stock price adjustment
associated with new issues of equity is more negative for firms with poor investment
opportunities than for firms with more profitable investment opportunities (Jung et. al.,
1996).

There are several implications for acquisitions undertaken in periods of high financial
stress. First, consider an economy with one firm. If the firm has less promising
investment opportunities in periods of high financial stress, it faces a decrease in the
marginal agency cost of debt, because firm value is less sensitive to being unable to
invest in less profitable projects. In other words, the debt overhang problem is no longer
as costly for shareholders of the firm in periods of high financial stress. Second, less
promising investment opportunities increase goal incongruence between shareholders
and managers, increasing the marginal agency costs of managerial discretion (Jung et.
al., 1996). Put differently, poorer investment opportunities imply that managers are
more likely to act in their own self-interest by taking on poor projects to the detriment
of shareholders. Overall, less promising investment opportunities in periods of high
financial stress should therefore increase optimal leverage and make equity issuance
less attractive than debt issuance. However, an exogenous limit to debt issuance
associated with a supply-driven credit crunch and increased asset volatility may limit
managements’ ability to finance acquisitions with debt (Ivashina & Scharfstein, 2010).

The combination of a recession with poorer investment opportunities and financial
stress limiting the supply of credit may produce an interesting outcome. Namely, the
prevailing market conditions may motivate managers of the acquiring firm to undertake
a stock deal, moving the firm further away from optimal leverage and further
exacerbating agency problems associated with managerial discretion. Similarly, the
effect of financial stress on the abnormal returns in stock deals is predicted to be more
negative than for cash or combination deals because cash or combination entail either a
movement towards optimal leverage, or no substantial change in leverage. All else
equal, a stock deal in periods of financial stress should generate a more negative (less
positive) market reaction. This theoretical prediction is in line with existing empirical
evidence on seasoned equity issues which suggests that the average negative price
reaction to the announcement of a seasoned stock offering is significantly more negative

                                   8
in contractionary periods (Choe, Masulis & Nanda, 1993). Choe et. al. (1993) cite a
stronger adverse selection effect associated with lower profitability of new investments
and increased asset valuation uncertainty in recessions as a theoretical explanation for
their findings. My prediction is not much different from theirs, except that it also
considers the agency costs of managerial discretion in line with Jung et. al. (1996).

The Financing Hierarchy Explanation

The financing hierarchy explanation is based on standard pecking order theory, which
states that under information asymmetry, firms’ financing choices follow a financing
hierarchy. Managers prefer to finance investments in order of the cost of financing and
based on availability, with cash being the first option, debt second, and equity as a last
resort. Martin (1996) confirms that the availability of cash and debt capacity determine
whether cash is used as a method of payment in acquisitions. There is also evidence that
large firms substitute among financing sources in a credit supply shock according to the
pecking order (Leary, 2009). Specifically, large firms substitute away from bank debt
and toward nonbank debt in their debt financing structure. In addition, due to the limited
availability of debt capital and a relatively higher price of debt during a credit crunch,
large firms also substitute away from debt and toward either internal sources of
financing (i.e. asset sales, retained earnings) or external equity financing (Leary, 2009).
Prevailing credit conditions captured by the Kansas City Financial Stress Index should
therefore serve as important determinants of the use and signaling implication of stock
as a method of payment as well as the underlying source of financing when cash is used
as a method of payment.

For stock acquisitions in periods of high financial stress, pecking order theory implies
that equity in the acquiring firm is overvalued, but also that firm fundamentals have
deteriorated so that the company is unable to finance the acquisition with cash or debt.
In this sense, the pecking order theory prediction for the market’s reaction to stock
acquisitions in periods of high financial stress is not directionally different from the
agency theory prediction. For cash acquisitions in periods of financial stress, predictions
derived from the financing hierarchy differ based on the underlying source of financing.
Because risky securities can be sold for more than they are worth when management has
better information than investors, the market reaction is predicted to be more negative
for cash acquisitions financed with risky debt than for cash acquisitions financed with
safe debt (e.g. secured bank debt). According to the pecking order, if the acquiring firm
has cash or liquid assets available to finance its cash bid, it uses these internal sources of
financing before relying on the debt markets. If instead bidders are cash constrained and
must use external sources of financing, limited access to capital markets in periods of
financial stress may depress bidding as in Vladimirov (2015). In this case, the market’s
reaction to a stock acquisition or cash acquisition financed with risky debt reveals
information about the lower bid premia benefits of depressed bidding as well as the
effect of financing the bid with a more costly source of financing. For both stock and
cash acquisitions, the market reaction may also reflect forward-looking investor
concerns about undertaking a stock or risky debt acquisition in a period of high
financial stress, when the same acquisition could be undertaken using alternative

                                   9
                                                                                 2
(cheaper) financing options following a return to normal market conditions. My
prediction is that if the negative effects of issuing more costly sources of financing
exceed the lower bid premia benefits of depressed bidding, then financial stress has a
negative impact on abnormal returns for cash acquisitions, combination acquisitions,
and stock acquisitions.

2
 Forward-looking concerns do not necessarily reflect that management made a suboptimal decision to the
detriment of shareholders, only that the market evaluates the announcement negatively given the
information available when it learns of the acquisition announcement.
                                  10
3. Data & Methodology

3.1. Data

In this thesis, I use daily return data collected from the Center for Research in Securities
Prices (CRSP) database and data on acquisitions collected from the Securities Data
Company (SDC) Platinum Mergers & Acquisitions database. The following selection
criteria are applied for the construction of the sample:

   1) The announcement date of the M&A transaction falls between January 1, 1984
                                      3
       and December 31, 2022.

   2) The ownership in the target by the acquiring firm before the announcement date
       does not exceed 50% (no ownership/minority investment), and ownership after
                                                                                           4
        the announcement date is ≥50% (controlling interest/full ownership).

    3) The deal is completed, and the transaction value is disclosed, exceeding $1M
       and 1% of the acquiring firm’s market value of equity 4 weeks prior to the
                                 5
       announcement date.

    4) The acquiring firm is listed on the NYSE, NYSE American, or Nasdaq stock
       exchanges, with CRSP daily return data available in the estimation window [-
        200, -20] as well as the event window [-2, 2].

   5) The acquiring firm does not primarily operate in Utilities or in Finance &
        Insurance (North American Industry Classification System sectors 22, 52).

    6) The target is either public, private, or a subsidiary of a public or private firm.

Apart from a small degree of variability, these sample selection criteria are typical for
                                                 6
research on acquisition announcement returns.  However, the lack of detailed
information on the specific transaction types included in previous research complicates
my efforts to construct a comparable sample. To deal with this issue, I use sample size

3
 Fuller et. al. (2002) report that the announcement dates provided by SDC are exact for more than 90% of
observations. For the remaining <10%, the announcement dates reported by SDC are within 2 days of the
actual announcement dates. These reporting inaccuracies are immaterial to the analysis for several
reasons:
    a) First, Barnes, Harp & Oler (2014) find that in cases where the announcement dates reported by
         SDC differ from the researchers’ own hand collected announcement dates, the official
        announcement date is usually replaced by the date of a “strong rumor” appearing in the public
        domain.
    b) Second, for a large sample, any upward or downward bias to the abnormal return estimates
        induced by small reporting inaccuracies for a small number of observations should not affect the
        informativeness of the sample as a whole.
4
 While an ownership stake in the target exceeding 50% does not always correspond to a change of
control, it is a good approximation in the U.S. due to the relative infrequency of dual class share
structures with unequal voting rights (Howell, 2017).
5
 Deal value and relative size lower bounds ensure that the acquisitions are economically meaningful.
6
 See Chang (1998), Fuller et. al. (2002), Moeller et. al. (2004) and Travlos (1987).
                                  11
information and other criteria disclosed by the authors to infer the undisclosed
transaction types, selecting the most reasonable transaction types until the sample size
closely matches. The resulting sample includes traditional M&A transactions such as
leveraged buyouts, exchange offers, and tender offers, and excludes repurchases,
spinoffs, recapitalizations, self-tenders, and privatizations (see Appendix A).

Acquisitions by firms primarily operating in utilities are excluded because the industry
is highly regulated with lengthy approval processes. A longer approval process prolongs
the interim period between the acquisition announcement and its completion and may
entail substantial costs to the acquiring firm. For utility acquirors, abnormal returns
surrounding the acquisition announcement date therefore capture regulatory risks and
uncertainties to a higher degree than in other industries (Becher, Mulherin & Walkling,
2012). Acquisitions by firms primarily operating in finance & insurance are excluded
for the same reason, in addition to the following. Acquirors in finance & insurance,
apart from participating in the market for corporate control, also act as intermediaries,
providing underwriting services and advising acquirors and their targets on the terms of
the deal. Despite being responsible for a large number of acquisitions, these companies
also often have vastly different objectives compared to more strategic non-financial
buyers. One such objective unique to financial acquirors includes creating value in the
target and selling after a shorter period of time. Finally, the exclusion of these
acquisitions from the sample does not rule out that utility or financial companies
participate in the bidding process for the targets included in the sample (Boone &
Mulherin, 2008). It only excludes deals in which these firms are the winning bidders. As
a result, the sample of completed acquisitions implicitly accounts for the important
price-setting role of utility and financial bidders.

In terms of issues with the data, a small number of deals in the SDC database are
recorded multiple times with different information. Barnes. et. al. (2014) show that
these duplicates are the result of errors in SDC’s data updating process. Moreover, there
are no reliable methods for distinguishing between the original observation and its
updated versions. Out of 1438 observations in the raw data, I identify zero duplicates
based on the “SDC Deal Number” variable and ten pairs of duplicates (20 observations)
based on the “Target CUSIP” variable. I retain four pairs of duplicates for which no
errors were found, and remove one to two observations from each of the remaining six
                                                                                    7
pairs of duplicates, for a total of seven observations removed from the sample.  I also
exclude a large number of observations as a result of the matching process, for a final
                              8
sample of 676 observations. The vast majority of the observations excluded in the
matching process are acquisitions announced from 1984 to 1989, meaning that the

7
 Some duplicates based on the Target CUSIP variable are separate acquisitions (e.g. the original acquirer
divests from the target firm) whereas others are clearly errors (e.g. acquisition of partial/remaining
interest is misclassified as acquisition of majority interest). For each duplicate, I confirm whether to
remove any observations by cross-referencing with press releases.
8
 When matching the acquisition announcement data from SDC with the daily stock return data from
CRSP, inconsistencies between the acquiror CUSIP (SDC) and the NCUSIP (CRSP) cause certain
observations to be completely dropped (no match) and others to be partially missing. For example, if the
NCUSIP in CRSP changes before the event date, there may be data for the estimation window but not for
the event window. Since these are errors in the SDC database unrelated to the other observed variables in
the dataset, I assume that missing observations are randomly missing. Thus, removing them should not
bias the results.
                                  12
sample period effectively encompasses deals announced from 1989 to 2022 and is more
or less complete during this time (Barnes et. al., 2014).

Table 1 reports summary statistics for all the acquisitions in the sample (Panel A), as
well as for acquisitions grouped by method of payment (Panel B) and target public
status (Panel C). Variable definitions are provided in Appendix B. The majority of deals
in the sample are friendly acquisitions, with a slightly lower number of cross-border
deals and a relatively even split between same industry and diversifying (conglomerate)
acquisitions. For acquisitions grouped by method of payment, there are no significant
differences in means for the deal values and acquiror equity market capitalizations. In
addition, there are no significant differences in proportions for the deal attitudes (cash
acquisitions are no more likely to be hostile than stock acquisitions), and same industry
deals (cash acquisitions are no more likely to be in the same major industry sector than
stock acquisitions). Any differences in cumulative abnormal returns by method of
payment can therefore be attributed to other acquiror, deal, or target characteristics. For
example, the mean values for relative size and proportions for target public status are
significantly different for at least one payment method pair. As a result, a difference in
cumulative abnormal returns by method of payment may reflect differences in relative
size and the type of target being acquired. Similarly, Table 1 Panel C shows that for
acquisitions grouped by target public status, there is a higher percentage of cash and
stock consideration for acquisitions of public targets, and a higher percentage of a
combination of different forms of consideration for acquisitions of private targets. As a
result, a difference in cumulative abnormal returns by target public status may reflect
differences in the payment method choice. In summary, Table 1 shows significant
differences in proportions of private, public, and subsidiary targets for different
payment methods and significant differences in means of stock, cash, and combination
consideration between acquisitions of public and private targets. Table 1 therefore
provides a motivation for grouping the event study results by two variables: first by
method of payment and second by target public status. It also provides an additional
motivation for controlling for relative size in the cross-sectional analysis of acquiror
abnormal returns.

Figure 3A shows the total number of deals in the sample over time grouped by method
of payment, and figure 3B shows the deal value in millions of constant 2022 dollars
over time grouped by method of payment. There appears to be a downward trend in the
number of deals by NYSE, NYSE American, and Nasdaq listed non-financial, non-
utility firms, following a large runup during the merger wave of the late 1990s.
However, total deal values have remained resilient despite the downward trend in the
number of transactions in the last 25 years. With respect to the composition of deals by
method of payment, a notable trend in recent years is that the proportion of combination
deals relative to the total has steadily declined with the share of cash deals rising. Stock
deals are rare but at times account for a disproportionate share of total deal value, with
the peak in the late 1990s driven by high stock market valuations (Shleifer & Vishny,
2003).

                                  13
           Table 1. Summary Statistics for Acquisitions in the Event Study

This table presents summary statistics for the acquisitions in the sample. AcquirorMVE is defined as the
equity market value of the acquiring firm 4 weeks before the acquisition announcement. RelativeSize is
defined as the deal value as a fraction of the AcquirorMVE. PercentCash, PercentStock, and
PercentCombination are defined as the respective percentages of consideration paid in cash, stock, and
combinations of cash and stock. Stock acquisitions are deals in which more than 50% of the total
consideration transferred consists of an exchange of the acquiror’s equity (or other forms of equity
consideration) for the target’s equity. Cash acquisitions include debt financed deals and cash financed
deals, or any combination of the two, exceeding 50% of total consideration. Finally, combination
acquisitions are financed by a combination of stock, cash, and other forms of consideration. Panel A
                                           th                             th
reports the mean, standard deviation, 25  percentile, median and 75  percentile for all acquisitions in the
sample. Panel B and Panel C report summary statistics for acquisitions sorted by method of payment and
target public status, respectively. Summary statistics for numeric variables are in the format Mean (SD)
and all categorical variables are reported in the format Number of Observations (%). For Panel B and
Panel C, hypothesis tests are also performed on the differences in proportions for categorical variables
(continuity corrected chi-squared test) and differences in means for continuous variables (three-group
ANOVA test). All Panel B three-group differences are significant at the p<0.05 level except for
DealValue, AcquirorMVE, DealAttitude, SameIndustry, and CrossBorderDeal. All Panel C differences
are significant at the p<0.05 level except for SameIndustry.

                           Panel A: Summary Statistics for Pooled Sample
                         Mean Std.Dev Q1 Median Q3
DealValue ($ mil) 387.82 1708.87 13.75 46.75 189.33
AcquirorMVE ($ bil) 5.41 18.62 0.18 0.72 2.86
RelativeSize 0.51 6.73 0.03 0.07 0.17
PercentCash 43.54 45.64 0 21.7 100
PercentStock 10.37 26.52 0 0 0
PercentCombination 37.22 48.33 0 0 100
NumberofBidders 1.02 0.17 1 1 1

                        Panel B: Summary Statistics by Method of Payment
                           Cash Stock Combination All
N 301 59 316 676
DealValue ($ mil) 429.38(1271.69)794.99(4224.18)272.20(1177.23)387.82 (1708.87)
AcquirorMVE ($ bil) 5.82 (16.50) 3.19 (10.50) 5.44 (21.50) 5.41 (18.62)
RelativeSize 0.20 (0.47) 3.81 (22.64) 0.19 (0.51) 0.51 (6.73)
PercentCash 92.46 (13.84) 8.90 (15.84) 3.41 (10.41) 43.54 (45.64)
PercentStock 3.87 (10.46) 89.75 (16.64) 1.74 (7.55) 10.37 (26.52)
PercentCombination 0.00 (0.00) 0.00 (0.00) 79.63 (40.23) 37.22 (48.33)
TargetPublicStatus (%)
               Priv. 143 (47.5) 29 (49.2) 174 (55.1) 346 (51.2)
              Public 83 (27.6) 20 (33.9) 39 (12.3) 142 (21.0)
              Sub. 75 (24.9) 10 (16.9) 103 (32.6) 188 (27.8)
DealAttitude (%)
              Friendly 285 (94.7) 56 (94.9) 306 (96.8) 647 (95.7)
               Hostile 3 (1.0) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 3 (0.4)
               Neutral 12 (4.0) 3 (5.1) 10 (3.2) 25 (3.7)
               Unsolic. 1 (0.3) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 1 (0.1)
SameIndustry = Yes (%) 167 (55.5) 35 (59.3) 170 (53.8) 372 (55.0)
CrossBorderDeal = Yes (%) 126 (41.9) 24 (40.7) 118 (37.3) 268 (39.6)
NumberofBidders 1.04 (0.24) 1.03 (0.18) 1.00 (0.00) 1.02 (0.17)
                                  14
                                Table 1. (Continued)

                          Panel C: Summary Statistics by Target Public Status
                             Private Public Subsidiary All
N 346 142 188 676
DealValue ($ mil) 180.67 (947.77) 849.62 (3168.70) 420.24 (1034.70) 387.82 (1708.87)
AcquirorMVE ($ bil) 3.12 (15.40) 9.35 (23.69) 6.67 (19.16) 5.41 (18.62)
RelativeSize 0.18 (0.55) 1.74 (14.63) 0.18 (0.39) 0.51 (6.73)
PercentCash 40.98 (45.12) 55.54 (46.14) 39.17 (44.92) 43.54 (45.64)
PercentStock 9.97 (25.60) 16.59 (33.58) 6.41 (20.86) 10.37 (26.52)
PercentCombination 40.74 (49.19) 20.21 (40.11) 43.61 (49.71) 37.22 (48.33)
TargetPublicStatus (%)
               Priv. 346 (100.0) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 346 (51.2)
               Public 0 (0.0) 142 (100.0) 0 (0.0) 142 (21.0)
              Sub. 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 188 (100.0) 188 (27.8)
DealAttitude (%)
              Friendly 333 (96.2) 128 (90.1) 186 (98.9) 647 (95.7)
               Hostile 0 (0.0) 3 (2.1) 0 (0.0) 3 (0.4)
               Neutral 13 (3.8) 10 (7.0) 2 (1.1) 25 (3.7)
               Unsolic. 0 (0.0) 1 (0.7) 0 (0.0) 1 (0.1)
SameIndustry = Yes (%) 186 (53.8) 84 (59.2) 102 (54.3) 372 (55.0)
CrossBorderDeal = Yes (%) 124 (35.8) 75 (52.8) 69 (36.7) 268 (39.6)
NumberofBidders 1.00 (0.05) 1.08 (0.35) 1.00 (0.00) 1.02 (0.17)

Note: NumberofBidders understates the degree of bidder competition because it excludes private bids for
the target, which is an important element of the auction process (Boone & Mulherin, 2008).

In periods of high financial stress, there is a slight decline in the total number of deals
but not in the total deal value (see Figure 3). In addition, the proportion of stock, cash,
and combination deals do not markedly differ from the surrounding years with no
financial stress. There is no clear evidence in Figure 3 for the substitution of cash for
combination or combination for stock as a share of the number of deals in periods with
high financial stress. However, the proportion of deal value in the combination category
does rise at the expense of the proportion of deal value in the cash category during the
peak of the 2008 financial stress event. The substitution of cash consideration for other
forms of consideration in the deal value structure may suggest that, apart from possible
variation in the financing of cash and combination deals, NYSE, NYSE American, and
Nasdaq listed non-financial non-utility acquirors also exhibit a pecking order
preference. Alternative explanations for the substitution of cash for combination include
that high financial stress may reduce debt capacity so that acquiring firm managers
curtail borrowing, or that high financial stress limits the amount of new lending. Given
increased asset volatility and a substantial supply-driven decline in new bank lending
during the financial crisis, both factors are likely to combine to reduce debt financing
(Ivashina & Scharfstein, 2010).

                                  15
Figure 3. Total Number of Deals and Deal Value by Method of Payment
Figure 3A shows the total annual number of selected acquisitions by NYSE, NYSE American, and
Nasdaq listed non-financial, non-utility firms grouped by method of payment. Figure 3B shows the total
annual deal values of the same acquisitions in millions of constant 2022 $ grouped by method of
payment. The deal value in 2022 $ is the nominal deal value deflated by the U.S. Bureau of Economic
Analysis GDP price deflator.

3.2. Methodology

In an acquisition announcement event study framework, abnormal returns are an
estimate of the difference between the return conditional on information revealed by the
event, and the expected return conditional on information available before the event
(Kothari & Warner, 2007).
                                       𝐴𝑅𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑅𝑖,𝑡 − E[𝑅𝑖,𝑡] (1)

The information revealed by the event may be completely unexpected, in which case a
readily interpretable measure of the acquisition announcement abnormal return is
obtained. However, not all new information is inherently unexpected. A portion of the
information revealed by the announcement may have already been priced in by market
participants. As a result, a positive acquiror abnormal return estimate may not be an
indication of a value-creating acquisition. Instead, it may be an indication that the
acquisition is less value-destroying than the market expected (Kaplan, 2000). Similarly,
a negative acquiror abnormal return for a particular acquisition may imply that the
market had high expectations initially, but that the acquisition generated less value than
anticipated. Figure 4 illustrates the challenge of attributing abnormal returns to the ex-
ante success or failure of a particular acquisition.

                                  16
                                       High Initial Market
                                               Expectations

                                   High Expectations      High Expectations
                                        Acquisition             Acquisition
                                     Performing            Performing
                                   Unexpectedly          Unexpectedly
                                       Poorly                 Well
                 Unexpected                                            Unexpected
                   Decrease in                                                   Increase in
                  Expectations    Low Expectations      Low Expectations     Expectations
                                       Acquisition             Acquisition
                                     Performing            Performing
                                   Unexpectedly          Unexpectedly
                                       Poorly                 Well

                                            Low Initial Market
                                               Expectations
Figure 4. Interpreting the Abnormal Performance of an Acquisition.
This figure plots initial market expectations against the unexpected change in market expectations
generated by an acquisition announcement. There are four possible scenarios. For acquirors in quadrants
1 & 3, the acquisition announcement is associated with negative abnormal returns. For acquirors in
quadrant 2 & 4, the acquisition announcement is associated with positive abnormal returns. The figure
omits completely unexpected acquisitions, for which there are no initial market expectations. These
acquisitions are interpreted as value-destroying or value-creating if the respective abnormal returns are
positive and negative.

In light of these considerations, the event study specification used in this thesis relies on
                                                                                                        9
the assumption that the representative acquisition in the sample is an unexpected event.
This assumption allows for a straightforward interpretation of the direction of the
abnormal return and cumulative abnormal return estimates. Moreover, even though
there may be individual acquisitions in the sample for which this assumption does not
hold, the focus of the study is not on the deal-specific estimates but on the first moment
of the abnormal return and cumulative abnormal return distributions.

                                                            𝑁
                           1
                               𝐴𝑅̂   𝑡 =   ∑(𝑅𝑖,𝑡 − E[𝑅𝑖,𝑡])                            (2)
                                      𝑁
                                             𝑖=1

                                  𝐶𝐴𝑅̂    𝑡 = ∑ 𝐴𝑅̂   𝑡                                (3)

                                                                                                                     𝑡

As a result, any idiosyncrasies in abnormal return estimates associated with individual
acquisitions (see Figure 4) should not affect the informativeness or reliability of
estimates for a large sample of acquisitions (Kaplan, 2000).

While the informativeness of abnormal return estimates in isolation is important, the
objective is also to reconcile differences in abnormal returns by method of payment and
target public status. As discussed in Section 2, it is well understood that differences in
abnormal performance can be attributed to various defining characteristics of certain

9
 Faccio, McConell & Stolin (2006) observe no significant differences in predictability when it comes to
acquisitions grouped by size, target public status, or method of payment.
                                  17
types of acquisitions. For example, when comparing cash and stock acquisitions of
private targets, the transfer of a large block of shares to target shareholders in the former
leads to a positive abnormal return absent in the latter (Chang, 1998). When making
these comparisons it is also important to be aware of differences along less salient
dimensions. One such dimension discussed by Faccio, McConell & Stolin (2006) is the
probability of an acquisition succeeding conditional on the acquisition being announced,
                                                           10
denoted as 𝑃(𝐷𝑒𝑎𝑙𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔|𝐴𝑐𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑑).   If this probability varies
across different types of acquisitions, say when comparing cash acquisitions with stock
acquisitions, abnormal return estimates may be biased, affecting comparability.
Specifically, Faccio et. al. (2006) show that if acquisitions are ex-ante NPV positive,
there is an upward bias to the abnormal return estimates for the group with a higher deal
closing probability relative to the group with a lower deal closing probability. I do not
control for variation in 𝑃(𝐷𝑒𝑎𝑙𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔), aside from noting that the magnitude (but not
the direction) of abnormal return estimates should be interpreted with caution,
especially where there is only a small difference between different types of acquisitions.

Another methodological concern in the context of acquisition announcement event
studies is to establish an appropriate time frame to measure the economic impact of the
event. Both short-horizon (daily/weekly) and long-horizon (monthly/yearly)
acquisition-announcement event studies have been conducted in the past. However,
long-run event studies are more susceptible to a lower power (probability of detecting a
true non-zero abnormal return), as well as a higher sensitivity to the return generating
process used (Kothari & Warner, 2007). In addition, the longer the event window, the
more likely it is to be contaminated by confounding events such as earnings
announcements and other price-relevant news (Armitage, 1995). Since there are no
available methods to overcome all these issues, long-run event studies remain unreliable
indicators of abnormal performance. To reduce the likelihood of misspecification, I
follow the literature in setting a symmetric five-day event window including two trading
days before and after the event day, denoted as [-2, 2]. Including the two trading days
before the acquisition announcement accounts for any anticipation of the event.
Including the two trading days after the acquisition announcement accounts for the fact
that the market reaction may not be concentrated on a single day. In other words, there
may be a market underreaction to the acquisition announcement on the first trading day
(event date), which is subsequently corrected.

Despite the consistency of results obtained in event studies focusing only on the days
surrounding the event, it remains standard practice to test their sensitivity to alternative
return-generating processes (Brown & Warner, 1985). Some commonly used
specifications for estimating the expected returns in the absence of treatment 𝐸[𝑅𝑖,𝑡]
include the market-adjusted model, market model, and the Fama-French 3 factor model
(FF3 model).

The first approach simply assumes that the normal return is the market return so that:

10
  The relationship between the abnormal return estimates and 𝑃(𝐷𝑒𝑎𝑙𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔|𝐴𝑐𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑑)
is a consequence of the sample selection criteria used in acquisition announcement event studies —
namely, that the focus is on completed deals, omitting deals that were announced but not closed (Faccio
et. al., 2006).
                                  18
                         𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 − 𝐴𝑑𝑗𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙 𝐸[𝑅𝑖,𝑡] = 𝑅𝑚,𝑡

The second and third approaches are factor models, and thus require an estimation
window, a designated period before the event for estimating the return-generating
parameters. Once more, I follow the literature in setting an estimation window 200
trading days before the event up to 20 trading days before the event, denoted as [-200, -
    11
20].  The gap between the end of the estimation window [-20] and the beginning of the
event window [-2] ensures that the estimates are not contaminated by any leakage of
information prior to the acquisition announcement. The expected returns in the event
window are estimated using the intercept terms and factor loadings, so that:

                                𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙 𝐸[𝑅𝑖,𝑡] = 𝑎̂  𝑖 + 𝛽̂ 𝑖𝑅𝑚,𝑡

         𝐹𝐹3 𝑀𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙 𝐸[𝑅𝑖,𝑡] = 𝑟𝑓 + 𝛽̂ 𝑖,𝑚(𝑅𝑚,𝑡 − 𝑟𝑓) + 𝛽̂ 𝑖,𝑆𝑀𝐵𝑆𝑀𝐵𝑡 + 𝛽̂ 𝑖,𝐻𝑀𝐿𝐻𝑀𝐿𝑡

For the remainder of this thesis, unless stated otherwise, the emphasis is on abnormal
return estimates generated by the market-model with the market-adjusted model and
                                                         12
Fama-French 3 factor models reported for robustness.  Rewriting equation 1 with
market-model expected return for clarity:

                                      𝐴𝑅𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑅𝑖,𝑡 − (𝑎̂  𝑖 + 𝛽̂ 𝑖𝑅𝑚,𝑡)

In Appendix C, I perform a simple robustness check which shows that the cumulative
abnormal return estimates are not sensitive to the choice of equally-weighted over
value-weighted market returns. As a placebo test, I partially mimic a procedure
proposed by Brown & Warner (1985) in which the abnormal performance estimates are
simulated by assigning a placebo event date to each acquisition in the sample (see
Appendix D). The placebo test provides evidence that the observed abnormal returns are
driven by the event itself rather than by other factors, as the simulation generates no
significantly positive or negative abnormal returns on average (Kothari & Warner,
2007). In Appendix E, I attempt to replicate the results in Fuller et. al. 2002 using the
sample selection criteria described in Appendix A while restricting the sample period to
January 1, 1990 to December 31, 2000. The sample is equivalent to Fuller et. al. (2002),
except that it does not consider only frequent acquirors. I show that the estimates in my
sample are generally consistent in terms of direction, magnitude, and significance with
the abnormal returns to frequent acquirors in Fuller et. al. (2002). Finally, the table
reported in Appendix F checks that the baseline results are not biased by the inclusion
of large deals with a DealValue>$200M in the sample. Appendix F confirms that the
baseline results are robust and generalizable to deals with a DealValue>$200M.

11
  Armitage (1995) reports that results are not sensitive to the length of the estimation window as long it
exceeds approximately 100 days. Including an excessively long estimation window is also not
recommended, as the bias from confounding events may exceed any benefits from improved precision.
12                                                                                                                                    ̂
  The market-model and FF3 model parameter estimates for the intercept term 𝛼̂  𝑖 and factor loadings 𝛽𝑖
are time-invariant. They are calculated only once in relation to the event date, not multiple times in
relation to each day in the event window. The market-adjusted model assumes that 𝛼𝑖 = 0 and 𝛽𝑖 = 1.
                                  19
4. Results

4.1. Baseline Results

Table 2 presents results for the average cumulative abnormal returns to acquiring firm
shareholders in a symmetric five-day window surrounding the announcement of 676
acquisitions by NYSE, NYSE American, and Nasdaq listed non-financial, non-utility
acquirors. The results are grouped by method of payment with a total of 301 cash deals,
59 stock deals, and 316 deals involving a combination of cash, stock, and other forms of
consideration. Panel A contains results for the full sample of acquisitions. On average,
acquiring firm shareholders gain a significantly positive 2% following the
announcement of an acquisition. This result is almost indistinguishable from the result
reported by Fuller et. al. (2002) for a January 1990 to December 2000 sample of
frequent acquirors. The average gains to acquiring firm shareholders do not appear to
have changed over time, but that does not exclude the possibility that there has been
variation over time in abnormal performance by method of payment. Figure 5 shows
that the market reaction is largely concentrated on the day of the announcement, lending
credence to the idea that acquisition announcements deliver meaningful new
information to the equity markets most of which is quickly priced in, and that the
average abnormal return estimates (see Equation 2) do not capture noise – random
variation that contaminates the value of the signal. Figure 5 also suggests that the
market underreacts to the information contained in acquisition announcements on the
day of the event, pricing in an additional 0.5% gain in the two trading sessions that
follow.

Grouping the results for all acquisitions (Panel A) by method of payment reveals that
stock acquisitions create the most wealth on average, with significantly positive
acquiror CARs ranging from 5.6% according to the market model to almost 8%
according to the market-adjusted model. At the same time, the market does not view
cash acquisitions or combination acquisitions as favorably, as there are no significant
abnormal returns associated with these acquisitions. The finding of no abnormal returns
for cash acquisitions overall is consistent with the results in Travlos (1987) yet
inconsistent with the Fuller et. al. (2002) sample, in which frequent acquirors
experience positive abnormal gains in cash acquisitions. Although it is difficult to
distinguish between various explanations for this result, there are several possible
factors that may contribute. First, the abnormal returns for cash acquisitions in the
different sample periods may reflect the availability of profitable acquisition investment
opportunities over time. Other possibilities include that frequent acquirors are
systematically better at identifying profitable acquisitions, or that less unexpected
adverse information regarding payout policy is released in subsequent cash acquisitions.
Finally, the acquisitions in the sample may differ in other ways such as the proportion
of cash deals by target public status. Grouping the acquisitions in Table 2 Panel A by
target public status, with acquisitions of public targets reported in Panel B and
acquisitions of private targets reported in Panel C allows me to explore this question
further.

                                  20
    Table 2. Public Acquiror Cumulative Abnormal Returns by Method of Payment

This table presents cumulative abnormal return (CAR) estimates (see Equation 3) for 676 acquisitions by
NYSE, NYSE American, and Nasdaq listed non-financial, non-utility firms. Panel A reports the CARs for
all acquisitions in the sample grouped by method of payment. Panels B and C report the CARs for
acquisitions of public targets and acquisitions of private targets grouped by method of payment. The
abnormal returns are estimated using the Market Model, Market-Adjusted Model, and Fama-French 3
Factor Model (FF3). Market Model and FF3 parameters are estimated over a [-200, -20] estimation
window. Abnormal returns are cumulated over a five-day [-2, 2] event window. If the acquisition
announcement date is a non-trading day (e.g. a weekend or holiday), the event date is assumed to be the
first subsequent trading day. Stock acquisitions are deals in which more than 50% of the total
consideration transferred consists of an exchange of the acquiror’s equity (or other forms of equity
consideration) for the target’s equity. Cash acquisitions include debt financed deals and cash financed
deals, or any combination of the two, exceeding 50% of total consideration. Finally, combination
acquisitions are financed by a combination of stock, cash, and other forms of consideration.

                    Panel A: All Acquisitions Grouped by Method of Payment
            Market Model Market-Adjusted Model FF3

Stock 0.056 (1.99) 0.0766** (3.26) 0.0704** (2.97)

Cash 0.0095 (0.98) 0.0181** (2.98) 0.0136 (1.75)

Combination 0.0177 (1.57) 0.0209 (1.94) 0.0156 (1.36)

All 0.0172* (2.37) 0.0242*** (3.93) 0.0192** (2.83)

              Panel B: Acquisitions of Public Targets Grouped by Method of Payment
              Market Model Market-Adjusted Model FF3

Stock 0.038 (0.58) 0.096** (2.21) 0.0787 (1.70)

Cash -0.0277 (-0.96) -0.0028 (-0.23) -0.0213 (-1.06)

Combination 0.0377 (1.99) 0.0362 (2.01) 0.0417* (2.32)

All -0.0007 (-0.03) 0.0209 (1.98) 0.0094 (0.65)

              Panel C: Acquisitions of Private Targets Grouped by Method of Payment
             Market Model Market-Adjusted Model FF3

Stock 0.0679* (2.64) 0.0741* (2.78) 0.07** (2.61)

Cash 0.0301** (3.04) 0.0309** (3.20) 0.0316**(3.16)

Combination 0.0164 (0.83) 0.0228 (1.2037) 0.016 (0.79)

All 0.0262* (2.37) 0.0302** (2.83) 0.0267* (2.37)

Note: t-statistics in parentheses.
* p<0.05; ** p<0.01; *** p<0.001
                                  21
Figure 5. Public Acquiror Cumulative Abnormal Returns for All Acquisitions
This figure plots the mean public acquiror cumulative abnormal returns at the end of each trading day in
the [-2, 2] event window for all acquisitions in the sample. It shows that the market reaction to acquisition
announcements is largely concentrated on the day of the announcement.

Table 2 Panel B shows that acquiring firm shareholders experience normal returns
surrounding announcements of acquisitions of public targets, while Panel C shows that
acquisitions of private targets generate significantly positive cumulative abnormal
returns of 2.62% on average. Both results are insensitive to the use of alternative return
generating models. Comparing these results to the sample of frequent acquirors in Fuller
et. al. (2002), the negative differential in abnormal performance between acquisitions of
public targets and acquisitions of private targets remains of a similar magnitude,
although acquisitions of public targets no longer destroy wealth on average in my
sample. The precise reason for acquisitions of public targets no longer destroying
wealth is unclear, but it appears to be a consequence of the sample selection criteria, as
my sample does not include only frequent acquirors (see Appendix E Panel B).
Interpreting the difference in ex-ante performance between acquisitions of public targets
and acquisitions of private targets is more straightforward, however. First, as
documented by Officer (2007), private markets are less liquid, which increases the
bargaining power of the acquiring firm vis-à-vis privately held targets. As a result,
private targets are forced to sell at significant discounts to market value of
approximately 15-30% on average. Given that the average relative size of acquisitions
of private targets in my sample is 18% on average, a 15-30% discount implies an
additional gain to acquiring firm shareholders in the 2.7% to 5.4% range. Interestingly,
assuming that public targets are acquired at market value, an average liquidity discount
of 15% corresponds almost exactly to the observed difference in abnormal performance
between acquisitions of public targets and acquisitions of private targets. Empirically,
since public targets sell for a premium, the difference in abnormal performance is
                                                                                13
consistent with a lower average discount for private targets (Officer, 2007).  However,

13
  To see this relationship more clearly, a premium to market value for public targets implies a decrease in
acquiror abnormal returns for acquisitions of public targets (all else equal). To maintain the same
differential in abnormal returns between acquisitions of public targets and acquisitions of private targets,
the discount in acquisitions of private targets must decrease for the discount related gains to decrease.
                                  22
that implies that the discount is the only explanation for the observed difference, which
is not well supported by the evidence.

Figure 6. Dot Plot of Public Acquiror Cumulative Abnormal Returns Grouped by
Target Public Status and Method of Payment
This figure plots cumulative abnormal returns for individual acquisitions grouped by target public status
and method of payment. The abnormal returns for each acquisition (dot) are cumulated over a five day [-
2, 2] event window.

To see why, Figure 6 illustrates the distributions of acquiror cumulative abnormal
returns for acquisitions grouped by both target public status and method of payment.
Each dot represents the cumulative abnormal returns for a specific acquisition.
Comparing acquisitions of public targets and acquisitions of private targets reveals that
there is significant variation in abnormal returns by target public status, holding method
of payment constant. For example, a small number of very poor cash acquisitions of
public targets shown in Figure 6 generate extremely negative cumulative abnormal
returns as low as -40%. Figure 6 also shows that the underperformance of cash
acquisitions of public targets relative to cash acquisitions of private targets is not only
the result of a small number of acquisitions with large losses. Instead, the distribution of
cumulative abnormal returns for cash acquisitions of public targets appears to be more
negatively skewed, especially when compared to acquisitions of public targets using
other payment methods. On the other hand, the distribution for cash acquisitions of
private targets is more symmetrical to positively skewed, with some deals generating
outsized gains for acquiring firm shareholders in the 20% to 40% range.

Another notable finding is that there is a large difference in abnormal performance
between stock deals involving private targets and stock deals involving public targets.
Stock acquisitions of private targets generate the highest cumulative abnormal returns
on average out of any type of acquisition grouped by method of payment and target
                                  23
public status. Specifically, the average cumulative abnormal returns surrounding stock
acquisitions of private targets range from 6.79% according to the market model to
7.41% according to the market-adjusted model. The distribution for stock acquisitions
of private targets in Figure 6 also exhibits favorable characteristics relative to the
distribution for other types of acquisitions. The mean is clearly positive (the
overwhelming majority of CARs are positive) and there is also a noticeable positive
skew. The same does not apply for stock acquisitions of public targets, for which most
CARs are clustered around 0. This result is consistent with several explanations.
According to Chang (1998), privately held targets are more likely to be owned by one
or a few large shareholders. When a public acquiror makes a stock acquisition of a
private target, a highly concentrated ownership structure in the target implies that a
large block of acquiring firm shares is transferred to target shareholders, resulting in the
creation of new block shareholders. In contrast, when a public acquiror makes a stock
acquisition of a public target, there is no transfer of a large block of shares since
ownership in public targets is more dispersed on average. Chang (1998) identifies
several distinct block shareholder characteristics that are conducive to long-term value
creation in the acquiring firm. First, block shareholders play a crucial role in external
governance of the firm by influencing major decisions and holding management
accountable for its performance. Second, new block shareholders expose management
to a greater threat emanating from the market for corporate control, which works to
reduce the agency costs of managerial discretion. Finally, the willingness of block
shareholders to accept a stock offer may reveal their confidence in gaining participation
in the future success of the acquiring firm, a positive signal for the firm’s equity value.
The striking benefits created in stock acquisitions of privately held targets can also be
seen when comparing stock acquisitions of private targets to acquisitions of private
targets using cash (see Figure 7).

Despite the underperformance of stock deals involving public targets relative to stock
deals involving private targets, there is some good news for acquiring firm shareholders
even with respect to the former. In particular, stock acquisitions of public targets no
longer produce significantly negative acquiror abnormal returns, which stands in
contrast to both previous findings and the negative drift observed following seasoned
equity offerings (Choe et. al., 1993; Fuller et. al., 2002; Travlos, 1987). A possible
explanation is that the synergy benefits in stock acquisitions of public targets are high
enough in my sample to offset the negative signaling implications of using stock as a
medium of exchange. In addition, stock deals offer target shareholders a valuable tax
deferral option not available in cash deals, which appears as a discount in stock deals
relative to the price that would have been paid in an otherwise equivalent cash deal
(Fuller et. al., 2002).

                                  24
Figure 7. Public Acquiror Cumulative Abnormal Returns for Acquisitions of Private
Targets
This figure plots the mean public acquiror CAR at the end of each trading day in the [-2, 2] event window
for acquisitions of private targets. It shows that the cumulative abnormal returns associated with
acquisitions of private targets using stock as a medium of exchange are higher than for cash deals and
acquisitions of private targets in general. All plotted values are statistically significant (p<0.05).

4.2. High Financial Stress Acquisitions

Table 3 presents results for the average acquiror CARs in 22 high financial stress
acquisitions by NYSE, NYSE American, and Nasdaq listed non-financial, non-utility
acquirors. High financial stress acquisitions are defined as deals undertaken during 2-
sigma or higher financial stress events, where the Kansas City Financial Stress Index
(KCFSI) exceeds two standard deviations above its mean in the month of the acquisition
announcement. More specifically, there are two periods in which KCFSI exceeds 2:
July 2008 to May 2009 and March 2020. The first high financial stress event
encompasses the deep recession associated with the Global Financial Crisis, while the
second is a less pronounced period of high financial stress associated with the 2020
stock market crash. Figure 8 shows that the market reaction to acquisition
announcements in periods of high financial stress is more volatile than in normal market
conditions, with significant price adjustments even in the trading days surrounding the
                     14
announcement date.  The market also underreacts to high financial stress acquisition
announcements on the day of the event, pricing in an additional 2% loss in the two
subsequent trading days. Altogether, high financial stress acquisitions generate negative
or insignificant negative abnormal returns of -3% to -6% in a symmetrical five-day
event window surrounding the announcement (see Table 3). This result stands in
contrast to the positive abnormal returns observed for all acquisitions in normal market
conditions (see Figure 8).

14
  Note that from this point forward I refer to the baseline results as the results for normal market
conditions. In Appendix G, I confirm that the baseline results do not materially change when high
financial stress acquisitions are removed from the sample. Where the results do differ, the baseline results
show lower acquiror gains, therefore allowing for more conservative comparisons.
                                  25
        Table 3. Public Acquiror Returns for High Financial Stress Acquisitions

This table presents cumulative abnormal return (CAR) estimates (see Equation 3) for high financial stress
acquisitions. High financial stress acquisitions are defined as deals undertaken during 2-sigma or higher
financial stress events, where the Kansas City Financial Stress Index (KCFSI) exceeds two standard
deviations above its mean in the month of the acquisition announcement. Panel A reports the CARs for all
acquisitions in periods of high financial stress grouped by method of payment. Panels B reports the CARs
for all acquisitions in period of high financial stress grouped by target public status. The abnormal returns
are estimated using the Market Model, Market-Adjusted Model, and Fama-French 3 Factor Model (FF3).
Market Model and FF3 parameters are estimated over a [-200, -20] estimation window. Abnormal returns
are cumulated over a five-day [-2, 2] event window. If the acquisition announcement date is a non-trading
day (e.g. a weekend or holiday), the event date is assumed to be the first subsequent trading day. Stock
acquisitions are deals in which more than 50% of the total consideration transferred consists of an
exchange of the acquiror’s equity (or other forms of equity consideration) for the target’s equity. Cash
acquisitions include debt financed deals and cash financed deals, or any combination of the two,
exceeding 50% of total consideration. Finally, combination acquisitions are financed by a combination of
stock, cash, and other forms of consideration.

              Market Model Market-Adjusted Model FF3

Stock -0.0691*** (-2.7468) -0.066*** (-2.8065) -0.0391* (-1.8498)

Cash -0.0907 (-0.1965) -0.085 (0.0808) -0.0791 (-0.3959)

Combination -0.0433 (-1.43) -0.005 (-0.066) -0.0385 (-0.3842)

All -0.0571** (-2.2236) -0.0297 (-1.0037) -0.0487 (-1.167)

Note: Generalized RANK test-statistic in parentheses. * p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01
The RANK test is robust to event-induced volatility, which may be especially pronounced in periods of
elevated market uncertainty and idiosyncratic volatility. It is also well-specified for all three return-
generating models (Kolari & Pynnonen, 2011).

Grouping the high financial stress acquisitions by method of payment reveals that
acquiror CARs in periods of high financial stress are negative regardless of the payment
method used (see Table 3). Cash acquisitions generate insignificant negative abnormal
returns of approximately -8.5% in periods of high financial stress compared to
insignificant positive abnormal returns of approximately 1.5% in normal market
conditions. Similarly, combination acquisitions in periods of high financial stress
generate insignificant negative abnormal returns of approximately -3% averaged across
specifications. On the other hand, in normal market conditions, combination
acquisitions create wealth on average with insignificantly positive cumulative abnormal
returns in the 1.5% to 2% range. The most strikingly different result by method of
payment is for stock acquisitions in periods of high financial stress. As shown in Figure
9, stock acquisitions generate significantly positive abnormal returns to acquiring firm
shareholders in normal market conditions. However, in periods of financial stress, stock
acquisitions destroy wealth for acquiring firm shareholders on average, with negative
cumulative abnormal returns as low as -7%. The difference in stock acquisition CARs
between normal market conditions and high financial stress conditions varies from
10.95% according to the Fama-French 3 factor model up to 14.26% according to the

                                  26
market model. As I will clarify, such a difference is in line with the predictions derived
from models of financing choice in Section 2.

Figure 8. Public Acquiror Cumulative Abnormal Returns for All Acquisitions and
Acquisitions in Periods of High Financial Stress
This figure plots the mean public acquiror cumulative abnormal returns at the end of each trading day in
the [-2, 2] event window for all acquisitions in the sample and for all acquisitions in periods of high
financial stress (Kansas City Financial Stress Index>2). It shows that all acquisitions generate a positive
abnormal return to acquiring firm shareholders. However, all acquisitions in periods of high financial
stress generate negative abnormal returns to acquiring firm shareholders. All plotted values are
statistically significant (p<0.05).

Figure 9. Public Acquiror Cumulative Abnormal Returns for Stock Acquisitions in the
Full Sample and in Periods of High Financial Stress
This figure plots the mean public acquiror cumulative abnormal returns at the end of each trading day in
the [-2, 2] event window for all stock acquisitions and for stock acquisitions in periods of high financial
stress (Kansas City Financial Stress Index>2). It shows that stock acquisitions generate a positive
abnormal return to acquiring firm shareholders. However, stock acquisitions in periods of high financial
stress generate negative abnormal returns to acquiring firm shareholders. All plotted values are
statistically significant (p<0.05).

                                  27
There are two competing explanations for why acquiror gains in normal market
conditions turn into acquiror losses in periods of high financial stress. First, as discussed
in Section 2, less profitable investment opportunities in recessionary periods worsen the
agency conflict between managers and shareholders, shifting the marginal agency costs
of managerial discretion curve in Figure 10 up and to the right. Essentially, poorer
investment opportunities incentivize management to pursue private benefits by
investing in poor projects rather than acting in the best interest of shareholders. Less
profitable investment opportunities also shift the marginal agency costs of debt curve in
Figure 10 down and to the right. Holding leverage constant, the poorer the investment
opportunities available to the firm, the lower the cost of not being able to invest in these
projects due to debt overhang issues (Jung et. al., 1986). Overall, according to the
agency model in Figure 10, the optimal amount of leverage (L*) should increase in
periods of high financial stress. If that is the case, the model suggests that the optimal
payment method in periods of financial stress is cash and that the cash bid should be
financed using debt. However, recall from Section 2 that periods of high financial stress
are characterized by a contraction in the credit supply, increasing the cost at which firms
can borrow (Ivashina & Scharfstein, 2010). Self-interested managers respond to the
prevailing market conditions by increasing the share of stock consideration or financing
                            15
the bid entirely with stock.  For combination deals, the effect on leverage is
ambiguous. However, stock deals almost certainly move the firm further away from
optimal leverage. According to the agency model, announcements of stock acquisitions
in periods of high financial stress therefore contain more negative information than
stock acquisitions in normal market conditions, which is consistent with the results.

Figure 10. Marginal Agency Costs of Debt/Managerial Discretion
This figure, adopted from Jung et. al. (1996), plots the marginal agency costs of debt and the marginal
agency costs of managerial discretion as a function of leverage. The optimal amount of leverage is
denoted as L*. At this point, the marginal agency costs of debt are exactly offset by the marginal agency
costs of managerial discretion, minimizing total agency costs. When leverage falls below L*, the marginal
agency costs of debt are more than offset by the marginal agency costs of managerial discretion, leading
to an increase in total agency costs.

15
  This observation is consistent with Figure 3, which shows that as a fraction of the total number of deals
and total deal value, there is a higher share of combination in 2008 than in the surrounding years.
Nonetheless, an increase in the share of stock consideration is not required to make inferences about the
market reaction to acquisitions that do occur in periods of high financial stress.
                                  28
The second explanation, referred to in Section 2 as the financing hierarchy explanation,
states that managers seek to maximize shareholder value, preferring less costly sources
of financing. At face value, undertaking a stock deal in periods of high financial stress is
a negative signal about firm fundamentals, because it indicates that the firm is not in the
position to finance the acquisition using cash or debt. Increased stock price volatility in
periods of high financial stress also generates a more severe information asymmetry
problem between the firm and investors in equity, allowing acquiring firm managers to
issue overvalued securities (Faccio & Masulis, 2005). As a result, the announcement of
a stock acquisition is a more negative signal about the firm’s equity value in periods of
high financial stress. However, in this case there is also a countervailing economic
force. Because managers seek to maximize shareholder value, costly debt financing
associated with a credit crunch may cause them to leave the market for corporate control
entirely. If they do remain, managers may bid less aggressively to adjust for the higher
costs of financing. Depressed bidding may therefore generate lower bid premia benefits
to the extent that the acquiror obtains a larger share of the gains available in the
transaction (Vladimirov, 2015). Only if the costs associated with issuing more
expensive sources of financing exceed the lower bid premia benefits will financial stress
have a negative impact on acquiror abnormal returns in stock acquisitions. The fact that
stock acquisitions destroy wealth on average in periods of high financial stress is in line
with this prediction.

The financing hierarchy explanation also performs better than the agency model when it
comes to accounting for the underperformance of cash and combination acquisitions in
periods of high financial stress. Specifically, the signaling implication of a cash bid or
combination bid depends on the proportions of cash, safe debt, risky debt, and equity
financing. If the acquiring firm is more cash constrained in periods of high financial
stress, it may substitute among financing sources. For example, Leary (2009) finds that
firms substitute away from safe bank debt toward risky nonbank debt and equity during
a credit crunch. Yet, even safe debt is more expensive in periods of high financial stress
(Ivashina & Scharfstein, 2010). As a result, even without substitution of financing
sources, cash bids are on average likely to be more expensive to finance. If the lower
bid premia benefit in cash and combination acquisitions is more than offset by the costs
associated with issuing more expensive sources of financing, financial stress will have a
negative impact on the ex-ante success of cash and combination acquisitions. The
finding of insignificant negative abnormal returns in cash and combination acquisitions
in periods of financial stress as opposed to insignificant positive abnormal returns in
normal market conditions is consistent with this prediction.

To examine the relationship between method of payment, financial stress, and abnormal
returns further, I perform a cross-sectional analysis with announcement date acquiror
abnormal returns in % as the dependent variable. Table 4 reports estimates from four
OLS regression specifications in total, two for acquisitions of public targets and two for
acquisitions of private targets. The regression specifications are based on a procedure
for unbalanced observational data proposed by Nieuwenhuis, Grotenhuis & Pelzer
(2017), in which the authors model an interaction between a mean centered continuous
variable and a weighted effect coded factor variable. In Table 4, the interaction is
between the mean centered continuous variable Kansas City Financial Stress Index
(KCFSI) and wecMOP, a weighted effect coded factor variable with three categories:

                                  29
cash (wecCash), stock (wecStock), and combination (wecCombo). A mean centered
version of RelativeSize (RSCentered) is included as a control variable in all 4
specifications. For robustness, I also include additional weighted effect coded control
variables wecForeign and wecSameIndustry. The former is a factor variable with the
category foreign and the omitted category domestic, which accounts for whether the
target is domestic or foreign. The latter is a factor variable with the category
SameIndustry and the omitted category DifferentIndustry, which accounts for whether
the target is in the same industry as the acquiror. Detailed variable definitions are
provided in Appendix B. Using weighted effect coded factor variables and interactions
as well as mean-centered continuous variables has the advantage of changing the
reference category to the sample mean (Nieuwenhuis, Grotenhuis & Pelzer, 2017). This
procedure allows for a more convenient interpretation of the main effects and
interaction effects compared to a dummy coded specification. The coefficients of the
weighted effect coded categories (wecCash, wecStock, wecCombo) represent how
much higher or lower the average abnormal returns are for each category relative to the
sample mean abnormal return at the means of the continuous variables KCFSI and
relative size. In addition, the interaction term coefficients represent to what extent the
effect of KCFSI on abnormal returns differs from the main effect of KCFSI for stock,
cash, and combination acquisitions.

In the first regression of the sample of public targets, the coefficients on cash deals,
combination deals, KCFSI, and RSCentered are negative and significant. The same
coefficients are significant in the second regression, with an even more negative
estimate for KCFSI after controlling for whether the target is foreign and whether the
target is in the same industry as the acquiror. For acquisitions of public targets, cash
deals significantly underperform with announcement day abnormal returns -1.22%
lower than the sample average 0.43%. Stock deals outperform with 1.52% higher
abnormal return than the sample average, although the coefficient is insignificant.
Finally, combination deals involving public targets create significantly more wealth on
the day of the announcement, with a 1.74% higher abnormal return than the 0.43%
sample average. In addition, the higher the relative size of the deal (RSCentered), the
lower the abnormal return in acquisitions of public targets. The negative impact of
relative size on acquiror abnormal returns is partly consistent with the results in Fuller
et. al. (2002), in which the coefficient is negative and significant for acquisitions of
public targets. In Fuller et. al. (2002), the coefficient reflects larger losses the higher the
relative size of the target. However, since acquisitions of public targets in my sample
create wealth on average, the coefficient may reflect that there is overpayment in deals
with a higher relative size, decreasing the acquiring firm’s share of gains from the
transaction.

In terms of the effect of financial stress on abnormal returns, the average decrease in
abnormal returns for acquisitions of public targets is 1.08% for a one standard deviation
increase in KCFSI. In periods of high financial stress, the abnormal return is therefore at
least 2.16% lower. It is also more than 4.32% lower on average when the Kansas City
Financial Stress Index exceeds four standard deviations above its mean as in 2007-2008.

                                  30
Table 4. OLS Regression Analysis of Acquiror Announcement Date Abnormal Returns

This table reports the estimates from OLS regressions of the announcement day acquiror abnormal returns
in % for each acquisition as the dependent variable. For acquisitions announced on non-trading days, I
consider abnormal return estimates for the first trading day following the announcement. The categorical
variables wecMop (wecCash, wecStock, wecCombo), wecForeign and wecSameIndustry are weighted-
effect coded according to the procedure in Nieuwenhuis, Grotenhuis & Pelzer (2017). The Kansas City
Financial Stress Index (KCFSI) is a composite measure of disruption to the normal functioning of
financial markets. The interaction is between KCFSI and the weighted-effect coded categorical variable
wecMop. RSCentered represents the mean centered relative size of the deal. wecForeign controls for
whether the target is foreign, and wecSameIndustry controls for whether the target is in the same industry
as the acquiror.

(𝑃𝑢𝑏𝑙𝑖𝑐) 𝐴𝑅𝑖 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1𝑤𝑒𝑐𝐶𝑎𝑠ℎ + 𝛽2𝑤𝑒𝑐𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘 + 𝛽3𝑤𝑒𝑐𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑏𝑜 + 𝛽4𝐾𝐶𝐹𝑆𝐼 + 𝛽5𝐹𝑆𝐶𝑎𝑠ℎ + 𝛽6𝐹𝑆𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘 + 𝛽7𝐹𝑆𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑏𝑜 + 𝛽8𝑅𝑆𝐶𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑

(𝑃𝑢𝑏𝑙𝑖𝑐) 𝐴𝑅𝑖 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1𝑤𝑒𝑐𝐶𝑎𝑠ℎ + 𝛽2𝑤𝑒𝑐𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘 + 𝛽3𝑤𝑒𝑐𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑏𝑜 + 𝛽4𝐾𝐶𝐹𝑆𝐼 + 𝛽5𝐹𝑆𝐶𝑎𝑠ℎ + 𝛽6𝐹𝑆𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘 + 𝛽7𝐹𝑆𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑏𝑜 + 𝛽8𝑅𝑆𝐶𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑
                    + 𝛽9𝑤𝑒𝑐𝐹𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑔𝑛 + 𝛽10𝑤𝑒𝑐𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑒𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦

(𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑣𝑎𝑡𝑒) 𝐴𝑅𝑖 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1𝑤𝑒𝑐𝐶𝑎𝑠ℎ + 𝛽2𝑤𝑒𝑐𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘 + 𝛽3𝑤𝑒𝑐𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑏𝑜 + 𝛽4𝐾𝐶𝐹𝑆𝐼 + 𝛽5𝐹𝑆𝐶𝑎𝑠ℎ + 𝛽6𝐹𝑆𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘 + 𝛽7𝐹𝑆𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑏𝑜 + 𝛽8𝑅𝑆𝐶𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑

(𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑣𝑎𝑡𝑒) 𝐴𝑅𝑖 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1𝑤𝑒𝑐𝐶𝑎𝑠ℎ + 𝛽2𝑤𝑒𝑐𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘 + 𝛽3𝑤𝑒𝑐𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑏𝑜 + 𝛽4𝐾𝐶𝐹𝑆𝐼 + 𝛽5𝐹𝑆𝐶𝑎𝑠ℎ + 𝛽6𝐹𝑆𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘 + 𝛽7𝐹𝑆𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑏𝑜 + 𝛽8𝑅𝑆𝐶𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑
                    + 𝛽9𝑤𝑒𝑐𝐹𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖𝑔𝑛 + 𝛽10𝑤𝑒𝑐𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑒𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦

                             Public Public Private Private

(Intercept) 0.42 0.43 2.16 2.14
                             (0.55) (0.55) (1.18) (1.19)

wecCash -1.23 ** -1.22 * -0.95 -0.99
                             (0.46) (0.47) (1.22) (1.23)
wecStock 1.56 1.52 4.17 4.24
                             (1.44) (1.45) (3.54) (3.59)
wecCombo 1.74* 1.74* 0.14 0.15
                             (0.86) (0.86) (0.99) (0.99)

KCFSI -1.04 * -1.08 * -0.48 -0.45
                             (0.44) (0.44) (0.97) (0.98)
FSCash 0.29 0.32 1.19 1.21
                             (0.41) (0.41) (1.44) (1.44)
FSStock -0.31 -0.42 -1.45 -1.38
                             (0.66) (0.67) (2.47) (2.50)
FSCombo -0.38 -0.26 -0.33 -0.35
                             (1.02) (1.03) (0.88) (0.89)

RSCentered -0.33 * -0.33 * 0.47 0.39
                             (0.15) (0.15) (1.84) (1.85)
wecForeign 0.33 -0.76
                                             (0.51) (1.45)
wecSameIndustry -0.34 -0.40
                                             (0.45) (1.00)

N 128 128 328 328
R2 0.12 0.13 0.01 0.01

Note: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the deal level.
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
                                  31
The interaction terms indicate that the effects of KCFSI on abnormal returns by method
of payment do not significantly differ from the main effect of KCFSI. However, the
interaction terms are positive for cash acquisitions and negative for stock and
combination acquisitions of public targets. Acquiring firm shareholders therefore lose
more from a combination deal or stock deal in periods of high financial stress, while
losing less from a cash deal. More specifically, when controlling for whether the target
is foreign or in the same industry as the acquiror, the effect of KCFSI on abnormal
returns is -0.76% in cash deals, -1.34% in combination deals, and -1.50% in stock deals
(calculated by adding the main effect to the interaction effect). In periods of high
financial stress, this corresponds to a lower bound of 1.52% lower abnormal returns in
cash deals, 2.68% lower abnormal returns in combination deals, and 3% lower abnormal
returns in stock deals. This result is consistent with the financing hierarchy explanation
in which the costs associated with issuing more expensive sources of financing exceed
the lower bid premia benefits associated with depressed bidding. It is also partly
consistent with the agency model, considering that lower investment opportunities
imply more negative signaling implications for stock deals in periods of high financial
stress. In addition, because the firm moves closer to optimal leverage in a cash deal, the
lower losses in cash deals involving public targets are consistent with the agency model.

In the regressions of acquisitions of private targets, the results differ to a considerable
extent in terms of significance, although most coefficients have the same signs. The
coefficients on cash deals, combination deals, KCFSI, and relative size are no longer
significant even after controlling for whether the target is foreign and whether the target
is in the same industry as the acquiror. Cash deals insignificantly underperform with
0.99% lower abnormal returns than the sample average 2.14%. On the other hand, stock
acquisitions and combination acquisitions of private targets generate insignificantly
higher abnormal returns of 4.24% and 0.15% relative to the 2.14% average. The
coefficient on RSCentered is insignificantly positive for acquisitions of private targets,
so that a one unit increase in relative size is associated with a 0.39% improvement in
abnormal performance. As in Fuller et. al. (2002), the gains to acquiring firm
shareholders in acquisitions of private targets are increasing in the relative size of the
target.

For acquisitions of private targets, the average decrease in abnormal returns associated
with a one standard deviation increase in financial stress is -0.45%, although there is no
evidence that the effect is different from zero. In periods of high financial stress, the
abnormal return for acquisitions of private targets is therefore at least 0.9% lower and
more than 1.8% lower on average when KCFSI exceeds four standard deviations above
its mean. Since the interaction term coefficients are insignificant, the effect of KCFSI
on abnormal returns does not significantly differ for stock, cash, and combination
acquisitions. However, despite being insignificant, the coefficients are comparable to
those for acquisitions of public targets, with an even more positive interaction for cash
deals and a more negative interaction for stock deals. When controlling for whether the
target is foreign or in the same industry as the acquiror, the effect of KCFSI on
abnormal returns is an insignificant 0.76% in cash deals, -0.80% in combination deals,
and -1.83% in stock deals. In periods of high financial stress, this corresponds to a
lower bound of 1.52% higher abnormal returns in cash deals, 1.60% lower abnormal

                                  32
returns in combination deals, and 3.66% lower abnormal returns in stock deals. This
result is consistent with several explanations.

In this case, for cash acquisitions of private targets to have higher abnormal returns in
periods of high financial stress, the lower bid premia benefits likely exceed the costs
associated with more expensive sources of financing. A possible explanation for the
outsized lower bid premia benefit is that private targets are typically smaller and more
exposed to capital market imperfections, exhibiting higher cyclical variations in
financial performance than larger public targets (Gertler & Gilchrist, 1984). As a result,
the valuation of smaller private firms in periods of financial stress may
disproportionately decrease. In addition, when resources are scarce, shareholders in the
private target may have an increased need for cash, causing them to offer larger
liquidity discounts especially in cash deals. This may also be a possible reason why
KCFSI has no significantly negative impact for acquisitions of private targets in general
– gains from larger liquidity discounts in periods of financial stress offset losses
associated with issuing more expensive sources of financing.

The agency model shown in Figure 10 is another possible explanation for the
insignificant positive relationship between KCFSI and cash deal abnormal returns for
acquisitions of private targets, as well as the insignificant negative relationship between
KCFSI and stock deal abnormal returns. These findings are consistent with the firm
moving closer to optimal leverage in a cash deal and further away from optimal
leverage in a stock deal. In other words, the results are consistent with a reduction in
agency costs for cash deals and an increase in agency costs for stock deals in periods of
high financial stress.

                                  33
5. Conclusion

In this thesis I examine two interrelated questions: whether the relationship between
method of payment and acquiror abnormal returns established in the literature still
holds, and whether periods of high financial stress can account for differences in
acquiror abnormal returns by method of payment. Using a sample of 676 acquisitions
by NYSE, NYSE American, and Nasdaq listed firms, I find that the returns to acquiring
firm shareholders are generally consistent with previous findings. On average, acquiring
firm shareholders experience an almost 3% gain in acquisitions of private targets and no
significant gains or losses in acquisitions of public targets. The difference is attributed
to a larger liquidity discount in deals involving private targets as well as several cash
deals involving public targets generating outsized losses. A larger liquidity discount is
not the only benefit associated with acquisitions of private targets. In particular, the
market reacts to stock acquisitions of private targets by pricing in an increased potential
for long-term value creation, associated with a transfer of a large block of shares to
target shareholders. The most notable departure from previous findings in my sample is
that stock acquisitions of public targets no longer destroy wealth on average, indicating
both the value of the tax deferral option to target shareholders in stock deals and larger
synergy benefits.

In further analysis, I show that the market reaction to acquisitions announced in periods
of high financial stress is negative or insignificantly negative for all payment methods.
Specifically, a one standard deviation increase in KCFSI is associated with 1.08% lower
abnormal returns for acquisitions of public targets. For acquisitions of private targets,
the effect is insignificantly negative, suggesting that higher liquidity discounts in
periods of financial stress may partly offset the costs of issuing more expensive sources
of financing. Finally, for both public and private targets, there is no evidence that the
effect of financial stress on abnormal returns differs by method of payment.

The differing market reactions to acquisitions announced in periods of high financial
stress are consistent with two theoretical models: an agency model developed by Jung,
Kim & Stulz (1996) and standard pecking order theory. According to the agency model,
poorer investment opportunities in periods of high financial stress increase the optimal
amount of leverage. However, a credit crunch restricts the ability of acquiring firm
managers to finance the bid with debt. As a result, self-interested managers undertake a
stock deal, moving the firm further away from optimal leverage and exacerbating
agency problems associated with managerial discretion. The negative market reaction to
stock acquisitions in periods of high financial stress is consistent with this view. The
agency model also predicts a more negative market reaction for stock deals than for
cash or combination deals because cash or combination entail either a movement
towards optimal leverage, or no substantial change in leverage. The insignificantly more
positive market reaction to cash acquisitions of private targets in periods of financial
stress is consistent with this prediction. However, the agency model fails to explain why
financial stress also causes cash acquisitions of public targets and combination
acquisitions overall to underperform.

                                  34
Pecking order theory helps explain these relationships more comprehensively.
According to pecking order theory, managers prefer less costly forms of financing, and
an information asymmetry problem allows managers to issue overvalued securities. In
periods of high financial stress, a higher cost of financing depresses bidding and
generates lower bid premia benefits. However, there are also costs associated with
financing a bid with more expensive sources of financing in a period with increased
information asymmetry. In this view, the negative relationship between financial stress
and abnormal returns arises because the costs associated with more expensive sources of
financing exceed the lower bid premia benefits of depressed bidding. Since the higher
cost of financing affects all payment methods, this prediction helps explain why there
are no statistically significant differences in the effect of financial stress by method of
payment. In addition, it helps explain why there is no statistically significant negative
relationship between financial stress and abnormal returns in acquisitions of private
targets – depressed bidding and scarce resources in periods of financial stress induce
shareholders of private targets to offer larger liquidity discounts. Especially in cash
acquisitions of private targets, the lower bid premia benefits offset losses associated
with issuing more expensive sources of financing.

The results have important implications for the method of payment choice in periods of
financial stress. To the extent that acquiring firm managers seek to maximize
shareholder value, the firm would likely benefit from undertaking an acquisition only
after a return to normal market conditions, regardless of the method of payment and
especially if the target is public. In addition, shareholders may benefit from improved
corporate governance mechanisms if there is concern about the increased agency costs
of managerial discretion that arise when self-interested managers undertake a stock deal
in a period of high financial stress.

                                  35
6. References

Armitage, S. (1995). Event study methods and evidence on their performance. Journal
   of economic surveys, 9(1), 25-52.
Barnes, B. G., L. Harp, N., & Oler, D. (2014). Evaluating the SDC mergers and
   acquisitions database. Financial Review, 49(4), 793-822.
Becher, D. A., Mulherin, J. H., & Walkling, R. A. (2012). Sources of gains in corporate
   mergers: Refined tests from a neglected industry. Journal of Financial and
   Quantitative Analysis, 47(1), 57-89.
Betton, S., Eckbo, B. E., & Thorburn, K. S. (2008). Corporate takeovers. Handbook of
   empirical corporate finance, 291-429.
Boone, A. L., & Mulherin, J. H. (2008). Do auctions induce a winner's curse? New
   evidence from the corporate takeover market. Journal of financial Economics, 89(1),
   1-19.
Brown, S. J., & Warner, J. B. (1985). Using daily stock returns: The case of event
   studies. Journal of financial economics, 14(1), 3-31.
Bruner, R. F., & Perella, J. R. (2004). Applied mergers and acquisitions (Vol. 173).
   John Wiley & Sons.
Chang, S. (1998). Takeovers of privately held targets, methods of payment, and bidder
   returns. The Journal of Finance, 53(2), 773-784.
Choe, H., Masulis, R. W., & Nanda, V. (1993). Common stock offerings across the
   business cycle: Theory and evidence. Journal of Empirical finance, 1(1), 3-31.
Faccio, M., & Masulis, R. W. (2005). The choice of payment method in European
   mergers and acquisitions. The Journal of Finance, 60(3), 1345-1388.
Faccio, M., McConnell, J. J., & Stolin, D. (2006). Returns to acquirers of listed and
   unlisted targets. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 41(1), 197-220.
Fuller, K., Netter, J., & Stegemoller, M. (2002). What do returns to acquiring firms tell
   us? Evidence from firms that make many acquisitions. The Journal of Finance, 57(4),
   1763-1793.
Gertler, M., & Gilchrist, S. (1994). Monetary policy, business cycles, and the behavior
   of small manufacturing firms. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(2), 309-340.
Hakkio, C. S., & Keeton, W. R. (2009). Financial stress: What is it, how can it be
   measured, and why does it matter. Economic Review, 94(2), 5-50.
Howell, J. W. (2017). The survival of the US dual class share structure. Journal of
   Corporate Finance, 44, 440-450.
Ivashina, V., & Scharfstein, D. (2010). Bank lending during the financial crisis of 2008.
   Journal of Financial economics, 97(3), 319-338.
Jung, K., Kim, Y. C., & Stulz, R. (1996). Timing, investment opportunities, managerial
   discretion, and the security issue decision. Journal of financial economics, 42(2),
   159-185.
Kaplan, S. N. (Ed.). (2007). Mergers and productivity. University of Chicago Press.
Kolari, J. W., & Pynnonen, S. (2011). Nonparametric rank tests for event studies.
   Journal of Empirical Finance, 18(5), 953-971.
Kothari, S. P., & Warner, J. B. (2007). Econometrics of event studies. In Handbook of
   empirical corporate finance (pp. 3-36). Elsevier.
Leary, M. T. (2009). Bank loan supply, lender choice, and corporate capital structure.
   The Journal of Finance, 64(3), 1143-1185.
                                  36
Martin, K. J. (1996). The method of payment in corporate acquisitions, investment
   opportunities, and management ownership. The Journal of finance, 51(4), 1227-
   1246.
Moeller, S. B., Schlingemann, F. P., & Stulz, R. M. (2004). Firm size and the gains
   from acquisitions. Journal of financial economics, 73(2), 201-228.
Nieuwenhuis, R., te Grotenhuis, H. F., & Pelzer, B. J. (2017). Weighted effect coding
   for observational data with wec.
Officer, M. S. (2007). The price of corporate liquidity: Acquisition discounts for
   unlisted targets. Journal of Financial Economics, 83(3), 571-598.
Reuters, T. (2017). SDC platinum: Mergers and acquisitions, equity, bonds, and loans
   transactions definition glossary.
Rigobon, R., & Sack, B. (2004). The impact of monetary policy on asset prices. Journal
   of monetary economics, 51(8), 1553-1575.
Schuster, W. (2017). Group accounting: an analytical approach. Studentlitteratur AB.
Shleifer, A., & Vishny, R. W. (2003). Stock market driven acquisitions. Journal of
   financial Economics, 70(3), 295-311.
Vladimirov, V. (2015). Financing bidders in takeover contests. Journal of Financial
   Economics, 117(3), 534-557.

                                  37
7. Appendix A – Sample Selection Procedure

                             Step 1: SDC Data Screen

 Criteria Obs. Criteria Description

    1 Date Announced: 01/01/1984 to 12/31/2022
    2 154005 Acquiror Primary Stock Exchange: A, NM, N
    3 5743 Form of the Deal: Acquisition of Majority Interest (AM)
    4 2963 Deal Type: 1, 3, 4, 8 (Disclosed Value M&A, Leveraged Buyouts,
                    Exchange Offers, Tender Offers)
    5 2433 Deal Status: C, U
    6 2233 Deal Value > $1 Mil
    7 1963 Percent of Shares Owned After Transaction > 50%
    8 1637 Acquiror Primary NAIC ≠ Sector 22 (Utilities) & Sector 52
                    (Finance and Insurance)
    9 1625 Acquiror Public Status: Public
   10 1551 Target Primary NAIC ≠ Sector 22 (Utilities) & Sector 52 (Finance
                    and Insurance)
   11 1438 Target Public Status: Public, Private, Subsidiary
               Step 2: Data Cleaning, Matching, and Additional Criteria

 Criteria Obs. Criteria Description

   12 1431 Removing Duplicate Observations
   13 NA Match SDC Data with daily return data from CRSP, removing
                     observations with no/partial match (e.g. missing return data in
                   event window or estimation window)
   14 NA Relative Size (Deal Value/Acquiror MVE) > 1%

   15 676 FINAL SAMPLE

                                  38
8. Appendix B – Variable Definitions

                                        Panel A: Summary Statistics
 Variable Definition

 DealValue Total amount of consideration transferred by the acquiring firm in $ mil.

 AcquirorMVE Total equity market value of the acquiring firm 4 weeks before the acquisition
                        announcement date.

 RelativeSize                   𝐷𝑒𝑎𝑙𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒
                                       RelativeSize =
                                                                            𝐴𝑐𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑟𝑜𝑟 𝑀𝑉𝐸

 PercentCash                 𝐶𝑎𝑠ℎ 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
                                    PercentCash =
                                                                                                                𝐷𝑒𝑎𝑙𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒

 PercentStock                   𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
                                   PercentStock =
                                                                                                                𝐷𝑒𝑎𝑙𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒

 PercentCombination                           𝑂𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
                                PercentCombination =
                                                                                                                      𝐷𝑒𝑎𝑙𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒

 SameIndustry A binary variable =YES if the acquiring firm and the target share the same two-digit
                    SIC codes, and =NO otherwise.

 CrossBorderDeal A binary variable =YES if the target firm is non-US based, and =NO otherwise.

                                   Panel B: Cross-Sectional Analysis

 wecMop A factor variable with three categories: cash (wecCash), stock (wecStock), and
                        combination (wecCombo), weighted effect coded according to the procedure in
                        Nieuwenhuis, Grotenhuis & Pelzer (2017).

 RSCentered A mean centered version of the continuous variable RelativeSize.

 KCFSI A continuous variable Kansas City Financial Stress Index (KCFSI), mean centered
                         by construction. The Kansas City Financial Stress Index is a composite of the
                          following variables: several measures of credit spreads, uncertainty about
                           fundamental asset values (volatility), and stress in the banking industry (bank stock
                           volatility and cross-sectional dispersion), among others (Hakkio & Keeton, 2009).

 FSMop An interaction variable between the weighted-effect coded factor variable wecMop
                      and the mean centered continuous variable KCFSI, interacted according to the
                        procedure in Nieuwenhuis et. al. (2017). The interaction produces three interaction
                       terms: FSCash, FSStock, and FSCombo

 wecForeign A factor variable with two categories: Foreign and the omitted category Domestic,
                          weighted effect coded according to the procedure in Nieuwenhuis et. al. (2017).

 wecSameIndustry A factor variable with two categories: SameIndustry and the omitted category
                       DifferentIndustry, weighted effect coded according to the procedure in Nieuwenhuis
                                  et. al. (2017).

Note: Definitions of variables directly from the SDC database are adopted from the SDC definition glossary (Reuters,
2017). These include DealValue, AcquirorMVE, PercentCash, PercentStock, PercentCombination, and
CrossBorderDeal.
                                  39
9. Appendix C – CAR Estimates using Value-Weighted
     Market Returns

This table presents cumulative abnormal return (CAR) estimates for the acquisitions in the sample, using
value-weighted market returns instead of equally-weighted market returns as in Table 2. Panel A reports
the CARs for all acquisitions in the sample grouped by method of payment. Panels B and C report the
CARs for acquisitions of public targets and acquisitions of private targets grouped by method of payment.
The abnormal returns are estimated using the Market Model, Market-Adjusted Model, and Fama-French 3
Factor Model (FF3). Market Model and FF3 parameters are estimated over a [-200, -20] estimation
window. Abnormal returns are cumulated over a five-day [-2, 2] event window. If the acquisition
announcement date is a non-trading day (e.g. a weekend or holiday), the event date is assumed to be the
first subsequent trading day. Refer to Table 2 and Appendix B for definitions of stock, cash and
combination acquisitions.

                    Panel A: All Acquisitions Grouped by Method of Payment
            Market-Model Market-Adjusted Model FF3
Stock 0.0572* (2.03) 0.0779** (3.34) 0.0673** (2.69)

Cash 0.0105 (1.20) 0.0175** (2.93) 0.0146 (1.96)

Combination 0.0176 (1.56) 0.0207 (1.92) 0.0154 (1.34)

All 0.0178* (2.52) 0.024*** (3.90) 0.0193** (2.85)

              Panel B: Acquisitions of Public Targets Grouped by Method of Payment
              Market-Model Market-Adjusted Model FF3
Stock 0.0398 (0.61) 0.0968* (2.28) 0.0674 (1.32)

Cash -0.0244 (-0.98) -0.0038 (-0.33) -0.0192 (-1.02)

Combination 0.0376 (1.99) 0.0372* (2.08) 0.042* (2.34)

All 0.0015 (0.08) 0.0207 (1.97) 0.0093 (0.66)

              Panel C: Acquisitions of Private Targets Grouped by Method of Payment
            Market-Model Market-Adjusted Model FF3
Stock 0.069* (2.71) 0.0758** (2.84) 0.0692** (2.62)

Cash 0.0309** (3.16) 0.0301** (3.16) 0.032** (3.21)

Combination 0.0168 (0.85) 0.0232 (1.22) 0.0157 (0.77)

All 0.0268* (2.42) 0.0302** (2.83) 0.0267* (2.35)

Note: t-statistics in parentheses. The estimates in bold have a higher statistical significance level (one
additional *) and the estimates in italics have a lower statistical significance level (one fewer *),
compared to the estimates in Table 2. All results are comparable, both in magnitude and statistical
significance, to the original results in Table 2 using equally-weighted market returns.
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
                                  40
10. Appendix D – Placebo Test Results

This table reports cumulative abnormal return (CAR) estimates generated by partially mimicking a
procedure proposed by Brown & Warner (1985), in which the estimates are simulated by assigning a
placebo event date to each event. As evidence that the observed abnormal returns are driven by the event
itself rather than by other factors, the simulation should generate no significantly positive or negative
abnormal returns on average (Kothari & Warner, 2007). In this case, each acquisition in the sample is
assigned a single placebo event date 30 calendar days (approx. 21 trading days) before the acquisition
announcement date, corresponding roughly to the end of the estimation window in the original sample.
This placebo event date provides a reasonable gap which ensures that the estimates are not contaminated
by any leakage of information prior to the acquisition announcement. Panel A reports the simulated CARs
for all acquisitions in the sample grouped by method of payment. Panels B and C report the simulated
CARs for acquisitions of public targets and acquisitions of private targets grouped by method of payment.
The abnormal returns are estimated using the Market Model, Market-Adjusted Model, and Fama-French 3
Factor Model (FF3). Market Model and FF3 parameters are estimated over a [-200, -20] estimation
window. Abnormal returns are cumulated over a five-day [-2, 2] event window. If the placebo event date
is a non-trading day (e.g. a weekend or holiday), the event date is assumed to be the first subsequent
trading day. Refer to Table 2 and Appendix B for definitions of stock, cash and combination acquisitions.

                    Panel A: All Acquisitions Grouped by Method of Payment
              Market-Model Market-Adjusted Model FF3
Stock -0.056* (-2.2504) -0.0278 (-1.8308) -0.007 (-0.2192)

Cash -0.008 (-1.0997) -0.0007 (-0.1599) -0.0066 (-1.0445)

Combination 0.007 (1.6165) 0.0108* (2.5098) 0.0049 (1.0598)

All -0.0046 (-1.0539) 0.0027 (0.8758) -0.0011 (-0.2483)
              Panel B: Acquisitions of Public Targets Grouped by Method of Payment
              Market-Model Market-Adjusted Model FF3
Stock -0.0774 (-1.3531) -0.0147 (-1.2642) 0.0603 (0.7673)

Cash -0.0168 (-0.7122) 0.0053 (0.488) -0.0149 (-0.7743)

Combination 0.0162 (1.2851) 0.0195 (1.5894) 0.0159 (1.1794)

All -0.0151 (-0.9356) 0.0068 (0.9186) 0.0034 (0.2215)
              Panel C: Acquisitions of Private Targets Grouped by Method of Payment
              Market-Model Market-Adjusted Model FF3
Stock -0.0491 (-1.5906) -0.0369 (-1.3181) -0.0414 (-1.2272)

Cash -0.0004 (-0.0741) 0.001 (0.1776) 0.0003 (0.047)

Combination 0.0047 (0.877) 0.0093 (1.6047) 0.0006 (0.0992)

All -0.0015 (-0.3523) 0.0023 (0.5264) -0.0028 (0.6006)

Note: t-statistics in parentheses. All simulated results are statistically insignificant except the Market
Model CAR for stock acquisitions and the Market-Adjusted Model CAR for combination acquisitions.
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

                                  41
11. Appendix E – Replicating Fuller et. al. (2002) Results

This table presents cumulative abnormal return (CAR) estimates for acquisitions announced in the
January 1, 1990 to December 31, 2000 period. The sample is equivalent to Fuller et. al. (2002), except
that it does not consider only frequent acquirors. Fuller et. al. (2002) report abnormal returns estimated
using the Market-Adjusted Model. Panel A reports the CARs for all acquisitions in the sample grouped
by method of payment. Panels B and C report the CARs for acquisitions of public targets and acquisitions
of private targets grouped by method of payment. The abnormal returns are estimated using the Market
Model, Market-Adjusted Model, and Fama-French 3 Factor Model (FF3). Market Model and FF3
parameters are estimated over a [-200, -20] estimation window. Abnormal returns are cumulated over a
five-day [-2, 2] event window. If the acquisition announcement date is a non-trading day (e.g. a weekend
or holiday), the event date is assumed to be the first subsequent trading day. Stock acquisitions are deals
in which more than 50% of the total consideration transferred consists of an exchange of the acquiror’s
equity for the target’s equity. Cash acquisitions include debt financed deals and cash financed deals, or
any combination of the two, exceeding 50% of total consideration. Finally, combination acquisitions are
financed by a combination of stock, cash, and other forms of consideration.

                    Panel A: All Acquisitions Grouped by Method of Payment
            Market Model Market-Adjusted Model FF3
Cash 0.0397** (2.5782) 0.0394** (2.5687) 0.0403** (2.5716)

Stock 0.0364 (0.7792) 0.0765** (2.2051) 0.068* (1.8617)

Combination 0.0071 (0.7301) 0.0119 (1.4448) 0.004 (0.3352)

All 0.021** (2.2639) 0.0285*** (3.5526) 0.0233** (2.4509)
              Panel B: Acquisitions of Public Targets Grouped by Method of Payment
              Market Model Market-Adjusted Model FF3
Stock 0.0483 (0.2767) 0.1971* (2.0759) 0.1519 (1.3823)

Cash 0.0306 (1.5379) 0.0301 (1.4325) 0.0232 (1.3199)

Combination 0.0525 (1.4769) 0.0482 (1.4351) 0.0527 (1.5759)

All 0.0423 (1.4556) 0.0621*** (2.7357) 0.0542** (2.4041)
              Panel C: Acquisitions of Private Targets Grouped by Method of Payment
              Market Model Market-Adjusted Model FF3
Stock 0.0553 (1.6676) 0.0604* (1.8998) 0.061 (1.6888)

Cash 0.0561* (1.9868) 0.0535* (1.9163) 0.0605** (2.0726)

Combination -0.0022 (-0.1843) 0.007 (0.8745) -0.0056 (-0.3346)

All 0.0222* (1.9141) 0.0275*** (2.6807) 0.0223 (1.6019)

Note: t-statistics in parentheses. The estimates in bold are consistent with the estimates in Fuller et. al.
(2002). The estimates in italics are inconsistent with the estimates in Fuller et. al. (2002). Notable
discrepancies include: no finding of negative significant abnormal returns for stock acquisitions of public
targets, no finding of negative and significant abnormal returns for all acquisitions of public targets, and a
less robust finding of positive and significant abnormal returns for stock acquisitions of private targets.
* p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01

                                  42
12. Appendix F – Baseline Results Excluding Large Deals

This table presents cumulative abnormal return (CAR) estimates for the acquisitions in the sample
excluding large deals with DealValue≥$200M. Excluding large deals ensures that the results in Table 2
are not sensitive to their exclusion (i.e. that no bias is introduced from their inclusion in the full sample).
The results confirm that abnormal returns by method of payment for a sample excluding large deals are
not directionally different from abnormal returns by method of payment for all deals. Panel A reports the
CARs for all acquisitions grouped by method of payment. Panels B and C report the CARs for
acquisitions of public targets and acquisitions of private targets grouped by method of payment. The
abnormal returns are estimated using the Market Model, Market-Adjusted Model, and Fama-French 3
Factor Model (FF3). Market Model and FF3 parameters are estimated over a [-200, -20] estimation
window. Abnormal returns are cumulated over a five-day [-2, 2] event window. If the acquisition
announcement date is a non-trading day (e.g. a weekend or holiday), the event date is assumed to be the
first subsequent trading day. Stock acquisitions are deals in which more than 50% of the total
consideration transferred consists of an exchange of the acquiror’s equity (or other forms of equity
consideration) for the target’s equity. Cash acquisitions include debt financed deals and cash financed
deals, or any combination of the two, exceeding 50% of total consideration. Finally, combination
acquisitions are financed by a combination of stock, cash, and other forms of consideration.

                    Panel A: All Acquisitions Grouped by Method of Payment
              Market Model Market-Adjusted Model FF3
Stock 0.0535 (1.5874) 0.0746* (2.655) 0.0729* (2.5974)

Cash 0.0102 (0.768) 0.0216** (2.795) 0.0145 (1.3994)

Combination 0.0203 (1.4693) 0.0239 (1.8029) 0.0178 (1.2663)

All 0.0192* (2.0582) 0.0274*** (3.4897) 0.0214* (2.4576)
              Panel B: Acquisitions of Public Targets Grouped by Method of Payment
              Market Model Market-Adjusted Model FF3
Stock -0.0044 (-0.0433) 0.087 (1.2835) 0.062 (0.8619)

Cash -0.0453 (-0.8926) 0.0025 (0.1389) -0.031 (-0.8989)

Combination 0.0321 (1.3211) 0.0326 (1.4325) 0.037 (1.6328)

All -0.0139 (-0.4464) 0.0236 (1.5653) 0.0041 (0.1841)
              Panel C: Acquisitions of Private Targets Grouped by Method of Payment
              Market Model Market-Adjusted Model FF3
Stock 0.0726* (2.7491) 0.0726* (2.6148) 0.0771** (2.8537)

Cash 0.0291** (2.6216) 0.0292** (2.7306) 0.0304** (2.7174)

Combination 0.0186 (0.8276) 0.0255 (1.1808) 0.0183 (0.7945)

All 0.0275* (2.1906) 0.0311* (2.5676) 0.0283* (2.2015)

Note: t-statistics in parentheses. The estimates in bold have a lower statistical significance level (one
fewer *), compared to the estimates in Table 2, and the underlined estimates are no longer significant
when compared to the estimates in Table 2. Most results are comparable, both in magnitude and statistical
significance, to the original baseline results in Table 2. The findings in Table 2 are therefore generalizable
to deals with DealValue<$200M. * p<0.05; ** p<0.01; *** p<0.001
                                  43
13. Appendix G – Results Excluding High Financial Stress

This table presents cumulative abnormal return (CAR) estimates for the acquisitions in the sample
excluding high financial stress acquisitions (i.e. acquisitions announced when the Kansas City Financial
Stress Index>2). Excluding high financial stress acquisitions ensures that the results in Table 2 are
generalizable to normal market conditions. The results confirm that abnormal returns excluding high
financial stress acquisitions are almost the same as the results reported in Table 2. Panel A reports the
CARs for the acquisitions grouped by method of payment. Panels B and C report the CARs for
acquisitions of public targets and acquisitions of private targets grouped by method of payment. The
abnormal returns are estimated using the Market Model, Market-Adjusted Model, and Fama-French 3
Factor Model (FF3). Market Model and FF3 parameters are estimated over a [-200, -20] estimation
window. Abnormal returns are cumulated over a five-day [-2, 2] event window. If the acquisition
announcement date is a non-trading day (e.g. a weekend or holiday), the event date is assumed to be the
first subsequent trading day. Stock acquisitions are deals in which more than 50% of the total
consideration transferred consists of an exchange of the acquiror’s equity (or other forms of equity
consideration) for the target’s equity. Cash acquisitions include debt financed deals and cash financed
deals, or any combination of the two, exceeding 50% of total consideration. Finally, combination
acquisitions are financed by a combination of stock, cash, and other forms of consideration.

                     Panel A: All Acquisitions Grouped by Method of Payment
              Market Model Market-Adjusted Model FF3
Stock 0.0602* (2.072) 0.0815*** (3.3702) 0.0733** (2.9801)

Cash 0.0104 (1.0634) 0.0194*** (3.2076) 0.0149 (1.9056)

Combination 0.018 (1.5492) 0.0204 (1.8294) 0.0151 (1.271)

All 0.0181** (2.434) 0.0249*** (3.9463) 0.0197** (2.8331)
                Panel B: Acquisitions of Public Targets Grouped by Method of Payment
              Market Model Market-Adjusted Model FF3
Stock 0.0462 (0.6697) 0.1082* (2.4248) 0.0874 (1.8012)

Cash -0.0246 (-0.8308) 0.0017 (0.1546) -0.0167 (-0.816)

Combination 0.0433* (2.2022) 0.0395* (2.0874) 0.0428* (2.268)

All 0.0035 (0.1692) 0.0257* (2.4329) 0.0132 (0.8877)
              Panel C: Acquisitions of Private Targets Grouped by Method of Payment
              Market Model Market-Adjusted Model FF3
Stock 0.071* (2.6645) 0.077* (2.7882) 0.0708* (2.5289)

Cash 0.0297** (2.939) 0.0307** (3.1131) 0.031** (3.0286)

Combination 0.0173 (0.8557) 0.0223 (1.1498) 0.0163 (0.7866)

All 0.0266* (2.3539) 0.0301** (2.7516) 0.0266* (2.3002)

Note: t-statistics in parentheses. The estimates in bold are insignificant in Table 2, but significant here.
Otherwise, the results are comparable both in direction, magnitude, and statistical significance to the
original baseline results in Table 2. The findings in Table 2 are therefore generalizable to normal market
conditions. * p<0.05; ** p<0.01; *** p<0.001

                                  44