OPENING THE GATES TO THE
SWEDISH MORTGAGE
MARKET

A STUDY ON HOW THE RECENT EMERGENCE OF
MORTGAGE CREDIT COMPANIES AFFECTS REAL INTEREST
RATES IN SWEDEN

HANNA ERIKSSON

LUDVIG HÖJMAN

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2023
Opening The Gates to The Swedish Mortgage Market  –  A Study on How the Recent
Emergence of Mortgage Credit Companies Affects  Real Interest Rates in Sweden

Abstract:

   This paper examines the impact of the emergence of mortgage credit companies (MCCs) on
   real mortgage interest rates in Sweden. Our  results  reveal that MCCs exert downward
   pressure on average mortgage interest rates  for the whole  market and monetary financial
   institutions (MFIs), with statistical significance for most interest rate fixation periods.
   Additionally, the paper investigates the influence of policy  rates  on  mortgage credit
   companies’  ability to  affect  mortgage pricing.  We conclude  that higher policy rates  limit
   MCCs’  ability  to influence pricing, primarily for  fixed-rate mortgages.  Our findings
   highlight  the role that mortgage credit companies play in enhancing mortgage market
   competition and provide insights into their sensitivity to changes in policy rates. In a broader
   context,  our  study and  its  results  contribute  to  the current debate  on  mortgage market
   competition  in Sweden.

Keywords:

   Mortgage credit companies, “Lag 2016:1024”, average mortgage interest rate, policy rate
   transmission

Authors:

   Hanna Eriksson (24903)
   Ludvig Höjman (25060)

Tutors:

   Paula Roth, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor’s  Program in  Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Hanna Eriksson and Ludvig Höjman, 2023

                                     2
Table of Contents
1.  Introduction                                                                  4
1.1 Background and Motivation                                                  4
1.2 Characteristics of the Swedish Mortgage Market                                  6
1.3 Sweden’s Mortgage Market in a European Context                                8
2.  Literature Review  and Hypothesis Development                                10
3.  Data                                                                        12
3.1 Dependent Variables                                                      12
3.2 Independent Variable                                                      13
3.3 Control Variables                                                         13
3.4 Fixed Effect Variables                                                      13
3.5 Excluded Control Variables                                                 14
3.6 Data Collection                                                           14
3.7 Limitations to the Data                                                     14
3.8 Summary Statistics                                                        15
3.9 Correlation and Multicollinearity                                             16
4.  Methodology                                                                 17
4.1 Description of Applied Model                                               17
5.  Empirical Results                                                              20
5.1 Results and Analysis                                                       20
  5.1.1 Results and Analysis – Full Time Period                                               20
   5.1.2 Results and Analysis – Pre- and Post-Policy Rate Shock                                     21
5.2  Robustness Tests                                                            22
  5.2.1 Robustness Tests – Full Time Period                                                 22
   5.2.2 Robustness Tests – Pre- and Post-Policy Rate Shock                                        23
6.  Discussion                                                                     25
6.1  Market Pressure from Mortgage Credit Companies                                25
6.2  The Effect of Tightening  Monetary Policy                                       26
7.  Conclusion                                                                  29
7.1 Concluding Remarks                                                     29
7.2 Further Research                                                          29
8.  References                                                                    31
9.  Appendices                                                                  36

Ludvig Höjman & Hanna Eriksson         3            Stockholm School of Economics
1.  Introduction

1.1  Background and Motivation

The global mortgage market is predicted to reach a valuation of USD 1,615.97 billion in 2027,
growing at a compounded annual growth rate of 12.1 percent (Mortgage Lender Global Market
Report,  2023).  Alongside  this high growth rate,  the  United States,  Australia,  and  the  United
Kingdom  report  increasing  competition in their respective  mortgage markets  (Rees, 2019;
Sanglap & Ramos, 2023; Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 2023). Simultaneously, there
is  a global trend of  tightening monetary policy,  leading to  increasing  mortgage interest rates
(Council on Foreign Relations, 2023).  The  interplay between  the  growing number of mortgage
institutions and the tightening of monetary policy brings to the forefront  a  discussion about
effective competition in mortgage markets. Specifically, it raises the question of how increased
competition  influences  mortgage  pricing.  According  to  neoclassical  economic  theory,
increased  competition  results  in lower prices.  Marshall  (1920) argues that more intense
competition benefits consumers  by reducing prices and improving product quality.  However,
critics argue that  neoclassical theories  do not  accurately represent  the  dynamics of real-world
competition.  According to  J. McNulty  (1968),  competition  should be  recognised  not only  by
the number of competitors but rather the degree of rivalry amongst  them,  departing  from the
idea of perfect  competition.  In addition,  the work of  Gabaix,  Laibson,  D.  Li,  H.  Li,  Resnick
and de Vries (2016) contests the view that heightened competition results in significantly lower
prices.  They  conclude  that  high markups still exist in fragmented markets because of  market
characteristics and customers’ individual preferences.  While opinions vary on the correlation
between price  and competition, there  is  a  general agreement  amongst  the  literature  that this
relationship is not strictly linear.
       Examining the price-competition relationship in the mortgage market, Allen, Clark and
Houde  (2014)  investigate  the  link  between market concentration and  variation in mortgage
prices  in  the Canadian market.  The  study  reveals  a  significant  correlation  between  bank
mergers and  decreasing  price  dispersion,  as well as  an  increase  in average mortgage interest
rates.  In addition,  van Leuvensteijn, Kok  Sørensen, Bikker and van Rixtel  (2008)  examine  the
influence of  market competition  on the  pass-through of policy rates  in the Euro  Area.  They
discover that  increased competition  leads to  lower interest rate spreads  across several  loan
products,  with mortgages showing statistically significant results.  Moreover,  Treur and
Boonstra (2014)  examine the impact of Dutch market  conditions  on mortgage funding and
interest rates  following the financial crisis. The paper  discovers  a correlation between higher
market concentration and  rising  mortgage interest rates.  However, the authors  add  that  the
correlation  can  result from  changes  in  funding costs.
       Building on  the  cited  research,  our study aims to provide  a broader understanding  of
how  increased competition  influences  mortgage interest rates.  Specifically,  our research
investigates  how “Lag 2016:1024”,  a legislation implemented in Sweden in 2017 that
introduced a new type of mortgage institution,  impacts  mortgage market competition.  To

                                     4
understand the  effect  of  the legislative  change, we  analyse  the effects of these new players,
                                                                                                    1
known as  mortgage  credit  companies (MCCs), on  average  mortgage interest rates.
       By focusing on the Swedish market, whose competitive landscape is characterised by a
growing  number  of  competitors  rather  than  consolidation,  we add to previous literature  on
mortgage   market   competition.   Furthermore,   our   research   contributes   with   additional
perspectives on how monetary policy influences the mortgage market’s competitive landscape.
Examining the effect of monetary policy  allows us to  analyse mortgage credit companies’
ability to survive and grow in the long run.  To  determine  monetary  policy’s  impact, we
compare  the effect  of mortgage credit companies  on interest rates  during  periods with high
versus low repo  rates.  Additionally, instead of focusing on interest rate dispersions, spreads, or
margins as related literature does, our study directs attention to average mortgage interest rates,
which directly  reflects  real  customer prices. Moreover, we examine how monetary financial
institutions (MFIs), which hold most of the market power, are impacted by mortgage credit
            2
companies.  We intend  for  the study’s results  to  contribute to the discussion on efficient
mortgage markets  through  the insights  gained from the Swedish market.  Further, we  aim to
understand if  allowing  MCCs  or similar mortgage institutes  to operate  is  an effective  tool for
government-controlled market regulation.
       Our  study  analyses  data  from  2012  to  2023,  providing an opportunity to  examine  the
price-competition relationship in the mortgage market without including the atypical dynamics
of the  2008  financial crisis  (Crotty, 2009).  Additionally, using  newer  data  offers  a  perspective
that aligns with current market structures,  which is  essential  given  the  banking sector’s  digital
transformation in recent years  (European Central Bank, 2023).  The  emergence  of  Swedish
mortgage credit companies  is part  of this  transformation.  They  use a fully digital business
model  that  has the potential  to  reshape  the  mortgage market’s  competitive landscape.
According to  J.  Ferreira, Fernandes and  F.  Ferreira  (2019),  digitalisation  alters  market
structures by removing barriers to entry, paving the way for new competitors and substitutes to
emerge.  To understand how  this development  in  the  Swedish mortgage market has impacted
prices, our  research  questions  are as follows:

How has the recent emergence of mortgage credit companies  affected real mortgage interest
rates in Sweden?  And  have  changes to  monetary  policy with respect to  repo rates  affected
mortgage credit companies’ ability to influence  real mortgage  interest rates?

To answer the research questions, we use a multiple linear regression model. We want to assess
the effect of  mortgage credit companies’  presence, represented by their market share
(independent  variable),  on  average  mortgage  interest  rates  (dependent  variable).  The
regressions  are  run using average mortgage interest rates for the  whole  market and monetary
financial institutions  separately, capturing both market and competitor effects. Additionally,
we account for year  fixed effects by including a dummy variable for each year, and the
                                                                              3
regressions are  conducted for various interest rate fixation periods.   To  determine  how

1
 Mortgage credit companies and  their  abbreviation MCCs are used  interchangeably.
2
 The abbreviation MFIs will be used interchangeably  with monetary financial  institutions.
3
 Interest fixation periods are  separated  by  ≤ 3 months (Variable) and > 3 months (Fixed), and Total.

Ludvig Höjman & Hanna Eriksson         5            Stockholm School of Economics
monetary policy  influences  mortgage credit  companies’  effect  on rates,  we split and compare
the data across two periods:  pre-  and post-policy  rate  shock. We determine  the  cut-off  date
                                                                                                       th
based on  the  Swedish Central Bank’s  policy rate change  on  May  4 ,  2022.
       Our  results  offer two unique perspectives.  First, we find that  the growing market share
of mortgage credit companies  exerts  downward pressure on  average mortgage  interest rates.
This finding is true for  both  the whole market and MFIs, as well as  for all interest fixation
periods,  which is  discussed  to be the result of  increased competition and  operational
efficiencies of MCCs.  Second, we  observe  that  mortgage credit companies’  effect  on rates
diminishes  as  monetary policy tightens. Several  factors  can  account  for this  reduced impact,
with  the  inability  of  mortgage credit companies  to  hold deposits  being a  major contributor.

1.2  Characteristics of the  Swedish  Mortgage  Market

To provide background for our study, we describe the characteristics of the Swedish mortgage
market and  outline  the legislation that  allowed  MCCs  to enter the market.  In Sweden,
outstanding  household  mortgages have increased  by an  average  of  7.9 percent  annually  in the
past  20 years  (Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority, 2022).  These mortgages currently
account for 83 percent of total household debt  (Swedish  Financial Supervisory  Authority,
2023).  Historically  characterised  by high concentration, the Swedish mortgage market  is
experiencing a rise in  new entrants.  Still,  60  percent  of  the  market share  is  held by  Sweden’s
four  largest  banks:  Nordea,  Swedbank,  SEB,  and  Handelsbanken  (Swedish  Bankers’
                      4
Association, 2023).   In  2015,  a  Swedish  government  official  report concluded that  only
allowing  traditional banks  to  issue mortgages would  “restrict the market for  mortgages  in a
way that would not be compatible  with consumers’  interests”  (Government Offices, 2016).
Following  the  report,  “Lag 2016:1024” was passed into  law,  making it  possible for a new type
                                                                  5
of competitor to enter the market: mortgage credit companies. According to Statistics Sweden
(2020), mortgage credit companies are institutions  authorised  by the Swedish Financial
Supervisory Authority  to issue  mortgages.  Since 2017, several  companies have  applied for  a
permit; however,  many  have  never  supplied any mortgages  and  have since  returned  their
permits  (Dagens Industri, 2023).  As of 2023,  mortgage credit companies hold an  approximate
market share  of  1  percent, with  Stabelo and Hypoteket  being the  largest  participants  (Statistics
Sweden, 2023).  Graph I  displays  the historical development of  MCCs’  outstanding  loan
volume to  help comprehend  what  their market share  means in absolute terms.

4
  Market share calculated using lending to Swedish households with residential security as of June 2023.
5
 The report (SOU 2015:40) was inquired by the  Department of Justice, then led by Morgan Johansson, to
investigate how 2008/48/EG, 2013/36/EU, and regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 would be translated into Swedish
law. Following the report, the Department of Justice submitted a bill (Proposition 2015/16:197) that was passed
into law through “Lag 2016:1024”.

                                     6
       Graph I: MCCs Outstanding Mortgage Volume Over Time in SEK Million

  60 000

  50 000

  40 000

  30 000

  20 000

  10 000

      0

         2018M122019M022019M042019M062019M082019M102019M122020M022020M042020M062020M082020M102020M122021M022021M042021M062021M082021M102021M122022M022022M042022M062022M082022M102022M122023M022023M042023M062023M08
Graph I: This graph presents MCCs outstanding mortgage volume in SEK million, split on months.

Mortgage credit companies distinguish themselves from monetary financial institutions in
many ways; they have different rights  and  obligations.  A  major difference between the two
categories  of mortgage institutions  is how their mortgages  are  financed. MFIs mainly finance
their mortgages through deposits and covered bonds, while MCCs issue or transfer mortgages,
which they, in turn,  sell to alternative investment funds (AIFs).  These  AIFs,  which are  usually
subsidiaries  of mortgage credit companies, develop investment products derived from these
mortgages and sell them  to investors  (Sveriges Riksbank,  2020).  Investors primarily  include
Nordic pension funds and insurance companies,  but the funds are available to  all  investors
interested in Swedish mortgages (Sveriges Riksbank, 2020; Hypoteket, 2023). Mortgage credit
companies’   financing   structure   alleviates   certain   risks   in   the   mortgage   market.   This
international risk sharing,  facilitated by the securitisation of mortgage debt, effectively
distributes the risks associated with domestic credit.  It  not only  helps  to  mitigate  financial
strains on local mortgage institutions but also broadens the investor base (Hoffman & Nitschka,
2012). However, international investment in the Swedish mortgage market is a well-established
practice, where  investors have had  the option to allocate money  into covered bonds issued by
monetary  financial  institutions  prior to MCCs existence.  Yet,  while  investors in MFIs hold a
claim against the issuer  and the underlying assets, those who invest in  mortgage credit
companies  only have  a  claim on the fund itself  (Sveriges Riksbank,  2020).  Consequently, in
the event of  default, investors holding covered bonds issued by monetary financial institutions
benefit from an additional layer of security  (Sveriges Riksbank, 2013).

Ludvig Höjman & Hanna Eriksson         7            Stockholm School of Economics
       In addition to using  different  financing methods,  mortgage credit companies  target
customers with  safer  risk profiles.  MCCs  have  a maximum loan-to-value ratio of  0.60  to  0.75,
compared to monetary financial institutions’  ratio of  0.85.  By setting a  lower  loan-to-value
threshold,  MCCs  reduce  credit risk for  those investing in  their  funds, while  their  mortgage
customers benefit from more competitive rates (Sveriges Riksbank, 2020). However, it is worth
recognising that in Sweden, the average loan-to-value ratio in 2017 was only 0.40,  making  the
difference  between  institutions’  credit risk  marginal  (SEB, 2017).  In addition to  targeting  less
risky customers, mortgage credit  companies’  business model  is  built on  the idea that they can
offer lower rates due to cost savings  (Sveriges Riksbank, 2020).  Nonetheless, more  recently,
with the shift in the Swedish Central Bank’s monetary policy and the subsequent rise of interest
rates, mortgage credit companies are struggling to offer competitive interest rates  (SvD
Näringsliv, 2023).  In  September 2023,  the growth  rate for  mortgages  issued  by MCCs
decreased  by  5.8 percent,  compared to the same period the  previous  year (Statistics Sweden,
2023). Meanwhile, as mortgage credit companies face difficulties, Sweden’s four largest banks
have collectively made a profit of  SEK  120  billion  in the first three quarters of 2023. These
substantial  earnings  have  raised a debate regarding the  mortgage market’s competitive climate
(Dagens Nyheter, 2023).  According  to  Sweden’s largest political party,  Socialdemokraterna,
large banks are reaping profits at the expense of struggling households,  upholding a
competitive  landscape  with  unfair pricing  (Riksdag,  2023).

1.3  Sweden’s  Mortgage Market  in a  European  Context

To further describe the characteristics of the Swedish mortgage market,  it is  essential  to
recognise the  factors that  set  it  apart, as well as  its  shared features  with the European  market.
The European Union  is characterised  by  its free movement of resources and  harmonisation  of
financial structures,  which  provides  flexibility for customers to fulfil their individual needs.
Despite this  alignment,  there is a distinct heterogeneity  between  the  European  Union’s
mortgage markets (European Covered Bond Council, 2023). This variety is evident in Sweden,
whose mortgage market  displays  several factors that  set  it  apart  from other member countries.
       One  differentiating  factor is the  preferred  interest  rate  fixation period.  In Sweden,  72
percent  of new  mortgages  are issued  with  variable interest rates,  a proportion that is high
compared to the rest of Europe, where fixed rates are more common  (Swedish Banking
Association, 2018).  Additionally,  Sweden’s outstanding  mortgages  per capita  amount to  EUR
57.5  thousand,  compared to the  EU  average  of  EUR  20.5  thousand  (European Covered Bond
                   6, 7
Council, 2023).   Non-performing loans, as a percentage of gross loans,  is  0.23 percent  in
                                                         8
Sweden,  lower  than  the  EU  average of  1.75 percent. Furthermore,  Sweden’s  average  default
rate  is 0.08 percent,  compared to the European  average of 0.81 percent,  implying  that the
                                                                                     9
Swedish mortgage market is less risky  (European Banking Authority, 2023).  Despite these
differences, there are similarities between Sweden and its neighbouring countries. Research on
the  mortgage markets in  Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Finland,  and  the Netherlands,  published

6
 The EU average includes Iceland and Norway.
7
 Mortgages per capita  excludes individuals under the age of 18 years old.
8
 Non-performing loans are defined as loans where payments are overdue by 90 days or more.
9
 Average default rate  numbers are  for retail loans secured on real estate property.

                                     8
by the Swedish  Financial Supervisory Authority  (2023),  reveals  that  market concentration is
relatively high  across  these  countries.  In addition, the  Swedish  average  mortgage interest rate
makes out  the  EU  median  at  3.8 percent  (The Global Economy, 2023).
       Like  in  Sweden,  most  European  mortgages  are  issued  by  monetary  financial
institutions.  Only a subset of countries  has  entities  with  similar business models  to Swedish
mortgage credit companies (European Covered Bond Council, 2023). Amongst these countries
are the Netherlands,  Ireland,  and the United Kingdom  (Sveriges Riksbank, 2020).  In the Dutch
mortgage market,  MFIs  represent a dominant market share  that is growing partially at the
expense of other financial institutions (OFIs), which exhibit  similar  characteristics  to Swedish
MCCs.  This  market  trend  can  be explained by a reclassification  of mortgage  institutions
alongside new  accounting  standards  (De Nederlandsche Bank, 2023).  In  the Irish mortgage
market,  besides  MFIs, other  institutions  have mortgages on their balance  sheets.  These
institutions  are  called  retail credit firms (RCFs) and  unregulated loan owners (ULOs),  which
together  make up 18  percent  of  total Irish mortgages.  In the United Kingdom,  there are  also
institutions  that  do not fit the criteria of  MFIs  and exhibit similar characteristics  to  Swedish
MCCs.  These  UK  institutions  are  labelled  as  other specialist lenders (OLSs)  and  non-MFIs,
which  account  for  7.6  percent  and 3.6  percent  of total  mortgages issued  (Sveriges Riksbank,
2020).
       We choose to  limit  our study  to  the Swedish mortgage market  based on the  diversity  of
mortgage markets across different countries.  Also,  by focusing on the Swedish market,  our
study’s  findings  can better  contribute  to the ongoing discussion about mortgage market
competition in Sweden.  Nevertheless, insights from  our  study  are valuable for  governments,
such as those in the Netherlands,  Ireland,  and the United Kingdom, which currently  permit
entities like mortgage credit companies to operate, or those governments contemplating making
similar  legislative changes.  If  governments can  regulate in favour of institutions similar to
mortgage credit companies, they can  potentially  redistribute  market power  away from  large
banks and  thereby  improve  customer terms.

Ludvig Höjman & Hanna Eriksson         9            Stockholm School of Economics
2. Literature Review  and Hypothesis Development

The central concept  of  our study is the  price-competition relationship, a topic that  has been
discussed  and  studied  for  the last  century.  Neoclassical economic theory  has  long  championed
the idea  of  perfect competition (Marshall,  1920).  However,  more  recent  research supports  a
more complex price-competition relationship, emphasising the importance of market dynamics
(Gabaix  et al., 2016).  Evidently,  the  interaction  between  price  and  competition  is  a  well-
established concept. However, it is not until more recently that these theories have been applied
to the mortgage market.
       Van Leuvensteijn  et al.  (2008)  investigate  how market competition affects  the  cost of
borrowing  and  the pass-through of  the European Central Bank’s  policy rate  on  loans and
deposits  in the Euro Area.  A  central finding  is  that  bank interest rate spreads  (the difference
between market rate and bank rate) on most loans, including mortgages, are significantly lower
with greater competition.  Furthermore, the  study  finds  that  changes to  the  ECB’s policy rate
are  more  effectively transmitted to  loan and policy rates  when there is  heightened  competition.
Their  result  supports  the idea  that competition reduces prices  and increases social welfare, as
mortgage interest rates are lower with greater competition. However, the same effect cannot be
observed  when looking at  deposits,  as  banks compensate for  losses  in  the loan market  by
lowering  their  deposit rates.  This  idea  that there is a discrepancy in competitive pressure
between deposits and mortgages  contradicts  the findings of  Corvoisier and Gropp  (2002).  In
contrast,  they  propose  that  customers have a more comprehensive range of options when
allocating deposits due to the differing requirements for information and geographical
proximity between deposits and mortgages. Therefore, depositories face more competition and
must  adjust their  prices  accordingly,  offering  more  attractive  deposit rates.  However,  the
possibility that this  effect  results from  a  more efficient  market  structure  cannot be excluded.
       An  additional  perspective  is  provided  by Allen  et al.  (2014),  who  examine the
relationship between market concentration and the variation in  mortgage prices,  analysing  the
changes brought about by a merger  in  the Canadian mortgage industry.  Their  study  explores
how bank mergers influence interest rates,  considering  the search and negotiation processes in
mortgage contract formation.  They discover  that average interest rates rise following a bank
merger,  though  this is  not  highlighted as  the most  significant finding. More  importantly, the
merger  reduces  price dispersion and affects borrowers  to varying degrees.  Those  who had
previously secured better terms and were at the lower end of the interest rate spectrum  are
affected  more. This  finding  emphasises  the  role  of bargaining power in the mortgage market
and demonstrates that competition’s effect on pricing  differs  amongst  individual  borrowers.
       Treur  and  Boonstra  (2014)  propose  an  alternative  view  on  mortgage  market
concentration.  Their  study  examines  the impact of  Dutch  mortgage  market  conditions  on
mortgage funding and mortgage interest rates following the 2008 financial crisis. They discover
a correlation between higher market concentration and rising mortgage interest rates; however,
they do not imply  a  cause-and-effect relationship  between the two variables. Instead, they
believe  that  funding costs  drive  changes in market  concentration and mortgage interest rates.
Compared to other countries, the Netherlands has a high loan-to-deposit ratio, and its mortgage
market relies heavily  on international capital markets  for funding.  After the financial crisis,
deposit rates and  the  capital market’s risk premia  increased,  making  mortgage  funding  more

                                     10
challenging.  They  highlight the  relevance of financial market conditions  when  measuring the
effect  of competition  on  mortgage interest rates, adding to  previous  understanding of the price-
competition relationship. The findings by Treur and Boonstra (2014) are insightful to our study,
as  the Swedish  mortgage  market  shares many  characteristics with  the Dutch market.
       Based  on  previous  research  demonstrating  the  relationship  between  price  and
competition in the mortgage market, we anticipate a decrease in Swedish  average  mortgage
interest rates as the market share of mortgage credit companies  increases.  Consequently, we
have developed the following hypotheses:

Null hypothesis (H0):  Mortgage credit companies have no effect on average mortgage interest
rates.

Alternative hypothesis (H1):  Mortgage credit companies have an effect on average mortgage
interest rates.

Moreover,  the perspective offered by Treur and Boonstra (2014)  can  be used to  expand  our
hypothesis  by  including  different  financial market conditions.  Building on their insights, we
incorporate the effect of recent changes in Swedish monetary policy on mortgage interest rates.
We hypothesise that MCCs’ presence influences average mortgage interest rates during periods
of  low repo rates but not during high repo rates.

Ludvig Höjman & Hanna Eriksson        11           Stockholm School of Economics
3.  Data

In this  section, we  present our variables,  descriptive statistics,  data collection process,  and
discuss  the limitations of  our data.

3.1 Dependent Variables

Whole market average  mortgage  interest rates  (Whole Market Average Mortgage Interest
Rate):  the  average  monthly  interest rate  that  all  mortgage  institutions’  customers  pay,  i.e.,  the
list interest rate (starting price)  less  individually  negotiated discounts.  Mortgage institutions
consist of  monetary financial  institutions  as well as  mortgage credit companies  and  alternative
investment funds.  Transparency  from institutions  regarding  average rates  is required by  the
Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority and  compiled  monthly  by Statistics Sweden.
MFI average mortgage interest rates  (MFIs Average Mortgage Interest Rate):  the average
monthly interest rate that all monetary financial institutions’ customers pay, i.e., the list interest
rate (starting price)  less  individually negotiated discounts.  Monetary financial institutions
include banks, banking corporations, savings banks, foreign bank branches in Sweden, housing
institutes,  finance  companies,  and “other” MFIs.  The monthly data compiled by Statistics
Sweden  further  breaks down the average interest rate for each  institution category.
       For both dependent variables, the data is limited to only account for Swedish household
mortgages.  Swedish mortgage customers are defined by their residence, meaning that the data
on  average mortgage interest rates  can  include mortgages issued by non-Swedish companies.
To align more closely with our thesis’s aim and offer relevant insights into the discussion about
mortgage market competition, we focus exclusively on household mortgages,  excluding
corporations.
       Furthermore, the  data  on  average  mortgage interest rates  is limited to  new and
renegotiated contracts.  We  remove  outstanding  contracts  to analyse better  the  direct effects of
changes in market conditions on the rates. Because outstanding contracts are constructed based
on past market conditions, excluding them  reduces  noise in  our  model  and better reflects our
purpose.  This  delimitation  is  essential  when  examining  fixed interest  rates, which  are  set
months or  years  in advance  and  thus do  not reflect  contemporary  market changes.  Lastly, the
dependent variables  for  average  mortgage interest rates  are  separated based on  interest rate
fixation period: ≤ 3 months  (variable interest  rate)  and  > 3 months  (fixed interest rate), as well
as the total.  The data  on  fixed  interest rates  are  an aggregated measure that  includes several
different  interest rate fixation periods  that all fall under the umbrella term “fixed rate”  (> 3
months to 10 years).  We separate variable and fixed interest rates to  account for  potential
differences.  Fixed rates offer more stability, whereas variable rates are more volatile and
represent  a different  risk profile. For mortgage institutions, these fixation periods  require
different pricing assumptions, as  the pass-through of financing costs  varies  amongst them.
Fixed interest rates require  stronger assumptions  as the future economic climate is more
uncertain.  Due to these inherent differences between  fixation periods, they are separated  to  not
interfere with the  interpretation of our results.

                                     12
3.2 Independent Variable

Mortgage credit  companies market share  (MCC  Market  Share):  the  percentage of  all
outstanding  mortgages to  Swedish  households  attributable  to  mortgage credit  companies  and
alternative investment funds.  We use market share to measure mortgage credit companies’
presence in the mortgage market.  Using  a relative measure, we exclude  the  effects  of volume
fluctuations in the overall market.  Data  on  lending volume  per institution  is calculated and
published monthly  by Statistics Sweden.

3.3 Control Variables

Growth in GDP  (GDP Growth):  the  quarterly growth  of  Swedish  Gross Domestic Product  in
current prices.  The  data is converted  to monthly numbers  with a compounded monthly growth
rate  for the intra-quarter months.  GDP  growth  acts as  a  macroeconomic  health indicator, as
higher growth  tends to  fuel  higher  wages and  consumption.  Swedish GDP is calculated  and
published  quarterly  by  Statistics Sweden.
Inflation  (Inflation):  the  Swedish  consumer price index (CPI). Due  to the design of  mortgage
contracts,  which are based  on future payments, inflation plays a  major role  in mortgage loan
pricing. A higher  inflation rate will directly dilute the purchasing power of future money  that
lenders   receive.   To   account   for   this   dilution,   mortgage   institutions   price   mortgages
accordingly, thereby influencing  average mortgage interest rates.  Data  on  CPI is published
monthly by Statistics Sweden.
Repo rate  (REPO):  a monetary policy tool  defined as the  interest rate  at which  the Swedish
Central Bank  lends money to commercial banks.  Changes to the  repo  rate  are  communicated
by the Swedish Central Bank  six times  a year, and the rate remains constant in between  these
announcements.  The repo  rate is included  due  to  its  effects  on  mortgage  institutions’  cost  of
borrowing. Furthermore, the Swedish repo rate is closely linked to the risk-free rate (commonly
defined as  STIBOR  in Sweden)  and,  hence,  represents  a  foundational component  of the capital
market. The data is published by the Swedish Central Bank and updated per announced change.
Housing sales  (Housing Sales):  the number of  housing cooperative units,  houses,  and vacation
homes sold.  Data  published  on  houses and vacation homes  are  split  on  monthly  numbers.
However, data on housing cooperative units  are  made yearly and, therefore, have been evenly
distributed over  the  twelve months  to  match the rest of the data observations.  Housing sales are
included as a proxy for housing demand,  affecting  the demand for new mortgages. If mortgage
institutions want to maintain profitability across periods, a change in mortgage demand can
impact mortgage interest rates, as  banks compensate for  loss in volume  with higher rates.  The
data  on  housing sales  is published  yearly  by Statistics Sweden.

3.4  Fixed Effect Variables

Year fixed effect: dummies for each year (2012 - 2023) are included to control for year specific
shocks that impact average mortgage interest rates  and  to  minimise omitted variable bias.

Ludvig Höjman & Hanna Eriksson        13           Stockholm School of Economics
3.5  Excluded  Control  Variables

In addition to  the variables in our model,  we have also attempted to include other variables to
control  for variation  not attributable  to  MCC  Market  Share. The following variables have,
however,   been   excluded:   household   loan-to-assets,   treasury   discount   notes,   consumer
confidence index, unemployment rate, and mortgage  margin.  While these variables have the
potential to explain variation in our dependent variables (Average mortgage interest rates), they
are excluded due to issues with multicollinearity. The excluded control variables are highly
correlated with other variables,  and therefore,  we  assume  that their effect is  already controlled
for  in the model.  Thus, their removal  will not  create omitted variable bias.  Definitions and
rationale  for the  excluded  variables  can be found in  Appendix  1.

3.6  Data Collection

                                                                       st                         st
For the full time period,  data is collected from  January 1  2012  to  August  31  2023.  This data
                                                                       st                        st
set is then  split into two periods of equal  length  from 1  March 2021  -  31  August 2023  to
answer the latter part of our research question:  have changes to monetary policy with  respect
to repo rates affected mortgage credit companies’ ability to influence real mortgage interest
rates?  We  chose  to exclude data from years  before  2012  since  there is less reliable  data
available from that time. Furthermore, excluding data affected by the 2008 financial crisis helps
us to  avoid  distortions  of our results. This caution is due to the stark  mispricing of mortgages
during  the years leading up to the crisis  (Crotty, 2009).  Additionally, we  chose  data from 2012
and onwards  to investigate a period  where  the  digital transformation in the banking sector has
already  occurred  (Swedish Bankers’  Association, 2022). Otherwise,  digitalisation, which we
do not control for,  can explain  some variation in our dependent variable  and distort our results.
All data is sourced from Statistics Sweden, except for the  repo rate,  which is collected from the
Swedish Central Bank. The regressions  are  run  using  monthly data; thus, if possible, data is
collected monthly. However, due to  the  lack of more precise data  on  certain variables, some
data points are collected on a quarterly or yearly basis. To align all observations, the yearly and
quarterly data are  converted to fit the monthly periods  by  assuming  constant  values  across
months.  Data  on  average mortgage interest rates  (whole market and MFIs),  MCCs’  market
share, inflation, and repo rates are published monthly; thus,  we collect  data until  the latest
available data point. However, data on housing sales is published yearly, and consequently, we
assume that the  aggregate  data  from December 2022  remains  constant  throughout all months
                                            st
leading up to  August  31 ,  2023. In addition, data  on  GDP growth is published quarterly, and
to solve this, monthly growth is assumed to remain constant from the end of June 2023 to the
end of August 2023.

3.7  Limitations to the Data

There are certain limitations to our data set. As mentioned, data on housing sales are published
yearly  and  GDP  growth  quarterly. This forces us to  include  estimates  for the months  without
available data.  We  make  the assumption  that  the  last recorded data point remains  constant
throughout  the  missing  months,  for  both  variables.  To  assume  constant  values  is  a

                                     14
simplification  of reality, and  these  data points  will, therefore,  deviate from the  real  values.
However,  to  understand the impact  of this  limitation, we  conduct  sensitivity  analyses  for the
                               st                        st
eight estimated values (1  January 2023 - 31  August 2023) of the Housing Sales variable. The
sensitivity analyses in Appendix 2 and 3 show that a -50 to +50 percent change to the estimated
values has  an  insignificant  effect on the  p-value and estimate  of  the  MCC Market Share
variable.  This  observation  is true for both the full time period  and the post-policy rate shock
period.  No sensitivity analysis is  run for the  pre-shock period, as  no estimated values are
included in  that data set.  Observing from our  analysis,  to  assume  housing sales  to be  constant
does  not impact the quality of our results.  Furthermore,  given that  only two months of  data are
missing for the  GDP Growth  variable, we  anticipate that this  does  not  significantly  impact  the
outcomes of our regressions.

3.8  Summary Statistics

Table I  presents  descriptive statistics  for all variables  included  in our applied model,  covering
the  full time  period  (2012  -  2023).  Looking at the table, we observe  minimal  variation  between
the different interest rate fixation periods  and  the rates for  both market scopes.  As MCCs’
market share is small and the only factor differentiating  the two data sets,  homogenous data is
expected.  Further,  the observed  similarity  across interest rate fixation periods  can be  explained
by our decision to include interest rates from new and renegotiated contracts rather than
focusing on outstanding ones.  As a result, mortgages with fixed interest rates tend to closely
resemble  those with variable rates since these new  and  renegotiated mortgages are influenced
by market conditions prevalent at the same time.  Moreover,  we  observe  that GDP  growth
displays  smaller  values  compared to other  variables,  a difference that can  be  attributed to the
data construction. As  detailed  in section  3.3,  the data  is a  growth measure  calculated as a
percentage.  Consequently, its values are  smaller  relative to  the  other variables  included in our
model.

                               Table  I: Descriptive  Statistics

Table I: The descriptive statistics are reported for the full time period (2012 - 2023), where the data is subdivided
monthly.  Rate  refers to the average mortgage interest rate, and the parenthesis contains the respective market
scopes and interest rate  fixation periods to which the average mortgage interest rate belongs.

Ludvig Höjman & Hanna Eriksson        15           Stockholm School of Economics
3.9 Correlation  and  Multicollinearity

In Table II, we present the correlation matrix and variance inflation factor (“VIF”) for variables
in our  model  across  the  full time  period  and  total  interest  rate fixation period. We  compile
identical correlation matrices for  variable and fixed interest rates  in Appendix 4 and 5.
However,  due to the minimal differences  between  fixation periods,  the  total will  be  the
foundation  of our  discussion  on correlation and multicollinearity.  In  Table  II,  we observe a
highly  positive correlation between  repo rates  and  average mortgage interest  rates  (0.93),
according  to Belsley,  Kuh  and  Welsch’s  definition  (1980).  However, this positive  relationship
is  expected, as  the  repo rate  is  a foundational component of mortgage financing  and pricing  in
Sweden.  Moreover, we  recognise  that VIF values across all variables are  <  10, which  most
practitioners consider  the threshold  for  problematic multicollinearity  (O’Brien, 2007).

      Table  II: Correlation Matrix,  Total  Interest  Rate Fixation  Periods,  Whole  Market

Table  II:  This correlation matrix  presents the  correlation  for every  combination of variables used in the model.
The coefficients  describe  the  degree  to which  variables move  in relation to each other.  A negative  coefficient
indicates that the  variable  pair  moves  opposite to each other,  and a positive  coefficient  indicates that the variable
pair move  together.  Additionally,  the table  presents the VIF values for each variable.  The VIF values  quantify
how much of the variance  of an estimated regression  coefficient increases  if the variable is  correlated with other
predictors.

                                     16
4.  Methodology

This section outlines our model and clarifies  how it is used to address  our  research questions.

4.1  Description  of Applied Model

In our study,  we  use a  multiple  linear  regression model,  which is  an empirical tool developed
by Galton (1886) that assesses how changes in multiple independent variables affect  a
dependent variable.  For  us, it is the effect of  mortgage  credit  companies’  market share
(independent variable)  on  average mortgage  interest rates  (dependent variable)  that is of
interest.  However,  to  isolate the effect of mortgage credit companies  on  rates,  it is  crucial  to
control for  outside  influence.  In our model,  the following control variables  are  incorporated:
GDP Growth, Inflation, REPO, and Housing Sales. These control variables are selected to best
reflect real-world dynamics  while  simultaneously  minimising excessive multicollinearity.
       The model used to test whether mortgage credit companies influence average mortgage
interest rates  for  the whole market  –  is stated as  follows:

 Whole Market  Average Mortgage Interest Ratetf  =  β0 +  β1 × GDP  Growtht  +  β2 × Inflationt +
              β3 × REPOt  +  β4  × Housing Salest  +  β5  × MCC Market Sharet +  εt
                                                                                              (1)

The model used to test whether mortgage credit companies influence average mortgage interest
rates for monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  –  is stated as  follows:

   MFIs  Average Mortgage Interest Ratetf  =  β0  +  β1  ×  GDP Growtht  +  β2  × Inflationt  +  β3  ×
                REPOt  +  β4  × Housing Salest  +  β5  × MCC Market Sharet  +  εt
                                                                                              (2)

In addition to controlling for  independent variables,  we  use  year  fixed effects.  By introducing
dummy variables for  every year, we account  for year-specific shocks that  can  impact  our
variables. These year-specific shocks are  unique to a specific point in time, and their  variation
should, therefore,  not  contribute to explaining  the variation in the dependent variable.
Additionally, by including year fixed effects, we minimise the risk of omitted variable bias and
contribute to the mitigation of trend and seasonality not captured by the control variables
(Wooldridge, 2019).
       Models (1) and (2)  are  used for  all regressions  to  test  all  aspects of our  research
questions.  The subscripts  t  and  f  correspond to  interest rate fixation period  f  in time  t.  The
interest  rate  fixation periods  are  divided as follows:  ≤ 3 months (variable interest rate) and > 3
months (fixed interest rate),  and  the total for both interest rate fixation periods.  Further,  the
                                                                                  st                        st
time interval  is  separated  into  three different  periods:  full  time  (1  January 2012  -  31  August
                                         st                        st                                                         st
2023), pre-policy rate  shock  (1  March 2021  -  31  May 2022), and post-policy rate  shock  (1
                   st
June 2022  -  31  August 2023).  The  pre-  and post-policy rate shock periods  are  separated by
                                                                                          th
the Swedish  Central  Bank’s policy rate change  on May  4 , 2022.  The post-policy rate shock
                      st
period starts  on  1  June,  as it is the first  whole  month following the policy rate change.

Ludvig Höjman & Hanna Eriksson        17           Stockholm School of Economics
        A multiple linear regression model can be constructed in several different ways.  For
model (1) and (2), we run an ordinary least squares (OLS) multiple regression for the shorter
periods, pre-policy rate shock and post-policy rate shock.  The  OLS  model  identifies  the
coefficients that  minimise the sum of squared residuals, meaning the  best-fit  hyperplane
through the data.  The residuals are squared  to  prevent  positive and negative  values  from
cancelling  out  each other  and  are calculated using the following formula:

     2
∑(ε ) = ∑(Average Mortgage Interest Ratetf  − (β0 +  β1 ×  GDP Growtht  +  β2 × Inflationt +  β3 ×
                                                                                            2
                 REPOt  +  β4  × Housing Salest  +  β5  × MCC Market Sharet))

Additionally,  an  OLS  model  is  more sensitive to  outliers,  as it  allocates  a disproportionate
amount of weight  to  extreme values.  According to the Gauss-Markov theorem, the OLS model
is the  “best  linear unbiased estimator”  (BLUE),  meaning  it has the  smallest variance amongst
all unbiased estimators,  given  that the  classical linear assumptions are  satisfied. These
assumptions  are linearity, independence, homoscedasticity, and  zero mean  of errors.  When
residuals  follow  these  assumptions,  OLS  offers  the  most  reliable estimates  (Graybill, 1976).
We perform several robustness tests to test these assumptions,  which are further  discussed  in
section  5.2.2.  For  the pre-  and post-policy rate shock periods,  the  model passes most  tests,
indicating that an OLS model is sufficient  in  explaining  the relationship between  mortgage
credit companies and average  mortgage interest rates.
       However, when running  the OLS regression for the  full  time  period,  model (1) and (2)
fail the Breusch-Pagan  test.  It  suggests that the  models’  residuals are  heteroscedastic  and
consequently  proposes  that  OLS is not the  “best linear unbiased estimator”  (BLUE)  for  this
data  set.  To combat heteroscedasticity, we replace OLS with an alternative approach  called
weighted least squares (WLS).  The difference between these methods  is that  while  OLS gives
all observations equal importance when determining the best-fitting  hyperplane, WLS  assigns
weights   to   observations   differently.   In   addition,   the   WLS   model   does   not   assume
homoscedasticity.  There are several ways to assign weights in a WLS model.  We  use  inverse
variance weighting with fitted values as a proxy, which is a widely adopted method recognised
in  the  field of  econometrics  (Wooldridge,  2019).  To  determine the appropriate weights,  we
start by  regressing the fitted values of the OLS model on  the  squared residuals. We do this  to
determine if the fitted values can significantly predict the variance of residuals and, if true, will
act as a good  determinant  for  heteroscedasticity.  The regression output is presented in  Table
III,  where  we can confirm that  fitted values  are  good  estimates  for  residuals’ variance  for all
interest rate fixation periods.

                  Table III: Regression, Squared Residuals on Fitted Values

Table III: This is a  tailored  regression output describing the level of statistical significance for the regression,
which is run  to  test if  the fitted values from the OLS model can accurately predict the squared residuals.

                                     18
Lastly, we take the inverse of the estimated variance to determine the weights for each
observation. The formula used to calculate appropriate weights is as follows:

                                    1
                           𝑤!"  =                       #
                                          (𝐹𝑖𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑑(𝑂𝐿𝑆𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙)!")

                                                                                              (3)

The  rationale  for  the weighting formula  (3)  is that observations with higher uncertainty  (larger
variances) should be given less weight, and observations with less uncertainty (smaller
variances) should be given more weight (Wooldridge, 2019).  As a result of  this weighting,
model (1) and (2),  for the full time period,  pass the Breusch-Pagan test.

Ludvig Höjman & Hanna Eriksson        19           Stockholm School of Economics
5.  Empirical  Results

This section outlines the key empirical findings of our paper. We start by presenting the results
from  the full time period  to answer:  How has the recent emergence of mortgage credit
companies affected real mortgage  interest rates in Sweden?  After that,  we report the results
from  our pre-  and post-policy rate shock  periods, answering the question:  Have changes to
monetary policy with respect to repo rates affected mortgage credit companies’ ability to
influence real mortgage interest rates?  Lastly,  we  present  the results of  the  robustness tests
conducted  to strengthen our empirical results further.

5.1 Results and Analysis

In the  upcoming  sections,  we  present  the  output  of  the  MCC Market Share  variable for  each
regression.  Following  models  (1) and (2)  specified in section  4.1, we  analyse  how the  market
share  of  mortgage credit  companies  affects average mortgage interest rates. This analysis
covers both the whole market as well as monetary financial institutions. The effect of mortgage
credit companies’ market share is also regressed on different interest rate fixation periods:  total,
variable, and fixed.  The  regressions’  results  are displayed  in separate tables based on  the  time
period  of data collection.  The analysis  is divided  into two parts  -  the  full time period and pre-
and post-policy rate shock  periods  -  as  these  answer different parts of our research question.

5.1.1 Results and Analysis – Full Time Period

Table  IV  presents the  WLS regression results,  analysing  whether  mortgage credit  companies’
market share affects average mortgage interest rates for the  full time  period.  In this section, we
only display the output for the  MCC Market Share  variable.  For  a  detailed table with all
variables, refer to  Appendix  6.  The coefficient for  MCC Market Share  is negative across all
interest rate fixation periods and the two market scopes. This  means that  an increase in
mortgage credit companies’ market share leads to a decrease in average mortgage interest rates.
                            2
Moreover, the  adjusted  R values  are all >  0.93,  suggesting  that a large  part  of the  dependent
variable’s variance  is accounted for by the  respective models  (Newbold, Carlson &  Thorne,
                    2                                     2
2023).  Adjusted R is included instead of  multiple  R as it provides  a  more accurate  measure
in the  presence of  multiple  independent  variables.  This accuracy stems from its adjustment
based on the number of variables included in the model, which prevents overestimation of the
model’s explanatory power.  All  coefficients are statistically significant at the 5  percent  level
(p-values < 0.05).  Thereby,  we can  reject our null hypothesis  and  confirm  our alternative
hypothesis  with a  low probability of a type I error  (falsely rejecting the null hypothesis).
Overall, according to the  results,  a linear relationship exists  between an increase in mortgage
credit  companies’  market share and a decrease in average mortgage interest rates for  both
market scopes and  across all  interest rate  fixation periods.

                                     20
                          Table IV:  Regressions,  Full  Time Period

Table IV: This is a  tailored  regression output aimed at describing the level of statistical significance  (p-value),
                                       2
degree of explained variance (R ), and estimate for the dependent variable MCC Market Share in a more digestible
way.  The t-statistic  is included  for  transparency regarding  the  significance calculations.  Significant  p-vales
(*,**,***) demonstrate the level of significance.

5.1.2 Results and  Analysis  –  Pre-  and Post-Policy  Rate  Shock

Tables V and VI present the output from the OLS regressions analysing whether mortgage
credit companies’ market share affects average mortgage interest rates in the pre-  and  post-
policy rate shock  periods.  Like with the full  time  period,  we only display the output for the
MCC Market Share  variable.  For a  detailed table with all variables, refer to  Appendix  7  and  8.
Tables V and VI  demonstrate that consistent with the findings from the full-time period
analysis, the coefficient for  MCC Market Share  remains negative  for  all regressions.  However,
for the  pre-  and post-monetary shock, most estimates are, in comparison,  more  negative.
                                                      2
Another  notable distinction  is  that  the adjusted R  values are consistently lower for the pre-
policy rate shock compared to  those observed for  the post-policy rate shock and the full time
                                                                            2
period.  There is no universal rule for an acceptable adjusted R , so  intermediate values do not
necessarily suggest a poorly constructed model.  However, this indicates that a  portion  of the
variance in the dependent variable  is not explained  by the regression equation (Newbold et al.,
                                                  2
2023). A plausible  explanation  for the lower R is that other factors, which our model does not
account for,  have  a greater influence on average mortgage interest rates  in  the pre-policy rate
shock.  As for the significance level, the coefficient for  MCC Market Share  is statistically
significant (p-values < 0.05)  for  all regressions, except for the regressions  run for the post-
policy rate  shock period  with  fixed rates.  As  the  MCC Market Share  variable  for these
regressions  surpasses  the 5 percent significance level, we cannot reject the null hypothesis  -
that mortgage credit companies have no effect on average mortgage interest rates. This suggests
that there is  insufficient  evidence to  conclude  that mortgage credit companies  significantly
impacted fixed interest rates during this time. However, the results suggest that mortgage credit
companies affected all rates before  the rise in the Swedish Central Bank’s policy rate, as well
as variable and total interest rates  after the shock.

Ludvig Höjman & Hanna Eriksson        21           Stockholm School of Economics
                         Table V: Regressions,  Pre-Shock  Period

Table V:  This is a  tailored  regression output aimed at describing the level of statistical significance (p-value),
                                       2
degree of explained variance (R ), and estimate for the dependent variable MCC Market Share in a more digestible
way.  The t-statistic  is included for transparency regarding the significance calculations.  Significant p-vales
(*,**,***) demonstrate the level of significance.

                         Table VI: Regressions,  Post-Shock  Period

Table VI:  This is a  tailored  regression output aimed at describing the level of statistical significance (p-value),
                                       2
degree of explained variance (R ), and estimate for the dependent variable MCC Market Share in a more digestible
way.  The t-statistic  is included for transparency regarding the significance calculations.  Significant p-vales
(*,**,***) demonstrate the level of significance.

5.2 Robustness  Tests

To check whether our results are robust and not overly sensitive to changes in assumptions or
the presence of unusual data points, the  regressions  are  put through diagnostic tests, including
Breusch-Pagan  and  Shapiro-Wilk.  We conduct robustness tests for each regression  and
organise them into tables according to time periods in Tables  VII  -  IX. Additionally, the
discussion is divided into  two  sections: the full time period, and the pre-  and post-policy rate
shock periods,  to  address the  differences in  sample sizes.

5.2.1  Robustness Tests  –  Full  Time  Period

The Breusch-Pagan test checks for heteroskedasticity, as it examines the dependency of
residual’s variance on the values of the independent variables.  Table VII shows that the
Breusch-Pagan test  has a p-value of >  0.05 across all regressions. Because the test does not
pass the  5 percent significance level,  we fail to reject the null hypothesis of homoscedasticity
and,  therefore,  can  assume homoscedastic  data. The Shapiro-Wilk test,  also  displayed in Table
VII,  determines  if a model’s sample  is  drawn from a  normally distributed  population. Testing
the model with the Shapiro-Wilk test  suggests that the observed data deviates significantly
from a normal distribution.  As p-values  are  <  0.05, it  forces  us to reject the null hypothesis of

                                     22
normally distributed data.  However, according to the Central Limit Theorem  (CLT),  dubbed
by  Pólya  (1920),  as the sample size increases, the distribution of sample means resembles a
normal distribution,  irrespective of the population’s distribution.  According to Newbold  et al.
(2023),  sample sizes ≥  25  are satisfactory for the CLT to hold. As our sample size is 140, CLT
applies to our model, and therefore,  the assumption of normal distribution  can be  made.
Altogether,   the   tests   imply   that   our   regressions’   empirical   findings   are   robust,   and
consequently,  more weight can be put into  their  conclusions  and explanatory value.

    Table VII: Model Diagnostics  for  Full  Time Period, Breusch-Pagan and Shapiro-Wilk

Table VII: The table presents a tailored test output  describing the level of statistical significance for the Breusch-
Pagan and Shapiro-Wilk test.  Significant values  (*,**,***)  indicate that the model fails the test.

5.2.2  Robustness  Tests  –  Pre-  and Post-Policy  Rate  Shock

Examining the results of the Breusch-Pagan test, displayed in Table VIII and IX, most p-values
are > 0.05, meaning there is no statistical evidence of heteroskedasticity. However, we observe
p-values of 0.0457 (Whole market) and 0.0437 (MFI) for the  variable rates in the pre-shock
period, meaning that these regressions pass the 5 percent significance level by a narrow margin.
This   forces   us   to   reject   the   null   hypothesis   of   homoscedastic   data   and   assume
heteroscedasticity.  Consequently,  less  weight can be put into the results of the  pre-shock
regressions using variable rates. Further, testing the model using the Shapiro-Wilk test, in Table
VIII  and  IX,  p-values  are  >  0.05.  These results  suggest that there is no  significant  evidence to
reject the null hypothesis  of  normality distributed data, and therefore,  normality  can be
assumed.  The  robustness  tests  provide  further creditability to our  findings  and the conclusions
we can draw from them.

   Table  VIII: Model Diagnostics  for  Pre-Shock  Period, Breusch-Pagan and Shapiro-Wilk

Table VIII: The table presents a tailored test output describing the level of statistical significance for the Breusch-
Pagan and Shapiro-Wilk test. Significant values (*,**,***) indicate that the model fails the test.

Ludvig Höjman & Hanna Eriksson        23           Stockholm School of Economics
   Table IX:  Model Diagnostics  for  Post-Shock  Period, Breusch-Pagan and Shapiro-Wilk

Table IX: The  table  presents a  tailored  test output describing the level of statistical significance for the Breusch-
Pagan and Shapiro-Wilk test. Significant values (*,**,***) indicate that the model fails the test.

                                     24
6. Discussion

Our study aims  to answer the research questions:  How has the recent emergence of mortgage
credit companies affected real mortgage interest rates in Sweden? And have changes to
monetary policy with respect to repo rates affected mortgage credit companies’ ability to
influence real mortgage interest rates?  In this  part of  the  paper,  we discuss the findings of our
study and  what  it  entails for  the  research questions.  We  begin  by  discussing  the  rationale  for
the  results  of  the full time period regressions,  for both market scopes and all interest rate
fixation periods.  Additionally, we  make comparisons  to  related literature  that  studies  similar
dynamics  of the price-competition relationship.  Thereafter,  we  discuss  the  rationale  for  the
results obtained from the  pre-  and post-policy rate  shock  regressions  for both market scopes
and all interest rate fixation periods. We relate these findings to  literature that studies  the effect
of policy rate changes  on mortgage interest rates.

6.1 Market Pressure from Mortgage Credit Companies

                                                    st                        st
From the results  of  the full  time  period (1  January 2012  -  31  August 2023), we  observe that
mortgage credit companies’  market share significantly  affects  average mortgage interest rates.
The results confirm our alternative hypothesis and align with existing literature. They highlight
a correlation between increased market  fragmentation  and rising mortgage interest rates,
similar to the findings of Treur and Boonstra (2014). Moreover, research by Allen et al. (2014),
which  illustrates  how  bank  mergers  increase  average  mortgage  interest  rates,  further
corroborates our findings.  However, the study  by Allen et al. (2014)  analyses  the effects of
market consolidation  and  does not specifically address market fragmentation. Despite this
difference in focus, the observed correlation between price and competition  aligns with our
results.  Additionally,  the same relationship can be observed when studying the Euro Area  (van
Leuvensteijn et al., 2008).  Furthermore,  our  results  reinforce  the  idea brought forward  by  the
Swedish Central Bank  (2020).  They  suggest  that as mortgage credit companies’ loan volume
                                                         10
increases,  MFIs’  gross mortgage margins  decrease.   This simultaneous trend  implies  that
mortgage credit companies might be influencing the Swedish market by offering competitive
rates.  Additionally, the  trend observed  in  MFIs’  gross margins  is in accordance with our
findings, indicating that MCCs  influence average mortgage interest rates across the whole
market and  for  MFIs  separately.
       Several causes, supported by existing literature,  can  describe  our significant results.
Firstly,  the  concept  of  price  and  competition  can explain  why MCCs market  share and rates
move in opposite directions. However, opinions on this relationship vary. The theory of perfect
competition  suggests  that  prices  should  decrease  as  the number of  competitors  increases
(Marshall, 1920).  Yet, perfect competition remains a theoretical  concept, as  it does not exist in
the real world  (Malkiel, 2003).  Nonetheless,  we argue  that  the  Swedish  mortgage  market is
moving  closer  to the  concept  of perfect competition.  This is evident through  the growing
number  of competitors  and  improved access and  quality of  price  information.  Another

10
  MFIs’ mortgage gross margins are approximated based on numbers from Swedbank, Nordea and
Handelsbanken.

Ludvig Höjman & Hanna Eriksson        25           Stockholm School of Economics
perspective on  competition is  presented  by  McNulty (1968) and Gabaix  et al.  (2016). They
argue  that the  degree of rivalry,  specific  market characteristics,  and customer preferences  play
significant  roles  in  determining  how market fragmentation impacts prices.  Despite these
differences  in theory,  there is  a  broad consensus  that increased  competition and market
efficiency  can potentially  reduce  prices,  or  in  the context of our study,  mortgage interest rates.
       Secondly,  digitalisation  and organisational efficiencies  can explain our  significant
results.  Mortgage credit  companies,  unlike  MFIs, specialise  in mortgage lending, enabling
them to  reduce costs.  They  use  a more scalable  business model,  offering  a  digitalised
application  process, no  possibility  for bargaining,  and  the ability  for customers to  transfer
existing  mortgage debts  to their  services  without human  interaction.  By leveraging these
specialised operations, mortgage credit companies  should  be  able to  reduce  costs,  thereby
enhancing their ability to offer more competitive rates (Sveriges Riksbank, 2020). This strategy
of  using  digitalisation  to provide  competitive rates  also  aligns  with  the  findings  of  Ferreira et
al. (2019),  who argue  that industry digitalisation  can  transform  competitive landscapes.

6.2  The Effect of Tightening  Monetary Policy

                th
On May  4 , 2022, the Swedish Central Bank  raised  the  repo rate  to 0.25 percent,  making it  the
first time the repo rate surpassed 0 percent since 2014 (Sveriges Riksbank, 2022). In connection
with this  raise, the Central Bank  issued  a caution  regarding the potential for  further tightening
of monetary policy going forward. As  of  August 2023, the  repo rate  has increased to  3.75
percent  (Sveriges Riksbank, 2023).  This  rise  in  policy  rate  has  altered  the  conditions of the
Swedish mortgage market,  a change  evident in our  findings.
                                                                                      st                       st
       Upon  analysing the  output  from the pre-policy rate shock (1  March 2021  -  31  May
2022), it is evident that the market share of mortgage credit companies significantly  affects
average mortgage interest rates.  However,  we obtain slightly different results when assessing
                                                    st                    st
the output of the post-policy rate shock (1  June 2022  -  31  August 2023).  In this latter period,
mortgage credit companies  continue  to  significantly  affect  average mortgage interest rates  for
both  variable and total interest rate fixation periods. However, for  fixed rates,  the impact  is
insignificant,  affecting  neither the whole market  nor MFIs.  Given that 60 percent of  Swedish
mortgages  are tied to  variable rates (Swedish  Financial Supervisory Authority, 2023), it is
unsurprising that the  total  interest rate fixation period  follows variable  rates.
       Several factors can explain the diminished significance of MCCs’ impact on fixed rates.
One  possible  explanation  is  the limited number of observations used for the post-policy rate
shock  period (n=15).  Garriga, Kydland  and  Šustek (2017) proved that  the transmission
mechanism of  the  policy rate is more effective for  variable  rates  compared to fixed  rates.  This
lag in the transmission of the policy rate adds complexity to our regression model  due  to its
few observations, making it more challenging to explain the variation observed in fixed rates.
Another possible  explanation  for  MCCs’  unsignificant  influence  on  fixed rates  during this
period  is displayed  in  Graphs  II-IV.  The graphs  show  the difference in average mortgage
interest rates for  MCCs  and  MFIs, where  the red dotted line indicates the policy rate  change
that separates the pre-  and post-policy rate shock.  After  October 2022,  it is evident that
mortgage credit companies  are unable to offer competitive fixed rates.  This  challenge  might
arise  from  mortgage credit companies  supplying  unsustainable  rates  during  periods  of  tight

                                     26
monetary policy to  remain attractive to customers  (SvD Näringsliv, 2023).  To set fixed  rates,
MCCs  must  predict  future funding costs, which are  largely determined by the policy rate.  If
they price their fixed interest rates low while their funding costs increase over time, it can erode
profits.  The uncertainty of funding costs  makes  it riskier for MCCs to offer  attractive  fixed
rates  compared to  variable  rates,  mainly  since they  already  operate with  squeezed  margins
(Statistics Sweden,  2022).  In contrast,  MFIs,  can maintain good margins  throughout  periods
with strict monetary policy, as they can  absorb  more risk  in the long  term due  to their  diverse
financing methods  (SvD Näringsliv, 2023).  That  fixed rates are  riskier  for lenders  is supported
by Santomero (1983), who  argues that  fixed  interest  rates are  less desirable  to  lenders due to
the  inherent  uncertainties  in  funding costs.
       According to our  results, it is for the  fixed interest rates that  MCCs  lose influence.
However,  Graphs II-IV show  that  they  struggle  to compete with lower interest rates across all
fixation periods  in the  post-policy  rate  shock  period.  The  key reason  for this  is  the difference
in financing  options available  to  MCCs and MFIs  and  the  attractiveness  of these  options  under
different  economic  climates.  While  MFIs have access to  a broad range of financing methods,
including covered bonds and deposits,  MCCs rely  on alternative investment  products.  During
times of high repo rates, MCCs’ lack of deposit financing becomes a major disadvantage (SvD
Näringsliv, 2023).  When the Central Bank raises the repo rate,  deposit rates  take longer  to
adjust  than  mortgage interest rates  (Riksdag, 2023).  This  lag results in  greater net interest
(difference between mortgage and deposit  rates)  for  monetary financial institutions,  making
deposit financing  cheaper  relative to other  financing methods.
       Simultaneously,  as  the  repo rate  rises, covered bonds and other similar investment
products,  like  investments in  alternative investment funds,  become  less attractive.  Their  value
decreases  as newer  investment products  that offer higher interest rates  become  available (SvD
Näringsliv, 2016).  As a  result,  MFIs, especially those with substantial  deposit  holdings, can
offer more competitive interest rates  than  mortgage credit companies  without  compromising
their  profitability.  This  is supported by,  Fuster, Plosser, Schnabl and Vickery (2019)  who
recognise that  access to  low-cost deposit funding is a competitive advantage.  Given that
mortgage credit companies’ business model  is  primarily based  on  the  ability to offer lower
interest rates,  sustained high repo rates pose a threat to their market position  going forward
(SvD Näringsliv, 2023).

Ludvig Höjman & Hanna Eriksson        27           Stockholm School of Economics
          Graphs  II, III, IV:  Average  Mortgage  Interest  Rates,  MCCs,  and MFIs

                     Total                                          Variable

  5                                                     5

  4                                                     4

  3                                                     3

  2                                                     2

  1                                                     1

  0                                                     0

       2021M032021M052021M072021M092021M112022M012022M032022M052022M072022M092022M112023M012023M032023M052023M07       2021M032021M052021M072021M092021M112022M012022M032022M052022M072022M092022M112023M012023M032023M052023M07

                              Fixed

 5

 4

 3

 2

 1

 0

       2021M032021M042021M052021M062021M072021M082021M092021M102021M112021M122022M012022M022022M032022M042022M052022M062022M072022M082022M092022M102022M112022M122023M012023M022023M032023M042023M052023M062023M072023M08

Graphs  II-IV:  These graphs present the average mortgage interest rate split by  category of mortgage institution.
                                                            th
The red dotted line marks  the repo rate change on May 4  2022,  separating  the  pre-  and post-policy rate shock.

Our  findings  highlight  the  challenges  mortgage  credit  companies  face  in  maintaining
competitive prices in changing economic climates.  When these companies  were first legalised
in 2017,  the intention  was  to  increase  market competition.  Yet,  as  observed in our results, this
positive effect on competition has not been sustained.  In the current economic climate,
characterised by  high repo rates,  some MFIs  are making  large  profits, while  mortgage credit
companies like Hejmo, Bofink, and Youple need to liquidate their operations (Dagens Industri,
2023).  Therefore, to prevent  MCCs  from being  outcompeted,  legislative measures  are
necessary to  mitigate  the dominance of larger  mortgage institutions.  This could involve
supporting  mortgage  credit  companies  or  imposing  restrictions  on  monetary  financial
institutions.  An interpellation introduced to the Swedish parliament  proposes  a temporary tax
on  MFIs’  net  interest.  By penalising  large profits, they want to  prevent  large banks from
exploiting households  through  unfair  deposit rates  and foster a more competitive climate
(Riksdag, 2023).

                                     28
7.  Conclusion

7.1 Concluding Remarks

In this paper, using a multiple linear regression model, we explore our hypothesis that mortgage
credit companies  growing market share impacts  average mortgage interest rates in Sweden.
This  hypothesis  is  tested  on  rates  for  the whole mortgage market and  MFIs,  with data from
            st                        st
January 1  2012 to August 31  2023. Our analysis reveals that mortgage credit companies exert
downward  pressure  on  average mortgage interest rates  for  both market scopes  and  across  all
studied  interest  rate  fixation  periods.  The  discussion  highlights  the  price-competition
relationship alongside digitalisation and organisational efficiencies as possible explanations for
the observed effects.
       Further, we investigate how changes to monetary policy with respect to repo rates affect
mortgage credit companies’ ability to influence real mortgage interest rates.  We find  that
MCCs,  irrespective of  policy rate climate (pre-  and post-policy  rate  shock),  exert  downward
pressure  on rates  across  most  interest  rate  fixation periods.  The only exception is  the fixed rate
in the post-policy  rate  shock period.  The diminished  impact of mortgage credit companies on
fixed rates in this period  can  be attributed to their unsustainable interest rates and  squeezed
margins, as well as the increased attractiveness of deposit financing during periods of strict
monetary policy.
       In conclusion,  the Swedish government’s implementation of  “Lag 2016:1024”,  which
allowed for the entrance of mortgage credit companies, has stimulated the mortgage market by
increasing  competition.  It  has led to the benefit of lower mortgage interest rates for Swedish
borrowers.  However,  our study implies that  in  tougher  financial climates,  mortgage credit
companies’  positive  impact  on  market competition  may  diminish over time.  To effectively
maintain competitiveness and advantages for borrowers,  also in periods of stricter monetary
policy,  legislators  will have  to address  advantages inherent in different financing methods.

7.2 Further Research

Considering the  delimitation  of  our  study,  we have  suggestions  for  extensions  that can be  used
in  further research.  First, we want to address the  limited  time frame  that is  available.  The law
allowing mortgage credit companies  to enter the market was  first introduced in  2017,  and  the
Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority’s requirement to report average interest rates was not
implemented until 2019. This limitation affects the number of available data points for the pre-
and post-policy  rate  shock periods  (n=15). Therefore,  replicating  our  study  with a more
extensive data set in the future  would  help  validate  our  results.  Additionally,  a future study
conducted  at  a  more  suitable  time  would allow  for the  circumvention of  using  estimations  for
annually  reported variables.
       Second,  multiple  studies  have examined the  intensity of  banking  competition  using
measurements like the Boone Indicator, Lerner Index, and  Herfindahl-Hirschman Index.
Building on this, one could expand our study by introducing a control variable for the intensity
of competition.  This would  help to  isolate  the effect  attributable to  mortgage credit companies
as an alternative way to finance mortgages.

Ludvig Höjman & Hanna Eriksson        29           Stockholm School of Economics
       Third,  further research  could  segment  the  borrower  data per  loan-to-value decile to
investigate how mortgage credit companies’  impact  differs across  leverage  levels.  Moreover,
such a  study would  distinguish  the  effect  on  mortgage  interest rates  offered  to customers  with
loan-to-value ratios not exceeding  0.75. This would  allow for the exclusion of customers with
higher risk profiles, who are not  targeted by  mortgage credit companies  and, therefore,  not
directly  influenced by their presence.

                                     30
8. References

Allen, Jason, Clark, Robert, and Jean-François Houde, 2014,  The Effect of Mergers in Search
       Markets: Evidence from the Canadian Mortgage Industry, The American Economic
       Review vol. 104 (10), 3365-3396.

Belsley, David A., Kuh, Edwin, and Roy E. Welsch, 1980, Regression Diagnostics: Identifying
       Influential Data and Sources of Collinearity, (Wiley, New York).

Bratt, Frida, 2016, Sparandet som tar stryk när räntorna stiger, SvD Näringsliv, December  15.
        https://www.svd.se/a/B9EOQ/sparandet-som-tar-stryk-nar-rantorna-stiger  [Retrieved:
       November 5]

Carlsson,  Gunilla,  2023,  Interpellation  2023/24:137  –  Bankernas  övervinster,  Riksdag
       [Swedish Parlament].

Consumer  Financial Protection Bureau,  2023,  Summary of 2022 Data on Mortgage Lending.
        https://www.consumerfinance.gov/data-research/hmda/summary-of-2022-data-on-
        mortgage-lending/  [Retrieved:  November 15]

Corvoisier, Sandrine, and Reint Gropp, 2002, Bank concentration and retail interest rates,
        Journal of Banking & Finance vol. 26 (11), 2155-2189.

Crotty, James, 2009, Structural causes of the global financial crisis: a critical assessment of the
        “new financial architecture”, Cambridge Journal of Economics vol. 33 (4), 563-580.

Dahlberg,  Joel,  2023,  Uppstickarna  svettas:  ”En  ohållbar  situation”,  SvD  Näringsliv,
       September 12.
        https://www.svd.se/a/rlJpPR/stabelo-och-landshypotek-i-oro-kring-bolanemarknaden
        [Retrieved: October 23]

De Nederlendsche Bank, 2023, Size and breakdown of the mortgage market.
        https://www.dnb.nl/en/statistics/dashboards/residential-mortgages/size-and-
        breakdown-of-the-mortgage-market/  [Retrieved: November 8]

Engström, Nina, 2020, New challengers on the mortgage market  –  Increased competition and
       possible pressure on interest rates, Economic Commentaries no. 1, Sveriges Riksbank
       [Swedish Central Bank].
        https://www.riksbank.se/globalassets/media/rapporter/ekonomiska-
        kommentarer/engelska/2020/new-challengers-on-the-mortgage-market--increased-
        competition-and-possible-pressure-on-interest-rates.pdf  [Retrieved:  September 31]

European Banking Authority, 2023, Risk Dashboard.
        https://www.eba.europa.eu/risk-analysis-and-data/risk-dashboard
       [Retrieved: November 20]

European Central Bank Banking Supervision, 2023, Banks’ digital transformation: where do
       we stand?
       https://www.bankingsupervision.europa.eu/press/publications/newsletter/2023/html/ss
       m.nl230215_2.en.html  [Retrieved: October 20]

Ludvig Höjman & Hanna Eriksson        31           Stockholm School of Economics
European Covered Bond Council, 2023, Hypostat  2023  –  A review of Europe’s mortgage and
       housing markets, European Mortgage Federation.
        https://hypo.org/ecbc/publications/hypostat/  [Retrieved: October 20]

Ferreira, João J.M., Fernandes, Cristina I., and Fernando A.F. Ferreira, 2019, To be or not to
       be digital, that is the question: Firm innovation and performance, Journal of Business
        Research vol.101, 583-590.

Fuster, Andreas, Plosser, Matthew, Schnabl, Philipp and James Vickery, 2019, The Role of
        Technology in Mortgage Lending, The Review of Financial Studies vol. 32 (5), 1854-
       1899.

Gabaix, Xavier, Laibson, David, Li, Deyuan, Li, Hongyi, Resnick, Sidney, and, Casper G. de
       Vries, 2016, The impact of competition on prices with numerous firms, Journal of
        Economic Theory vol. 165 (C), 1-24.

Galton, Francis, 1886, Regression Towards Mediocrity in Hereditary Stature., The Journal of
       the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland vol. 15, 246-263

Garriga, Carlos, Kydland, Finn E., and Roman Šustek, 2017, Mortgages and Monetary Policy,
        The Review of Financial Studies vol. 30 (10), 3337-3375.

Graybill, Franklin A., 1976, Theory and Application of the Linear Model, (Duxbury Press,
      London).

Hoffman,   Mathias,   and   Thomas   Nitschka,   2012,   Securitization   of   mortgage   debt,
       domesticlending, and international risk sharing,  Canadian Journal of Economics  vol.
       45 (2),  373-807.

Hypoteket,  2023, Hypotekets lån finansieras av pensionsfonder och försäkringsbolag,  Mer om
        Hypoteket.
       https://hypoteket.com/om-hypoteket  [Retrieved: November 2]

Javeus, Johan, 2017, Tio frågor och svar om svenskarnas skulder, SEB Group.
        https://sebgroup.com/sv/press/nyheter/2017/tio-fragor-och-svar-om-svenskarnas-
       skulder  [Retrieved: November 2]

Johansson, Morgan, 2016, Regeringens proposition 2015/16:197  -  Stärkt konsumentskydd på
       bolånemarknaden, Government Offices.

Lindberg,   Kristoffer,   2023,   Motion   2023/24:946   -   Begränsning   av   bankernas
       räntenettomarginaler, Riksdag [Swedish Parlament].

                                     32
Lucas, Dan, and Andreas Lindberg, 2023, Rekordvinster för bankerna när räntorna höjs,
       Dagens Nyheter, October 26.
        https://www.dn.se/ekonomi/rekordvinster-for-bankerna-nar-rantorna-
      hojs/#:~:text=F%C3%B6r%20Nordeas%20del%20steg%20vinsten,45%2C4%20milja
      rder%20kronor).&text=Att%20r%C3%A4ntenettot%20stigit%20s%C3%A5%20snab
      bt,tempo%20sedan%20v%C3%A5ren%20i%20fjol
       [Retrieved: November 2]

Malkiel, Burton G., 2003, The Efficient Market Hypothesis and Its Critics, The Journal of
        Economic Perspectives vol. 17 (1), 59-82.

                                                                     th
Marshall,   Alfred,   1920,   Principles   of   Economics,   8   Edition,   (Palgrave   Macmillan,
       Hampshire), 674-675.

McNulty, Paul J., 1968, Economic Theory and the Meaning of Competition, The Quarterly
        Journal of Economics vol. 82(4), 639-656.

Newbold, Paul, Carlson, William L., and Betty M. Thorne, 2022, Statistics for Business and
                           th
       Economics, 10  Edition, (Pearson Education Limited, Harlow), 262-440.

Nilsson Lysell, Monika, 2023, Spiltans bolåneutmanare ger upp: ”Nästan omöjligt”, Dagens
       Industri, November 22.
        https://www.di.se/digital/spiltans-bolaneutmanare-ger-upp-nastan-omojligt/
       [Retrieved: November 7]

O’brien, Robert M., 2017, A Caution Regarding Rules of Thumb for Variance  Inflation
        Factors, Quality & Quantity vol. 41, 673-690.

Pólya, Georg, 1920, Über den zentralen Grenzwertsatz der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung und
        das Momentenproblem, Mathematische Zeitschrift vol. 8, 171-181.

Rees,  Jon,  2019,  Big banks squeeze out smaller rivals in UK’s ultra-competitive mortgage
       market,  S&P Global Market Intelligence,  September 26.
        https://www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/news-insights/latest-news-
        headlines/big-banks-squeeze-out-smaller-rivals-in-uk-s-ultra-competitive-mortgage-
       market-54409385  [Retrieved: November 15]

Sandström, Maria, Forsman, David, Stenkula von Rosen, Johanna,  and  Johanna Fager
       Wettergren,  2013, The Swedish covered bond market and links to financial stability,
       Economic Review,  Sveriges Riksbank [Swedish Central Bank].
       http://archive.riksbank.se/Documents/rapporter/pov/2013/2013_2/rap_pov_artikel_2_
       130918_eng.pdf  [Retrieved: November 2]

Sanglap, Ranina, and Marissa Ramos,  2023, Australia’s big banks look beyond mortgage
       lending as competition intensifies, S&P Global Market Intelligence, May 23.
        https://www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/news-insights/latest-news-
        headlines/australia-s-big-banks-look-beyond-mortgage-lending-as-competition-
       intensifies-75836845  [Retrieved: November 15]

Ludvig Höjman & Hanna Eriksson        33           Stockholm School of Economics
Santomero, Anthony M., 1983, Fixed Versus Variable Rate Loans, The Journal of Finance vol.
        38 (5), 1363-1380.

Statistics  Sweden, 2020, Ordlista till Finansmarknadsstatistiken.
       https://www.scb.se/contentassets/a0953773361648838b72a4775b0dd9b2/ordlista_till
       _finansmarknadsstatistik_20200227.pdf  [Retrieved: October 2]

Statistics Sweden, 2022, Fler väljer att binda bolånen, Sveriges ekonomi – statistiskt perspektiv
        no. 5.
        https://www.scb.se/hitta-statistik/temaomraden/sveriges-
        ekonomi/fordjupningsartiklar_Sveriges_ekonomi/fler-valjer-att-binda-bolanen/
       [Retrieved: November 2]

Statistics Sweden, 2023, Bostadslån från bostadskreditinstitut minskar, Statistiknyhet från
       SCB, 26 October.
         https://www.scb.se/hitta-statistik/statistik-efter-
       amne/finansmarknad/finansmarknadsstatistik/finansmarknadsstatistik/pong/statistikny
        het/finansmarknadsstatistik-september-2023/  [Retrieved: October 28]

Statistics Sweden, 2023,  Monetära finansinstitutens tillgångar och skulder efter institut,
         kontopost och valuta.
      https://www.statistikdatabasen.scb.se/pxweb/sv/ssd/START__FM__FM0401__FM04
       01X/MFIM1/  [Retrieved: September 28]

Steil, Benn, 2023, Global Monetary Policy Tracker, Council on Foreign Relations.
        https://www.cfr.org/global/global-monetary-policy-tracker/p37726
       [Retrieved: November 15]

Sveriges Riksbank [Swedish Central Bank], 2022, Reporäntan höjs till 0,25 procent.
        https://www.riksbank.se/sv/press-och-publicerat/nyheter-och-
        pressmeddelanden/pressmeddelanden/2022/reporantan-hojs-till-025-procent/
       [Retrieved: November 10]

Sveriges Riksbank [Swedish Central Bank], 2023, Riksbanken höjer styrräntan med 0,25
        procentenheter och ökar takten i försäljningarna av statsobligationer.
        https://www.riksbank.se/sv/press-och-publicerat/nyheter-och-
        pressmeddelanden/pressmeddelanden/2023/riksbanken-hojer-styrrantan-med-025-
        procentenheter-och-okar-takten-i-forsaljningarna-av-statsobligationer/
       [Retrieved:  November  28]

Swedish Bankers’ Association, 2018, Stora skillnader mellan europeiska bolånemarknader,
       Bankfokus no. 3.
        https://www.swedishbankers.se/repository/bankfokus/bankfokus-nr-3-2018/stora-
        skillnader-mellan-europeiska-bolaanemarknader/  [Retrieved: October 28]

Swedish   Bankers’   Association,   2022,   Den   digitaliserade   banken   2001   –   2021,
       Bankföreningens Historia.
        https://www.swedishbankers.se/om-oss/bankfoereningens-historia/svenska-
        bankfoereningens-historia-1880-2022/den-digitaliserade-banken-2001-2021/
       [Retrieved: November 15]

                                     34
Swedish Bankers’ Association, 2023, Bolånemarknaden i Sverige.
        https://www.swedishbankers.se/fakta-och-rapporter/statistik-och-
         rapporter/bolaanemarknaden-i-
      sverige/#:~:text=I%20rapporten%20Bol%C3%A5nemarknaden%20i%20Sverige,seda
      n%20statistikserien%20startade%20%C3%A5r%202001
       [Retrieved: November 15]

Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority, 2022, Den svenska bolånemarknaden.
        https://www.fi.se/contentassets/3b77b17e98524f1f9e026a7ceb4423c7/den-svenska-
       bolanemarknaden-2022.pdf  [Retrieved: November 1]

Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority, 2023, Den svenska bolånemarknaden.
        https://www.fi.se/contentassets/a35a4b8a4a1b4604acbcb680ae763153/den-svenska-
       bolanemarknaden-2023-ny2.pdf  [Retrieved: November 15]

Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority, 2023, Konsumenternas ställning  –  en internationell
       jämförelse, RBB Economics.
        https://www.fi.se/contentassets/0007f7fb35cb4a88b1571448d2a09bff/bilaga-1-
        konsumenternas-stallning-internationell-jamforelse.pdf  [Retrieved: November 15]

The Business Research Company, 2023, Global Mortgage Lender Market Report 2023,
       Research and Markets.
        https://www.researchandmarkets.com/report/mortgage-lender
       [Retrieved: November 17]

The Global Economy, 2023, Mortgage credit interest rate by country: the latest data.
       https://www.theglobaleconomy.com/rankings/mortgage_interest_rate/
       [Retrieved: November 16]

Treur, Leontine, and Wim Boonstra, 2014, Competition In The Dutch Mortgage Market: Notes
       On Concentration, Entry, Funding, And Margins, Journal of Competition Law and
        Economics vol. 10(4), 819-841.

van  Leuvensteijn, Michiel, Kok Sørensen, Christoffer, Bikker, Jacob A., and Adrian A.R.J.M.
        van Rixtel, 2008, Impact of Bank Competition  on  the Interest Rate Pass-Through in  the
       Euro Area, Working Paper no. 885, European Central Bank.

                                                                                                    th
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., 2019, Introductory Econometrics  –  A Modern Approach, 7  edition,
       (Cengage, Boston), 275.

Ludvig Höjman & Hanna Eriksson        35           Stockholm School of Economics
9.  Appendices

Appendix 1.  Excluded Control Variables
Household loan-to-assets:  the ratio between outstanding loan balance and total financial assets
held per household. Household loan-to-assets was intended to be used as a proxy for mortgage
customer’s leverage risk. It reflects individuals’ vulnerability to economic downturns and
changes to mortgage interest rates, as it affects their ability to service debt. The data is
published yearly by Statistics Sweden.
Treasury discount note:  the Swedish 3-month treasury discount note yield.  The treasury
discount note serves as an indicator of short-term interest rates in the capital market,
influencing short-term borrowing for mortgage institutions which in turn affects mortgage
interest rates. The data is published monthly by Statistics Sweden and calculated as the average
monthly yield.
Consumer confidence index:  the consumer confidence index (CCI)  assesses households’  view
                                                                                          11
of their personal finances, serving as a proxy for housing and mortgage demand.    CCI is
derived from the Economy Tendency Survey  conducted by the National Institute of Economic
Research.
Unemployment rate:  the unemployment rate serves as an economic health indicator, as
                                                                                        12
increasing unemployment rate is assumed to reduce housing and mortgage demand.    The data
is published monthly by Statistic Sweden, derived from their Labour Force Survey (LFS).
Mortgage margin:  mortgage gross margins, published by the Swedish Financial Supervisory
Authority. The proxy is calculated using an estimate of mortgage financing costs from three of
Sweden’s largest MFIs (Swedbank, Nordea, and Handelsbanken). This proxy has been
excluded  from the model because of its simplification and inaccuracy to determine real gross
margins across all mortgage institutions due to the small sample size.

11
  Consumer confidence index formula: “confidence indicator = financial situation of the household now +
financial situation of the household within 12 months + Swedish economy now + Swedish economy within 12
months + good time to buy consumer durables now (simplified by Statistics Sweden, 2023).”
12
  Unemployment rate is defined in accordance with Statistics Sweden’s definition: “The unemployment rate
refers to the proportion of people in the labour force aged 15-74 years who are  unemployed. An unemployed
person is a person who was without a job during a certain week (the reference week) but who has been actively
seeking work in the past four weeks and was available to start work within two weeks from the end of the
reference week.  The definition of an unemployed person also includes people who have found a job that starts
within three months, provided they could have started working within two weeks from the end of the reference
week.”

                                     36
Appendix 2.  Sensitivity Analysis, Housing Sales Estimation, Full Time Period

Note: The numbers presented in the “Changes in MCC P-value” and “Changes in MCC estimate” columns refer
to changes in the p-value and estimate for the  MCC Market Share  variable in each model. The change made to
the Housing Sales variable is specified in the “Percentage change in Housing Sales column”.

Ludvig Höjman & Hanna Eriksson        37           Stockholm School of Economics
Appendix 3.  Sensitivity Analysis, Housing Sales Estimation, Post-Policy Rate Shock

Note: The numbers presented in the “Changes in MCC P-value” and “Changes in MCC estimate” columns refer
to changes in the p-value and estimate for the  MCC Market Share  variable in each model. The change made to
the Housing Sales variable is specified in the “Percentage change in Housing Sales column”.

Appendix  4. Correlation Matrix for Full  Time  Period (Variable  Rates)

Note: Certain variables have been shortened to fit the table. HS in the table refers to the Housing Sales variable.

                                     38
Appendix  5. Correlation Matrix for Full  Time  Period (Fixed  Rates)

Note: Certain variables have been shortened to fit the table. HS in the table refers to the Housing Sales variable.

Appendix  6.  Output  for  Full  Time Period, All Variables

Ludvig Höjman & Hanna Eriksson        39           Stockholm School of Economics
Appendix  7.  Output for Pre-Shock Period, All Variables

                                     40
Appendix  8.  Output for Post-Shock Period, All Variables

Ludvig Höjman & Hanna Eriksson        41           Stockholm School of Economics