SHAREHOLDER ADVANTAGE
AND SHORT-TERM LEVERAGE

NIKOLA PAJKIC

PRATIK KULKARNI

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2023
Shareholder Advantage and  Short-Term Leverage

Abstract:

   We find a correlational relationship between proxies of shareholder bargaining
   power and liquidation costs (indicating the value extraction ability of shareholders
   from debtholders in reorganization in default) and short-term leverage. The
   theoretical literature suggests to us that firms with higher shareholder advantage will
   reduce their short-term leverage to a greater extent than those with lower shareholder
   advantage (due to shareholders disliking commitment to rollover risk) in a systemic
   shock to bond  market liquidity, i.e.,  that shareholder advantage influences short-term
   leverage and not the other way. We fail to measure this, owing to an inability to
   identify a shock that only influenced bond market liquidity.

Keywords:

   Bargaining, Default, Debt maturity structure, Rollover risk

Authors:

   Nikola Pajkic  (25369)
   Pratik Kulkarni  (25241)

Tutors:

   Marieke Bos, Deputy Director, Swedish House of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in  Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Nikola Pajkic and Pratik Kulkarni, 2023

                                   1
   1.  Introduction

80%  of  bankrupting  publicly  traded  companies  go  into  Chapter  11  reorganization  (Corbae
and  D’Erasmo,  2017)  and  it  has  been  widely  documented  that  shareholders  can  use  their
                                                            1
bargaining  power  to  violate  the  absolute  priority  rule (APR)  in  such  reorganizations  (see  e.g.
Franks  and  Torous,  1989,  Weiss,  1990  and  Bris,  Welch  and  Zhu,  2006).  This  core  idea  is
found  to  have  wide-ranging  implications,  including  equity  risk  (e.g.  Garlappi,  Shu  and  Yan
2008  and  Hackbarth,  Haselmann  and  Schoenherr,  2015)  and  capital  structure  (Antill  and
Grenadier,  2019).  We  believe  we  are  the  first  to  investigate  its  connection  to  debt  maturity
structure,  motivated  by  the  asset  pricing  implications  of  debt  maturity  found  by  Friewald,
Nagler  and  Wagner  (2022),  that  is,  that  short-term  leverage  confers  risk  upon  shareholders
whereas  long-term  leverage  does  not.  Specifically,  based  on  the  notion  that  powerful
shareholders   can   negotiate   more   favorable   terms   for   themselves   coming   out   of
reorganization,  we  ask:  does  having  higher  shareholder  advantage  (a  combination  of
bargaining  power  of  shareholders  and  liquidation  costs  for  debtholders)  reduce  a  firm’s
short-term  leverage?

To  measure  this  relationship,  we  need  to  be  sure  of  the  direction  of  causality,  and  of  that
shareholders  indeed  dislike  committing  to  short-term  debt,  i.e.  in  a  way  consistent  with  the
debt  rollover  risk  notion  from  He  and  Xiong  (2012)  used  by  Friewald,  Nagler  and  Wagner
(2022).  Ideally,  one  would  devise  a  structural  model  both  capturing  the  bargaining  game  and
the  rollover  risk  channel  in  a  firm’s  credit  spread,  but  we  draw  broader-strokes  theoretical
intuition  from  the  work  of  Fan  and  Sundaresan  (2000)  (who  model  the  bargaining  game)  and
He  and  Xiong  (2012)  (who  model  the  rollover  risk  channel),  concluding  that  the  threshold
asset  value  for  default  is  increasing  in  shareholder  advantage  but  decreasing  in  the  quality  of
bond  market  liquidity,  as  well  as  that  shareholder  value  extraction  from  debtholders  in  default
is  increasing  in  shareholder  advantage.

We  use  the  firm-dependence  of  shareholder  advantage  and  firm-independence  of  bond  market
liquidity  to  our  advantage,  hypothesizing  that  in  a  systemic  debt  market  liquidity  shock,  firms
with  higher  shareholder  advantage  will  reduce  their  short-term  leverage  to  a  greater  extent
than  firms  with  lower  shareholder  advantage.  While  this  resolves  the  first  two  problems,  two
new  ones  arise.  Firstly,  our  measurement  relies  on  annual  accounting  numbers,  which
impedes  our  ability  to  measure  close  in  time  to  the  shock,  and  we  mitigate  this  by  devising  an
imperfect  measure  of  short-term  leverage  computable  on  a  quarterly  basis,  though  such  data
is  limited  and  restricts  us  to  more  recent  shocks.  Secondly,  the  identified  shocks  are  not  pure
shocks  to  bond  market  liquidity  but  events  with  more  wide-ranging  implications,  implying  a
risk  of  making  spurious  connections  based  on  the  idiosyncratic  characteristics  of  a  single
shock,  which  is  why  we  repeat  our  analysis  on  several  shocks  and  attempt  to  discern  shared
characteristics  among  them.

Our  data  is  comprised  of  levered,  nonfinancial  U.S.  firms  listed  on  the  NYSE,  NASDAQ  and
Amex,  where  accounting  variables  are  taken  from  Compustat  and  market  variables  from  the
Center  for  Research  in  Security  Prices  (CRSP).  We  use  refinancing  intensity  to  measure  firm
short-term  leverage  (as  in  Friewald,  Nagler  and  Wagner,  2022).  As  for  shareholder  advantage,
we  follow  Garlappi,  Shu  and  Yan  (2008)  and  Hackbarth,  Haselmann  and  Schoenherr  (2015)
to  establish  five  proxies,  namely  firm  asset  size,  R&D  expenditure-to-assets  and  insider

1
 The  absolute  priority  rule  states  that  a  bankrupt  firm’s  value  is  to  be  redistributed  first  so  as  to  fully  settle
senior  debtholders’  claims,  then  to  fully  settle  junior  debtholders’  claims,  and  only  then  those  of  shareholders.

                                                                                 2
ownership  proxying  shareholder  bargaining  power,  and  Herfindahl  index  and  the  Berger,
Ofek  and  Swary  (1996)  asset  tangibility  measure  proxying  liquidation  costs.  Requiring
nonmissing  values  for  the  market  value  of  equity  removes  the  most  observations  (even  all
data  before  1998),  and  our  initial  sample  favors  small  firms  and  discriminates  against  public
administration  firms,  and  we  find  no  other  significant  biases  with  our  data  or  data  cleaning
process.

Similar  to  the  approach  in  Hackbarth,  Haselmann  and  Schoenherr  (2015),  we  regress
refinancing  intensity  on  each  of  the  proxies  individually  before  and  after  a  systemic  debt
market  liquidity  shock,  and  then  add  in  a  dummy  (that  is  0  in  the  pre-period  and  1  in  the
post-period)  and  proxy-dummy  interaction  term  and  regress  it  on  the  combined  dataset.  Our
research  design  circumvents  the  difficulty  of  measuring  bond  market  liquidity  by  instead
hand-picking  shocks  that  have  been  discussed  in  the  literature.  In  the  interest  of  gauging
robustness,  we  run  three  models  for  each  shock:  Model  (1)  purely  regresses  refinancing
intensity  on  each  proxy  of  shareholder  advantage,  Model  (2)  adds  leverage  control  variables
from  the  literature  on  the  determinants  of  leverage,  and  Model  (3)  adds  firm  fixed  effects.

We  find  a  correlational  relationship  between  shareholder  advantage  proxies  and  firm
refinancing  intensity  that  is  distinct  from  the  relationship  between  those  same  proxies  of
shareholder  advantage  and  overall  firm  leverage,  in  line  with  our  theoretical  intuition  based
on  the  literature.  However,  as  we  are  unable  to  identify  a  pure  shock  to  bond  market  liquidity
that  fits  with  our  data  constraints  (as  seen  by  our  inconsistent  results  when  it  comes  to  the
interaction  between  the  proxy  and  dummy),  we  fail  to  discern  a  direction  of  causality.
Additionally,  our  models  explain  little  of  the  overall  variation  in  refinancing  intensity
(adjusted  R-squared  persistently  below  20%)  and  significance  tends  to  disappear  when  going
into  more  advanced  model  specifications,  suggesting  a  weak  relationship  with  little  influence.

To  the  extent  that  shareholder  advantage  and  short-term  leverage  are  correlated,  our  findings
match  with  what  is  implied  by  the  theoretical  literature,  though  our  failure  to  identify  that  it  is
indeed  shareholder  advantage  that  affects  short-term  leverage  calls  for  further  research,
especially  a  structural  model  that  would  explicitly  take  into  account  both  the  bargaining  game
as  in  Fan  and  Sundaresan  (2000)  and  the  rollover  risk  channel  in  a  firm’s  credit  spread  from
He  and  Xiong  (2012).  Our  conclusions  also  separately  ask  new  questions  surrounding  the
determinants  of  debt  maturity  structure  and  of  the  scope  of  the  influence  of  claimholder
bargaining  in  default.  Do  powerful  shareholders  bring  down  short-term  leverage,  or  does
short-term  leverage  bring  down  shareholder  power?

The  rest  of  the  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  Section  2  provides  an  overview  of  the  related
literature  and  connects  our  work  to  it.  Section  3  details  our  theoretical  intuition  where  bond
market  liquidity  and  shareholder  advantage  are  joint  determinants  of  default  boundary  asset
value.  Section  4  explains  our  sample,  construction  of  variables,  and  the  representativeness  of
our  data.  Section  5  explains  our  hypothesis  and  methodology.  Section  6  identifies  a  number
of  bond  market  liquidity  shocks  and  reports  the  main  results.  Section  7  discusses  the  main
results.  Section  8  carries  out  robustness  tests.  The  Appendix  contains  additional  tables
referred  to  for  illustration.

   2.  Literature  review

Our  work  is  related  to  several  strands  of  literature.  Firstly,  both  of  the  bodies  of  literature
elaborated  on  below  make  use  of  structural  credit  risk  modeling,  which  can  be  traced  back  to

                                                                                 3
Black  and  Scholes  (1973)  and  Merton  (1974)  who  realize  that  options  pricing  methods  can  be
applied  to  a  firm’s  capital  structure.  Shareholders  are  long  and  debtholders  short  a  call  option
on  firm  assets,  with  the  maturity  being  the  maturity  of  the  debt,  and  the  strike  price  being  a
threshold  asset  value  below  which  the  firm  defaults.  While  we  do  not  use  structural  modeling
methods  in  our  work,  we  draw  strongly  on  the  established  literature,  and  our  conclusions
invite  future  research  to  model  the  relationship  between  the  bargaining  game  and  debt
rollover,  especially  given  the  complications  (measurement  frequency  of  key  variables  in  4.1,
identifying  pure  shocks  to  bond  market  liquidity  in  6.1)  we  come  across  in  our  work.

Second,  we  work  with  the  literature  on  reorganizations  in  default.  Franks  and  Torous  (1989)
document  that  Chapter  11  reorganizations  lead  to  deviations  from  the  APR,  with  one
interpretation  pointing  to  the  bargaining  nature  of  Chapter  11,  where  shareholders  with
greater  bargaining  power  extract  more  value  from  debtholders.  In  Fan  and  Sundaresan
(2000),  this  bargaining  game  is  modeled  using  the  above  discussed  structural  framework.  The
firm  defaults  when  asset  value  goes  below  an  endogenously  determined  threshold,  and  the
value   of   the   firm  is  split  between  shareholders  and  debtholders  in  accordance  with
shareholder  bargaining  power  and  liquidation  costs.  Antill  and  Grenadier  (2019)  also  model
the  bargaining  game  and  derive  capital  structure  implications,  which  is  closer  to  our
undertaking.  In  our  work  we  use  the  notion  that  shareholders  can  use  their  power  in
reorganizations  to  influence  matters  in  their  favor,  and  we  observe  that  shareholder  advantage
(shareholder  bargaining  power  and  liquidation  costs  taken  together)  is  correlated  with
short-term  leverage.

Finally,  we  draw  from  literature  on  the  equity  risk  implications  of  leverage,  distress  and
bargaining  between  claimholders.  Garlappi,  Shu  and  Yan  (2008)  examine  the  link  between
equity  risk  and  default  probability,  and  find  that  default  probability  only  increases  equity  risk
if  shareholder  advantage  is  low.  Hackbarth,  Haselmann  and  Schoenherr  (2015)  study  the
equity  risk  implications  of  the  1978  Bankruptcy  Reform  Act,  finding  that  it  reduces  the
equity  risk  of  firms  with  a  differential  influence  depending  on  the  firm’s  initial  level  of
shareholder  bargaining  power.  Friewald,  Nagler  and  Wagner  (2022)  examine  the  influence  of
debt  maturity  structure  on  the  relationship  between  leverage  and  equity  risk,  finding  that
short-term  leverage  increases  equity  risk  while  long-term  leverage  does  not.  Our  work  rests
on  the  idea  that  shareholders  dislike  rollover  risk  and  that  they  will  take  the  opportunity  to
reduce  this  commitment  in  reorganizations,  and  suggests  a  way  in  which  a  shock  to  bond
markets  can  be  connected  to  the  equity  markets.

  3.  Theoretical  background

We  are  faced  with  two  issues.  In  measuring  whether  shareholder  advantage  influences
short-term  leverage,  it  is  unclear  whether  the  first  influences  the  second  or  vice  versa.
Additionally,  the  theoretical  background  of  the  equity  risk  implications  that  Friewald,  Nagler
and  Wagner  (2022)  find  specifies  that  the  risk  of  short-term  leverage  is  the  risk  of  renewing
debt  at  higher  rates  (since  the  additional  costs  are  borne  by  shareholders).  If  a  firm  rolling
over  its  debt  faces  lower  (more  favorable)  rates,  would  shareholders  then  not  be  in  favor  of
debt  rollover?  Ideally,  one  would  devise  a  structural  model  that  both  captures  the  bargaining
game  and  the  rollover  risk  channel  in  a  firm’s  credit  spread,  but  this  is  beyond  the  scope  of
this  paper.  We  instead  draw  theoretical  intuition  in  broader  strokes  from  Fan  and  Sundaresan
(2000)  who  model  the  bargaining  game  and  He  and  Xiong  (2012)  who  model  the  rollover
risk  channel.

                                                                                 4
       3.1.  Claimholder  bargaining

In  the  face  of  inefficient  liquidation,  reorganizing  a  defaulted  firm  can  be  preferable  to  all
claimholders.  We  borrow  theoretical  intuition  from  Fan  and  Sundaresan  (2000)  who  model
such  reorganization.  When  a  firm’s  asset  value  goes  below 𝑉 ,  an  endogenous  trigger  point
                                                                                                                                       𝑆
asset  value,  the  firm  defaults.  𝑉  is  higher  if  shareholder  bargaining  power  is  higher  and  if
                                                                       𝑆
liquidation  costs  are  higher  (because  debtholders  are  relatively  more  willing  to  reorganize
over  liquidating  if  their  recovery  from  liquidation  is  small).  In  default,  shareholders  and
debtholders  bargain  over  firm  value,  and  the  amount  that  shareholders  obtain  is  increasing  in
shareholder   bargaining   power   and  liquidation  costs  (we  denote  these  two  variables
“shareholder  advantage”).  Taken  together,  greater  shareholder  advantage  involves  default  at
higher   asset   values   (earlier   default),   and   greater   shareholder   value   extraction   from
debtholders  well  in  default.

       3.2.  Rollover  risk

He  and  Xiong  (2012)  model  the  relationship  between  the  default  premium  and  liquidity
premium  in  a  firm’s  credit  spread.  They  find  that  deteriorating  liquidity  in  the  debt  market,
which  is  normally  associated  only  with  a  higher  liquidity  premium,  also  contributes  to  a
firm’s  default  premium  through  a  rollover  risk  channel:  when  a  firm  renews  its  short-term
debt  at  a  higher  interest  rate,  shareholders  take  all  of  the  losses  associated  with  this  rollover,
and  this  leads  shareholders  to  be  willing  to  default  at  a  higher  threshold 𝑉 ,  which  increases
                                                                                                                                                                  𝑆
the  default  premium  in  the  credit  spread.

       3.3.  Theoretical  intuition

A  firm’s  default  boundary 𝑉  is  jointly  determined  by  the  level  of  shareholder  advantage  and
                                                              𝑆
quality  of  bond  market  liquidity.  All  firms  ought  to  be  influenced  by  a  bond  market  liquidity
shock,  whereas  firms  can  have  differing  levels  of  shareholder  advantage  amongst  themselves.
This  allows  us  to  identify  a  systemic  shock  to  debt  market  liquidity  and  measure  its
differential  impact  on  the  refinancing  intensities  of  firms  based  on  their  pre-shock  level  of
shareholder  advantage.  Given  that  more  high-advantage  firms  are  pushed  into  default  (see
Figure  1),  the  shareholders  of  these  firms  will  be  given  the  opportunity  to  negotiate  down
firm  refinancing  intensity  (which  they  now  dislike  due  to  rollover  risk).  This  theoretical
intuition  resolves  our  two  issues:  the  exogeneity  of  a  bond  market  liquidity  shock  addresses
the  first,  and  the  fact  that  we  focus  around  the  time  of  the  shock  addresses  the  second,  though
                               2
this  gives  rise  to  new  issues that  are  addressed  in  later  sections.

2
 Namely that intervals between measurement of accounting data, be they one year or one quarter, impede our
ability  to  measure  right  before  and  right  after  the  shock  (addressed  in  section  4.1),  and  that  the  shocks  we
identify  usually  influence  more  than  bond  market  liquidity  (addressed  in  section  6.1).

                                                                                 5
 Figure  1.  Illustration  of  our  theoretical  intuition.  Two  hypothetical  firms,  before  and  after  a  shock  to  bond
 market  liquidity,  are  the  exact  same  save  for  their  levels  of  shareholder  advantage.  The  higher-advantage  firm
 has  a  higher 𝑉  (default  boundary  asset  value),  as  in  Fan  and  Sundaresan  (2000).  The  shock  to  bond  market
                                   𝑆
 liquidity  brings  up  the 𝑉  of  both  firms,  as  in  He  and  Xiong  (2012),  while  neither  firm’s  asset  value  changes.
                                                        𝑆
 Only  the  high-advantage  firm  defaults.

   4.  Data

Our  initial  sample  entails  levered,  nonfinancial  U.S.  firms  listed  on  the  NYSE,  NASDAQ  and
Amex,  with  annual  and  quarterly  accounting  and  market  data  spanning  1976-2023  and  annual
insider  ownership  data  1992-2023.  We  gather  accounting  data  from  the  Compustat  Annual
and  Quarterly  Files,  insider  ownership  information  from  the  Compustat  Execucomp  database,
and  securities  information  from  the  Center  for  Research  in  Security  Prices  (CRSP).
According  to  standard  practice,  we  exclude  financial  firms  (Standard  Industrial  Classification
(SIC)  codes  starting  in  6).

       4.1  Leverage  variables

In  line  with  Friewald,  Nagler  and  Wagner  (2022)  we  exclude  firms  with  nonpositive  book
equity,  nonpositive  market  equity  and  nonpositive  assets.  We  collect  debt  maturity  structure
data  from  Compustat.  Specifically,  variables  dd1  and  dltt  which  partition  a  firm’s  debt  into
debt  maturing  within  one  year  and  debt  maturing  in  more  than  one  year,  and  dd2  and  dd3
which  specify  the  amount  of  debt  maturing  in  two  and  three  years  respectively.  All  of  these
items  pertain  to  debt  whose  original  maturity  is  more  than  one  year.  According  to  Barclay  and
Smith  (1995),  Compustat  only  has  items  dd2  and  dd3  as  of  fiscal  year  1974,  which  is  why  our
sample  period  is  constrained  to  years  past  1974,  and  begins  in  1976.  Following  Cooper,
Gulen  and  Schill  (2008),  we  set  missing  values  of  dd1  and  dltt  to  zero.  In  line  with  Almeida,
Campello,  Laranjeira  and  Weisbenner  (2012),  we  remove  observations  for  which  total  debt
(dd1  +  dltt)  exceeds  total  assets.  Additionally,  we  collect  the  market  value  of  equity  (ME)
from  CRSP.  We  calculate  (market)  leverage  (LEV)  and  debt  refinancing  intensity  (RI)  in  line
with  a  lot  of  the  literature  (e.g.,  Barclay  and  Smith,  1995,  Almeida  et  al.,  2012,  Harford,
Klasa,  and  Maxwell,  2014,  Friewald,  Nagler  and  Wagner,  2022):

                                                                                 6
                                                                                𝑑𝑑1+𝑑𝑙𝑡𝑡
                                              𝐿𝐸𝑉  =  𝑑𝑑1+𝑑𝑙𝑡𝑡+𝑀𝐸
                                                        𝑑𝑑1+𝑑𝑑2+𝑑𝑑3
                                                𝑅𝐼  =     𝑑𝑑1+𝑑𝑙𝑡𝑡
Further  following  Friewald,  Nagler  and  Wagner  (2022),  we  exclude  firms  with  leverage  ratios
below  0.05,  because  firms  with  zero  leverage  have  an  undefined  refinancing  intensity,  and
because  firms  with  near-zero  leverage  ( 0  <  𝐿𝐸𝑉  <  0. 05)  should  not  drive  our  conclusions.

In  our  definition  of  pre-  and  post-periods  for  liquidity  shocks,  we  are  constrained  by  the
frequency  at  which  companies  report  their  debt.  In  an  ideal  world  we  would  use  daily  debt
measurements  to  be  able  to  define  pre-  and  post-periods  in  close  proximity  to  debt  liquidity
shocks,  which  would  minimize  the  risk  that  the  variation  in  RI  captured  is  attributable  to
anything  other  than  the  shock  examined,  though  this  is  impossible  for  many  reasons.  Using
quarterly  data  would  be  preferred  to  annual  data,  but  it  comes  with  two  significant  caveats.
Firstly,  variables  dd2  and  dd3  are  unavailable  at  the  quarterly  level,  meaning  we  would  have
to  define  a  new  and  less  ideal  measurement  of  short-term  leverage.  It  only  captures  the  ratio
of  long-term  debt  maturing  in  one  year  (as  opposed  to  long-term  debt  maturing  within  three
years)  to  total  long-term  debt.  We  will  call  this  ratio 𝑅𝐼        to  distinguish  it  from  the  one
                                                                                                                                   𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑙𝑦
more  prevalent  in  the  literature:
                                                                                 𝑑𝑑1
                                                  𝑅𝐼           =  𝑑𝑑1+𝑑𝑙𝑡𝑡
                                                                                 𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑙𝑦
Leverage  will  not  be  influenced  by  these  concerns  because  it  does  not  use  variables  dd2  and
dd3.  Secondly,  there  are  fewer  than  1000  quarterly  observations  with  nonmissing  dd1  and  dltt
for  the  years  up  to  and  including  2010,  some  years  (even,  for  instance,  the  entire  period
1990-1996)  even  having  zero  observations.  For  this  reason  we  will  constrain  our  quarterly
analysis  to  shocks  past  the  year  2012.  See  Figure  2.

                                                                                 7
 Figure  2.  Nonmissing  dd1 and dltt for quarterly data. To understand quarterly data availability, we remove
 all  observations  where  either  dd1,  dltt  or  both  are  missing  (since  both  these  variables  are  necessary  for
 computing 𝑅𝐼       ,  and  denote  this  new  dataset  noNA.  We  present  the  number  of  rows  of  noNA  in  our
                                    𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑙𝑦
 quarterly  data  per  year  to  demonstrate  the  infeasibility  of  conducting  our  analysis  on  bond  market  liquidity
 shocks  happening  in  years  prior  to  2012,  and  highlight  our  cutoff  year  (2012)  before  which  we  choose  not  to
 analyze  quarterly  data.

       4.2  Shareholder  advantage  variables

We  base  four  proxies  of  shareholder  advantage  on  those  used  by  Garlappi,  Shu  and  Yan
(2008),  and  add  a  fifth  one  from  Favara,  Schroth  and  Valta  (2012)  and  Hackbarth,  Haselmann
and   Schoenherr   (2015).   The   log   of   firm   asset   size   (Compustat   item   AT),   R&D
expenditure-to-assets  ratio  (R&D  being  Compustat  item  XRD)  and  insider  ownership  are  used
to  proxy  shareholder  bargaining  power.  Smaller  firms,  or  firms  with  a  smaller  asset  size,  due
to  asymmetric  information,  have  a  very  concentrated  group  of  debtholders  who  boast  an
advantage  in  monitoring  the  firm  (Diamond,  1991  and  Sufi,  2007).  This  can  weaken  the
bargaining  power  of  shareholders  in  the  event  of  financial  distress.  Furthermore,  Franks  and
Torous  (1994)  and  Betker  (1995)  find  that  large  asset  sizes  in  firms  is  a  crucial  determinant
that  can  justify  a  firm’s  deviation  from  the  APR.  As  for  our  second  proxy  of  shareholder
bargaining  power,  R&D-to-assets,  firms  with  a  high  R&D  expenditure  can  be  subject  to
liquidity   shortages   in   times   of   financial   distress   (Opler   and   Titman,   1994)   putting
shareholders  in  a  bad  bargaining  position  with  creditors  given  the  cash-flow  problems.  Thus
the  presence  of  cash-flow  covenants  can  prevent  debt  renegotiation  and  bring  shareholder
bargaining  power  to  zero  (Garlappi,  Shu  and  Yan,  2008).  Finally,  Favara,  Schroth  and  Valta
(2012)  and  Hackbarth,  Haselmann  and  Schoenherr  (2015)  explain  that  insider  ownership
confers  bargaining  power  to  shareholders  because  of  improved  coordination  between
management  and  shareholders.  We  measure  insider  ownership  using  data  from  the  Compustat
Execucomp  and  Annual  Files  databases,  by  finding  the  percentage  of  shares  outstanding
(CSHO)  owned  by  executives  (the  sum  of 𝑆𝐻𝑅𝑂𝑊𝑁_𝑇𝑂𝑇 ,  total  shares  owned  by  executive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     𝑖
i,  for  each  firm)  in  the  firm  for  each  year.  Next,  we  proxy  liquidation  costs  using  two  different

                                                                                 8
proxies  for  asset  specificity,  again  in  line  with  Garlappi,  Shu  and  Yan  (2008).  The  first  is
industry  concentration,  itself  proxied  by  the  Herfindahl  index  on  sales,  given  by:

                                                                                                                                                      𝐼
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  𝑗
                                                       2
                                  𝐻𝐸𝑅𝐹 =  ∑  𝑠
                                                                                                  𝑗                  𝑖,𝑗
                                                         𝑖=1

where 𝑠  is  the  ratio  of  sales  of  firm  i  to  the  total  sales  of  industry  j,  and 𝐼 is  the  total  number
                 𝑖,𝑗                                                                                                                            𝑗
of  firms  in  industry  j.  In  line  with  Garlappi,  Shu  and  Yan  (2008)  we  define  industries
according  to  the  first  two  digits  of  each  company’s  SIC  code.  The  second  proxy  is  the  asset
tangibility  measure  devised  in  Berger,  Ofek  and  Swary  (1996),  given  by:

𝑇𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑖𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦  =  0. 715  ×  𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑒𝑖𝑣𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒𝑠  +  0. 547  ×  𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑦  +  0. 535  ×  𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙

To  this  we  add  cash  and  divide  by  assets  as  in  Almeida  and  Campello  (2007),  Garlappi,  Shu
and  Yan  (2008)  and  Favara,  Schroth  and  Valta  (2012).  Here,  receivables  are  Compustat  item
RECT,  inventory  INVT,  capital  PPENT,  cash  CHE  and  assets  AT.  Asset  specificity  is  crucial
in  determining  a  firm’s  liquidation  value  in  times  of  bankruptcy  (see  e.g.,  Acharya,
Sundaram,  and  John,  2005).  If  an  asset  is  highly  specific,  there  is  a  higher  chance  of  it
undergoing  fire-sale  discounts  in  liquidation  auctions  (Shleifer  and  Vishny,  1992).  An
increase  in  asset  tangibility  means  a  reduction  in  liquidation  costs  resulting  in  lower
shareholder  advantage  (Garlappi,  Shu  and  Yan,  2008).  Following  Hackbarth,  Haselmann  and
Schoenherr  (2015),  we  use  the  decile  rankings  of  all  our  proxies  in  our  regressions  (Garlappi,
Shu  and  Yan,  2008  do  this  for  all  proxies  except  log  assets).  Lastly,  in  an  effort  to  maximize
observations,  we  will  only  remove  missing  observations  in  the  variables  required  to  calculate
a  certain  proxy  in  the  regression  specific  to  that  proxy—for  example,  we  only  remove
missing  observations  of  R&D  expense  when  running  regressions  using  the  R&D  ratio.

                                                                                 9
      4.3  Summary  of  variables

Table 1. Definitions of all dependent and independent variables.

                                                                               10
       4.4  Summary  statistics

We  report  summary  statistics  for  annual  data  (Table  2)  and  quarterly  data  (Table  3)  separately.

 Table  2  and  3.  Summary  statistics,  annual  data  1998-2023  (left)  and  quarterly  data  2016-2023  (right).
 We  report  the  number  of  observations,  mean,  median  and standard deviation (SD) for market value of equity
 (ME),  market  leverage  (LEV),  refinancing  intensity  (RI  for  annual  data, 𝑅𝐼        for  quarterly  data),  log
                                                                                                                                                                                        𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑙𝑦
 assets  (LOGAT),  R&D-expenditure-to-assets  (RD),  insider  ownership  (INS,  though  only  for  annual  data),
 asset  tangibility  (TANG),  Herfindahl  index  (HERF),  market-to-book  ratios  and  return  on  assets  (RoA)  as  well
 as  the  total  number  of  industries  in  our  sample  as  defined  by  the  first  two  digits  of  a  firm’s  SIC  code
 (industry-specific  controls  are  excluded).

Our  quarterly  data  has  consistently  more  observations  (except  for  INS,  for  which  we  lack
measurements  at  the  quarterly  frequency)  despite  spanning  a  shorter  time  interval,  owing  to
that  annual  data  measures  an  interval  around  3.5  times  longer  yet  quarterly  data  has  four
times  as  many  observations  for  each  year.  Average  leverage  is  29%  in  annual  data  and  30%  in
quarterly  data,  and  the  medians  (24%  and  25%  respectively)  are  below  the  means,  implying  a
positive  skewness  in  the  distribution  of  firm  leverage.  Refinancing  intensity  is  lower  in
quarterly  data  because  we  only  measure  debt  due  in  one  year  as  opposed  to  three  years  for  the
quarterly  data  (refer  to  4.1).  Nonetheless,  they  both  exhibit  a  skewness  pattern  where  the
respective  means  (26%  for  annual,  10%  for  quarterly)  are  above  the  medians  (21%  for
annual,  4%  for  quarterly).  From  the  annual  data,  it  is  implied  that  debt  maturing  in  more  than
three  years  makes  up  74%  of  leverage,  and  from  the  quarterly  data  that  debt  maturing  in  more
than  one  year  makes  up  90%  of  leverage.  LOGAT  and TANG appear approximately the same
in  both  measurement  frequencies,  while  RD  and  HERF  are  both  lower  and  have  lower
variation,  implying  that  on  average,  firms  over  time  have  spent  less  on  R&D  (6%  versus  2%
on  average)  and  that  industry  concentration  is  going  down  across  industries  (13%  versus  4%
on  average).  These  differences  over  time  do  not  bias  our  results  because  we  use  annual  and
quarterly  data  from  the  same  point  in  time  around  a  shock  to  bond  market  liquidity.

       4.5  Selection

                                                                                                                            3
We  first  evaluate  the  influence  of  our  cleaning  steps  on  the  total  number  of  observations.
86.43%  of  our  annual  data  sample  is  lost  as  part  of  the  cleaning  process,  leaving  us  with  72

3
 Note  that  an  observation  might  be  a  candidate  for  removal  in  several  cleaning  steps,  and  as  such  the  percentage
change  in  data  is  subject  to  the  order  of  cleaning  decisions,  which  is  why  we  evaluate  each  cleaning  step  only
with  respect  to  the  initial  sample  and  do  not  evaluate  our  cleaning  as  a  step-by-step  process.

                                                                                11
446  observations.  Examining  the  cleaning  steps  one  at  a  time,  as  shown  in  the  Appendix
(Table  A1),  we  find  the  removal  of  missing  ME  values  to  be  the  main  culprit  in  removing
observations.  In  the  initial  sample,  60.56%  of  observations  lacked  one  or  both  of  the  two
necessary  variables  in  computing  ME.  While  maximizing  observations  is  essential,  knowing
the  market  value  of  equity  is  essential  to  our  testing,  being  used  in  calculating  LEV  and  the
market-to-book  control  variable.  Another  significant  step  is  requiring  the  company  to  be
listed  on  the  NYSE,  NASDAQ  or  Amex,  namely  removing  45.83%  of  observations.  In  terms
of  proxy-related  steps,  requiring  nonmissing  R&D  expense  reduces  observations  by  62.56%
and  requiring  all  the  variables  required  in  computing  HERF  reduces  observations  by  97.08%.

In  terms  of  observations  on  specific  dates,  after  all  cleaning  steps,  the  highest  proportion  of
our  observations  belongs  to  1998  and  1999  at  9.56%,  refer  to  the  Appendix  (Table  A2),  while
proportions  from  the  rest  of  the  years  seem  to  be  balanced  at  a  range  of  between  3%  to  5%.
This  poses  no  problem  to  us  since  all  our  event  windows  are  post-2000.  In  terms  of  the  steps
in  isolation,  some  favor  older  data  (removing  financial  firms  and  removing  non-positive  book
equity  firms),  in  the  sense  that  it  removes  more  observations  belonging  to  earlier  years,  while
some  favor  newer  data  (removing  observations  that  do  not  belong  to  NYSE,  NASDAQ  or
Amex),  whilst  others  show  no  significant  bias.  The  removal  of  missing  HERF  values,  while
showing  no  bias,  results  in  drastic  proportion  changes  for  certain  years  like  a  288.30%  change
in  the  proportion  of  observations  belonging  to  1976  and  a  1380.79%  change  in  the  proportion
of  observations  belonging  to  2023.  One  large  caveat  with  our  cleaning  process  is  that,
although  we  sourced  data  from  1976  to  2023,  observations  pre-1998  were  eradicated  due  to
the  removal  of  missing  ME  values,  however,  as  mentioned  before,  ME  values  are  crucial  to
the  calculation  of  some  of  our  key  variables.

As  to  the  influence  of  our  cleaning  process  on  the  size  (ME)  distribution  of  firms,  as  seen  in
the  Appendix  (Table  A3),  we  observe  that  99.83%  of  the  initial  sample  belongs  to  the
smallest  size  group  ($0-220  000  million).  There  are  also  zero  firms  in  one  of  the  larger  size
groups  ($1  200  000  -  1  400  000  million).  In  an  ideal  scenario,  data  would  be  balanced  (thus
not  biasing  our  conclusions  based  on  firm  size),  but  trying  to  create  balance  in  our  sample
would  bring  still  more  bias  (through  removing  small-firm  observations).  It  comes  as  no
surprise  that  our  cleaning  steps  tend  to  eliminate  small  firms  and  increase  the  proportion  of
large  firms,  given  how  favored  small  firms  are  in  the  initial  sample.  To  that  extent,  our
cleaning  creates  some  balance  in  our  sample.  As  to  the  influence  of  requiring  nonmissing
shareholder  advantage  variables,  this  balancing  is  less  evident.  Removing  missing  HERF
values  removes  all  observations  from  some  of  the  larger  size  groups,  refer  to  the  Appendix
(Table  A4),  though  the  proportion  of  small  firms  remains  largely  the  same  at  99.66%.  Our
cleaning  process  does  not  involve  size  bias.

Finally,  we  evaluate  industry  bias,  based  on  only  the  first  digit  of  each  firm’s  SIC  number.
After  removing  financial  firms,  the  initial  sample  is  relatively  unbalanced,  from  industries
representing  2.04%  of  the  sample  (SIC  beginning  in  9)  to  26.19%  of  the  sample  (SIC
beginning  in  3).  As  to  our  cleaning  process,  we  observe  the  most  substantial  bias  here  relative
to  the  time  or  size  dimensions.  As  an  example,  the  2.04%  of  public  administration  firms  (SIC
beginning  in  9)  in  our  initial  sample  decreases  by  54.90%  to  0.92%  of  the  post-cleaning
sample,  while  service  firms  (SIC  beginning  in  7)  increase  by  18.15%  from  14.49%  of  the
initial  sample  to  17.12%  of  the  final  sample,  refer  to  the  Appendix  (Table  A5).  Individual
steps  in  the  cleaning  process,  too,  appear  to  confer  industry  bias.  When  requiring  companies
to  be  listed  on  the  NYSE,  NASDAQ  or  Amex,  firms  with  SIC  beginning  in  1,  4,  5  and  9
decreased  between  11.79%  and  71.80%  with  respect  to  their  initial  proportion  of  the  sample.

                                                                                12
The  cleaning  steps  pertaining  to  exchanges,  nonpositive  book  equity,  nonpositive  assets  and
missing  HERF  values  exhibited  clear  bias  against  public  administration  firms,  causing
decreases  in  proportions  from  the  initial  sample  ranging  between  17.64%  to  72.39%,  which
should  explain  the  overall  54.90%  decrease  in  the  proportion  of  such  firms  from  the  initial
sample  to  the  final  data.  In  conclusion,  we  find  the  industry  dimension  to  be  the  most
pronounced  bias  among  our  cleaning  process,  especially  in  terms  of  public  administration
firms.

  5.  Hypothesis  and  methodology

Our  hypothesis  is  that  in  a  systemic  debt  market  liquidity  shock,  firms  with  higher
shareholder  advantage  will  reduce  their  refinancing  intensity  to  a  greater  extent  than  firms
with  lower  shareholder  advantage,  given  that  shareholders  dislike  committing  to  taking  on
rollover  losses,  and  if  they  have  high  advantage  they  will  use  their  power  to  reduce  this
commitment.

We  base  our  empirical  approach  on  that  of  Hackbarth,  Haselmann  and  Schoenherr  (2015).  In
one  part  of  their  analysis,  they  evaluate  the  differential  influence  of  a  shock  to  shareholder
bargaining  power  (namely  the  1978  Bankruptcy  Reform  Act)  upon  firm  equity  risk
depending  on  pre-reform  levels  of  bargaining  power,  which  is  similar  to  our  setting  since  we
evaluate  the  differential  influence  of  shocks  to  bond  market  liquidity  upon  firm  refinancing
intensity  depending  on  pre-shock  levels  of  shareholder  advantage.  First,  we  identify  a
systemic  debt  market  liquidity  shock  and  define  a  pre-  and  post-period.  Then  we  run  the
following  regression  for  both  the  pre-  and  post-period:
                              𝑅𝐼  =  α  +  β 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑥𝑦
                                                   1
where  proxy  is  one  of  the  five  identified  proxies  of  shareholder  advantage  (every  regression
we  specify  is  run  five  times,  one  for  each  proxy,  as  in  Hackbarth,  Haselmann  and  Schoenherr,
2015).  Here  our  subject  of  interest  is  the  sign  of  and  change  in  β ,  which  our  theoretical
                                                                       1
intuition  indicates  should  have  a  lower  magnitude  in  the  post-period  (though  this  change  and
the  significance  of  it  is  captured  in  the  final  regression  explained  below),  and  that  the  sign
should  be  positive  for  RD  and  TANG  and  negative  for  LOGAT,  INS  and  HERF.  After  that,  we
combine  the  data  for  the  pre-  and  post-period  and  run  the  following  regression  on  the
combined  dataset:
               𝑅𝐼  =  α  +  β 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑥𝑦  +  β 𝑑𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦  +  β 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑥𝑦  *  𝑑𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦
                               1            2              3
where 𝑑𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦 takes  on  a  value  of  zero  for  the  pre-period  and  one  for  the  post-period.  Our
main  interest  is β ,  which  should  be  significant  and  have  the  opposite  coefficient  of  the  one
                  3
predicted  for  the  proxy  in  the  first  two  regressions,  because  the  influence  of  shareholder
advantage  on  refinancing  intensity  should  become  lower  post-shock.  This  is  what  would
confirm  our  theory  that  firms  with  higher  levels  of  shareholder  advantage  are  influenced  by  a
debt  market  liquidity  shock  more  than  those  with  lower  levels.  In  the  interest  of  gauging  the
robustness  of  our  results  we  follow  several  different  model  specifications.  In  our  tables,
Model  (1)  will  not  use  any  control  variables  or  fixed  effects,  Model  (2)  will  use  control
variables  from  the  literature  on  the  determinants  of  leverage  (see  e.g.  Harris  and  Raviv,  1991,
Rajan  and  Zingales,  1995,  Lemmon,  Roberts,  and  Zender,  2008  and  Frank  and  Goyal,  2009),
and  Model  (3)  will  use  both  firm  fixed  effects  and  control  variables.  Our  control  variables  are
market-to-book  ratio,  profitability  (return  on  assets),  industry  median  leverage,  and  industry
indicator  variables  (as  established,  we  define  an  industry  as  the  first  two  digits  of  a  firm’s  SIC
code).

                                                                                13
   6.  Empirical  analysis

       6.1  Identifying  bond  market  liquidity  shocks

To  avoid  the  difficult  task  of  measuring  bond  market  liquidity,  we  select  shocks  to  bond
market  liquidity  that  are  brought  up  in  the  literature.  Acharya  and  Pedersen  (2005)  point  to
several  liquidity  crises  that  negatively  affected  bond  market  liquidity,  going  back  to  the  Penn
Central  commercial  paper  crisis  in  1970.  However,  since  we  are  left  with  zero  observations
before  1998  following  our  cleaning  process  (refer  to  4.4),  we  are  constrained  to  carrying  out
tests  on  shocks  post  2000,  and  for  quarterly  data  we  are  further  constrained  to  shocks  after  the
year  2012  (refer  to  4.1),  meaning  we  only  draw  the  Internet  bubble  crash  of  2000  and  the
aftermath  of  the  9/11  attacks  as  a  shock  from  here.  He  and  Xiong  (2012)  mention  more  recent
events,  from  where  we  get  the  credit  crisis  of  2007  and  2008.  Finally,  we  use  the  COVID-19
crisis  (see  e.g.  Kargar,  Lester,  Lindsay,  Liu,  Weill  and  Zúñiga,  2021  and  Boyarchenko,
Kovner  and  Shachar,  2022),  since  between  March  5  and  23,  the  ICE  Bank  of  America  AAA
U.S.  Corporate  Index  Option-Adjusted  spread  increased  by  about  150  bps  and  high-yield
(HY)  corporate  debt  spread  increased  by  more  than  500  bps  implying  rapidly  falling  prices  of
bonds  (Kargar  et.  al,  2021).  All  of  these  events,  however,  are  characterized  not  only  by
shocks  to  bond  market  liquidity.  This  confers  upon  our  research  a  risk  of  making  spurious
observations  based  on  the  unique  characteristics  of  single  events.  It  is  for  this  reason  we
ensure  to  run  the  same  test  on  several  shocks  and  to  aim  to  tell  apart  what  is  shared  across
them.

       6.2  Events  following  9/11

Acharya,  Amihud,  and  Bharath  (2009)  define  the  Internet  bubble  crash  of  2000  and  the
aftermath  of  the  9/11  tragedy  to  be  under  a  stress  regime,  or  in  other  words,  a  period  of  a
negative  bond  market  liquidity.  To  exploit  this  in  our  model,  we  define  the  shock  to  have
occurred  on  11/9/2001  setting  the  dummy  variable  to  0  for  all  observations  before  this  date,
and  1  to  all  the  dates  after.  Moreover,  we  take  into  account  two  years  to  be  part  of  our  event
window,  namely  2000  and  2002.  We  avoid  taking  the  year  2001,  since  the  shock  occurred
close  to  the  end  of  its  calendar  year  meaning  that  the  number  of  observations  in  the  post
period  may  have  been  limited.

INS  is  excluded  from  our  results  because  we  consistently  have  fewer  than  50  observations
regardless  of  the  model  specification  for  this  shock.  Looking  at  the  Model  (1),  all  the
coefficients  in  the  post-data  sample,  show  significance.  Moreover,  the  signs  of  these
coefficients  are  in  line  with  our  hypothesis  with  the  consistent  exception  of  the  coefficient
surrounding  HERF.  Thus,  three  out  of  four  of  our  proxies  suggest  that  shareholder  advantage
indeed  influences  refinancing  intensity  in  the  way  we  predict.  Focusing  on  Model  (1)  in  the
Combined  Data  panel,  the  interaction  terms  show  little  to  no  significance.  Furthermore,
looking  at  Models  (2)  and  (3)  for  the  pre-data  panel,  the  LOGAT  and  HERF  proxies  show
significance  whilst  in  the  post-data  panel  the  LOGAT  and  TANG  proxies  show  significance.
As  for  the  combined-data  panel,  and  Models  (2)  and  (3),  we  find  both  the  coefficients
surrounding  the  proxies  and  interaction  terms  to  show  little  to  no  significance.  Given  the
insignificant  proxy  coefficients,  our  previous  conclusion  that  shareholder  advantage  indeed
might  influence  refinancing  intensity  in  the  hypothesized  manner  is  brought  to  question.
Furthermore,  given  the  insignificant  interaction  terms,  it  cannot  be  said  that  this  liquidity
shock  has  had  an  influence  on  the  relationship  between  shareholder  advantage  and  firm
refinancing  intensities.  Though,  once  again,  we  cannot  definitely  ascertain  that  our  theory  is

                                                                                14
wrong  by  only  analyzing  a  single  shock,  since  few  events  exist  that  may  be  purely  defined  as
bond  market  liquidity  shocks  (meaning  that  there  can  be  other  relevant  aspects  of  the  events
following  9/11  that  distort  our  conclusions).

       6.3  Credit  crisis  of  2008-2009

Both  Acharya,  Amihud,  and  Bharath  (2009)  and  He  and  Xiong  (2012)  point  to  the  credit
crisis  in  2008  and  2009  as  another  negative  bond  market  liquidity  shock.  The  difference  with
this  shock  and  the  one  prior  is  the  existence  of  multiple  events  that  have  contributed  to  the
faltering  liquidity  market.  For  example,  in  March  of  2008,  with  Bear  Stearns’  collapse
followed  by  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  to  December  of  2008.  Because  of
this  characteristic,  it  becomes  rather  difficult  to  point  out  a  singular  month  with  which  to
separate  the  pre  and  post  periods,  thus  we  define  the  dummy  variable  as  0  for  all  observations
occurring  before  2008,  regardless  of  month,  and  1  for  all  observations  occurring  during  or
after.  Furthermore,  in  order  to  cover  the  event  to  the  closest  extent  possible,  we  define  the
years  of  2007  (pre-period)  and  2008  (post-period)  to  be  our  event  window.  Our  results  are
presented  in  Table  5.

Focusing  on  Model  (1)  in  the  pre-  and  post-period  panel,  we  find  that,  similar  to  the  prior
shock,  most  coefficients  show  significance  (with  the  exception  of  HERF  in  the  pre-data
panel)  with  signs  that  are  in  line  with  our  hypothesis,  with  the  consistent  exception  of  HERF
and  INS.  Moreover,  looking  at  Model  (2)  in  the  pre-period  sample,  we  find  the  LOGAT,  RD
and  TANG  proxy  to  be  statistically  significant  with  signs  in  line  with  our  hypothesis  and,
looking  at  Model  (2)  in  the  post-period  sample,  with  the  exception  of  the  Herfindahl  index
and  INS,  we  find  statistically  significant  coefficients  in  line  with  our  hypothesis.  In  this  way
our  conclusions  from  the  2008-9  credit  crisis  differ.  The  R&D  ratio  and  asset  tangibility
might  be  the  stronger  proxies  in  measuring  our  predicted  relationship.  Focusing  on  Model  (1)
in  the  combined  dataset,  and  specifically  on  the  interaction  terms,  there  is  little  to  no
significance  which  means  that  we  cannot  decipher  any  substantial  evidence  supporting  our
hypothesis  akin  to  the  results  in  the  prior  shock.  Furthermore,  the  interaction  terms  in  Model
(2)  and  (3)  show  the  same  trend.  That  is,  we  once  again  fail  to  measure  that  a  bond  market
liquidity  shock  has  a  significant  influence  on  the  relationship  between  shareholder  advantage
and  refinancing  intensity.

                                                                                15
Table  4.  Event  window  2000  and  2002  (annual  data). The first two panels use only pre-period (2000) data
and  only  post-period  (2002)  data  respectively.  They  use  cross-sectional  OLS  regressions,  and  because  of  that
only  models  (1)  and  (2),  Model  (3)  being  excluded  due  to  it  involving  fixed  effects.  Model  (1)  is  a  simple
regression  with  each  individual  proxy—LOGAT  (log  assets),  RD  (R&D-to-assets  ratio),  INS  (insider
ownership),  HERF  (Herfindahl  index  on  sales)  or  TANG  (asset  tangibility)—being  the  independent  variable,
and  refinancing  intensity  the  dependent  variable.  INS  is  excluded  in  this  table  due  to  insufficient  observations.
Model  (2)  is  Model  (1)  with  the  addition  of  leverage  controls,  namely  market-to-book  ratio,  return  on  assets,
industry  median  leverage,  and  industry  indicator  variables.  The  final  panel  combines  the  pre-period  and
post-period  data,  once  again  applying  Model  (1)  and  (2),  with  the  addition  of  Model  (3)  which  is  Model  (2)
with  the  addition  of  firm-fixed  effects.  The  final  panel  also  features  the  interaction  between  each  proxy  and  a
dummy  variable  that  is  0  in  the  pre-period  and  1  in  the  post-period.

                                                                               16
Table 5. Event window 2007 and 2008 (annual data). Refer to table 4 for full description.

                                                                               17
      6.4 COVID-19

Our  last  and  most  recent  shock  is  that  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic.  Unlike  the  credit  crisis  of
2008-2009,  we  have  a  clearly  defined  month  and  year  (March  of  2020)  after  which  we  can
assume  that  the  bond  market  liquidity  took  a  drastic  and  negative  shock  (see  eg.  Kargar  et.  al,
2021,  Boyarchenko,  Kovner  and  Shachar,  2022).  Thus,  our  dummy  variable  is  set  to  0  for  all
observations  prior  and  1  for  observations  during  or  after  the  date  mentioned.  As  a  result,  the
event  window  that  we  use  to  investigate  this  shock  are  the  years  2019  and  2020.  An
advantage  with  exploiting  such  a  shock  is  its  recentness  and  consequently,  the  availability  of
quarterly  debt  data  (see  Figure  1).  Hence,  we  conduct  two  tests  with  regards  to  this  shock,
one  with  the  use  of  annual  data  and  the  other  with  quarterly  data,  the  latter  being  used  to
maximize  the  number  of  observations  in  our  sample,  though  once  again  with  the  trade-off  of
using 𝑅𝐼         as  opposed  to 𝑅𝐼 as  the  dependent  variable  (refer  to  4.1).
                 𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑙𝑦

A  summary  of  the  results  we  obtained  with  annual  data  is  shown  in  Table  6.  Looking  at
Model  (1)  for  both  the  pre-  and  post-period  samples,  we  can  find,  similar  to  the  previous
shocks,  all  coefficients  to  be  statistically  significant  with  signs  in  line  with  our  hypothesis,
with  the  exception  of  the  Herfindahl  index  and  INS  (either  in  terms  of  significance  or  the
correct  sign).  Looking  at  Model  (2),  however,  for  both  the  pre-  and  post-period  data  samples,
we  find  that  solely  the  LOGAT  ,  RD  and  TANG  coefficients  are  statistically  significant  with
signs  in  line  with  our  hypothesis.  Lastly,  looking  at  all  3  models  in  the  combined  dataset,  our
findings  are  similar  to  that  of  our  other  shocks  in  the  sense  that  the  coefficients  have  little  to
no  statistical  significance.

A  summary  of  the  results  with  quarterly  data  is  shown  in  Table  7.  INS  is  excluded  from  our
results  because  we  do  not  have  this  data  for  the  quarterly  measurement  frequency.  Looking  at
all  3  models  in  the  pre-period  sample,  we  find  that,  with  the  exception  of  the  coefficient
surrounding  the  Herfindahl  index,  all  the  proxies  show  statistical  significance  with  signs  in
line  with  our  hypothesis.  Models  (1)  and  (2)  in  the  post-period  sample  carry  the  same
conclusion,  however,  the  coefficient  around  the  RD  proxy  in  Model  (3)  is  statistically
insignificant.  As  for  the  3  models  in  the  combined  data  sample,  only  the  interaction  term
surrounding  the  asset  proxy  consistently  shows  statistical  significance  albeit  with  a  sign
contradictory  to  our  hypothesis.  Furthermore,  in  Model  (1),  the  coefficient  surrounding  the
interaction  term  of  the  Herfindahl  index  shows  strong  significance,  but  with  a  sign
contradictory  to  our  predictions.

                                                                                18
Table 6. Event window 2019 and 2020 (annual data). Refer to table 4 for full description.

                                                                               19
Table  7.  Event window 2019 and 2020 (quarterly data). Refer to table 4 for full description. Note that with
quarterly  data,  we  are  able  to  include  a  third  model  within  the  pre-  and  post-sample  tests  since  they  contain,
like  the  combined  data  sample,  panel  rather  than  cross-sectional  data.  Thus,  with  the  use  of  quarterly  data,  we
are  able  to  utilize  firm-fixed  effects.

                                                                               20
   7.  Discussion

When  it  comes  to  the  proxy  coefficient  signs,  LOGAT  and  TANG  almost  always  show  the
predicted  sign  with  overall  strong  significance  (TANG  shows  no  significance  in  Model  (2)  of
the  first  shock  in  the  pre-data  sample),  and  RD  also  has  the  predicted  sign,  however,  with
lower  significance,  likely  due  to  the  smaller  amount  of  observations  with  nonmissing  R&D
expense.  A  general  pattern  is  that  while  significance  tends  to  be  higher  in  the  more  basic
model  specifications,  the  coefficients  tend  to  exhibit  the  predicted  sign  in  the  more  advanced
ones.  Overall,  our  results  indicate  that  firms  with  higher  shareholder  advantage  have  lower
refinancing  intensities,  though  with  mixed  significance.

INS  rarely  takes  on  the  predicted  sign,  and  the  significance  is  mixed.  We  see  two  problems
with  this  proxy.  First,  it  is  the  poorest  of  our  proxies  in  terms  of  observations  available,  to  the
extent  that  it  is  excluded  from  the  first  shock  table  due  to  insufficient  observations  (<  50),  and
is  also  excluded  from  the  quarterly  COVID  table  due  to  the  unavailability  of  quarterly  data.
Second,  our  measurement  of  it  only  entails  shares  owned  by  firm  executives,  which  calls  into
question  its  ability  to  truly  capture  insider  ownership.  For  example,  Favara,  Schroth  and  Valta
(2012),  who  also  use  insider  ownership  as  a  proxy  of  shareholder  bargaining  power,  measure
shares  owned  by  “officers,  directors,  and  their  immediate  families;  shares  held  in  trust  or  by
pension  plans;  and  shares  held  by  individuals  who  hold  5%  or  more  of  the  outstanding
shares.”

HERF  displays  an  interesting  pattern  where  the  sign  is  at  odds  with  our  predictions  in  Model
(1)  yet  flips  in  subsequent  models  (in  the  pre-data  sample  of  the  first  shock,  post-data  sample
of  the  second  shock,  and  pre-  and  combined-data  samples  of  the  third  shock),  which
potentially  arises  due  to  the  inclusion  of  industry-related  controls  in  Models  (2)  and  (3)  but
not  1—the  Herfindahl  index  itself,  measuring  industry  concentration,  might  be  additionally
capturing  other  industry  variation  in  Model  (1)  that  it  does  not  in  Model  (2)  which  explains
its  oft-wrong  sign  in  that  model.  A  different  explanation  of  our  mixed  results  comes  from
Garlappi,  Shu  and  Yan  (2008),  who  clarify  that  the  influence  of  HERF  on  liquidation  costs  is
subject  to  the  capacity  of  the  industry.  In  an  industry  with  high  sales  growth  (high  capacity),  a
firm  needing  to  liquidate  its  assets  will  be  more  influenced  by  the  concentration  of  said
industry,  since  its  liquidation  is  idiosyncratic.  The  liquidation  costs  of  a  firm  in  an  industry
experiencing  a  systemic  shock  will  not  be  as  influenced  by  the  concentration  of  said  industry
because  of  the  lack  of  bidders.  Thus,  in  concretely  proxying  for  shareholder  advantage,
specifically,  the  component  making  up  liquidation  costs,  it  is  necessary  to  take  such  factors
into  consideration,  the  factors  being  the  growth  of  the  industry  and  its  interaction  with  its
concentration.  Thus,  solely  using  the  Herfindahl  index  may  not  prove  to  suffice  for  a  full
description  of  a  firm’s  liquidation  costs  since  a  firm  defined  with  a  lower  Herfindahl  index
does  not  necessarily  face  higher  liquidation  costs  unless  its  potential  liquidation  in  said
industry  is  idiosyncratic.  In  other  words,  if  there  are  several  firms  within  the  industry  that  are
liquidating,  industry  concentration  shows  no  significance  in  influencing  the  advantage  of  the
shareholders  undergoing  the  liquidation.

For  2  of  3  of  the  shocks,  albeit  not  for  all  the  models,  the  interaction  term  surrounding
LOGAT  manages  to  capture  the  effects  of  bond  market  liquidity  on  the  interaction  between
shareholder   advantage,   proxied   by   firm   size,   on   refinancing   intensity,   by  showing
significance.  However,  it  captures  the  interaction  contrary  to  our  theoretical  intuition  by
showing  the  opposite  sign  from  our  prediction,  meaning  that,  in  periods  of  bad  bond  market
liquidity,  the  effects  of  shareholder  advantage  (proxied  by  firm  size)  are  greater  in  influencing

                                                                                21
refinancing  intensity.  Whereas,  when  it  comes  to  the  interaction  terms  surrounding  the  other
proxies,  results  are  relatively  more  mixed.  In  most  shocks,  most  interaction  terms  carry  little
to  no  significance,  while  the  TANG  interaction  term,  is  significant  and  in-line  with  our
hypothesis  during  the  2019  and  2020  shock,  measured  annually,  in  Model  (1)  and  the  HERF
coefficient  in  Model  (1)  in  the  2019  and  2020  shock,  measured  quarterly,  shows  the  same
picture.  In  essence,  our  models  fail  to  show  a  consistent  interaction  between  shareholder
advantage  and  refinancing  intensity  in  periods  of  bad  bond  market  liquidity,  either  at  all,  or  in
the  way  we  have  hypothesized.  We  cannot  conclude  that  the  reasons  for  this  is  due  to  the
frequency  of  data  that  we  have  gathered  (yearly  and  quarterly)  and  the  fact  that  we  tend  to
stray  quite  far  from  the  event  windows  in  question  since  the  significance  of  the  interaction
terms  does  not  necessarily  improve  when  using  quarterly  data  vis-a-vis  annual  data  for  the
same  shock.  We  can  however,  attribute  this  to  the  complexity  of  the  shocks  that  we  have
chosen  in  the  sense  that,  while  affecting  bond  market  liquidity,  it  may  affect  several  factors
simultaneously  including  that  of  our  independent  and  dependent  variables.  In  an  ideal
scenario,  to  explore  our  hypothesis  in  greater  detail,  we  would  require  a  shock  solely
affecting  bond  market  liquidity,  however,  none  existent,  we  test  our  hypothesis  with  several
different  shocks  that,  individually,  render  mixed  results.

A  final  noteworthy  observation  is  the  adjusted  R-squared  of  our  models,  which  varies
between  0%  and  16%  for  Model  (1)  and  increases  somewhat  in  Model  (2)  to  a  maximum  of
25%  owing  to  the  addition  of  established  controls  in  the  literature.  Across  proxies,  LOGAT
tends  to  have  the  highest  goodness-of-fit,  while  INS  and  HERF  are  among  the  lowest.  Values
in  this  range  have  appeared  in  related  literature  (see  e.g.  Hackbarth,  Haselmann  and
Schoenherr,  2015)  and  only  indicate  to  us  that  the  overall  influence  of  this  mechanism  is  low.
As  our  aim  is  to  find  a  relationship  between  two  variables  (shareholder  advantage  and
refinancing  intensity)  and  not  to  predict,  these  values  do  not  have  a  bearing.  Model  (3)
exhibits  exclusively  negative  values,  which  essentially  shows  0  predictive  power  within  the
model.  Since  the  adjusted  R-squared  value,  which  we  have  reported,  takes  into  consideration
the  number  of  additional  variables,  i.e.  controls  and  fixed  effects,  that  we  have  used  to  fit  the
regression,  a  model  with  an  almost  nil  predictive  power  will  naturally  show  a  negative
adjusted  R-squared  value.

  8.  Robustness

We  test  the  validity  of  our  conclusions  in  two  ways.  First,  given  that  short-term  leverage  is
just  a  subset  of  leverage,  we  run  the  same  tests  with  LEV  being  the  dependent  variable  as
opposed  to  RI  in  the  name  of  seeing  whether  our  conclusions  are  spuriously  made  for
short-term  leverage  while  actually  holding  for  all  leverage.  Second,  given  that  our  interaction
signs  are  less  frequently  in  line  with  our  predictions  and  less  significant,  it  is  possible  that  this
arises  out  of  a  failure  to  truly  measure  around  a  shock  to  bond  market  liquidity,  and  that  our
regressions  merely  captured  noise.  We  thus  repeat  our  main  test  for  a  time  period  where  there
were  no  shocks  to  bond  market  liquidity.

       8.1.  Leverage  regressions

We  repeat  our  tests  with  LEV  instead  of  RI  as  the  dependent  variable.  Our  key  concern  is  that
the  results  do  not  match  with  those  found  in  our  RI  regressions,  as  formulating  an  exact
prediction  is  not  as  straightforward  in  this  instance.  As  Friewald,  Nagler  and  Wagner  (2022)
find,  higher  short-term  leverage  involves  higher  equity  risk  due  to  debt  rollover  risk,  whereas
higher  long-term  leverage  is  not  linked  with  additional  risk  to  shareholders.  Based  on  this,  we

                                                                                22
would  anticipate  long-term  leverage  to  display  the  opposite  signs  to  that  of  short-term
leverage.  LEV,  however,  captures  all  leverage,  rendering  the  result  subject  to  the  amount  of
long-term  leverage  relative  to  short-term  leverage  of  a  typical  firm  in  our  sample.  As  seen  in
our  summary  statistics  (section  4.4),  refinancing  intensity  represents  approximately  one
quarter  of  leverage,  implying  that  long-term  leverage  (maturing  in  more  than  three  years)
stands  for  three  quarters.  This  suggests  that  our  leverage  regressions  should  display  the
opposite  signs  from  our  refinancing  intensity  regressions  (because  long-term  leverage  is  a
greater  portion  of  total  leverage  than  short-term  leverage)  and  lower  significance  (because  of
the  mixture  of  short-  and  long-term  leverage  found  in  total  leverage).  Since  we  find  a  similar
pattern  across  results,  we  only  display  our  results  for  the  2008-9  crisis,  and  leave  the  tables
for  the  remaining  regressions  in  the  Appendix  (Table  A6,  A7  and  A8).  Table  8  shows  our
results.

The  majority  of  proxy  coefficient  signs  are  the  opposite  of  what  is  received  in  the
corresponding  RI  output,  with  the  exception  of  INS  and  HERF  in  some  places  and  a  few
interaction  terms  belonging  to  LOGAT,  INS,  RD  and  HERF.  A  number  of  interaction  terms
exhibit  the  same  sign  for  LEV  as  for  RI,  and  this  is  a  repeated  pattern  (see  Appendix,  Table
A6,  A7  and  A8),  though  there  is  no  pattern  in  which  proxies  that  occurs  for.  The  significance
displayed  in  LEV  regressions  is  also  weaker  across  the  board  than  that  found  in  RI
regressions,  in  line  with  our  predictions.  We  conclude  that  our  conclusions  from  our  RI
regressions  apply  distinctly  to  refinancing  intensity  and  do  not  spuriously  capture  what
influences  leverage  instead.

       8.2.  Placebo  test

We  repeat  our  tests  for  a  period  where  no  shocks  to  bond  market  liquidity  occurred,  to  ensure
that  our  results  do  not  capture  noise.  The  International  Monetary  Fund  Global  Financial
Stability  Report  from  October  2015  features  a  chapter  on  market  liquidity  and  a  figure
(Figure  2.2,  panel  1,  in  IMF,  2015)  detailing  the  imputed  round-trip  cost  of  US  corporate
bonds  (a  proxy  for  bond  market  liquidity),  where  we  discern  overall  low  levels  and  almost  no
change  in  round-trip  costs  for  the  years  2013-2014,  which  we  will  use  in  our  placebo  test.  In
this  test  we  only  use  annual  data  because  it  lets  us  include  the  INS  proxy  and  because  there  is
no  specific  point  in  time  to  adhere  to  that  would  warrant  the  use  of  quarterly  data.  We  expect
the  proxy  coefficients  to  exhibit  all  the  same  signs  since  this  does  not  depend  on  a  shock  to
bond  market  liquidity  occurring,  while  the  interaction  terms  should  be  less  statistically
significant  and  overall  match  less  often  with  our  original  predictions  in  section  5.  Table  9
shows  our  results.

The  proxy  coefficients  exhibit  the  same  patterns  as  before,  such  as  LOGAT,  RD  and  TANG
exhibiting  the  predicted  sign  in  almost  all  cases  (in  this  case,  in  all  cases),  while  INS  and
HERF  have  mixed  results  (HERF  is  now  never  as  predicted).  That  the  correlational
relationship  holds  regardless  of  measurement  period  is  in  line  with  our  expectations.  The  only
significant  interaction  is  for  HERF  in  Model  (3)—the  overall  insignificance  of  interaction
terms  matches  with  our  prediction  that  where  there  is  no  shock  these  terms  will  be
insignificant  (subject  to  other  changes  in  the  economy  at  the  time).  We  conclude  that  while
our  shock  measurements  seem  to  indeed  capture  shocks  (given  that  interaction  terms  in  these
instances  are  more  frequently  significant),  these  shocks  all  exhibit  a  high  degree  of  impurity
in  the  sense  that  they  do  not  solely  entail  poorer  bond  market  liquidity  but  influence  our
proxies  of  shareholder  advantage  through  other  channels.

                                                                                23
Table  8.  Event  window  2007  and  2008  (annual  data),  leverage  regression.  Refer  to  table  4  for  full
description,  the  only  difference  is  that  our  dependent  variable  is  LEV  as  opposed  to  RI  so  as  to  ensure  that  our
conclusions  surrounding  refinancing  intensity  do  not  apply  to  leverage  altogether.

                                                                               24
Table 9. Event window 2013 and 2014 (annual data), placebo test. Refer to table 4 for full description.

                                                                               25
   9.  Conclusion

This  thesis  studies  the  relationship  between  shareholder  advantage  (the  ability  of  shareholders
to  extract  value  from  debtholders  in  reorganizations  in  default)  and  short-term  leverage.  We
find  a  clear  correlational  relationship  between  proxies  of  shareholder  advantage  and
short-term  leverage,  suggesting  that  firms  whose  shareholders  have  higher  bargaining  power
and  who  are  faced  with  liquidation  costs  (that  is,  firms  with  higher  shareholder  advantage)
also  have  lower  short-term  leverage,  though  this  explains  little  (<  20%)  of  the  overall
variation.  We  are  unable  to  discern  a  clear  causal  relationship  owing  to  the  impurity  of  the
shocks  to  bond  market  liquidity  identified.  Robustness  tests  show  that  our  results  distinctly
apply  to  short-term  leverage  and  not  leverage  overall,  as  well  as  that  our  measurements
around  shocks  to  bond  market  liquidity  do  not  capture  noise.

Our  work  calls  for  the  explicit  structural  modeling  of  the  relationship  between  rollover  risk
and  shareholder  advantage,  given  our  difficulties  with  discerning  causality  empirically.  By
documenting  that  shareholder  advantage  and  short-term  leverage  correlate,  it  also  asks  new
questions  about  the  determinants  of  debt  maturity  structure  and  of  the  scope  of  influence  of
bargaining  between  firm  claimholders  in  default.  Do  powerful  shareholders  bring  down
short-term  leverage,  or  does  having  more  short-term  leverage  reduce  the  power  of
shareholders?

                                                                                26
  10.   Appendix

Table  A1.  Change  in  observations  after  cleaning  steps  (in  isolation).  We  view  each  cleaning  step  in
isolation,  i.e.  separate  from  other  steps,  to  see  which  steps  result  in  significant  removals  of  data.  As  can  be
observed,  the  removal  of  missing  market  cap  values  results  in  the  removal  of  more  observations  than  any
other  step  from  the  initial  sample.

Table  A2.  Proportions  per  years  after  all  cleaning  steps.  In  this  table,  we  are  able  to  view  the  proportions
of  observations  belonging  to  different  year  groups  after  all  the  cleaning  steps  are  performed.  The  bulk  of  our
data is dated between 1998 to 1999 with a proportion of 9.94%.

                                                                               27
Table  A3.  Initial  proportions  per  size  group.  This  table  shows  the  proportions  of  observations  belonging  to
different  size  groups  (with  ME  as  a  proxy  for  size)  before  any  cleaning  steps  are  performed,  ie.  in  the  initial
sample.  Most  of  the  observations  are  small-sized  firms  with  market  caps  between  0  to  200  000  million  dollars
with a proportion of 99.83%

Table  A4.  Change  in  proportion  of  observations  after  removing  missing  HERF  values. In this table, we
observe  the  effect  of  the  removal  of  missing  HERF  values  from  the  initial  sample,  in  isolation,  on
observations  belonging  to  different  size  groups.  Where  there  has  been  a  percent  change  of  -100%,
observations  belonging  to  those  respective  size  groups  have  been  completely  eradicated.

                                                                               28
Table  A5.  Change  in  proportions  per  industry  after  all  cleaning  steps.  This  table  shows  the  effect  of all
the  cleaning  steps  on  observations  belonging  to  different  industries.  Our  cleaning  process  clearly  favors  firms
from  the  service  industry  (SIC  beginning  with  7)  with  a  percent  change  of  18.15%  and  discriminates  against
firms  from  the  public  administration  industry  (SIC  beginning  with  9)  with  a  percent  change  of  -54.90%.

                                                                               29
Table  A6.  Event  window  2000  and  2002  (annual  data),  leverage  regression.  Refer  to  table  4  for  full
description,  the  only  difference  is  that  our  dependent  variable  is  LEV  as  opposed  to  RI  so  as  to  ensure  that  our
conclusions  surrounding  refinancing  intensity  do  not  apply  to  leverage  altogether.

                                                                               30
Table  A7.  Event  window  2019  and  2020  (annual  data),  leverage  regression.  Refer  to  table  4  for  full
description,  the  only  difference  is  that  our  dependent  variable  is  LEV  as  opposed  to  RI  so  as  to  ensure  that  our
conclusions  surrounding  refinancing  intensity  do  not  apply  to  leverage  altogether.

                                                                               31
Table  A8.  Event  window  2019  and  2020  (quarterly  data),  leverage  regression.  Refer  to  table  4  for  full
description,  the  only  difference  is  that  our  dependent  variable  is  LEV  as  opposed  to  RI  so  as  to  ensure  that  our
conclusions  surrounding  refinancing  intensity  do  not  apply  to  leverage  altogether.

                                                                               32
   11.   References

Acharya,  Viral  V.,  Amihud,  Yakov,  and  Sreedhar  T.  Bharath,  2013,  Liquidity  Risk  of
Corporate  Bond  Returns:  Conditional  Approach,  Journal  of  Financial  Economics  110,
358-386.

Acharya,  Viral  V.,  and  Lasse  Heje  Pedersen,  2005,  Asset  Pricing  with  Liquidity  Risk,  Journal
of  Financial  Economics  77,  375–410.

Acharya,  Viral  V.,  Sundaram,  Rangarajan  K.,  and  Kose  John,  2011,  Cross-Country  Variations
in  Capital  Structures:  The  Role  of  Bankruptcy  Codes,  Journal  of  Financial  Intermediation
20,  25-54.

Almeida,  Heitor,  and  Murillo  Campello,  2007,  Financial  Constraints,  Asset  Tangibility,  and
Corporate  Investment,  Review  of  Financial  Studies  20,  1429-1460.

Almeida,  Heitor,  Campello,  Murillo,  Laranjeira,  Bruno,  and  Scott  Weisbenner,  2012,
Corporate  Debt  Maturity  and  the  Real  Effects  of  the  2007  Credit  Crisis,  Critical  Finance
Review  1,  3-58.

Antill,  Samuel,  and  Steven  R.  Grenadier,  2019,  Optimal  Capital  Structure  and  Bankruptcy
Choice:  Dynamic  Bargaining  versus  Liquidation,  Journal  of  Financial  Economics  133,
198–224.

Barclay,  Michael  J.,  and  Clifford  W.  Smith,  Jr.,  1995,  The  Maturity  Structure  of  Corporate
Debt,  Journal  of  Finance  50,  609-631.

Berger,  Philip  G.,  Ofek,  Eli,  and  Itzhak  Swary,  1996,  Investor  Valuation  of  the  Abandonment
Option,  Journal  of  Financial  Economics  42,  259-287.

Betker,  Brian  L.,  1995,  Management’s  Incentives,  Equity’s  Bargaining  Power,  and  Deviations
from  Absolute  Priority  in  Chapter  11  Bankruptcies,  Journal  of  Business  68,  161–183.

Black,  Fischer,  and  Myron  Scholes,  1973,  The  Pricing  of  Options  and  Corporate  Liabilities,
Journal  of  Political  Economy  81,  637-654.

Boyarchenko,  Nina,  Kovner,  Anna,  and  Or  Shachar,  2022,  It’s  What  You  Say  and  What  You
Buy:  A  Holistic  Evaluation  of  the  Corporate  Credit  Facilities,  Journal  of  Financial
Economics  144,  695-731.

Bris,  Arturo,  Welch,  Ivo  and  Ning  Zhu,  2006,  The  Costs  of  Bankruptcy:  Chapter  7
Liquidation  versus  Chapter  11  Reorganization,  Journal  of  Finance  61,  1253-1303.

Cooper,  Michael  J.,  Gulen,  Huseyin,  and  Michael  J.  Schill,  2008,  Asset  Growth  and  the
Cross-Section  of  Stock  Returns,  Journal  of  Finance  63,  1609-1651.

Corbae,  Dean,  and  Pablo  D’Erasmo,  2017,  Reorganization  or  Liquidation:  Bankruptcy
Choice and Firm Dynamics, NBER Working Paper 23515.

                                                                                33
Diamond,  Douglas  W.,  1991,  Debt  Maturity  Structure  and  Liquidity  Risk,  Quarterly  Journal
of  Economics  106,  709–737.

Fan,  Hua,  and  Suresh  M.  Sundaresan,  2000,  Debt  Valuation,  Renegotiation,  and  Optimal
Dividend  Policy,  Review  of  Financial  Studies  13,  1057–1099.

Favara,  Giovanni,  Schroth,  Enrique,  and  Philip  Valta,  2012,  Strategic  Default  and  Equity  Risk
Across  Countries,  Journal  of  Finance  67,  2051-2095.

Frank,  Murray  Z.,  and  Vidhan  K.  Goyal,  2009,  Capital  Structure  Decisions:  Which  Factors
Are  Reliably  Important?,  Financial  Management  38,  1–37.

Franks,  Julian  R.,  and  Walter  N.  Torous,  1989,  An  Empirical  Investigation  of  U.S.  Firms  in
Reorganization,  Journal  of  Finance  44,  747-769.

Franks,  Julian  R.,  and  Walter  N.  Torous,  1994,  A  Comparison  of  Financial  Recontracting  in
Distressed  Exchanges  and  Chapter  11  Reorganizations,  Journal  of  Financial  Economics  35,
349-370.

Friewald,  Nils,  Nagler,  Florian,  and  Christian  Wagner,  2022,  Debt  Refinancing  and  Equity
Returns,  Journal  of  Finance  77,  2287-2329.

Garlappi,  Lorenzo,  Shu,  Tao,  and  Hong  Yan,  2008,  Default  Risk,  Shareholder  Advantage,  and
Stock  Returns,  Review  of  Financial  Studies  21,  2743–2778.

Hackbarth,  Dirk,  Haselmann,  Rainer  and  David  Schoenherr,  2015,  Financial  Distress,  Stock
Returns,  and  the  1978  Bankruptcy  Reform  Act,  Review  of  Financial  Studies  28,  1810-1847.

Harford,  Jarrad,  Klasa,  Sandy,  and  William  F.  Maxwell,  2014,  Refinancing  Risk  and  Cash
Holdings,  Journal  of  Finance  69,  975-1012.

Harris,  Milton,  and  Artur  Raviv,  1991,  The  Theory  of  Capital  Structure,  Journal  of  Finance
46,  297-355.

Hlavac,  Marek  (2022).  stargazer:  Well-Formatted  Regression  and  Summary  Statistics
Tables.  R  package  version  5.2.3.  https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=stargazer

He,  Zhiguo,  and  Wei  Xiong,  2012,  Rollover  Risk  and  Credit  Risk,  Journal  of  Finance  67,
391-430.

International  Monetary  Fund,  2015,  Global  Financial  Stability  Report:  Vulnerabilities,
Legacies,  and  Policy  Challenges  -  Risks  Rotating  to  Emerging  Markets.

Kargar,  Mahyar,  Lester,  Benjamin,  Lindsay,  David,  Liu,  Shuo,  Weill,  Pierre-Olivier,  and
Diego  Zúñiga,  2021,  Corporate  Bond  Liquidity  during  the  COVID-19  Crisis,  Review  of
Financial  Studies  34,  5352-5401.

Lemmon,  Michael  L.,  Roberts,  Michael  R.,  and  Jaime  F.  Zender,  2008,  Back  to  the
Beginning:  Persistence  and  the  Cross-Section  of  Corporate  Capital  Structure,  Journal  of
Finance  63,  1575-1608.

                                                                                34
Merton,  Robert  C.,  1974,  On  the  Pricing  of  Corporate  Debt:  The  Risk  Structure  of  Interest
Rates,  Journal  of  Finance  29,  449-470.

Opler,  Tim  C.,  and  Sheridan  Titman,  1994,  Financial  Distress  and  Corporate  Performance,
Journal  of  Finance  49,  1015-1040.

Rajan,  Raghuram  G.,  and  Luigi  Zingales,  1995,  What Do We Know about Capital Structure?
Some  Evidence  from  International  Data,  Journal  of  Finance  50,  1421-1460.

Shleifer,  Andrei,  and  Robert  W.  Vishny,  1992,  Liquidation  Values  and  Debt  Capacity:  A
Market  Equilibrium  Approach,  Journal  of  Finance  47,  1343-1366.

Sufi,  Amir,  2007,  Information  Asymmetry  and  Financing  Arrangements:  Evidence  from
Syndicated  Loans,  Journal  of  Finance  62,  629-668.

Weiss,  Lawrence  A.,  1990,  Bankruptcy  Resolution:  Direct  Costs  and  Violation  of  Priority  of
Claims,  Journal  of  Financial  Economics  27,  285–314.

                                                                                35