Credible Engagements
or Empty Promises?

A Study of Investors’ Reactions to Commitment to
the Science-Based Target Initiative

Theodor Minnhagen 25332
Alexander Stenberg 25330

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2023

                                                                         1
Credible Engagements or Empty Promises? A Study of Investors
Reactions to Committing to the Science Based Targets Initiative

Abstract:

This paper seeks to explore the short-term financial implications of a commitment to the
Science-Based Targets Initiative (SBTi), a previously sparsely researched topic in financial
literature. By employing an event study methodology, the findings point towards a non-
conclusive link between a commitment to the SBTi and abnormal returns around the date of
commitment. While the market seems to react negatively to the announcement on the event
day, this effect is not strong enough to persist throughout the event window, even for event
windows as short as five days. This paper aims to fill the gap in the literature in two ways:
Light is shed on the previously unexplored link between stock returns and a commitment to
SBTi, and an event study is conducted on events that look virtually identical across firms. The
results of the analysis raise questions about whether information about SBTi commitment is
not taken into consideration by investors, or if there could be perceived uncertainties around
the initiative that result in investor hesitancy.

Keywords:

Sustainability, ESG, Science-Based Targets Initiative, Event Study, Abnormal Returns

Authors:

Theodor Minnhagen 25332
Alexander Stenberg 25330

Tutor:

Maíra Sontag González, Teaching Assistant, Department of Finance

Examiner:

Adrien D’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Theodor Minnhagen and Alexander Stenberg, 2023

                                                                         2
  I. Introduction
       Sustainable investing, where one takes environmental, social, and governance (ESG)
considerations into account when formulating an investment strategy, has grown rapidly in
conjunction with calls for the private sector to take on responsibility with regards to societal
issues such as climate change and human rights. In 2021, asset managers had a total of US$18.4
trillion in ESG-related assets under management (AUM), and this figure is expected to rise to
US$33.9 trillion by 2026 (PwC, 2022).

       The link between ESG and financial performance has been studied vigorously, and has
yielded some positive results from a societal perspective. For example, a review study by
Friede, Busch and Bassen (2015) shows that the aggregated evidence of 2200 studies conducted
since the 1970’s point towards a non-negative relation between ESG criteria and corporate
financial performance. More specifically, ESG performance has been found to negatively affect
equity cost of capital, where environmental and governance considerations are the main drivers
(Ng and Rezaee, 2015). As such, firms with a high cost of equity capital tend to voluntarily
disclose ESG performance, and if their performance is superior relative to competitors, they
tend to enjoy a reduction in cost of equity capital (Dhaliwal et al., 2011).

        In the asset pricing literature, positive links have been found between ESG-performance
and alpha. For example, Edmans (2011) finds that firms on the “100 Best Companies to Work
For in America” earned an annual four-factor alpha of 3.5% between 1984 and 2009.
Meanwhile, Pástor, Stambaugh and Taylor. (2021) states that in equilibrium, ESG-assets bring
a negative alpha, and in Pástor, Stambaugh and Taylor (2022), they attribute the discrepancy
between expected and realized returns to unexpectedly strong increases in environmental
concerns.

        One persistent issue pertaining to research on sustainable finance is the unreliability of
ESG-scores. There are many different providers of such scores, and each provider has its own,
often proprietary, method of calculating them. As such, it is unclear whether they have any
credible bearing. In a study comparing ESG-ratings from six different providers during 2014
to examine their potential divergence, the mean pairwise correlation between the providers
were 0.54, with some dropping as low as 0,38 (Berg et al., 2022). The low correlation between
the providers makes it difficult to draw any strong conclusions about the link between ESG-
ratings and financial performance.

        Furthermore, these kinds of studies run the risk of reverse causality. There is an ongoing
debate around studies that find positive correlations between firm value and CSR efforts, and
more specifically those that use “low-frequency measures” (Krüger, 2015). Finding a positive
correlation between two measures that are infrequently updated (such as annual firm value
measures and ESG scores), often fail to conclude whether firms are doing well because they
are doing good, or if they can afford to do good because they are doing well.

                                                                         3
        To combat this, Krüger (2015) conducts a study on investors’ short-term reactions to
corporate CSR events. Using a dataset of 2,116 corporate events, he finds that investors react
strongly negatively towards negative news about a company’s ESG performance. More
striking, however, is the finding that investors react weakly negatively towards positive news.
In both cases, events regarding community and the environment have the strongest impact on
investor reactions. To explore the reaction to positive events further, he divides them into two
categories – those who are likely to be a result of agency-problems, and those where firms are
trying to compensate for prior ESG underperformance. Here, he finds that for firms with a low
(high) probability of agency problems, there is a positive (negative) market reaction to ESG
news. This shows that while investors on average do not tend to value ESG initiatives, their
views are mainly driven by instances where agency-problems are the cause for the initiatives.

       We extend on this paper by examining a particular type of event – namely, firms’
commitment to the Science-Based Targets Initiative (henceforth SBTi). The SBTi is an
initiative helping firms to reduce their green-house gas (GHG) emissions by setting tangible
short-term and long-term targets based on the latest research in climate science. After
committing, there is a 24-month period where the firm is to formulate their targets. If their
targets are deemed to be too unambitious, or if they fail to set the targets within the 24-month
period, they are excluded from the initiative. By following the methodology of Krüger, we try
to answer whether or not SBTi commitment has a short-term effect on firms’ stock returns.
As such the following hypothesis materializes:

Hypothesis: Commitment to SBTi will result in short-term abnormal returns.

       We contribute to Krüger (2015) and to the literature in two ways. Firstly, the events
Krüger (2015) refers to in his paper are not identical, in the sense that they will differ in
severity. It is reasonable to assume that a major oil spill of one firm will have a different impact
on returns than a news story about a slight increase in scope 1 emissions of the same firm. In
our study, the events are virtually identical, since the SBTi commitment looks the same for
every firm. To add on to this, we also fill a gap in the more general sustainable finance literature
by the same rationale, as research on the topic has historically been focusing on unreliable ESG
scores.

        Secondly, as opposed to ESG-news where there is no clear distinction between realized
events and expected events, all events in this study are announcements of expected action in
the future. Similarly to M&A announcements, there is no guarantee that the commitments that
are communicated will be followed through on, which could have an effect on how investors
evaluate this information. This discussion is also adjacent to the issue of greenwashing, where
the potential effects of merely communicating an intent to act in the future, could shed light on
the potency of these types of commitment in terms of greenwashing-prospects.

       The findings of this paper suggest no conclusive link between SBTi commitment and
the average abnormal return of the firm during the event window. While the firms experience
a significantly negative spike in their abnormal returns on the 90%-level during the event day,

                                                                         4
this effect is non-persistent, and no effects can be seen in the cumulative average abnormal
returns.

       One hypothesis that could explain the lack of significant results is that there is no
guarantee that the firms will follow through on their commitment. It may be so that investors
deem that probability too low for it to trigger a market reaction in any direction. However,
another possibility could simply be that investors do not view the SBTi commitment as
something that is worth taking into consideration while making decisions regarding the firm’s
security.

       The disposition of the paper is as follows. In section II we will review previous
literature on the topic of ESG in finance. In section III, we elaborate on the collected data and
the final sample, as well as the methodology and in section IV, the findings are presented.
Lastly, in section V, concluding remarks are presented with a discussion around the results, a
conclusion of the study, the study’s limitations, as well as suggestions for future research.

 II. Literature Review

A. ESG Initiatives in Finance
        While there are some major third-party initiatives that promote sustainability in finance,
the research on them is quite nascent. Liang, Sun and Teo (2022) shows that hedge funds that
have signed the United Nation’s Principles for Responsible Investment enjoy greater investor
flows and can charge higher management fees, even though their risk-adjusted return is lower
than other hedge funds. They attribute this result to agency problems and potential
greenwashing, as the main drivers of the underperformance are PRI-signatories with low ESG-
scores. On the other hand, a similar study by Humphrey and Li (2021) shows that the PRI
signatories who enjoy the greatest increase in flow are the ones that fulfil their commitment of
reducing GHG emissions after endorsing the initiative, because of investor preferences.

        As seen by these two studies, sustainability initiatives in finance can be used for dual
purposes. On one hand, it is possible to pander to investors with certain preferences to increase
the financial performance, but on the other hand, there seems to lie additional value in
following through on the commitments and promises that have been made.

        The SBTi in particular has received little attention within financial research. One study
points towards the fact that SBTi-committed firms that are increasing their corporate carbon
emission performance CCP enjoy an increase in both ROA and Tobin’s Q (Bendig, Wagner
and Lau, 2023). However, as shown by Giesekam et al. (2021), a significant number of
signatories were underperforming in at least one of their targets – especially those regarding
scope 3 emissions. Similarly, Blok and Manuel (2023) also find that the majority of the
progress towards the targets on an aggregated level is driven by a few of the most emission
intensive firms. Following this, they state that “most members show little evidence of emission
reductions within their operations, only achieving progress via renewable energy purchases.”

                                                                         5
The lacking amount of research on SBTi, as well as the ambiguous performance in relation to
the targets amongst signatories make it difficult to assess the financial implications of
committing to the initiative based on previous literature on the topic.

B. Carbon Emissions in Asset Pricing
       An ongoing discussion within the asset pricing literature is the impact of investor
behavior on security prices, and whether norms and societal values play a role in investors’
decision-making processes. In a study by Hong and Kacperczyk (2009), they studied so-called
“sin” stocks (firms involved in the industries of, for example, alcohol, tobacco and gaming),
and found that institutional investors constrained by societal norms (e.g pension funds,
universities etc.) hold less of these types of stocks relative stocks with otherwise comparable
characteristics. Additionally, they find that these stocks earn a higher expected return than
comparable firms using the Fama-French Four-Factor Model. These findings support their
theory of societal norms playing a role in the pricing of securities, and while high-emission
companies were not studied specifically, it is possible that the same economic rationale can be
extended to these types of stocks as well. This is also in line with the views of Pástor,
Stambaugh and Taylor (2022) on the subject.

       Bolton and Kacperczyk (2020) disputes this theory by looking at exclusionary
screening of institutional investors based on emissions. While exclusionary screening is done
to some extent on Scope 1 emission-intensity, no such behavior can be found for absolute levels
of emissions. In the same study, they also find that emission-intensity has no impact on stock
returns, while both absolute emissions and changes in emissions positively predict returns. As
such, they reject the divestment hypothesis, and rather suggest a carbon risk premium that is
priced in at the firm-level.

       Similarly, Tsu, Li and Tsou (2023) look at firm pollution and find a pollution price
premium which they cannot attribute to existing systematic risks nor investor preferences.
Instead, they propose a systematic risk linked to environmental policy uncertainty, which is a
systematic risk that disproportionately affects high-polluting firms.

       Based on these findings, it seems not unlikely that a commitment to the SBTi would
negatively impact the returns of the firm, as it not only signals a negative change in future
carbon emissions, but also signals that the firm is planning on positioning itself to decrease the
exposure to environmental policy uncertainty.

C. ESG News and Market Reactions
       In addition to the effect of ESG performance on financial performance, previous
literature has also explored the market reactions to positive and negative ESG-related news.
Krüger (2015) examined the effect of positive and negative CSR related news coverage on
returns and found that the market reacted strongly to such news publishings. On average the
market reacted strongly negatively on negative news and weakly negatively on positive news.

                                                                         6
Only when the positive news can be traced to managerial efforts to offset prior CSR
irresponsibility do the stock prices increase on average.

       Following this line of research Capelle-Blancard and Petit (2021) explored more
specifically ESG related news and found that on average, firms facing negative ESG related
news events experience a market value drop of 0.1% while firms gain nothing on average from
positive announcements. In general, previous research seems to suggest that the market on
average tends to react negatively to negative ESG and CSR news and only weakly positively
or even weakly negatively to positive news. Similarly, Serafeim and Yoon (2022) explored the
market reaction on ESG news and found that the prices only react to financially material news
as defined by the Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB) and do not react at all to
financially immaterial news.

       From a strictly environmental perspective, the communication of a firm's SBTi
commitment must be considered a positive piece of news. As such, this paper sheds further
light on how investors evaluate and react to positive ESG-news. In contrast to the other articles
mentioned, however, the type of news studied in this paper are identical in character and so
there is no need to account for the news pieces' severity.

D. ESG News and Size Differences
       Firms of different sizes may also be impacted in different ways by news events and be
subject to varied levels of information and investor coverage. For example, Krüger (2015)
includes market capitalization as a control variable in the analysis and finds that it has a
statistically significant effect on cumulative average abnormal returns when examining
negative ESG news, both when using a CAPM model and a value-weighted FF48 - industry
model. Firms with a larger market cap tend to have more coverage in news outlets and a larger
investor audience and therefore see a larger impact of news on abnormal returns.

        Capelle-Blancard and Petit (2019) also control for this effect, stating that “on the one
hand, investors may be more sensitive to ESG news concerning large firms, but on the other
hand, the shares of small firms are less liquid, and their reallocation possibilities are weaker.”
In the paper, the authors reference a more in-depth study done on the effect of ESG news on
market value of firms by Aouadi and Marsat (2018). Here they find that market value of firms
that have higher GSV score (which in this case was used as a proxy for investor attention) is
more susceptible to news events than firms who have a lower GSV score. With this taken into
account, the main analysis of this paper is supplemented by a secondary analysis, where the
firms are split up into three portfolios based on what tercile they belong to on the market
capitalization distribution.

                                                                         7
III. Data & Methodology

A: The Science Based Targets Initiative
       As of December 2022, the total committed annual reduction of CO2 emissions across
all approved Science Based Targets was 76 million tonnes and firms that have committed to
the initiative represented approximately 34% of the global market capitalization. The ambitions
of the Science Based Targets Initiative can be described to be threefold. For one, it is making
an effort to fight climate change by reducing GHG emissions from individual institutions. Two,
to help firms to set actionable, realistic yet ambitious emission reduction targets that will have
a material impact on the climate footprint of the firm. Thirdly, to validate that the targets set
by the firms are in line with the targets set out in the Paris Agreement and the latest science
and findings on the topic.

        The process of joining the Science Based Targets Initiative is a step-by-step process.
First the firm makes an internal assessment whether to join SBTi. Thereafter, they issue a letter
of commitment to SBTi which is then published and made official on the SBTi website. The
firm then enters a 24-month period of drafting their targets and following up on their data
collection before officially submitting these targets to SBTi for validation.

        The emission reduction targets have to follow a strict guideline set out by SBTi to either
be compatible with the 2℃ Paris Agreement, 1.5℃ scenario or as of 28 October 2021, a
corporate net zero scenario (SBTi Corporate Net Zero Standard, 2023). The targets and the
firm are then analyzed by the independent experts at the organization and if the targets are
concluded to be in line with the standard set out by SBTi, the firm will officially be part of the
initiative and can communicate this to their stakeholders. After this, the firm has to report
annually on their progress in reaching said targets. Figure I illustrates the entire process in a
timeline.

        The initiative is currently working on a system to evaluate the progress of the firms in
reaching the targets but at this point in time, it is up to each individual firm to report on progress
through annual reports and sustainability reports. A firm may also choose to publicly report on
the progress in CDP’s own database. As of 2022, 76% of firms publicly reported on the
progress in some form, while more than half (53%) of firms fully reported progress on all their
near-term and long-term targets. Around 50% of financial institutions also chose to report on
their progress publicly via CDP (SBTi 2023)

B: Sample and Data
        The firm-specific data pertaining to the status of their SBTi commitment was gathered
from SBTi’s own website. In this data set information is provided on when the organizations
committed to the initiative, what type of institution they are classified as, if they are publicly
listed or not (displayed by whether or not they have an ISIN), the region where their

                                                                         8
                                               Figure I
This figure illustrates the process of joining the SBTi. It includes all major steps, beginning with internal
evaluation and ending with annual reporting on the progress towards the targets. The date of commitment used
as the event date in this paper is highlighted in bold.

headquarters reside, and the status of their commitment. For this paper, the organizations
studied must meet the criteria displayed in Table I. Historical daily closing prices of the firms,
as well as their individual market capitalization for the year 2022 were collected from Refinitiv
Eikon, and the corresponding daily return of the S&P500 index was retrieved from Yahoo
Finance.

       The combined dataset includes daily data on historical stock returns for 360 publicly
listed firms all in the North American region who have committed to the SBTi between the
period 2016-04-01 and 2023-08-01 as well as the dates during which the commitment of each
individual firm to the SBTi was published on the official SBTi website. The reason for the
regional demarcation is both the availability of financial data, as well as the comparability and
ability to regress on a common stock index (the S&P500).

        Important to note is that the dataset includes both firms that have committed as well as
firms that have come further in the process and thus have had their targets officially validated
by the SBTi. To ensure comparability between the firms’ events, we have chosen the date of
commitment as the event date of interest. There are three main reasons for this. Firstly, while
the act of committing to the SBTi is identical across all firms, they can decide to set unequally
ambitious targets. As such, the effect of the validation of the firms’ targets on the stock return
could vary in intensity in accordance with how ambitious the targets are, thus increasing
variance and the difficulty to analyze the results. Secondly, the number of North American
firms that have had their targets validated are significantly lower than those who have
committed, and as a result the sample would simply be too small to conduct any meaningful
analysis. Lastly, specifying the date of when the validation of the targets becomes public
knowledge is hard, since this is not something that the SBTi discloses in their data.

       The commitment date signifies when the firm is publicly acknowledged on the SBTi
website. In addition to this, the Commitment Submission Application form

                                                                         9
                                                Table I
  This table states the characteristics and criteria the firms have to meet in order to be included in the final
  sample. All variables are reported on by the Science-Based Target Initiative.

of the SBTi states that the commitment is also published on the partner websites at Home - We
Mean Business Coalition and for firms participating in UN Global Compact they will be
recognized on the UNGC webpage (Our Participants | UN Global Compact). For some firms,
the commitment date coincided with a non-trading day, and for those firms, the first
superseding trading day was chosen as the event date to avoid look-ahead bias. The same goes
for a select few firms where the return data was missing on the commitment date.

        To avoid skewing of the results by outliers with extreme abnormal returns and variance,
“penny stocks” have been excluded from the sample. Penny stocks are defined as stocks that
have a daily closing price of under $1 at any point during the estimation period. This resulted
in the removal of a total of four stocks from the sample, leaving 356 stocks in the dataset.
Additionally, three firms were removed due to missing data in the estimation period, leaving
353 firms in the final dataset.

C: The Event Study
       We follow the methodology established in Krüger (2015), with some minor adjustments
due to data availability. For each firm we establish an estimation period of 251 trading days,
with the start date being 300 trading days before the event date, and the end date 50 trading
days before. In the estimation period, we estimated each firms’ alpha and beta using the market
model, by regressing the firm daily return on the S&P 500 market index. Using these
parameters, we then calculate the abnormal returns for certain event windows defined as
[𝜏1: 𝜏2], where 𝜏1 represents the number of days prior to the event date, and 𝜏2 is the number of
days after the event date. The abnormal returns are calculated as follows:

                                  𝐴𝑅𝑖𝑡 = 𝑟𝑖𝑡 − (𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽𝑖𝑟𝑚𝑟𝑘𝑡,𝑡) (1)

where 𝑟𝑖𝑡 is the realized return of firm i at time t, 𝛼 and 𝛽 are the estimated parameters for firm
i, and 𝑟𝑚𝑟𝑘𝑡,𝑡 is the corresponding market return index. Thus, the AR is defined as the

                                                                        10
                                                Figure II
  This figure reports the results of the regression of the daily return of each firm in the full sample on the daily
  return of the S&P 500 index. The results show that the intercept has a p-value of 0.959 and is thus statistically
  nonsignificant, while the standard error of 0.22484 is of a large nature. The sample size is 353 and the sample
  period is 2016-04-01 to 2023-08-01.

difference between the realized return for firm i at time t and the corresponding expected return.
The results of the market model regression are presented in Figure II. While the calculated
intercept is non-significant, the standard error is very large and thus, we decided to omit the
intercept from the abnormal return calculation. As such, equation (1) is modified to:

                                             𝐴𝑅𝑖𝑡 = 𝑟𝑖𝑡 − 𝛽𝑖𝑟𝑚𝑟𝑘𝑡,𝑡 (1)

       The main analysis is done on the Cumulative Average Abnormal Returns (CAAR) for
the event window. The CAAR is calculated as follows:

                                                                                  𝜏2          1    𝑁
                                        𝐶𝐴𝐴𝑅(𝜏1, 𝜏2) = ∑𝑡=𝜏    (   ∑𝑖=1 𝐴𝑅𝑖𝑡)
                                                                    1  𝑁

       The sample variance of the event window abnormal returns is unknown and must
therefore be estimated by using the estimation period residuals (for reasonably large estimation
periods):

                                              2     1    𝑇        2
                                          𝜎𝐴𝑅𝑖𝑡 =    ∑𝑡=2 𝑢𝑖𝑡
                                                 𝑇−2

                                                                   2
         Where T is the number of days in the event window and 𝑢𝑖𝑡 is the square of the residual
                                                  2
for each firm and day of the estimation period. 𝜎𝐴𝑅𝑖𝑡is then used to calculate the variance of the
average abnormal returns:

                                            2     1   𝑁       2
                                            𝜎𝐴𝐴𝑅𝑡 =  2 ∑𝑖=1 𝜎𝐴𝑅𝑖𝑡
                                                                     𝑁

       Where N is the number of firms. Lastly, the variance for the cumulative average
abnormal returns is calculated as follows:

                                                                        11
                                                 2      𝜏2         2
                                                 𝜎𝐶𝐴𝐴𝑅(𝜏1:𝜏2) = ∑𝑡=𝜏     𝜎𝐴𝐴𝑅𝑡
                                                                 1

The test-statistics for AAR and CAAR respectively thus become:

                                                                            𝐴𝐴𝑅𝑡
                                       ~𝑁(0,1)
                                                                     𝜎𝐴𝐴𝑅
                                                                                                                          𝑡

and

                                                              𝐶𝐴𝐴𝑅(𝜏1:𝜏2)
                                           ~𝑁(0,1)
                                                                            𝜎𝐶𝐴𝐴𝑅(𝜏  :𝜏  )
                                                             1  2

        In the cases where non-trading days have occurred during an event window, the last
available closing price for the security and the S&P500 index was used, resulting in an
abnormal return of zero. The AAR was calculated for each day of a 21-day event window,
while the CAAR was calculated for three different event window lengths ([-2:2], [-5:5] and [-
10:10]). Their respective variances were used to calculate the two-tailed significance levels of
the results.

IV. Results
        Table II illustrates the findings of the analysis with regards to the effect on average
abnormal returns in the [-10:10] event window. When viewing the full sample of 353 firms, a
drop of -0.21151% in average abnormal returns on the event day can be observed, which is
statistically significant at the 90% level. The drop in average abnormal returns at the event day
is also of larger magnitude than any of the other days in the event window. These findings
indicate that there is some sort of market reaction, albeit small, to the SBTi commitment.

       Apart from the event day, only on the last day of the event window a statistically
significant AAR can be observed at the 90% level, with a magnitude of 0.0855%. It is difficult
to conclude what this observation can be attributed to, but likely it is due to some noise that the
model fails to control for. Furthermore, the effect on AAR that can be observed on the event
day is quickly nullified during the days superceding the event, as seen by Table II.

        Table II also illustrates the result when the sample is divided into portfolios based on
market capitalization. In order to be able to observe how the size of the firm affects the
abnormal return, the dataset is divided into three different portfolios based on the 2022 market

                                                                        12
                                                   Table II
This table reports the Average Abnormal Returns, t-statistics and p-values for the full, as well as the “High” , “Mid”,
and “Low” portfolios based on the market capitalization for the fiscal year of 2022. The sample sizes are 353, 120, 116
and 117 respectively. The studied event window is 21 days and the event day is defined as day 0.

  capitalization of each company (High, Mid and Low Market Cap). The “Low” portfolio
   consists of 117 stocks, the “Mid” portfolio of 116 stocks and the “High” portfolio of 120 stocks.

          When dividing the sample into the three portfolios, differentiation in the effect of the
   event on AAR during the event day can be observed. For the high and low portfolios, the event
   day effect now becomes non-significant, while a stronger significance can be observed in the
   mid portfolio. The high and low portfolios have a p-value of 0.466 and 0.522 respectively,
   while the mid portfolio has a p-value of 0.067. As such, there seems to be no clear link between
   market capitalization and the AAR on the event day. It also seems like the statistically

                                                                          13
                                                   Figure III
This figure graphically illustrates the values and changes over time of Average Abnormal Returns in the 21-day event
window for the full sample (black), “High” (light blue), “Mid” (dark blue) and “Low” (gray) portfolios. The Y-axis
shows average abnormal returns in per cent, the X-axis shows days from event window in days.

 significant effect on day 10 is mainly driven by the low portfolio, suggesting some exogenous
 factor that disproportionately affects smaller firms.

        Figure III illustrates the fluctuations of the AAR during the [-10:10] event window
 across all days, for the full sample as well as the portfolios. Here, the seemingly random
 fluctuation of the AAR becomes more visible. While all samples experience a clear drop during
 the event day, the effect is quickly compensated for by the following days. That effect seems
 to be persistent across the entire event window, where large spikes (drops) are quickly followed
 by a corresponding drop (spike).

        In order to paint a clearer picture of the (non)persistence of the AAR over time, an
 analysis is conducted on the cumulative average abnormal returns across different event
 window lengths. As shown by Table III, the CAAR is negative over all event window lengths
 for the full sample, but the magnitude is decreasing with the length of the event window, and
 none of the event windows are significant.

        With regards to the portfolios, some divergent patterns can be observed. Just as with
 the full sample, the high and mid portfolios both experience negative CAAR, but the magnitude
 is increasing with event window length in the high portfolio, while the opposite is true for the
 mid portfolio. Moreover, the negative CAAR for the mid portfolio's [-2:2] event

                                                                        14
                                                   Table III
  This table reports the Cumulative Average Abnormal Returns, t-statistic and p-value for the full sample, “High”,
  “Mid”, and “Low” portfolios based on the market capitalization for the fiscal year of 2022. Their sample sizes are
  353, 120, 116 and 117 respectively. The table also reports these statistics for the event window lengths [-2:2], [-5:5]
  and [-10:10].

window is statistically significant on the 90% level, which is mostly attributable to the large
drop in AAR during the event day. Interestingly, the CAAR for the low portfolio are positive,
and increasing in the event window length.

        Because of the general non-significance of the results, no more conclusions can be
drawn from these patterns, other than that it opens up for possible interesting discussions for
future research regarding ESG-related events and firm-size.

       The main finding of the analysis is thereby that the commitment to the SBTi does not
have a significant effect on the cumulative average abnormal returns. There is a statistically
significant effect on the average abnormal returns the event day, but this does not have a
material impact on the cumulative average abnormal returns other than the [-2:2] event window
for the mid portfolios. Therefore, a rejection of the null hypothesis that a commitment to SBTi
will not result in short-term abnormal returns cannot be made.

 V. Discussion & Concluding Remarks

A. Discussion
       The findings of the analysis seem to suggest that investors do not make investment
decisions in the short term based on the information that the firm has committed to the SBTi.
One simple explanation could be that SBTi commitment is not a piece of information that
investors take into consideration while making their investment decisions. However, due to the
observable drop in AAR on the event day, another possible explanation is that investors are
reacting to the commitment in one way or another, but that they do not see it as something that

                                                                        15
should affect the value of the security in any meaningful way. While both explanations are
possible, some discussion around the economic rationale behind the latter will be presented
below.

       One hypothesis is that investors perceive great uncertainty as to whether or not a
commitment to the SBTi will lead to a validation of the commitment within the 24-month
submission period. Recently, more than 60 firms have been classified as "commitment
removed" due to not submitting their targets in time (Business Green 2023). Furthermore,
according to the SBTi database, 106 firms of a total of 8547 have the status "expired
commitment during the time-period 2015-06-01 until 2023-04-13. Given the very low
frequency of removed commitments, this hypothesis seems unlikely.

       Another hypothesis could be that investors perceive a high uncertainty with regards to
whether an SBTi-validation will result in material efforts to reduce GHG-emissions. Giesekam
et. al (2021) finds that more than half of the SBTi-validated firms included in the study
underperform with regards to at least one of the targets that have been set. In addition to this,
firm reporting practices were highly variable and often of poor quality. This suggests that the
implications of SBTi-commitment might be difficult for investors to assess, and that they might
be prudent when taking this information into account.

        Lastly, this study does not differentiate the committed firms based on industry nor level
of GHG emissions. It is reasonable to assume that strategic decisions that affect GHG emissions
will be viewed differently by investors depending on how dependent the firm in question is on
said emissions. A manufacturing firm will most likely experience a different effect on their
stock price from environment-related commitments than a consulting firm heavily reliant on
intangible assets. Excluding the possibility that investors simply do not value SBTi-
commitment, this hypothesis to be the most likely with regards to the lack of results in the
analysis.

        Worth mentioning is that the findings of this paper are fairly in line with the original
findings of Krüger (2015), where positive ESG news only have an incremental effect on
returns, whereas negative ESG news have a much larger impact. As was previously discussed,
a commitment to the SBTi could be classified as a positive news announcement and should
according to previous research not have a significant impact on returns. While the results of
this paper are non-significant, a trend of negative abnormal returns can be observed for the full
sample, as well as the high and mid portfolios.

       While these hypotheses give some insight into possible explanations of the results, they
do not provide any final proof of why there is no statistically significant effect. Important to
acknowledge is the fact that there might simply not be an effect at all and that there are no
hypotheses that can ultimately explain this phenomenon. A firm’s commitment to the Science
Based Targets Initiative might not be material enough to have an effect on the cumulative

                                                                        16
average abnormal return. What the long-term effects will be is an entirely different discussion
in itself and requires further research with different statistical methods of analysis.

B. Limitations and opportunities for future research
       This paper examines the effect of a commitment to the Science Based Targets Initiative
on abnormal returns around the date of commitment. While the methods used in this paper are
robust, there are some minor shortcomings that should be acknowledged. For example, the
portfolios used for analysis are not perfectly divided due to the removal of three firms based
on data availability. A reweighting of the portfolios would however only have a very marginal
effect on the results and should not alter the findings of the analysis, as the likely consequence
is that only a select few firms would change portfolio.

        While the paper follows the conventional event-study methodology, the literature does
suggest adjustments to it to increase the robustness of the results. For example, Patell and
Wolfson (1979) find an increase in variance during the days around an event containing
information that affects stock prices, resulting in too high of a frequency of null hypothesis-
rejection by test-statistics that do not account for this. In response to this, Boehmer, Musumeci
and Poulsen (1991) proposed a test-statistic that accounts for both event-induced variance as
well as cross-sectional dependence. This adjusted test-statistic has not been used in this paper,
but with that said, the expected consequence would have been an even weaker significance of
the results. As such, the main conclusions would likely not have been affected.

       As discussed above, industry type and emission levels are not controlled for in this
study, and there are reasons to assume that these factors have an effect on how investors view
the announcement of SBTi-commitment. With this in mind, an analysis with these factors
included would be able to validate whether the hypothesis that these factors have an effect on
AAR and CAAR is reasonable or not.

        The Science Based Targets Initiative does, at the time of the publication of this article,
not provide any data on the date of validation of firms. An analysis similar to the one conducted
here, but with the event being the validation of the commitment, could shed further light on the
likelihood of the hypotheses discussed above, as the validation might act as a more credible
announcement than a mere commitment. Furthermore, a similar analysis could be conducted
on firms that have been excluded from the SBTi if this data were to be released from the
initiative in the future. At the time of the publication of this paper however, there are not enough
companies to conduct such an analysis and no data on the dates of when the exclusions became
public knowledge exist. For both these analyzes, the event dates would have to be manually
retrieved.

C. Conclusion
        In this paper, the effect of SBTi commitment on the daily stock returns of publicly listed
firms were studied. To conduct the analysis, an event study methodology was used, where

                                                                        17
abnormal returns were calculated using the market model as the estimation model. The main
analysis was done on average abnormal returns (AAR) and cumulative average abnormal
returns (CAAR). For the full sample, a statistically significant AAR was found at the 90% level
on the event day, but otherwise no results could be observed. When dividing the sample into
three portfolios based on market capitalization, it became evident that the drivers for the
 significant result on the event day were the firms included in the mid portfolio.

       With regards to CAAR, a negative trend could be observed, where shorter event
windows resulted in larger negative cumulative average abnormal returns. When conducting
the analysis on the different portfolios however, no such clear pattern could be observed. While
the causes of these results are impossible to decipher from this study, some hypotheses have
 been presented, where the two that seem most likely are that investors either do not take SBTi
 commitment into account when deciding on their investment strategy, or the fact that this study
 does not differentiate between different types of firms with regards to industry and emission-
 levels. Future research on the topic is needed to be able to confirm or dispute these hypotheses.

VI. Acknowledgements

        The authors of this article would like to extend a special gratitude towards the SEB
Sustainable Banking team and in particular give a special thanks to Jessica Mattsson and Theo
Kinnersley for their support in the formulation of the research question and data collection.
Additionally, the authors would like to show their appreciation to Maíra Sontag González for
 their guidance in the process of writing this paper.

                                                                        18
VII. References

  Aouadi, A. and Marsat, S. (2018). Do ESG Controversies Matter for Firm Value? Evidence
  from International Data. Journal of Business Ethics, 151(4), p.1027–1047. doi:
  10.1007/s10551-016-3213-8

  Bendig, D., Wagner, A. and Lau, K. (2023). Does It Pay to Be Science‐based Green? The
  Impact of Science‐based Emission‐reduction Targets on Corporate Financial Performance.
  Journal of Industrial Ecology, 27(1), p.125–140. doi: 10.1111/jiec.13341

  Berg, F., Kölbel, J. and Rigobon, R. (2022) Aggregate Confusion: The Divergence of ESG
  Ratings. Review of Finance, 26(6), p.1315–1344. doi: 10.1093/rof/rfac033

  Block, K. and Ruiz Manuel, I. (2023). Quantitative Evaluation of Large Corporate Climate
  Action Initiatives Shows Mixed Progress in their First Half-decade. Nature Communications,
  14(1), p.3487-3487. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-38989-2

  Boehmer, E., Masumeci, J. and Poulsen, A. (1991). Event-Study Methodology under
  Conditions of Event-Induced Variance. Journal of financial economics, 30(2), p.253–272.
  doi: 10.1016/0304-405X(91)90032-F

  Bolton, P. and Kacperczyk, M. (2021). Do Investors Care About Carbon Risk? Journal of
  Financial Economics, 142(2), p.517-549. doi: 10.1016/j.jfineco.2021.05.008

  Capelle-Blancard, G. and Petit, A. (2019). Every Little Helps? ESG News and Stock Market
  Reaction. Journal of Business Ethics, 157(2), p.543–565. doi: 10.1007/s10551-017-3667-3

  Dhaliwal, S., Li, O., Tsang, A. and Yang, Y. (2011). Voluntary Nonfinancial Disclosure and
  the Cost of Equity Capital: The Initiation of Corporate Social Responsibility Reporting. The
  Accounting Review, 86(1), p.59–100. doi: 10.2308/accr.00000005

  Edmans, A. (2011). Does the Stock Market Fully Value Intangibles? Employee Satisfaction
  and Equity Prices. Journal of Financial Economics 101(3), p.621–640. doi:
  10.1016/j.jfineco.2011.03.021

  Giesekam, J., Norman, J., Garvey, A. and Betts-Davies, S. (2021). Science-Based Targets:
  On Target? Sustainability (Basel, Switzerland) 13(4), p.1–20. doi: 10.3390/su13041657

  Friede, G. Busch, T. and Bassen, A. (2015). ESG and Financial Performance: Aggregated
  Evidence From More Than 2000 Empirical Studies. Journal of Sustainable Finance &
  Investment, 5(4), p.210-233. doi: 10.1080/20430795.2015.1118917

                                                                         19
Hong, H. and Kacperczyk, M. (2009). The Price of Sin: The Effects of Social Norms on
Markets. Journal of Financial Economics 93(1), p.15–36. doi: 10.1016/j.jfineco.2008.09.001

Hsu, P., Li, K. and Tsou, C. (2023). The Pollution Premium. The Journal of Finance 78(3),
p.1343-1392. doi: 10.1111/jofi.13217

Humphrey, J. and Yong L. (2021). Who Goes Green: Reducing Mutual Fund Emissions and
Its Consequences. Journal of Banking & Finance 126, p.106098. doi:
10.1016/j.jbankfin.2021.106098

Keating, C. (2023). ‘Commitment Removed’: Over 60 firms singled out by SBTi for failing
to submit climate goals, Business Green, October 4th.
https://www.businessgreen.com/news/4121592/commitment-removed-firms-singled-sbti-
failing-submit-climate-goals

Krüger, P. (2015). Corporate Goodness and Shareholder Wealth. Journal of Financial
Economics 115(2), p.304-329. doi: 10.1016/j.jfineco.2014.09.008

Liang, H., Lin S. and Melvyn T. (2022). Responsible Hedge Funds. Review of Finance 26(6),
p.1585-1633. doi:10.1093/rof/rfac028

MacKinlay, C. (1997). Event Studies in Economics and Finance. Journal of Economic
Literature 35(1), p.13-39. Print.

Ng, Anthony and Rezaee, Z. (2015). Business Sustainability Performance and Cost of Equity
Capital. Journal of Corporate Finance 34, p.128-149. doi: 10.1016/j.jcorpfin.2015.08.003

Pástor, L., Stambaugh, R. and Taylor, L. (2021) Sustainable Investing in Equilibrium.
Journal of Financial Economics 142(2), p.550-571. doi: 10.1016/j.jfineco.2020.12.011

Pástor, L., Stambaugh, R. and Taylor, L. (2022). Dissecting Green Returns. Journal of
Financial Economics 146(2), p.403-424. doi: 10.1016/j.jfineco.2022.07.007

Patell, J. and Wolfson, M. (1979). Anticipated Information Releases Reflected in Call Option
Prices. Journal of Accounting & Economics, 1(2), p.117-140. doi: 10.1016/0165-
4101(79)90003-X

PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) (2022). ESG-focused institutional investment seen soaring
84% to US$33.9 trillion in 2026, making up 21.5% of assets under management [Press
Release], October 10th. https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/news-room/press-releases/2022/awm-
revolution-2022-report.html

                                                                        20
Serafeim, G. and Yoon, A. (2022). Which Corporate ESG News Does the Market React To?
Financial Analysts Journal, 78(1), p.59-78. doi: 10.1080/0015198X.2021.1973879

Science Based Targets Initiative (2022). Monitoring Report 2022.
https://sciencebasedtargets.org/resources/files/SBTiMonitoringReport2022.pdf

Science Based Targets Initiative (2023). SBT Commitment Letter.
https://sciencebasedtargets.org/resources/files/SBT-Commitment-Letter.pdf

Science Based Targets Initiative (2023). About us. https://sciencebasedtargets.org/about-us

Science Based Targets Initiative (2023). SBTi Corporate Net Zero Standard.
https://sciencebasedtargets.org/resources/files/Net-Zero-Standard.pdf

                                                                        21