UNRAVELING THE IMPACT

AN EVENT STUDY OF THE  SWEDISH STOCK MARKET
REACTIONS TO THE RIKSBANK'S MONETARY POLICY
ANNOUNCEMENTS

JAKOB LINDER

JAKOB STRÖMHOLM SONTAGH

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2023
Unraveling the Impact: An Event Study of the Swedish Stock Market
Reactions to the Riksbank’s Monetary Policy Announcements

Abstract:
This study investigates the impact of the Riksbank’s monetary policy announce-
ments on Swedish equity returns. Using a methodology developed by Kuttner (2001)
and Fransson and Tysklind (2016) we distinguish between expected and unexpected
changes to the Riksbank rate and study how the components affect equity prices.
Our findings suggest there is a significant negative relationship between unexpected
changes to the Riksbank rate and OMX Stockholm 30 Index returns. This relation-
ship is however not consistently robust when dividing into subsamples. We find that
the presence of monetary policy announcements from the Federal Reserve and Euro-
pean Central Bank as well as Statistics Sweden inflation announcements affect both
the magnitude and significance of Swedish equity returns to Riksbank monetary pol-
icy announcements. We also document that the introduction of alternative monetary
policy measurements such as quantitative easing has reduced the impact Riksbank
rate changes have on Swedish equity returns.

Keywords:
The Riksbank, Monetary Policy, Spillover Effects, Monetary Policy Announcements,
Efficient Market Hypothesis, Event Study

Authors:
Jakob Linder (25407)
Jakob Str¨omholm Sontagh (25416)

Tutor:
Ma´ıra Sontag Gonz´alez

Examiner:
Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Jakob Linder and Jakob Str¨omholm Sontagh, 2023

                                           1
The effect of interest rates is all-pervasive throughout the economy. From steering
the cost of borrowing and lending to the cost of capital, as well as being an essential
tool to combat inflation, its impact is significant. The role of central banks such as
the Federal Reserve in the United States determining the Federal Funds rate or the
Riksbank in Sweden setting the ”styrr¨anta”, the Riksbank rate, is very powerful. Al-
though the explicit goal of some central banks is to keep inflation at a certain level, the
impact of monetary policy will undoubtedly be felt in other domains of the economy.
One such area is stock markets and equity prices representing the collective beliefs
and sentiments of the market and its investors. The relationship between these two
opposing players is complex and continuously changing, especially in times of a tur-
bulent economy. Since markets are often considered forward-looking, monetary policy
announcements can range from being viewed by the market as highly predictable to
very surprising. The relationship between Swedish equity prices and monetary policy
announcements published by the Riksbank will be examined in this thesis. More
specifically we study equity returns on days of monetary policy announcements made
by the Riksbank. This is a replication of Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) with Swedish
data, who found in an event study that monetary policy, more exactly unexpected
changes to the Effective Federal Funds rate, had significant effects on equity prices.
The main question in this thesis is:

What is the effect of monetary policy announcements made by the Swedish Riksbank
on equity returns of the OMX Stockholm 30 Index?

Our main hypothesis is that the effect of a Riksbank monetary policy announcement
is stronger when the change or non-change in the Riksbank rate is unanticipated by
the market. This pertains to the Efficient Market Hypothesis (EMH) as outlined by
Fama (1970) that asset prices should reflect all the available information to investors,
and thus the expected change in monetary policy should already be reflected in the
market prices. Deviations from the expected change, however, are likely to have a
larger effect on the market prices once the policy changes are announced. A central
part of our methodology, which will be described in the following section, is thus to
differentiate between expected and unexpected changes in the Riksbank rate.
   Additionally, we believe an increase (decrease) in the Riksbank rate, will yield a
negative (positive) return on equity prices. More specifically, that this would result
in a negative (positive) effect on the OMXS30. This is a key idea in the concept
of how interest rates are used to control the development of the economy and to
adjust inflation levels as well as market sentiment. Expected changes to the Riksbank
rate, in line with the Efficient Markets Hypothesis should not significantly impact
asset prices if assumed to already be priced in. Furthermore, we investigate how
various conditions, or levels of information during monetary policy announcements,
affect the responses of equity prices and whether they can be considered more or less

                                           2
expected. Such conditions that are controlled for are spillover effects from monetary
policy announcements by the Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank (ECB),
and whether a monetary policy announcement is made closely ahead of the release
of an inflation report. Finally, whether QE has impacted the responses of equity
prices is studied. Thus, we focus on how equity prices respond based on investors’
information and whether informative events have taken place in close proximity to
the Riksbank announcement. Our hypothesis here is, in conjunction with EMH, that
the less information investors have ahead of a Riksbank announcement, the stronger
the unexpected component of changes in equity prices will be. We thus expect the
presence of other pertinent announcements to dampen the unexpected aspects of a
Riksbank announcement. The opposite is also anticipated, i.e., the lack of other
sources of information should increase the magnitude of the unexpected component.
With an insufficient amount of relevant information, the market’s reaction would be
expected to be stronger, in conjunction with EMH.
   The first part (4A-D) of our paper studies the effect of the announcements of the
Riksbank’s possible changes in the Riksbank rate on the same day OMXS30 returns.
It is related to specific events between 2009 and 2023 and could thus be considered
as an event study. This is aligned with the method employed by Bernanke and
Kuttner (2005). In addition to the specific event study, we also control for other
kinds of information jointly affecting the stock market reactions. For the purpose of
this thesis, the relevant sample events are the announcement dates of the Riksbank’s
possible changes in the Riksbank rate and not the actual implementation date of
the monetary policy changes. This is because the financial markets are assumed
to incorporate new information published by the Riksbank into the equity prices
immediately, instead of waiting until the date when the economic monetary policy is
being implemented, as suggested by EMH.
   The second part (4E-F) of our paper studies the effects of other announcements
potentially impacting expectations ahead of monetary policy announcements. The
categories are spillover effects from monetary policy announcements by the Federal
Reserve, spillover effects from monetary announcements by the European Central
Bank, and Inflation Reports released by Statistics Sweden (SCB). In order to account
for the effects we will divide our sample based on whether the Riksbank’s monetary
policy announcements occur in close temporal proximity to these pertinent announce-
ments. Firstly, we divide our sample based on whether the Riksbank announcement
occurred within one week after a monetary policy announcement by the ECB. We
then run the same regression, however now with one dataset containing all Riksbank
monetary policy announcements occurring within one week after ECB monetary pol-
icy announcements and the other dataset where this was not the case. The same is
done to account for the spillover effects of Fed monetary policy announcements. To
estimate the impact of inflation reports on equity returns we divide our sample once
more. However, here we distinguish between monetary policy announcements by the

                                           3
Riksbank occurring within one week ahead of the publishing of an inflation report by
SCB.
   We then employ the same method as described above to examine the effect Quan-
titative Easing (QE) has had on the reactions of equity prices to monetary policy
announcements. We thus divide our sample into two datasets; one before and one
after the Riksbank decided to implement QE.
   The results related to the first part (4A-D) show that the OMXS30 does react to
the Riksbank’s monetary policy announcements and that the sign of the coefficient is
negative, meaning the stock markets go down (up) for an interest rate hike (cut). This
both at an aggregate level as well as when dividing the expectations into an expected
and an unexpected component. This is in line with earlier studies such as the one by
Bernanke and Kuttner (2005). The result shows that unexpected changes do imply a
larger change in equity prices, but only slightly. Secondly, there are also indications
that the direction of anticipation, i.e. whether the rate change is higher than market
expectations does not significantly influence the movement of equity prices. The
coefficient is always insignificant, which implies that the direction of anticipation
cannot explain some of the great variety in equity responses based on whether they
occur when changes to the Riksbank rate are greater than expected. The results
also indicate that the market not only reacts to changes in the Riksbank rate but
to non-changes as well. Thirdly, we have identified a strong timing effect, meaning
a large portion of the unexpected changes are likely interpreted as a postponement
or advancement of an unavoidable monetary policy path and that the surprise of the
changes to the Riksbank rate is related to the timing rather than the level effect.
   The second part (4E-F), which investigates other announcements potentially im-
pacting expectations ahead of monetary policy announcements, is an extension of
Bernanke and Kuttner (2005). It shows evidence of ECB spillover effects in terms of
a muted effect when the Riksbank announcements are preceded by an ECB monetary
announcement. The implication of Fed’s monetary policy announcements and po-
tential spillover effects seems to indicate an exaggerated response to the Riksbank’s
monetary policy announcement when preceded by a Fed announcement. However,
this cannot be established with certainty. Secondly, we have also observed that in-
flation reports are a strong determinant of the stock market’s reaction to monetary
policy announcements made by the Riksbank. The publishing of an inflation report
in close proximity after the Riksbank’s monetary policy announcement results in a
muted effect on equity prices. Thirdly, quantitative easing weakens the equity price
drop as a result of the Riksbank’s monetary policy announcement at the aggregate
level, but we were not able to identify whether this is related to the expected or
unexpected component.

                                           4
1 Theoretical background

A Literature review
The literature on the impact of monetary policy announcements and interest rate
changes on equity returns is vast. Thorbecke (1997) was one of the first to conduct
an event study on changes in the Effective Federal Funds rate and equity prices. This
yielded a statistically significant negative relationship between the two variables. He
did however not account for whether the changes to the interest rate were expected
or unexpected, which we will investigate.
   The foundational theory in this thesis is the Efficient Market Hypothesis (EMH)
by Fama (1970), which argues that asset prices reflect all the available information
to investors, and thus the expected change in monetary policy should already be
reflected in the market price of equities. This is a crucial theory in this thesis since
monetary policy announcements are regressed on the same day stock market returns,
implicitly assuming that equity prices directly incorporate the information published
by the central banks. It also implies that monetary policy surprises should provoke
much stronger equity price responses than expected ones.
   Bohl, Siklos and Sondermann (2008) investigated the relationship between the
European Central Bank’s monetary policy decisions and reactions on European stock
markets. They found a significant negative relationship between unanticipated ECB
monetary policy decisions and European stock returns.
   This thesis is a replication and extension of Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), which
examines the stock market’s reactions to Federal Reserve monetary policy by analyz-
ing how monetary policy changes affect equity prices in the US. They quantify to what
degree a monetary policy change was expected or unexpected by analyzing changes
in Federal Funds futures rates using a methodology by Kuttner (2001). Some insight
is also provided as to why the stock market reacts as it does, this part though will not
be the focus of this thesis. The findings are that the market reacts fairly strongly to
surprise changes in the interest rate, while the anticipated monetary policy changes
result in a minor reaction. To account for the lack of uniformity in the stock market’s
responses, they also investigate a timing vs level effect. They find that many of the
surprises have a muted effect since they may be interpreted as an advancement or
postponement of a more or less inevitable change in policy, while others were viewed
as altering the expected path of the Federal Funds rate for months to come. The first
section of this study will be a direct replication with Swedish data of Bernanke and
Kuttner (2005), however, we also extend the analysis. Sweden as a smaller economy
is subject to spillover effects emanating from other countries’ monetary policy which
is something we will venture into. Furthermore, the study by Bernanke and Kuttner
(2005) does not account for the consequences of inflation reports and was written
before QE as a monetary policy instrument had been born.
   Fransson and Tysklind (2016) conducted an event study to research the relation-

                                           5
ship between changes in the Riksbank rate and other Swedish interest rates. Inspired
by the method employed by Kuttner (2001), they used 1-month Overnight Index
Swaps (OIS) with the Swedish reference rate STIBOR T/N as the underlying asset
to calculate the expected and unexpected components of changes in monetary pol-
icy. They found a statistically significant relationship between surprise changes and
multiple Swedish interest rates. We employed their methodology to account for un-
expected and expected changes in the Riksbank rate, however, we differ in that we
study the repercussions on equity prices instead of other interest rates in the Swedish
economy.
   The nature of Sweden’s characteristics as a small-scale open economy is also a
relevant topic. Being a small country, the linkage to and the dependency on larger
economies becomes more accentuated. Thomas (2023) finds that minor raises in the
Federal Funds rate can significantly impede the Swedish economy. Furthermore, the
study finds that 73 percent of variation in the Swedish economy can be attributed to
international developments. The US, Euro area, UK, China and Norway influenced
the Swedish economy the most. This is highly relevant to our study since it serves
as a motivation for why we should include spillover effects from other countries when
measuring stock returns to monetary policy. It underlines why Sweden must be
regarded as distinctly different from the United States as a less independent monetary
policy maker.
   The concept of spillover effects is documented by Giovanni and Hale (2022) who
research the propagation of US monetary policy shocks and their spillover through-
out the world on country-sector-level stock returns. The network effects of global
production linkages, they find, account for 70 percent of the reactions to monetary
policy. The insight that US monetary policy affects asset prices globally is relevant to
our research as a motivation for adding controls for Federal Reserve decisions to our
regressions. Furthermore, Angeloni, Ehrmann, de Grauwe and Miles (2003) examines
the euro area monetary policy transmission process, before and after the EMU, and
its effect on the banking, interest-rate and asset-market channels. They find that
the estimated impact of a monetary tightening on stock indices is negative and sig-
nificant for all tested cases but one. The insight that ECB monetary policy affects
asset prices in Europe is relevant to our research as a motivation for adding controls
for ECB decisions to our regressions. These papers indicate that we cannot overlook
global monetary policy shocks when studying the reactions of Swedish equity prices
to monetary policy changes.
   The effect of quantitative easing on the UK stock market is studied by Chortar-
eas, Karanasos and Noikokyris (2018). A crucial finding for this study is the effect
of publishing inflation reports, in relation to how the stock market is affected by
announcements of monetary policy changes by the central bank. They find that the
strength of the market reaction depends among other things, on the bank’s informa-
tion dissemination through inflation reports. Furthermore, monetary Policy Commit-

                                           6
tee (MPC) meetings occurring within a week of the publishing of an inflation report,
with smaller-than-expected asset purchases, lead to higher equity prices. They argue
that smaller-than-expected asset purchases, less than a week before the inflation re-
port, might be perceived as revealing private information about better-than-expected
news from the forthcoming inflation report release. This would suggest that the
MPC meetings take on the role of a predictor of the inflation report. They then find
that equities respond in a manner intuitively expected only with regard to MPC an-
nouncement news that are unaccompanied by fresh inflation report news or when no
inflation report is due in the following week. In this study, the findings by Chortareas,
Karanasos and Noikokyris (2018) are used to evaluate whether the same logic holds
true for other actions taken by the central bank, such as changes in the Riksbank
rate as part of the central bank’s monetary policy toolbox. We thus differ in that
we partially study the relationship between interest rates and inflation reports and
do not profoundly research QE. This paper underlines why anticipation of inflation
reports can influence equity returns on days of monetary policy announcements. In
addition, it emphasizes that investors’ monetary policy expectations are affected by
other relevant announcements than the Riksbank’s own.
   Our study contributes to a well-documented section of the literature. The section
in question has however not been updated much recently, in times of several mone-
tary policy adjustments. The literature is additionally almost silent on the Swedish
economy and market, and reactions to monetary policy are rarely combined with
spillover effects. This paper’s contribution to the literature is thus to analyze if the
relationship between monetary policy and equity prices has the same characteristics
in Sweden as in the US, as well as to document potential spillover effects in terms of
both information and other markets that the Swedish economy is affected by.

B The Riksbank’s Role and Objective
The Swedish Riksbank’s role is explicitly outlined on its website: ”The objective of
monetary policy is to maintain a low and stable rate of inflation. More precisely the
target is to hold CPIF inflation at around 2 per cent a year. Without neglecting
the inflation target, the Riksbank shall moreover contribute to a balanced develop-
ment of output and employment. Monetary policy is the measures the Riksbank
                         1
takes to achieve this.”  The Riksbank’s main instrument for combating inflation is
the ”styrr¨anta”, or the Riksbank rate. It is determined by the Executive Board at
monetary policy meetings, which since 2020 have been held five times a year. 2009-
2019 they were held six times a year. At the monetary policy meeting, the Executive
Board makes a majority decision on the policy rate level and other monetary policy
measures. One day after the Executive Board has held a monetary policy meeting,
a press announcement is made, announcing the possible change to the Riksbank rate

   1
    Monetary Policy, The Riksbank, 2023

                                           7
and other monetary policy actions. This rate change is then implemented a couple of
days after the press release has been made. Furthermore, the Riksbank also provides
forward guidance in that they hint at where the Riksbank rate might be heading in
the future, by publishing forecasts contained in the monetary policy announcements.
˚Ahl (2017) found that the Riksbank managed the market’s rate expectations through
these forecasts, i.e., the Riksbank is a very important source for determining market
expectations.

C The Riksbank Rate 2009-2023
During the 15-year time period we study, January 2009 to June 2023, the monetary
policy of the Riksbank has been both expansionary and, recently in the wake of the
pandemic and subsequent higher levels of inflation, contractionary. The final obser-
vation of our sample is a raise of the Riksbank rate by 0.25 percentage points to the
3.75 percentage level. Our sample includes the unusual and rather controversial pe-
riod of negative interest rates in Sweden between 2015 and 2019, when the Executive
Board was unsatisfied with meager inflation numbers and pursued a very expansion-
ary monetary policy. The lowest Riksbank rate our sample contains is -0.50 percent
in 2016-2018. The Riksbank implemented an expansionary monetary policy following
the financial crisis in 2008 and 2009, which saw rate cuts from 1 to 0.25 percent in
2009 to rising interest rates in 2010-2011 to the 2.00 percent level. In December 2011,
the Riksbank began to utilize rate cuts that would first be reversed in January 2019
when the Riksbank rate was raised from -0.50 percent to -0.25 percent. Since May
2022, when the Riksbank began its hike to repel increasing levels of inflation, the
Riksbank rate has been raised 7 times.

D Quantitative Easing
A more novel monetary policy instrument used by the Riksbank is the method of
Quantitative Easing (QE). It is a method where central banks purchase securities
such as government bonds and other products in order to raise the prices and lower
the yield of these assets. They thereby increase the money supply and stimulate
economic activity, and thus QE can be considered a form of expansionary monetary
policy. The Riksbank pursued QE for the first time in February 2015 when they
purchased government bonds worth 10 billion SEK. The contractionary counterpart,
where central banks sell assets, is called Quantitative Tightening (QT). The method
of conducting asset purchases and sales is an alternative to using policy rates for
monetary policy, but will not be investigated in-depth in this thesis. Its impact on
the effect of interest rates on equity prices will however be accounted for.

                                           8
E Transmission of Monetary Policy to Equity Prices
The monetary policy transmission mechanism has been studied to a high degree to
understand the channels through which monetary policy actions move and impact
different sectors of the economy. Mishkin (1996) provides an overview of the trans-
mission mechanism of monetary policy and outlines three main channels. These are
the traditional interest rate channels, channels operating through other asset prices
and the credit channel. The equity price channel, and equities, are the focus of this
thesis and build on the idea that other relative asset prices and real wealth transmit
monetary effects onto the economy, where key assets are foreign exchange and equities.
The idea is that ”when money supply rises, the public finds it has more money than
it wants and so tries to reduce the holdings of money by increasing their spending.
One place the public can spend more is in the stock market, increasing demand for
equities and consequently raising their prices.” as explained by Mishkin (1996). An
alternative channel for monetary policy transmission through equity prices is through
wealth effects on consumption, which incorporates Modigliani’s (1971) life cycle model
of lifetime resources (human capital, real capital and financial wealth) determining
consumption spending. The financial wealth component consists largely of common
stocks and leads to that when stock prices rise, the value of financial wealth increases,
thus increasing the lifetime resources of consumers, and consumption should rise.

F Identifying expected vs unexpected monetary policy changes
To differentiate between expected and unexpected changes, we will employ a method-
ology developed by Kuttner. Krueger and Kuttner (1996) found that the Federal
Funds futures rates yielded efficient forecasts of funds rate changes by the Federal
Reserve. Kuttner (2001) subsequently used Federal Funds futures to separate mon-
etary policy changes into an expected and unexpected component. To do the same
for the Swedish market, a Swedish equivalent to Federal Funds futures is required.
A similar instrument for the Swedish market is RIBA-futures, a future that has the
Riksbank’s Riksbank rate as the underlying asset. A problem with this instrument,
however, is that RIBA-futures do not have shorter contract periods than three months.
For our purposes, we need shorter contract periods since monetary policy meetings
sometimes occur within these three-month periods. Thus, we need to use another
financial derivative to reflect the Swedish market’s expectations of interest rate levels
which are traded with contracts of 1 month. Fransson and Tysklind (2016) inspired
by the method employed by Kuttner (2001) used Overnight Index Swaps (OIS) to
calculate the expected and unexpected components of changes in monetary policy. It
is a swap where one party exchanges a fixed interest rate for a floating rate, at the
term of one month (the term extends from the first to the last day of every month).
The underlying asset for the swaps is based on the Stockholm Interbank Offered Rate
Tomorrow/Next (STIBOR T/N), which is a reference rate for financial contracts with

                                           9
Figure 1: Time series of the Riksbank rate and Stockholm Interbank Offered Rate
Tomorrow Next (STIBOR T/N) in the time period January 2, 2009 - July 5, 2023.
Riksbank rate rates and STIBOR T/N rates between January 2, 2009 - July 3, 2020 were obtained
from the Riksbank. STIBOR T/N rates July 4, 2020 - July 5, 2023 were retrieved from the Swedish
Financial Benchmark Facility (SFBF). We can observe that the two rates follow each other very
well.

floating interest rates denominated in Swedish Kronor. STIBOR was published by the
Riksbank between 1987 and 2020. Since 2020, it has been published by the Swedish
Financial Benchmark Facility (SFBF). A possible challenge with the STIBOR T/N
swaps is that their underlying asset is not the actual interest rate, the Riksbank rate,
i.e. the main monetary policy instrument of the Riksbank. Thus, the STIBOR T/N
rate and the swaps do not exactly reflect the expected changes of the Riksbank rate
and can at times have a risk premium over the Riksbank rate. We can however see in
Figure 1, which depicts the rate levels during the time period January 2, 2009 - July
5, 2023, that the two rates follow each other very well. The correlation between the
two rates is approximately 1, which further underlines STIBOR T/N’s adequacy as
a proxy for the Riksbank rate (see Appendix, Table 9).
   Hence, the use of STIBOR T/N 1-month OIS as an indicator of future levels of
the Riksbank rate is motivated. Although, it still has to be remembered that the
underlying asset is not directly linked to to the Riksbank rate. Even though STIBOR
very closely follows the Riksbank rate, not being the actual Riksbank is a limitation
of our study. One has to consider that during the observed time window there is a
possibility that over the course of one day, the two rates could differ even though

                                          10
they on the whole follow each other closely. Identifying the unexpected and expected
components of the monetary policy changes is done using the methodology employed
by Fransson and Tysklind (2016). The unexpected component of the interest rate
change is defined as:

                                Stina       Stina                   styr
                     u    (rt     − rt−1    )(τ1 + τ1 ) − ∆it
                 ∆it =                                                   (1)
                                      τ2 − 1
        Stina
where rt     is the rate of the STIBOR T/N 1-month OIS on the day t the monetary
policy change was announced, τ1 is the number of days of the contract that have
passed on the implementation date, τ2 is the number of days left until the contract
                                                   styr
expires on the implementation date and ∆it     is the actual change in the Riksbank
                                                                2
rate on the day t of the monetary policy announcement.  After having calculated
the unexpected component of the interest rate change, we can define the expected
component as:

                                        e        styr       u
                             ∆it = ∆it     − ∆it (2)
Having done this we will then regress 1-day OMXS30 equity returns on the expected
and unexpected components to determine whether they have significant effects and
to examine which statistical relationship is stronger.

2 Data

A The Riksbank announcement dates
The monetary policy announcements for the Swedish economy are published by the
Riksbank, 5 times a year since 2019 and 6 times a year between 2008 and 2019. The
press release dates have been gathered from the Riksbank’s website, during the event
window between January 02, 2009 and September 18, 2023. The first monetary policy
announcement in our sample is on February 11, 2009 and the last monetary policy
announcement in our sample is June 29, 2023, resulting in a total sample size of 86
observations. The press releases supply the dates which our event study will focus
on and also contain the necessary information regarding the level of the Riksbank
rate and how much it is changed by. These include 16 rate hikes, 14 rate cuts and
56 instances of keeping the Riksbank rate at the same level as before. To study the
effects in question we use the announcement dates of the press release announcing
possible changes to the Riksbank rate as the dates when we wish to study the equity
returns. The Riksbank publishes its monetary policy changes in a press release on its
website, one day after the Executive Board has taken their decision at the monetary

   2
    Observations occurring on the penultimate or last day of the month are treated as occurring on the first day of
the following month.

                                          11
policy meeting. We are thus looking at the dates when the monetary policy decision is
announced and not the day the possible change to the Riksbank rate is implemented.
As previously mentioned we assume that markets are efficient in accordance with the
EMH, and thus the implementation date can be discarded for our purpose.
   These announcements contain the monetary policy decisions that the Executive
Board has arrived at, i.e. changes in the Riksbank rate. Since 2015, these press
releases can also contain announcements regarding possible purchases or sales of se-
curities such as treasury and government bonds. The announcements often elaborate
on where the current and projected inflation levels are at and if they are in line
with the Riksbank’s target of 2 percent. Furthermore, the Riksbank provides forward
guidance where they indicate where policy rate levels could be in the future.

B Swap and stock index data
To investigate the unexpected and the expected component in the interest rate
changes we utilize the STIBOR T/N 1-month Overnight Index Swaps (OIS) and
STIBOR 3-month Overnight Index Swaps (OIS). The first STIBOR T/N OIS rate
in our sample is February 10, 2009, i.e. one day before the first monetary policy
announcement date since we measure the difference in STIBOR T/N 1M OIS rates
between the two days. The last observation is June 29, 2023. For STIBOR 3-month
swap dates the first and last dates are the same. The stock index used to reflect the
responses of equity prices is OMX Stockholm 30 (OMXS30) with the first data point
being January 05, 2009 and the last being September 18, 2023. The OMX Stockholm
30 is an index comprised of the 30 most traded stocks in Sweden, and it is considered
to be Sweden’s benchmark index. A large index with a high volume of intraday trad-
ing is important when analyzing same-day effects and reactions of the stock markets
to new information. The swaps data and OMXS30 returns are collected from Refini-
tiv Eikon, an open-technology solution for financial market professionals. Refinitiv
is an LSEG (London Stock Exchange Group) business and one of the world’s largest
providers of financial markets data and infrastructure. It is a widely used database
by professionals in the industry, and should thus be a valid source for the purpose of
this study.

C Monetary policy announcements
The European Central Bank (ECB) monetary policy announcements will be used
as a control and robustness check in the main regression. The ECB meetings occur
every 2 weeks, but monetary policy decisions are taken every 6 weeks since 2015 (8
meetings a year) and every month between 2009 and 2014. The press release dates
have been gathered from ECB’s website, during the event window between January
02, 2009 and September 18, 2023. The first monetary policy announcement in our
sample is on January 15, 2009, and the last monetary policy announcement in our

                                          12
sample is on July 27, 2023, resulting in a total sample size of 141 observations. For
the ECB data, we have only gathered the announcement dates and not the level of
interest change, as the dates will only be used as a control variable.
   The Federal Reserve (Fed) monetary policy announcements will also be used as a
robustness check in the main regression. The Fed monetary policy announcements
are published 8 times a year. In 2020 however, in times of Covid-19, they had 10
monetary policy announcements. The press release dates have been gathered from
the Fed’s website, during the event window between January 2, 2009 and September
18, 2023. The first monetary policy announcement in our sample is January 15, 2009,
and the last monetary policy announcement in our sample is September 20, 2023,
resulting in a total sample size of 120 observations. For the Fed data, we have only
gathered the announcement dates and not the level of interest change, as the dates
will only be used as a control to examine the subsample stability.

D Inflation Reports
Data on the inflation reports in Sweden are published by the governmental body
”Statistics Sweden” (SCB). Statistics Sweden is responsible for developing, produc-
ing and disseminating official statistics and other government statistics. The overall
goal is to produce official statistics of good quality that are easily available for the
users. The press releases are published every month (12 times a year), referencing the
inflation from the preceding month. The press release dates have been gathered from
SCB’s website, during the event window between January 2, 2009 and September
18, 2023. The first inflation announcement in our sample is February 19, 2009, and
the last inflation announcement in our sample is September 14, 2023, resulting in a
total sample size of 176 observations. For the SCB data, we have only gathered the
announcement dates and not the level or level changes of inflation, as the dates will
only be used to conduct sanity checks on our main results.

3 Event Study Results

Table 1 presents a selection of descriptive statistics from our sample of the 86 times
the Riksbank made a press release following a monetary policy meeting in the period
January 2009 to September 2023. The Riksbank has not changed the Riksbank rate
many times in our sample. 56 of the monetary policy decisions are non-changes,
whereas there have been 16 rate hikes and 14 rate cuts. However, this lack of activity
is not a problem since the market can also be surprised by the Riksbank retaining
the previous Riksbank rate.
   An interesting statistic is that the standard deviation on days when the Riksbank
publishes their monetary policy decisions is 1.38 percent, higher than the 1.24 percent
on non-event days. This indicates that the market is more volatile on event dates and
that monetary policy announcements provoke equity market reactions in conjunction

                                          13
                                       Table 1:

                               Summary Statistics
The table reports summary statistics for our sample of the 86 monetary policy announcements dates
over the period from January 2009 through September 2023. It includes statistics on the number of
Riksbank publication dates and daily OMXS30 equity returns on event dates, i.e., dates when the
Riksbank published monetary policy announcements and the 3612 non-event dates from our sample,
i.e. dates when no announcements were made.
                                                            January 2009-September 2023
  Number of publication dates 86
  Number of interest rate raises 16
  Number of interest rate cuts 14
  Number of non changes 56
  Number of non event days 3612
   Standard deviation of surprise change, in percentage points 0.85
   Standard deviation of equity returns on publication dates, % 1.38
   Standard deviation of equity returns on non-event days, % 1.24

with the logic that the market moves when new information is released. However,
it is important to consider that the amount of non-event days, 3612, is considerably
larger than that of publication dates, 86, and that the smaller amount of observations
can lead to a larger standard deviation.

A Equity Price Reactions
The estimates of equity market reactions to monetary policy announcements are
contained in Table 2. The estimates from column (1) contain results from a regression
of the OMXS30 index returns on changes in the Riksbank rate,

                                                     styr
                           Rt = α + β∆it    + εt (3)
not differentiating between expected and unexpected monetary policy decisions. R
                                                          styr
represents the one-day OMXS30 returns and ∆it      is the change to the Riksbank
rate. The regression in column (2) is specified as

                                            e   e      u   u
                       Rt = α + β ∆it + β ∆it + εt (4)

                                                                                                            e
where the distinction between expected and unexpected Riksbank rate changes, ∆it
        u
and ∆it is made using the formula described in equations (1) and (2). The error
term εt is defined as all factors other than monetary policy announcements that
impact stock prices on event days and the assumption is that it is orthogonal to the
right-hand side of the regression.
   The response of the raw Riksbank rate change in column (1) is significant and
negative. Based on economic theory as outlined earlier in the paper, a negative sign

                                          14
                                       Table 2:

          The Response of Equity Prices to Changes in the Riksbank rate
The table reports the results from regressing the 1-day OMXS30 equity returns on changes in the
Riksbank rate in column (1), and on the unexpected and expected components of the Riksbank rate
change, column (2). All variables are expressed in percentage terms. The full sample consists of the
30 Riksbank rate changes and the 86 monetary policy announcements dates over the period from
January 2009 through September 2023. Parentheses contain heteroskedasticity-consistent estimates
of the standard errors and dots indicate significance at different levels.

                                                 Dependent variable:
                                           OMXS30 returns
                                       Raw Model Surprise model
                                                (1) (2)
                     Intercept 0.002 0.002
                                                    (0.002) (0.002)
                                                           ∗∗
                   Interest rate change −1.219
                                                      (0.557)

                                                                              ∗∗
                   Expected change −1.155
                                                                         (0.571)

                                                                              ∗∗
                  Unexpected change −1.294
                                                                         (0.558)

                                2
                     Adjusted R                 0.034 0.030
                                                  ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
                 Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01

is to be expected as higher interest rates are associated with attempts to dampen
economic activity. The negative significant coefficient of -1.219 implies that OMXS30
equity prices fall by 1.219 percent following a 1 percentage point increase in the
Riksbank rate. This coefficient is in line with earlier research. Thorbecke (1997) had
a statistically significant coefficient of -1.44 when regressing the Dow Jones Industrial
Average Index on raw changes in the Federal Funds rate. Bernanke and Kuttner
(2005) found a significant coefficient of -0.61. Our coefficient is thus in the middle
of these two. It is evident that raw changes to the Riksbank rate have significant
negative effects on equity prices.
   When the effect is decomposed into an expected and unexpected change in column
(2) we can see that both effects are negative and significant at the 5 percent level. In
line with our hypothesis, the response of equity prices is stronger to surprise changes,
not by much, however. The results from column (2) imply that equity prices drop by

                                          15
1.294 percent as a reaction to a 1 percentage point unexpected Riksbank rate hike.
This effect is much more modest than the -4.68 unexpected change coefficient found
by Bernanke and Kuttner (2005). It is important to note though that we are using dif-
ferent formulas for our unexpected components, diminishing the direct comparability
                                  2
of our results. The adjusted R states that 3 percent of the variance in equity prices
on days of Riksbank monetary policy announcements are connected with monetary
policy, compared to 17 percent found by Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) in relation to
the Fed’s monetary policy announcements. This would imply that even though the ef-
fect of expected and unexpected changes in the Riksbank rate significantly negatively
affects equity prices, the magnitude of their effect is not substantial. A curious result
of the regression is that the expected and unexpected components are quite similar in
magnitude. According to the EMH, expected changes would already be incorporated
into prices. The implication of this and the expectation for how it affects our regres-
sion analysis would be that the expected component should be insignificant. Bernanke
and Kuttner (2005) generate a significant positive expected change coefficient in their
regression. Their expected coefficient thus also fails to support EMH. None of the
studies thus fall in line with the economic reasoning outlined in the EMH. The reason
for the similarity in magnitude between the expected and unexpected coefficients can
perhaps be comprehended from the definition of the expected component in equation
(2). With 56 of our observations being non-changes to the Riksbank rate, in all these
56 cases, the expected component is going to be the same number as the unexpected
with the opposite sign. This explains why their magnitude is very similar. However,
it raises questions surrounding the sign of the expected component. Given that in 56
cases, the expected component is simply the opposite sign of the unexpected compo-
nent, one would expect that the regression coefficient also would be of the opposite
sign. We further investigate the peculiar similarity between the two components by
running a regression where we exclude all 56 dates containing non-changes in order to
account for the problem arising when the actual change in the Riksbank rate is zero
(see Appendix, Table 8). This regression using 30 observations, however, yielded very
similar results to those where we included all observations. The expected component
coefficient was -1.090 and weakly significant at the 10 percent level, the unexpected
component was -1.211 but insignificant. One does have to consider that the bur-
den to prove significance increases with a decreasing sample size. However, since
the two components are still very close in magnitude when removing all non-changes
this proximity cannot solely be attributed to the high amount of non-changes, and
the identical magnitude but opposite signs of the expected and unexpected compo-
nents, non-changes imply. Their similarity is consistent throughout our study and a
seemingly robust although peculiar and counterintuitive result.
   Our first results thus both confirm and dispute the underlying economic framework
and our expectations. The reaction of equity prices is stronger in response to unex-
pected changes in the Riksbank rate than to expected changes, confirming our first

                                          16
Figure 2: Riksbank rate surprises and OMXS30 returns, daily data. This figure is a scatter
plot of 1-day OMXS30 returns against the unexpected component of changes to the Riksbank rate.
Our sample includes the 86 monetary policy announcements made by the Riksbank between January
2009 and September 2023.

hypothesis. The significance of the expected component, however, and its similarity
to the unexpected component rejects our hypothesis that expected changes should
already be incorporated into equity prices. In our sample, this is evidently not the
case. This raises doubts whether expected changes are actually accounted for in the
equity prices. The relationship between equity returns and unexpected rate changes
can be observed in Figure 2.
   Figure 2 clearly displays the high fluctuations in equity prices on days of monetary
policy announcements. Responses range from being very dramatic to being very
muted. For instance, when the unexpected change is above zero we can observe
multiple daily equity price returns both above and below zero. This spread and the
substantial lack of uniformity in equity price responses hint that the surprise changes
are interpreted differently. Furthermore, it could state that on days of monetary
policy announcements, these announcements are not the only force driving equity
price movements. Other information possibly affecting the relationship will be further
examined in the following sections by controlling for more specific aspects of the
Riksbank announcements and possible rate changes, as well as the circumstances
when they were released.

                                          17
B Possible Violations of Exogeneity
As previously mentioned, the regression model assumes that the error term is orthogo-
nal to changes in the Riksbank rate. Should the Riksbank’s changes to the policy rate
be made in response to equity price movements, the orthogonality condition would be
violated. The Riksbank’s explicit target is, as stated earlier, to keep inflation levels
at 2 percent CPIF. Additionally, they mention that balanced output and employment
levels are another of their objectives. Thus, on a superficial level, this assumption
seems to hold unless equity price fluctuations would significantly impact some of
the Riksbank’s target variables such as inflation. The literature on whether asset
prices can be seen as a predictor of monetary policy varies. Bernanke and Gertler
(1999) find that it is neither necessary nor desirable for central banks to respond to
large fluctuations in asset prices. Their studied economies are however the United
States and Japan and they note that it could be different for small open economies,
such as Sweden. Fuhrer and Tootell (2004) find that the perception that asset price
movements had impacted monetary policy decisions beyond the indirect effect on the
Federal Reserve’s target variable was not motivated. Their study indicated that the
Federal Reserve did not overreact to fluctuations in asset prices by altering monetary
policy. The Federal Reserve’s reactions were deemed to be in proportion with the
effect changes in asset prices had on their target variables. There exists however,
studies indicating that central banks do respond to asset price fluctuations. Rigobon
and Sack (2003) find that monetary policy is conducted following fluctuations in asset
prices and that a 5 percent increase in the S&P 500 increases the likelihood of a 0.25
percentage point increase in the Federal Funds rate by a probability of 0.5. Although,
they note that this response is in line with asset prices’ impact on macroeconomic
variables. A further study on the German Bundesbank by Bohl, Siklos and Werner
(2007) found that the responses of German monetary policy to changes in asset prices
were weak. Overall, there thus seems to be little support for the notion that there are
contemporaneous reactions of monetary policy to movements in asset prices. Mone-
tary policy can only be assumed to be affected by asset prices through their impact
on the central banks’ target variables.
   The orthogonality condition could also be rejected if stock prices and monetary
policy responded simultaneously to new information being released. This could be
employment reports, inflation reports, or other types of announcements, such as those
by other central banks. Since our sample only contains six instances of the Riksbank
announcement coinciding with the release of an unemployment report, this should
not give rise to contemporaneous responses in our model. Our sample also contains
observations occurring during the Covid-19 pandemic 2020-2021. There is however
little to suggest that the Riksbank reacted to news from the pandemic in terms of
the Riksbank rate since the Riksbank rate remained unchanged at the 0 percent level
during this time period. Pandemic-related announcements would hence not pose sig-
nificant challenges to the orthogonality condition. The challenges posed by related

                                          18
announcements such as those by other central banks will be addressed in later sec-
tions.
   The methods used in the literature to tackle problems of endogeneity have yielded
very similar results to those generated using event studies. The results from Rigobon
and Sack (2002), where they introduced a new estimator based on heteroskedasticity
in high-frequency data, did not diverge strongly from those using the event-study
method. The same seems to be true for the method employed by G¨urkaynak, Sack,
and Swanson (2004) where they used intraday data to distinctively capture the event
window. The findings were almost equivalent to those from daily data. Hence, based
on results in earlier studies and our sample, we assume our study is not substantially
hampered by a lack of orthogonality.

C Asymmetries
A possible explanation of the OMXS30’s varying reactions to the Riksbank’s mone-
tary policy announcements could be the phenomenon of asymmetries, namely if the
direction of a monetary policy decision induces varying reactions in equity prices.
To examine this phenomenon we will employ interacting dummy variables in our
regressions.
   Firstly, we add a dummy variable that is equal to 1 in the 40 cases where the
unexpected change component is greater than 0. An interactive term with this dummy
variable and the unexpected change component was added to the regression reported
in column (1) in Table 3. Here, we thus account for instances where the change in
the Riksbank rate was greater than anticipated. The rationale for this is that in
conjunction with EMH, a positive surprise, i.e. a change in the Riksbank rate greater
than anticipated, should withdraw a stronger market reaction and could serve as a
possible explanation for some of the equity prices’ more drastic movement on days of
monetary policy announcements.
   A related kind of asymmetry concerns the sign of the Riksbank rate change. Per-
haps market responses differ based on whether the monetary policy decision is a rate
hike or if it is keeping the rate at the previous level. The effects of different directions
of the monetary policy are studied using two dummy variables. The first equal to
1 for the 16 cases the Riksbank raised the Riksbank rate and the second equal to
1 for the 50 cases where the Riksbank announced that they would not be changing
rates. The regression with this specification is reported in column (2) of Table 3.
This allows us to account for the equity price response to non-changes in monetary
policy.
   The results from column (1) seem to suggest that whether the unexpected compo-
nent is positive or negative does not result in different reactions in equity prices. The
coefficient for the interaction term is as one would expect negative (-0.332), following
the logic that rate changes higher than anticipated withdraw a drop in equity prices.
However, the interaction term is insignificant and cannot be assumed to be different

                                          19
                                       Table 3:

                             Testing for Asymmetries
The table reports the results from regressions of the 1-day OMXS30 equity returns on the
unexpected and expected components of the Riksbank rate change. All variables are expressed in
percentage terms. The full sample consists of the 30 Riksbank rate changes and the 86 monetary
policy announcement dates over the period from January 2009 through September 2023. The
positive surprise dummy in column (1) is set to 1 for the 40 instances when the unexpected change
is greater than 0. The rate hike and no rate change dummies in column (2) are set to 1 when
the Riksbank rate is increased or unchanged. Parentheses contain heteroskedasticity-consistent
estimates of the standard errors and dots indicate significance at different levels.

                                                          Dependent variable:
                                                OMXS30 Returns
                                        Direction of Anticipation Direction of Rate Change
                                                     (1) (2)
Intercept 0.002 0.002
                                                         (0.002) (0.002)

                                                           ∗        ∗∗
Expected change −1.207                   −1.356
                                                         (0.637) (0.640)

Unexpected change −1.325 −1.403
                                                         (0.812) (1.739)

Unexpected Change x Positive surprise −0.332
                                                           (1.457)

Unexpected Change x Rate Hike −2.982
                                                                                           (2.783)

Unexpected change x No change −1.767
                                                                                           (1.876)

           2
Adjusted R                                          0.020 0.070
                                                                         ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01

from zero. The results thus seem to suggest that the direction of anticipation, i.e.,
whether the rate change is higher than market expectations does not significantly
influence the movement of equity prices. We can hence not explain some of the great
variety in equity price responses based on whether they occur when changes to the
Riksbank rate are greater than expected. This result is not what one would expect.
The intuitive result would be that a positive surprise induces a much stronger reaction

                                          20
from equity prices.
   The coefficient for the interaction term between unexpected changes and rate hikes
is strongly negative, as can be seen in column (2). This is in line with expectations
and our previous results that increases in the Riksbank rate are related to falls in
equity prices. It is although not statistically significant. One does have to consider
that the burden to prove statistical significance becomes substantially greater with
the small sample size of 16 rate hikes. The unexpected change component for non-
changes is also negative, -1.767, and not statistically significant. This result could
stipulate that the market does react to the Riksbank not changing the policy rate
if this is unexpected. One does, however, have to consider the implication of the
coefficient not being statistically significant. Thus, both coefficients concerning the
direction of policy changes cannot be assumed to be different from zero.
   Although the scant amount of rate hikes pose challenges to proving statistical sig-
nificance and thus obtaining conclusive evidence, the results convey that the different
directions of monetary policy decisions do not seem to substantially exert influence
on equity returns.
   The magnitude of the unexpected component remains stable in both of the speci-
fied regressions. It becomes slightly greater in both, compared to the original model
in Table 2, when accounting for unexpected changes. This at least hints at the
unexpected component displaying consistency in magnitude with varying specifica-
tions. The unexpected component in both regressions is however insignificant, raising
concerns about the stability of the significant negative relationship between the un-
expected component and equity returns. Furthermore, the expected and unexpected
components remain very similar in magnitude, with the unexpected component coef-
ficient still being moderately larger.

D Timing vs Level Surprises
As can be seen in Figure 2, equity price responses to monetary policy announce-
ments in Sweden vary from being very strong to silent. Thus, even though they
are significant, they are very far from being homogeneous. One possible explanation
offered by Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) for this lack of uniformity in responses is
that rate change surprises vary in their impact on short-term future interest rates.
Some rate change surprises may be interpreted as a postponement or advancement of
an unavoidable policy path, whereas others are construed as fundamental changes in
monetary policy. The former example thus merely constitutes a surprise in terms of
the timing of the rate change. The latter would have a much more significant impact
by emphatically altering policy expectations for the months to come. Another argu-
ment elucidating why announcements affect expectations of future interest rates is
that the Riksbank provides some forward guidance. ˚Ahl (2017) found that forecasts
of policy rates managed market expectations of future policy rates up to one and a
half years in the future. This could imply that the market has an idea of where the

                                          21
Figure 3: Riksbank rate surprises and 3-month expectations. This figure is a scatterplot
of 1-day changes in the STIBOR 3-month OIS against the unexpected component of changes to the
Riksbank rate. The 45-degree line indicates when there is a 1-for-1 effect. Our sample includes the
86 monetary policy announcements made by the Riksbank between January 2009 and September
2023.

Riksbank rate levels will be, the ambiguity concerns when they will reach the specified
levels. Hence, one should try to comprehend whether the responses of equity prices
to unexpected changes can be apportioned to surprises in terms of either the timing
or the level of the monetary policy decision.
   The method employed by Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) to determine the nature
of the surprise response is to examine the relationship between unexpected changes
and changes in 3-month Federal Funds futures rates. We will replicate this by re-
gressing changes in prices of STIBOR 3-month OIS on the expected and unexpected
components. This will provide an explanation as to whether an unexpected change
to the Riksbank rate in one day also significantly changes the market’s perception of
where the Riksbank rate will be in 3 months. The relationship between changes in
current and 3-month expectations following Riksbank announcements is portrayed in
Figure 3.
   Figure 3 clearly displays that there very rarely is a 1-for-1 effect in the changes
of STIBOR 3-month OIS prices and unexpected changes to the Riksbank rate. The
majority of observations are located above the 45-degree line which indicates when
there is a uniform response in the unexpected change component and the expectations
on the STIBOR rate in 3 months. The rate change in the STIBOR 3-month OIS is

                                          22
usually much tinier than the unexpected change. We can however note that many
observations are low in terms of the change in the unexpected component since most
of the dots find themselves around the vertical line marking a non-change to current
expectations. The wide spread both above and below the 45-degree line hints that
the responses of the 3-month expectations vary a lot. Those observations in the
upper right quadrant above the diagonal line imply that in many of the cases where a
positive surprise occurred the response of the 3-month rate change was much stronger.
The lack of uniformity is however palpable in Figure 3 and will be further enunciated
in the regression in Table 4.
   Table 4 displays the results from regressing 1-day changes in the STIBOR 3-month
OIS on unexpected changes in the Riksbank rate. As noted earlier, the effect is much

                                       Table 4:

 The Response of Interest Rate Expectations to Unexpected Riksbank Rate Changes
The table reports the results from regressions of the STIBOR 3-month OIS price changes on days of
monetary policy announcements on the unexpected and expected components of the Riksbank rate
change. Column (2) contains a dummy variable equal to 1 in the 40 cases where the unexpected
change component was greater than 0. All variables are expressed in percentage terms. The full
sample consists of the 30 Riksbank rate changes and the 86 monetary announcement dates over
the period from January 2009 through September 2023. Parentheses contain heteroskedasticity-
consistent estimates of the standard errors and dots indicate significance at different levels.

                                                          Dependent variable:
                                              STIBOR 3M OIS
                                         Normal model Controlling for Positive Surprise
                                                 (1) (2)
  Intercept −0.00003 −0.0001
                                                     (0.0001) (0.0001)

                                                        ∗∗      ∗∗
  Expected change 0.120                      0.140
                                                     (0.054) (0.057)

  Unexpected change 0.142 0.153
                                                     (0.127) (0.134)

  Unexpected change x Positive Surprise 0.129
                                                                                     (0.180)

             2
  Adjusted R                                     0.296 0.415
                                                                       ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
  Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01

                                          23
less than 1-for-1, as the insignificant unexpected coefficient of 0.142 suggests. Unex-
pected monetary policy decisions thus seem to influence 3-month expectations in a
much weaker way, if at all. This could be interpreted as that unexpected changes to
the Riksbank rate are solely construed as surprising in terms of their timing. They
do not seem to substantially alter expectations of their level in the future. This re-
lationship is much weaker than that found by Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), who
found a coefficient of 0.65. Our unexpected coefficient here is also not significant,
which indicates stronger evidence for timing effects. A reason for the insignificant
effect we observed for the Swedish market, could potentially be an effect of the in-
terest rate projections made by the Riksbank, which steer market expectations as
suggested by ˚Ahl (2017). These could possibly mitigate and even prevent monetary
policy shocks. The forecasts communicated by the Riksbank in their monetary policy
announcements reveal the possible future levels of the Riksbank rate. The ambiguity
regarding Riksbank announcements could hence be argued to rather pertain to when
they are implemented than to what they reveal. This is a possible explanation for the
strong ”timing” effect as indicated by the regression in Table 4. Although, the weak
and insignificant coefficient hints at a low correlation, as was observed in Figure 3,
many positive surprises resulted in stronger responses in the 3-month expectation. In
Table 4 column (2) a dummy variable is included equal to 1 when there is a positive
surprise that interacts with the unexpected change component. This coefficient is in-
significant, and also quite small. The 1-for-1 effect when there are positive surprises
is, however, evidently not present although the results establish that when there is
a positive surprise there is an increase in the 3-month expectation as proxied by the
STIBOR 3-month OIS. The effect of adding this interaction term raises the adjusted
  2
R from 0.260 to 0.415, meaning that monetary policy, when accounting for the indi-
vidual effect of positive surprises, explains 41.5 percent of the variations in the price
of STIBOR 3-month OIS.
   The fact that all unexpected coefficients are insignificant means that we cannot
statistically prove the presence of a ”level” effect through the unexpected component.
The insignificance demonstrates that an unexpected change in the Riksbank rate does
not significantly alter the prices of STIBOR 3-month OIS. This result is consistent
throughout both regressions, which establishes the existence of a timing effect when
it comes to interest rate surprises. A ”level” effect only seems to exist through the
expected component which in both regressions is significant but of a low magnitude
(0.120 and 0.140). In the context of our other results, the strong indication of a
timing effect could perhaps offer explanations as to why Swedish equity returns seem
to react less dramatically to unexpected changes in monetary policy.
   Our results from this section can thus be considered to state that most of the
surprises of the changes to the Riksbank rate are in terms of their timing, they
mostly seem to affect current expectations.

                                          24
E Information Conditions and Spillover Effects
We will proceed by studying other information released in close temporal proximity
to the 86 monetary policy announcements in our sample. This will include announce-
ments regarding information that is often pertinent to interest rate expectations.
These will include monetary policy announcements by central banks affecting bigger
markets such as the European Central Bank and the Federal Reserve. Furthermore,
we will include the effects of the market awaiting Swedish inflation reports. We can
thus state that we are investigating varying conditions where investors have differ-
ent degrees of information that may or may not provide insight into the monetary
policy decision that is being taken. So, for instance, a Riksbank announcement of a
monetary policy decision that is preceded by a monetary policy decision by another
bigger central bank in the week before may be considered less surprising and provoke
weaker reactions. The reverse logic applies to Riksbank monetary policy announce-
ments made ahead of the release of an inflation report. Perhaps market participants
await the inflation report, believing its revealed information will be more impactful.
Hence their reaction to a Riksbank monetary policy announcement might be sub-
dued in awaiting the inflation numbers. This section thus also serves to investigate
some instances where the assumption of orthogonality could be violated and whether
this could skew our results. The conditions under which a monetary policy report
was released can further elucidate and offer explanations as to why some OMXS30
responses were more accentuated and others muted.
   The spillover effects of central banks such as the ECB and the Fed were covered
in the literature by Angeloni et al. (2003) and Giovanni and Hale (2022). These
papers established that asset prices worldwide, or in the member states, reacted
following monetary policy decisions by these two central banks. The fact that asset
prices in foreign countries did react can be understood as that domestic investors
interpret foreign monetary policy announcements, i.e. those by the ECB and the
Fed, as significantly influencing the domestic economy. With this tenet as a starting
point, we will investigate whether monetary policy decisions by the ECB and the Fed
affect domestic investors’ interpretation of a domestic, i.e. in this case the Riksbank,
monetary policy decision. To determine whether the construing of Riksbank monetary
policy announcements is affected by previous monetary policy announcements by
the aforementioned central banks, we will construct subsamples and run the same
specified regressions with expected and unexpected components as previously. This
will aid in understanding when foreign monetary policy decisions impact Swedish
investors’ interpretations of Riksbank monetary policy announcements.

E.1 European Central Bank
Firstly, we will focus on the reactions of Swedish equity prices to the Riksbank’s
monetary policy announcements, made following monetary policy announcements by

                                          25
the European Central Bank. The way we have divided our sample is that we have
investigated which of the 86 Riksbank monetary policy announcements were made
within a 1-week time window after a monetary policy announcement by the ECB
was released. Note that we do not focus on the content of the ECB announcement
or whether it contains information regarding interest rates or QE. Our focus is the
unexpected component of the Swedish market with respect to Riksbank monetary
policy announcements. This methodology thus yields two subsamples. The first
one contains the 29 monetary policy observations made by the Riksbank within one
week after a monetary policy announcement made by the ECB. The other subsample
contains the 57 Riksbank monetary policy announcements in our sample that were
not made after an announcement by the ECB. We then ran our surprise model as
specified in equation (4) on these two subsamples. The results from these regressions
are reported in Table 5.
   As can be seen in Table 5, column (2), the statistically significant coefficients
related to ECB spillover effects are regarding Riksbank announcements that have not
been preceded by an ECB announcement. The expected change is significant at the
5 percent level, with a coefficient of -1.502, which indicates that an expected one
percentage point increase in the Riksbank rate would transmit to the stock market
by negative 1.502 percent if the announcement is not followed by an ECB report. The
unexpected component is not significant and has a negative coefficient, meaning that
the stock market would drop by 1.650 percent when the Riksbank rate is unexpectedly
raised by 1 percentage point. The magnitude is greater and a negative sign is in line
with our earlier regression coefficients. This indicates that the equity price response
is stronger when no monetary policy announcement is released by the ECB the week
before the Riksbank makes its own announcement. The magnitude can be considered
to be in line with EMH since the equity price movement is greater when investors
can be thought of as having less information. The reaction of OMXS30 prices hence
seems to be stronger when the Riksbank is ”undisturbed” within the release of their
monetary policy decision. However, the lack of significance means we cannot reject the
unexpected component being unequal to zero. It is thus another example proving the
lack of subsample stability. The unexpected component that at first was significantly
negative, is not so anymore.
   Column (1) refers to the Riksbank announcements that have been preceded by
an ECB announcement. These coefficients are negative for both the expected and
the unexpected Riksbank rate change, however, they are not statistically significant.
The unexpected change also indicates a weak effect of -0.227 between the unexpected
Riksbank rate change and the OMXS30 change, but since not being statistically
significant, it cannot be assumed to be unequal to zero. This can be interpreted as
that investors are much less surprised by the Riksbank’s monetary policy decisions
when they are made within one week after an ECB monetary policy announcement.
The effect of the unexpected component becomes muted. This could mean that

                                          26
                                       Table 5:

                                      Spillover effects
The table reports the results from regressing the 1-day OMXS30 equity returns on changes in the
unexpected and expected components of the Riksbank rate change. Column (1) reports results from
the 29 monetary policy announcements from the Riksbank that occurred within one week after a
monetary policy announcement made by the European Central Bank. Column (2) reports results
from those 57 Riksbank monetary policy announcements that were not preceded by a monetary
announcement by the ECB the week before. Column (3) reports results from the 13 monetary
policy announcements from the Riksbank that occurred within one week after a monetary policy
announcement made by the Federal Reserve. Column (4) reports results from those 73 Riksbank
monetary policy announcements that were not preceded by a monetary announcement by the
Federal Reserve the week before. All variables are expressed in percentage terms. The full sample
consists of the 30 Riksbank rate changes and the 86 monetary policy announcement dates over the
period January 2009 through September 2023. Parentheses contain heteroskedasticity-consistent
estimates of the standard errors and dots indicate significance at different levels.

                                                    Dependent variable:
                                              OMX30 returns
                   One Week after ECB No ECB One Week after Fed No Fed
                       announcement announcement announcement announcement
                               (1) (2) (3) (4)
Intercept 0.001 0.003 −0.004 0.002
                                 (0.002) (0.002) (0.006) (0.002)

                                                         ∗∗
Expected change −1.843 −1.502            −5.193 −0.896
                                 (1.610) (0.654) (3.010) (0.568)

                                                                                                             ∗
Unexpected change −0.227 −1.650 −2.992 −1.054
                                 (1.607) (1.019) (5.378) (0.602)

           2
Adjusted R                  −0.013 0.037 0.168 0.022
N 29 57 13 73
                                                                                 ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01

the market anticipates that the Riksbank will take similar measures as the ECB,
and the announcement can thus be seen as a forecast for the upcoming Riksbank
                                     2
announcement. The adjusted R  is even negative meaning that monetary policy
announcements by the Riksbank explain none of the variation in OMXS30 equity
returns. One could with caution, due to the small sample size and the subsequent
difficulty of proving statistical significance, take this as an indication of ECB spillover
effects. This in terms of a spillover in information which alters investors’ perception
of the Riksbank’s monetary policy decisions. The presence of ECB monetary policy

                                          27
decisions could hence be considered to explain some of the more phlegmatic equity
price responses in our sample.

E.2 Federal Reserve
We apply the same methodology as employed in the previous section with respect to
the response of OMXS30 equity prices to Riksbank monetary policy decisions made
within a week after a monetary policy announcement by the Federal Reserve. As
previously mentioned, we do not research the contents or directions of the Fed mon-
etary policy decision. Our sole concern is whether or not the Riksbank monetary
policy announcement is made within one week after that of the Federal Reserve. We
thus divided the original 86 observations into two subsamples, one containing the
13 observations where the Riksbank decision was released within one week after an
announcement by the Fed, the other where this was not the case. Table 5 contains
the results from running the regression containing the expected and unexpected com-
ponents on these two subsamples.
   As can be seen in Table 5, only the unexpected change with no Fed announcement
published within a week ahead of the Riksbank announcement, in column (4), is
significant and negative at the 10 percent level. The effect however is approximately
negatively 1-for-1 when the Riksbank unexpectedly raises rates by 1 percentage point
and this announcement is not preceded by a Fed announcement. The effect in question
is also smaller than in Table 2 column (2), which could be a consequence of the
smaller sample size when excluding the Riksbank’s announcements following a Fed
announcement. The reaction of equity prices to unexpected changes in the Riksbank
rate is however significantly negative in comparison to the ECB subsample where
this is not the case. The behavior of equity prices, in response to surprises in the
Riksbank rate unaffected by Fed announcements, can hence be viewed as somewhat
more subdued than they were in the previous regression.
   Table 5 column (3) shows the OMXS30 reaction when the Riksbank’s announce-
ments are preceded by a Fed announcement. The effect here is much larger than
in column (4) for the unexpected change in the Riksbank rate. This could indicate
that the market is negatively affected by and responds quite dramatically, with -2.992
percent for a 1 percentage point increase in the Riksbank rate, to the Riksbank an-
nouncement following the new information provided by Fed. The large unexpected
coefficient implies that uncertainty and equity price volatility increase dramatically
on days a Riksbank monetary policy announcement is released if it was preceded by
an announcement by the Federal Reserve. Column (4) indicates that the opposite
seems to be the case. These effects from column (3) are although not statistically
significant, and thus the potential insight it provides must be taken with caution
and cannot be assumed to be unequal to zero. One also has to consider that the
burden to prove statistical significance becomes substantially more difficult with the
small sample size of 13 observations. The very meager sample size of 13 means the

                                          28
regression merely serves as a sanity check rather than an actual source of insight.
However, the much larger volatility that becomes evident in both the expected and
unexpected components seems to be correlated with the presence of Fed announce-
ments. The more aggravated equity market responses of the OMXS30 in our sample
seem to occur in close proximity to Federal Reserve monetary policy decisions and
this is a relationship that requires further investigation.
   The spillover effects from the ECB and the Federal Reserve on Swedish equity
prices generate contrasting results. Volatility in the OMXS30 seems to increase in
the presence of Federal Reserve monetary policy announcements even though we
cannot say that these results are significant. This finding is in line with previous
results, namely that monetary policy decisions by the Federal Reserve are often less
anticipated and induce greater reactions. This statement is based on the results
from Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) whose unexpected component was significantly
greater than ours and who reported a substantially more pronounced ”level effect”.
The Swedish equity market also exhibits greater fluctuations when these American
monetary policy decisions are released. Our study has thus consistently indicated
that both Swedish and American equity price reactions to Federal Reserve decisions
are more enunciated than those of Swedish equity prices to Riksbank decisions in the
absence of a Fed announcement. A potential explanation for this increased volatility
can be the global spillover effects of US monetary policy shocks as documented by
Giovanni and Hale (2022). The worldwide reverberations could be interpreted as
augmenting uncertainty and hence induce more drastic investor reactions.
   Whereas Federal Reserve monetary policy decisions seem to increase the movement
of equity prices on days of Riksbank monetary policy announcements, the opposite
seems to be the case with ECB announcements. Following ECB announcements,
OMXS30 responses on days of Riksbank monetary policy decisions are ostensibly
close to zero, and the fluctuations in prices seem to increase when the Riksbank an-
nouncement is ”undisturbed” by the ECB. These contrasting dynamics, with the Fed
seemingly increasing OMXS30 volatility and the ECB lowering it would be interesting
to further investigate.

E.3 SCB Inflation Reports
The Statistiska Centralbyr˚an or Statistics Sweden releases inflation reports on a
monthly basis and is a separate entity from the Riksbank. Since CPIF is the main
target variable of the Riksbank, inflation announcements can be regarded as highly
pertinent to the path of the Riksbank’s monetary policy. As Chortareas, Karanasos
and Noikokyris (2018) found that monetary policy announcements made by the Bank
of England Monetary Policy Committee within one week ahead of an inflation report
provided insight into that inflation report and hence withdrew a specific market re-
action. This is an interesting relationship to examine. In England, it is the Bank
of England that releases the inflation report whereas in Sweden monetary policy de-

                                          29
cisions and inflation reports are released by different authorities. It is ambiguous
whether one can say that a monetary policy decision provides insight into upcoming
inflation numbers in Sweden in the same fashion as in England. The aspect of Swedish
equity markets anticipating the results of an inflation report when a Riksbank mon-
etary policy decision is announced will be examined in this section. Here we wish
to determine the effects of the market awaiting the inflation report on the responses
of equity prices to monetary policy announcements. Using the same methodology as
before we divide our sample of 86 Riksbank announcements into two subsamples, one
with the 27 announcement dates that occurred within one week ahead of the release
of an inflation report and the other with the 59 observations unaffected by inflation
reports. Regressions are then conducted on these two subsamples to compare the
effects on equity prices that Riksbank announcements have when they occur within
one week ahead of the release of an inflation report by Statistics Sweden. The results
from the regressions are portrayed in Table 6.
   Table 6 column (1) has a minor negative coefficient of -0.210, indicating that an
unexpected 1 percentage point raise of the Riksbank rate results in the OMXS30
decreasing by -0.210 percent when the Riksbank announcement precedes an inflation
report. The unexpected change to a Riksbank announcement is muted. This can be
regarded as an indication that the equity markets are more focused on the inflation
report than the monetary policy decision, hence why the reaction to the following
monetary policy announcement by the Riksbank is relatively weak. Since inflation
is the metric the Riksbank is most focused on, if there is an inflation announcement
in close succession to a monetary policy announcement, the inflation announcement
might be considered more important. The monetary policy announcement will be
regarded as relatively less important since the upcoming inflation report will likely
impact the course of monetary policy in the future. Another reason could be that
the Riksbank provides a description of the future prospects for inflation, perhaps re-
sulting in a larger component of expected inflation already priced into equity prices.
In conclusion, however, the low sample size of 27 observations does make it harder to
attain statistical significance for the relation between inflation reports and the Riks-
bank’s announcements. Our sample can thus not be considered to provide conclusive
evidence that the equity markets do not react to the release of inflation announce-
ments. There are, as previously mentioned, other aspects of the sample that might
hamper the ability to establish statistical significance. Furthermore, one has to con-
sider that subsample significance in our unexpected coefficient has been elusive. The
interpretation that the market anticipating an inflation decision results in a muted
reaction must be taken with caution.
   The unexpected change in column (2) is significant at the 10 percent level, indi-
cating that a 1 percentage point raise of the Riksbank rate results in the OMXS30
decreasing by -1.229 percent when the Riksbank announcement is not published in
the week before an inflation announcement. This result is in line with the results pre-

                                          30
                                       Table 6:

                          Inflation Announcement Effects
The table reports the results from regressions of the 1-day OMXS30 equity returns on changes
in the unexpected and expected components of the Riksbank rate change. Column (1) reports
results from the 27 monetary policy announcements from the Riksbank that occurred within one
week before an inflation report was released by Statistics Sweden. Column (2) reports results from
those 59 Riksbank monetary policy announcements that were not succeeded by an inflation report
release by Statistics Sweden within the following week. All variables are expressed in percentage
terms. The full sample consists of the 30 Riksbank rate changes and the 86 monetary policy
announcement dates over the period January 2009 through September 2023. Parentheses contain
heteroskedasticity-consistent estimates of the standard errors and dots indicate significance at
different levels.

                                                  Dependent variable:
                                           OMXS30 returns
                     Within One Week before SCB Inflation No SCB Inflation Announcement
                            Announcement
                                        (1) (2)
Intercept 0.003 0.001
                                           (0.003) (0.002)

                                                                                             ∗
Expected change −3.034 −1.066
                                           (1.978) (0.601)

                                                                                             ∗
Unexpected change −0.210 −1.229
                                           (2.978) (0.651)

           2
Adjusted R                              0.013 0.037
N 27 59
                                                                           ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01

viously mentioned in Table 2 column (2). In the case of inflation reports there thus
seem to be subsample stability in our results, although the coefficients are slightly
weaker in this regression than with the full sample. This is in contrast with for
instance the ECB case, where the non-presence of informative events close to the
Riksbank announcement amplified the movement of equity prices. However, this re-
sult was not significant. The behavior of equity returns without a following inflation
announcement can thus be regarded to be ”normal”. We can hence observe that the
presence of an inflation report deviates our results strongly from the original full-
sample regression, while the absence of inflation reports keeps them very much in line

                                          31
with the original regression. Therefore, it seems that inflation reports are a strong
determinant of the stock market’s reaction to monetary policy announcements by the
Riksbank. This could be argued as expected since inflation is the main target variable
of the Riksbank. The upcoming inflation report might render the latest monetary
policy decision less impactful since it will imply a different monetary policy path in
the future.

F Quantitative Easing
With the Riksbank not only utilizing the Riksbank rate as the sole monetary policy
instrument since February 2015, it is not clear that equity returns on monetary pol-
icy announcement dates can be attributed to revealed changes or non-changes to the
Riksbank rate. Since the announcements beginning in February 2015 now also convey
information on asset purchases/sales made by the Riksbank and whether and with
what pace they will be conducted, quantitative easing measurements must also be ac-
counted for. It is possible that for instance on dates where no rate changes were made,
the Riksbank bought treasury bills or government bonds as an alternative method
of conducting monetary policy. These alternative measures could induce reactions
from the equity market that are not accounted for in our regressions. Since interest
rates are no longer the exclusive tool for combating inflation, the role of QE ought
to be accounted for. The presence of QE makes the relationship between interest
rates and equity prices more ambiguous. We would thus continue by determining the
effect of Riksbank rate changes during the time frame of our sample where the Riks-
bank also implemented asset purchases or sales to attain their monetary policy goals.
This is to determine whether alternative monetary policy measures have affected the
relationship between interest rates and equity price movements.
   In order to ascertain this effect we will once again divide our original sample and
now solely look at the 50 observations occurring between February 2015 and June
2023. This is the time frame where the Riksbank in addition to making use of the
Riksbank rate used QE and its contractionary counterpart Quantitative Tightening
(QT), i.e., selling assets to lower their prices and increasing their demand, to conduct
monetary policy. One would now expect that a lesser degree of the variation in equity
prices can be apportioned to changes in the Riksbank rate. After having divided the
sample, we regress the OMXS30 1-day equity returns from the 50 monetary policy
announcement dates in our sample that occurred when the Riksbank also pursued
QE or QT on both the raw changes to the Riksbank rate as well as the expected and
unexpected components of the rate change. The results from these regressions are
reported in Table 7.
   Column (1) in Table 7, the raw model, refers to the regression of the raw interest
rate changes on the OMXS30 in the time period where the Riksbank pursued other
forms of monetary policy than simply setting the Riksbank rate. The model has an
            2
adjusted R  of 0.023, compared to 0.034 of the raw model in Table 2. This indi-

                                          32
                                       Table 7:

                                Quantitative Easing
The table reports the results from regressions of the 1-day OMXS30 equity returns on changes in
the Riksbank rate as well as the unexpected and expected components of the Riksbank rate change.
Column (1) reports results from regressing the raw interest rate changes from the 50 monetary
policy announcements from the Riksbank that occurred from February 12, 2015 when the Riksbank
announced Quantitative Easing (QE) actions for the first time. Column (2) reports results from
regressing the 1-day OMXS30 equity returns on the expected and unexpected components of the
change to the Riksbank rate during the same time period. All variables are expressed in percentage
terms. The sample consists of the 50 Riksbank monetary policy announcement dates over the period
from February 2015 through September 2023. Parentheses contain heteroskedasticity-consistent
estimates of the standard errors and dots indicate significance at different levels.

                                                 Dependent variable:
                                           OMXS30 returns
                                       Raw Model Surprise Model
                                                (1) (2)
                     Intercept 0.001 0.001
                                                    (0.002) (0.002)

                                                           ∗
                   Interest rate change −1.203
                                                      (0.658)

                   Expected change −1.123
                                                                         (0.788)

                     Unexpected change 0.392
                                                                         (4.265)

                                2
                     Adjusted R                 0.023 0.020
                 N 50 50
                                                  ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
                 Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01

cates that interest rate changes occurring during the time period where the Riksbank
pursued alternative monetary policy measures explain less of the variation in equity
returns than they did in our full sample. The logic that adding another monetary
policy instrument would suppress the effect of interest rate changes thus finds support
in our results. The coefficient for interest rate changes is also slightly weaker than in
Table 2 now at -1.203 meaning that equity prices respond a little bit less drastically
than in the full sample. This coefficient is significantly negative at the 10 percent
level. However, we cannot be certain that this difference is significant since the regres-

                                          33
sions are made on different samples, and since the QE regression relies on a smaller
sample size. Conclusively, one can state that the results from column (1) seem to tell
that alternative monetary policy instruments have dampened the effect changes to
the Riksbank rate have on equity returns, which is aligned with the purpose of QE
as a monetary policy tool to stimulate the economy by increasing the money supply
and indirectly facilitate increased investments.
   Table 7 column (2) has a positive coefficient regarding the unexpected change in
the Riksbank rate of 0.392, indicating that an unexpected 1 percentage point raise
of the Riksbank rate results in the OMXS30 increasing by 0.392 percent in times
where the Riksbank pursued quantitative easing. In this case, we thus do not have
subsample stability, since the intuitive result would be that the coefficient would be
slightly negative, but of a tinier magnitude than when the Riksbank did not pursue
quantitative easing. The coefficient is however not statistically significant and cannot
be assumed to be different from 0. The result thus has to be viewed with caution.
This adds to the lack of subsample stability our results suffer from and increases doubt
regarding their accuracy. The expected change variable is also not significant, and
cannot be assumed to differ from 0. Furthermore, we have another curious instant
here where the expected component is larger than the unexpected which could be
considered to violate EMH. Because the raw model is the only one that generates a
significant coefficient, and the decomposition does not, the decomposition does not
seem to provide clarification as to whether the equity market response was mainly
due to expected or unexpected changes. Attributing monetary policy announcements
to the categories, expected or unexpected does thus not improve our comprehension
of equity price movements here. This can also be said to constitute a violation of
EMH.

4 Discussion and limitations

In our first regression with the full sample of 86 Riksbank announcements, where we
are differentiating between expected and unexpected changes to the Riksbank rate,
we obtained a significant negative coefficient for the unexpected component. This
finding proved to be only sporadic when controlling for asymmetries and dividing
our sample to control for other announcements. The magnitude of the unexpected
component varied somewhat and even became positive in one instance. It is, however,
statistical significance that has proven to be the most elusive throughout our regres-
sions. Removing certain observations or adding interaction terms often deprives the
unexpected component of its significance. In the case of inflation reports and Federal
Reserve announcements, we found some subsample stability, where the unexpected
coefficient is significantly negative at the 10 percent level when removing observations
occurring in close temporal proximity to the Riksbank announcements. One has to
consider that many of our subsample regressions are hampered by sample sizes below

                                          34
60, many of them are even below 30, rendering the attainment of significance more
challenging. The elusiveness of significance in many regressions, arising from remov-
ing observations, also hinders us from excluding the possibility that the significance in
the first regression is caused by outliers, i.e. certain observations of large magnitude.
Dividing our sample is as mentioned rather a sanity and robustness check of the first
regression than results that should be viewed as particularly informative on their own.
Due to the lack of subsample stability, particularly the lack of consistent significance
in the unexpected coefficient, we can state that our results are not particularly robust.
The unexpected coefficient is persistently negative. Only when controlling for timing
effects and quantitative easing is this not the case. The domain of sign and magni-
tude can thus be stated to convey some robustness in contrast to that of significance.
The lack of consistent subsample significance does however undoubtedly constitute a
limitation of our study. Another consistent and peculiar finding in our study is the
similarity in magnitude between the expected and unexpected coefficients.
   Across all our regressions, the coefficient for expected changes to the Riksbank
rate is negative. It is also in some regressions, such as those when removing all obser-
vations ”undisturbed” by ECB announcements or adding interaction terms, the case
that the expected component is significant while the unexpected is not. This, in ad-
dition to the fact that the unexpected and expected coefficients are often very similar
in magnitude, poses questions regarding the value of the unexpected coefficient. As
previously mentioned, the lack of interest rate changes makes the unexpected and ex-
pected components identical in magnitude. However, removing all non-changes from
the sample did not result in significant changes to the coefficients in comparison to
the full sample coefficients. The similarity between the two is a consistent finding of
this study. This means we cannot state that unexpected changes to the Riksbank rate
indicate larger equity price movements than expected changes. This violates EMH.
Furthermore, the expected component in some cases can even be considered a superior
explanation of equity price movement than the unexpected since it is the only sig-
nificant coefficient. Even though the unexpected component is persistently slightly
larger than the expected, the expected component being more robustly significant
means we cannot categorically attribute equity price movements more to unexpected
than expected changes to the Riksbank rate. Furthermore, in Bernanke and Kuttner
                                                               2
(2005) the decomposed regression raised the adjusted R  substantially compared to
regressing on raw interest rate changes, whereas in our case it barely changes at all.
The decomposed regression is thus not able to explain a greater portion of equity
price variance in this study.
   We can also apportion a limitation and challenge of our study in the form of the
STIBOR T/N 1-month OIS. Although we have established that the STIBOR T/N
rate follows the Riksbank rate well, in comparison to Bernanke and Kuttner (2005)
where the derivative product they employ to measure unexpected changes has the
Federal Funds rate as the actual underlying asset, this is not the case in our study.

                                          35
Firstly, one has to consider it is possible and more probable that the STIBOR T/N
rate and Riksbank rate differ more in a small time window than in a larger one. Our
time window for the change in rates of the STIBOR T/N 1-month OIS is one day and
it is probable that the two rates differ compared to a much longer interval. This thus
becomes a challenge to the validity and accuracy of the derivative instrument we use
in providing a reflection of market expectations of the Riksbank rate. The literature
does not cover Swedish instruments to the same extent as American, meaning these
derivatives’ accuracy is not as well documented and established as those of Federal
Funds futures. This adds to the challenge faced by our measurements of expected
and unexpected changes in all regressions, and they cannot fully be assumed to be
as well suited for this purpose as the Federal Funds futures utilized by Bernanke and
Kuttner (2005).
   A further limitation of our study is the regressions controlling for spillover effects.
Although we outline their purpose as simply investigating possible violations of or-
thogonality and conducting robustness checks, they are limited in their profundity.
This is because we only investigate how our initial regression changes in the pres-
ence or non-presence of other announcements. Just as we control for a more detailed
decomposition of our 86 observations by considering the directions of Riksbank rate
changes, this could be done for our regressions covering spillover effects. It would
perhaps be elucidating to study, e.g., how equity prices react when the Riksbank
announces a monetary policy decision in line with the Federal Reserve or European
Central Bank or when the Riksbank takes a measure in the opposite direction. The
same applies to quantitative easing where we do not account for the amount of assets
purchased or sold. The potential for insight would definitely be furthered by account-
ing for the content of the announcements rather than only their mere presence.

5 Conclusion

This study has established a significant link between raw as well as unexpected
changes to the Riksbank rate and Swedish equity returns. The OMX Stockholm
30 index exhibits a drop of 1.294 percent following an unexpected Riksbank rate hike
of 1 percentage point. It is however important to note that these variables explain a
small part of the variance in equity prices. Our findings suggest responses are stronger
when there is an interest hike, however, a significant relationship was not found. The
monetary policy surprises are also deemed to be mostly unexpected with regards to
their timing, rather than the direction of the change. Announcements from the Fed-
eral Reserve seem to amplify the response of Swedish equity prices to unexpected
changes in the Riksbank rate, whereas those from the ECB seemingly dampen them.
The hypothesis that the more information the market has, the weaker the reaction
of securities’ prices thus finds varying support. Furthermore, monetary policy an-
nouncements closely followed by an inflation announcement seem to elicit very weak

                                          36
reactions from the Swedish stock markets. Finally, we find that quantitative easing
and alternative instruments of monetary policy have also reduced the effect of both
raw interest rate changes and unexpected changes in the Swedish Riksbank rate on
Swedish stock returns.
   Our results are however not robust and when removing observations occurring
closely after the release of other relevant information, we rarely attain statistical sig-
nificance. The same applies to the addition of interaction terms. Sample sizes are
however often small making the attainment of statistical significance harder. We find
a significant negative relationship between expected changes in the Riksbank rate and
Swedish equity returns which exhibits more robustness than that of our unexpected
coefficient. This is in clear violation of the Efficient Market Hypothesis. Our results
do not consistently support the notion that unexpected changes to the Riksbank rate
cause more movement in Swedish stock returns than expected changes.
   Areas not covered in this thesis that require further research are related to a
decomposition of stock market reactions. Looking at industry or even firm-level re-
actions would further the understanding of drivers of the stock market’s response to
announcements of monetary policy decisions. It would also highlight how the stock
prices of different firms are affected by monetary policy announcements. Another
area that would require further investigation is that of spillover effects from other
relevant announcements. By specifying the decisions outlined in the monetary pol-
icy announcements of the Fed and ECB as well as potential asset purchases or sales
by the Riksbank one could ameliorate the understanding of equity price movements.
Accounting for this in the regressions would increase the understanding of the driv-
ing forces behind the reactions of equity prices on days of Riksbank monetary policy
decisions.

                                          37
6 References

Angeloni, Ignazio, Ehrmann, Michael, de Grauwe, Paul and David Miles, 2003, Mon-
etary Transmission in the Euro Area: Early Evidence, 18, EMU Assessment, 469-501.

Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler, 1999, Monetary policy and asset price volatility,
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Review 84, 17–51.

Bernanke, Ben S. and Kenneth N. Kuttner, 2005, What Explains the Stock Market’s
Reaction to Federal Reserve Policy?, Journal of Finance, 60, 1121-1257.

Bohl, Martin T., Siklos, Pierre L. and David Sondermann, 2008, European stock mar-
kets and the ECB’s monetary policy surprises International Finance, 11 (2), 117-130.

Bohl, Martin T., Siklos, Pierre L. and Thomas Werner, 2007, Do central banks react
to the stock market? The case of the Bundesbank. Journal of Banking and Finance,
31(3), 719–733.

Chortareas, Georgios, Karanasos, Menelaos and Emmanouil Noikokyris, 2018, QE
and the UK Stock Market: Does the Bank of England Information Dissemination
Strategy Matter?, Working paper No. 2018/2, Kings College London.

Di Giovanni, Julian, and Galina Hales, 2022, Stock Market Spillovers via the Global
Production Network: Transmission of U.S. Monetary Policy, Journal of Finance, 77,
3373 - 3421.

Fama, Eugene, 1970, Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical
Work, Journal of Finance, 25, 383–417.

Fransson, Lina, and Oskar Tysklind, 2016, Penningpolitikens effekter p˚a r¨antor, The
Riksbank

Fuhrer, Jeff, and Geoffrey Tootell, 2003, Eyes on the prize: How did the Fed respond
to the stock market? Manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

G¨urkaynak, Refet S., Brian P. Sack, and Eric T. Swanson, 2004, The effects of mone-
tary policy on asset prices: An intraday event–study analysis, Working paper, Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Krueger, Joel T. and Kenneth N. Kuttner, 1996, The Fed funds futures rate as a
predictor of federal reserve policy, Journal of Futures Markets, 16, 865-879.

                                          38
Kuttner, Kenneth N., 2001, Monetary policy surprises and interest rates: Evidence
from the Fed funds futures market, Journal of Monetary Economics, 47, 523-544.

Mishkin, Frederic S., 1996, The Channels of Monetary transmission: Lessons for mon-
etary policy, NBER Working paper 5646.

Modigliani, Franco, 1971, Monetary Policy and Consumption in Consumer Spending
and Monetary Policy: The linkages, Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 9-84.

Rigobon, Roberto, and Brian Sack, 2002, The impact of monetary policy on asset
prices, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2002–4, Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.

Rigobon, Roberto, and Brian Sack, 2003, Measuring The Reaction of Monetary Pol-
icy to the Stock Market, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 639–670.

The Riksbank, Monetary Policy, 2023.
Retrieved Oktober 26 from the Riksbank: https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/monetary-
policy

Thomas, Lina, 2023, Global Currents, Local Waves: The Foreign Influences Shaping
Sweden’s Economy, The Riksbank Staff Memo.

Thorbecke, Willem, 1997, On Stock Market Returns and Monetary Policy, Journal
of Finance, 52, 447-992.

˚Ahl, Magnus, 2017, How big is the toolbox of a central banker? Managing expec-
tations with policy-rate forecasts: Evidence from Sweden, Working paper, Sveriges
Riksbank Working Paper Series No. 339.

                                          39
7 Appendix

                                       Table 8:

   Correlation between the Riksbank rate and Stockholm Interbank Offered Rate
  Tomorrow Next(STIBOR T/N) in the time period January 2, 2009 - July 5, 2023.
Riksbank rate rates and STIBOR T/N rates between January 2, 2009 - July 3, 2020 were obtained
from the Riksbank. STIBOR T/N rates July 4, 2020 - July 5, 2023 were retrieved from the Swedish
Financial Benchmark Factility(SFBF)

                                                      Correlation
                             Stibor/Riksbank rate 0.9954

                                       Table 9:

          The Response of Equity Prices to Changes in the Riksbank rate
The table reports the results from regressions of the 1-day OMXS30 equity returns on the unexpected
and expected components of the Riksbank rate change. All variables are expressed in percentage
terms. The full sample consists of the 30 Riksbank rate interest rate changes over the period from
January 2009 through September 2023. Parentheses contain heteroskedasticity-consistent estimates
of the standard errors and dots indicate significance at different levels.

                                                 Dependent variable:
                                           OMX30 returns
                                              Change Regression
                    Intercept −0.0003
                                                                (0.003)

                                                                     ∗
                    Expected change −1.090
                                                                (0.601)

                    Unexpected change −1.211
                                                                (1.013)

                                 2
                      Adjusted R                         0.038
                 N 30
                                                 ∗        ∗∗         ∗∗∗
                  Note:  p<0.1;   p<0.05;   p<0.01

                                          40