FOUNDERS AND FINANCIALS

MACHINE LEARNING ALGORITHMS IN VENTURE CAPITAL

VIKTOR LÅDÖ NAESS (25498)
EMRIK STÅL (25490)

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2023
                             Founders And Financials 2

Founders And Financials: Machine Learning Algorithms In Venture
Capital
Abstract
   The increased usage of machine learning (ML) algorithms in venture capital
   investment screening poses the question of how different characteristics influence
   predictions. The purpose of this study is to investigate how founder and financial
   characteristics influence ML predictions of the raising of more than one round for
   Swedish startups. A tuned random forest and logistic regression (logit model) are
   implemented on data for founder and financial characteristics for Swedish
   startups that have raised a minimum of one funding round. The target variable
   used for prediction is whether organizations have raised more than one round.
   SHAP values are used in an analysis of how different characteristics contribute to
   the ML predictions. For the random forest model, implemented on data from
   Sweden Tech Ecosystem and Serrano, financial characteristics impact the ML
   prediction more than founder characteristics. Further, a high share of female
   founders, a high distance from Stockholm and a lack of prior founder experience
   negatively contribute to the ML prediction. The importance of financials for the
   predictions is related to literature on founder replacement over time. The results
   for the founder characteristics are related to literature on geographical clustering
   in venture capital, gender bias among venture capitalists and the importance of
   entrepreneurial experience for future success. A positive contribution of prior
   founder experience to the prediction of a random forest model, implemented on
   data retrieved from EQT, is also found. The results inform a discussion on the
   effects of skewed data on ML predictions. Further, a discussion on how ML
   algorithms might institutionalize investor biases is conducted. If ML algorithms
   are not used constructively there is a risk that diversity becomes deprioritized in
    capital allocation.
Keywords
   Sweden, Venture Capital, Founder Characteristics, Entrepreneurial Finance,
   Machine Learning
Authors
   Viktor Lado Naess (25498)
   Emrik Stål (25490)
Tutor
   Marieke Bos, Deputy Director and Associate Professor, Swedish House of Finance
Examiner
   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance, SSE
Acknowledgements
   We want to express our gratitude for all the feedback and support Marieke Bos
   has provided us with, Christian Sinding, Alexandra Lutz, Gustav von Sydow,
   Vilhelm von Ehrenheim, Anton Ask Åström and Linus Frosteryd for your time
   and valuable insights, and EQT for providing us with data.
Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Viktor Lado Naess and Emrik Stål, 2023
                             Founders And Financials 3

                        I. Introduction
The contribution of venture capital to the growth and development of society spans
decades. Through investments in innovative startups, venture capitalists have helped
realize groundbreaking businesses such as Uber and Airbnb (Financial Times, 2020).
However, behind many successful ventures are a team of talented founders.
Gompers, Gornall, Kaplan and Strebulaev (2020) acknowledge the importance of the
team in the selection of investments for venture capitalists. Despite the significance
of the founders, to the best of our knowledge, we are short of studies that examine
the relationship between founder characteristics and startup success in a Swedish
context. Success is proxied as whether organizations have raised more than one
funding round. The focus of the second round as the success metric, rather than the
first, has inherent implications, not least the increased importance of financial
characteristics relative to founder characteristics. As a business develops, financial
characteristics will likely influence the possibility to raise capital at least equally as
much as a strong team. However, the need for funding is unobserved and the focus
on second round funding could lead to a selection bias in favor of successful startups.
    This paper explores the importance of founder and financial characteristics in the
context of Swedish startups and the raising of second round funding. We pose the
question: How do founder and financial characteristics influence machine learning
predictions of the raising of more than one funding round for Swedish startups?
    Investigating which founder profiles that raise capital and thereby can build
successful startups is relevant. Stockholm is ranked the fifth European capital with
regards to the share of venture capital received. According to The Swedish Private
Equity & Venture Capital Association Stockholm received on average 4 billion in
venture capital between years 2017-2021. Stockholm is prominent in a European
context in its attraction of venture capital. Three quarters of all venture capital raised
                                                    1
in Sweden is concentrated in Stockholm (Stockholm Chamber of Commerce, 2023).
    Swedish venture capital is not only concentrated geographically. Male startup
founders also dominate the share of venture capital received. Less than one percent
of private venture capital is invested in female founded companies. The Deputy
Prime Minister of Sweden and Minister of Energy, Business and Industry Ebba
Busch says that improvements of conditions for women to start, build and own
businesses are crucial to strengthen the future of the Swedish economy and
                                                                                2
competitiveness (The Government Offices of Sweden, 2023).
   Randomized controlled trials (RCT) would be the ideal method to investigate the
impact of founder characteristics on the possibility to raise VC funding. A randomly
generated group of startup founders could have been assigned founder
characteristics such as gender and location in applications for first round funding.
Then potential differences in the success to raise first round VC funding in an
experiment could have been compared between this group and a control group not
assigned the founder characteristics. We focus on how founder characteristics impact
machine learning (ML) success predictions. Thus, conclusions cannot be made
directly about decision making among venture capitalists. However, since ML is
increasingly used in investment screening our approach still provides valuable
insights. RCTs could reduce endogeneity issues associated with unobserved demand
for funding and selection bias associated with our focus on second round funding.

1
 Omni (2020), Göteborgs Posten (2020) and Dagens Industri (2020) also highlight the dominance of
Stockholm in the venture capital received in Sweden.
2
 SVT (2023), Dagens Industri (2022), Di Digital (2021) and Dagens Nyheter (2022) all address the
low gender diversity in the Swedish venture capital space.
                             Founders And Financials 4

   The paper consists of two separate result and analysis sections. In part one of the
paper, five characteristics are investigated. These include the founder characteristics:
the distance from Stockholm of the organization and prior founder experience in the
team complemented with the financial aspects: net sales to average industry net sales
ratio, return on equity (ROE) and the quick ratio. Moreover, the share of female
founders in a team is added as a variable to the model at the end of part one. In part
two a separate analysis is conducted and three characteristics are analyzed: share of
female founders, distance from Stockholm of the startup and prior founder
experience in the founding team. The success proxy used in both parts of the paper is
whether organizations have raised more than one funding round. That the need for
funding is unobserved is a limitation since a team with less capital needs could turn
out more successful than a team that raises multiple capital rounds. Certain
organizations that only raised one round might only have applied for a first round.
   We attempt to answer the research question through a methodology based on a
paper by Fuster, Goldsmith-Pinkham, Ramadorai and Walther (2022) focused on the
reasons for inequality in household finance. The authors find that white and asian
borrowers are favored relative to black and hispanic borrowers concluded by the
usage of ML algorithms in the context of credits. Similarly to the authors we use a
random forest model. However, the model is implemented on data for founder team,
financial characteristics and funding round data. The authors propose the
investigation of the effect of ML technologies on other financial markets than credit
markets. In our paper a logit and tuned random forest model are trained for two
separate datasets and sets of variables. Then the target variables are predicted for the
test datasets. The models are then evaluated with the help of 7-fold cross validation
with average accuracies computed. Using the superior tuned random forest model for
each dataset the importance of each feature in the prediction of the target variable is
extracted. It is interesting to investigate which characteristics will influence ML
predictions the most. ML and random forest bring more versatility compared to for
example logistic regression. Further, ML methods such as random forest scale better
as different dimensions are added to the model (Hastie et al. (2009)).
                                                                                        3
   Further, this methodology is combined with an analysis of SHAP values based on
Griffin, Hirschey and Kruger (2023). SHAP values contribute with an understanding
of the marginal contribution of each feature to the ML predictions. Griffin et al.
(2023) investigate the impact of characteristics of dealers on bond markups. SHAP
values are used in the identification of the relative importance of features in the
                             4
explanation of markups. A substantially lower number of features compared to the
authors are investigated in our paper due to data availability. Consequently, we
acknowledge that this is a limitation of our study. However, similarly to the authors
we graph average absolute SHAP values in the results section.
   First, in part one the tuned random forest model is superior in terms of accuracy
and cross validation train accuracy both with gender excluded and included. The
financial metrics of firms display the greatest explanatory power for the predictions
of the tuned random forest model across both datasets in part one. This is discussed
through the lens of literature by Kaplan, Sensoy and Strömberg (2009) on founder
replacement over time. Based on SHAP values, in both random forest models in part
one, fully female teams and teams without prior founder experience negatively
contribute to the ML prediction of raising more than one round. The SHAP values for

3
 Lloyd Shapley was awarded the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences in 2012 for the Shapley value
concept based on game theory and established in Shapley (1953).
4
 The method in the paper by Griffin et al (2023) builds upon work by Lundberg et al. (2020) on
adopting SHAP values for tree based machine learning models.
                              Founders And Financials 5

the share of female founder variable relates to literature by Ewens and Townsend
(2020) on the difficulty for women to get investor interest from male investors. The
contribution of the prior founder experience variable to the ML prediction is
analyzed through, for example, research by Gompers, Kovner, Lerner and Scharfstein
(2010) on the importance of prior entrepreneurial experience for future success.
    Second, in part two we find that the logit and tuned random forest model have
cross validation test accuracies of 65.2% and 68.5% respectively. Both models display
low F1 values of 0% for the logit model and 17.24% for the tuned random forest
model. The random forest model maintains a high placebo test accuracy, indicative
of a model that has not captured interaction. The share of female founders has the
highest explanatory weight, followed by distance from Stockholm and the serial
founder variable for the random forest model. Based on SHAP values for the random
forest model prior founder experience positively contributes to ML predictions of
raising more than one round. For gender, mixed teams have positive SHAP values
whereas both fully male and fully female teams display negative SHAP values.
Although the tuned random forest model in part two is more accurate compared to
the logit model neither of the models are optimal due to the low recall levels. The
recall levels seem to be influenced by the skewed nature of the data with most
observations being classified as not successes. The omission of financial
characteristics in part two naturally influences the results and is further addressed.
    Gender biases in selection of investments among venture capitalists have been
investigated in the literature. Ewens and Townsend (2020) provide empirical
evidence that women-led startups face discernible disparities in funding
                                                               5
opportunities compared to their male counterparts. It is acknowledged that gender
biases might be symmetric, meaning that investors invest in founders similar to
themselves. The authors emphasize that the majority of early stage investors are
male. Consequently, homophily is raised as a possible explanation for symmetric
biases among investors. Currarini, Jackson and Pin (2009) defines homophily as the
tendency of different individuals to relate with those they are similar to.
    Decision making among venture capitalists has been investigated in prior
literature. Gompers, Gornall, Kaplan and Strebulaev (2020) highlight the long time
period for closing deals, with on average 118 due diligence hours spent in the sample
of their study. Bonelli (2022) mentions the lengthy investment screening process in
VC and addresses potential biases in investment selection. Consequently, VCs have
started to adopt ML to improve and automate screening processes. For example,
EQT Ventures has its own proprietary tool used to automate the screening process.
    As a ML model is only as comprehensive as its input data, insights on founder
team attributes relative to the raising of funding rounds are relevant. Biases in VC
screening might become institutionalized as algorithms are trained on homogenous
historic data. A potential illusion of objectivity and data driven decision making
might for example lead male investors to continue to invest in those similar to
themselves, that is male startup founders.
    This paper is structured as follows. Section II presents related literature. Section
III provides an institutional background of the Swedish VC industry. Section IV
outlines the two datasets used, which include founder characteristics, financial
measures of organizations and funding rounds raised. Section V describes the
empirical implementation of the paper. Section VI displays the empirical results and
analysis for part one and two of the paper. Section VII includes a robustness section.
Section VIII concludes.

5
 For classical literature on statistical discrimination see for example Phelps (1972).
                             Founders And Financials 6

                      II. Related Literature
Firstly, previous literature study decision making among venture capitalists. Kaplan,
Sensoy and Strömberg (2009) study 50 VC backed startups up until IPO and find
that founder replacement together with going public is common. The results propose
investors should focus more on the business compared to the team in investment
screening. However, Gompers, Gornall, Kaplan, Ilya and Strebulaev (2020) uses a
survey based methodology and mentions the team as most important in selection of
investments among venture capitalists. The authors underline the importance of an
active approach to generating deals through networks and referrals. Bubna, Das, and
Prabhala (2020) highlight how different VCs apart from screening can co-invest in
startups to reduce the risks associated with investments. Gompers, Mukharlyamov
and Xuan (2016) also address VC syndication and its role for diversification,
accumulation and pooling of resources and competences and to decrease information
asymmetry relating to portfolio firms. The authors acknowledge that individual
venture capitalists are more likely to cooperate with other venture capitalists with
whom they are alike, for instance in terms of education and professional experiences,
                                 6
which relates to homophily. Performance of investments is shown to be diminished
for individual venture capitalists that are similar to each other.
   Moreover, our study relates to articles about human characteristics in the finance
literature. Ewens and Townsend (2020) find that female founders have a more
                                                                                        7
difficult time in funding opportunities relative to male founders.  Our paper
investigates characteristics of the founding team relative to the raising of funding
rounds, where gender is one of the characteristics used. Moreover, we use a machine
learning methodology unlike Ewens and Townsend. They focus on for example if an
                                                                                                        8
investor shares a startup’s profile on AngelList as a proxy for interest in the startup.
However, we concentrate on whether organizations have raised more than one
funding round as a success metric. Kaplan and Sorensen (2021) find certain personal
characteristics that distinguish CEOs from others: more extreme levels of execution,
general ability, strategic focus and charisma. The extension of our paper on Kaplan
and Sorensen’s is three-fold, firstly we focus on the attributes of founders of startups,
whereas Kaplan and Sorensen view only the CEO which has the whole selection bias
of hiring implemented. The second aspect is the set of attributes where our paper
focuses on less qualitative characteristics, such as geographic location, prior founder
                           9
experience and gender. Lastly, we employ a ML method unlike the authors.
     In addition, our study relates to literature about machine learning in finance
research. Fuster, Goldsmith-Pinkham, Ramadorai and Walther (2022) find that
white and asian borrowers are favored relative to black and hispanic borrowers due
to the usage of machine learning algorithms in the context of credits. Our paper uses
a similar methodology as the authors, however in another context, namely founder
and financial characteristics and startup success. Bonelli (2022) showcases that as
VCs adopt artificial intelligence (AI), investments are tilted toward startups with

6
 Ye Zhang (2023) also finds homophily, in an experiment where male US venture capitalists donate
more money to male startup founders relative to female in a donation game.
7
 Kessler, Low and Sullivan (2019) does not find gender discrimination in the context of employers
evaluating hypothetical resumes from Wharton graduates, where the importance of diversity for the
employers are used as an explanation by the authors.
8
 Bernstein, Korteweg and Laws (2017) also use AngelList and conduct an experiment where it is
found that investors’ reactions are the strongest to information about the founding team of startups.
9
 Other characteristics not part of our scope are also relevant, for example Bengtsson and Hsu (2015)
point out how shared ethnicity can strongly predict whether investors invest in startups.
                              Founders And Financials 7

similar business to already existing startups. The usage of historic data that are
uninformative about innovative firms is raised as an explanation.
     Our paper provides a machine learning based analysis of founder and financial
characteristics that predict startups’ possibilities to raise more than one funding
round. Existing literature investigates for instance how certain founder
characteristics influence startup attributes and the usage of machine learning in
other contexts such as credit markets. However, we combine the analysis of founder
attributes and financial measures with the usage of machine learning classification
methods for startup success. To the best of our knowledge few such analyses exist at
least in a Swedish context. Also our usage of Swedish data is relevant considering the
unique position of Sweden in the European venture capital landscape. Lastly, our
paper contributes with a feature importance analysis, nuanced by SHAP values based
on previous literature, yet in a new context. That is the effect of founder and financial
attributes on the raising of more than one round of funding.
                 III. Institutional Background
Sweden and Stockholm are unique in a European context in the support to startups
via financing, according to Fredrik Ekström, CEO of Nasdaq. The Swedish ecosystem
is higher on the political agenda compared to for instance the ecosystem in Norway
and Denmark. Ekström expresses the high engagement in the community of private
investors in Sweden, both directly through the stock exchange and indirectly via
funds and the pension system. (Stockholm Chamber of Commerce, 2023).
   Sweden represented 52% of the invested capital in the Nordic region during 2022
(PitchBook, 2023). The contribution of venture and growth capital to Swedish GDP is
1.5%, or 82 billion SEK. Swedish firms constitute 37 billion SEK of the invested
venture capital in Sweden. Although, there is a high upside potential in VC
investments the share of VC investments that generate a loss is 45%. Diversification
is used to mitigate these risks in VC. Technology firms are the focus in the Swedish
VC context and life science and ICT constitute 70% of Swedish venture and growth
                       10
capital investments  (SVCA, 2022).
    The high share of male VC partners (investors) has been raised as a potential
explanation for the low share of venture capital invested in female founded startups.
However, over the years female founded venture capital firms such as Backing Minds
have emerged and are starting to alter the investing landscape (Dagens Industri,
2019). For instance, only 6.94% or 20 of 288 venture capital firms available on
Sweden Tech Ecosystem have female partners as of 2023. Moreover, 68.4% or 197 of
the 288 VC investors on the website are situated in Stockholm. Furthermore, 8.3% or
24 VC investors are located in Skåne County and 7.29% or 21 investors are located in
Västra Götaland County. There are few VC investors in each of the rest of the
Swedish counties (Sweden Tech Ecosystem, 2023).
    There is a low share of female VC partners and venture capital firms situated
outside of three geographical clusters. Consequently, it is interesting to investigate if
certain founder profiles are benefitted or not in the machine learning predictions of
raising more than one round. This is for example discussed relative to literature on
homophily, VC clustering and prior entrepreneurial experience in section VI.
                           IV. Data
The ideal dataset would include data for founders in a control group and treatment
group. This relates to the discussion in the introduction about randomized controlled

10
  Simultaneously these sectors account for only 9% of the total Swedish economy (SVCA, 2022)
                            Founders And Financials 8

trials as the ideal method. Ideally financial metrics, including for example forecasted
sales growth and other potential metrics included in pitch decks presented to VCs
would be included in the dataset. Considering that future potential is important in
the VC context, our usage of historical financial data relative to the second round
year in part 1 might be a limitation. Further, in the ideal dataset different founder
characteristics would be randomly assigned to organizations in a treatment group in
an experiment. Ideally, the experiment would focus on pitches for first round
financing. This would ensure all startups included, actively seeked financing. Our
data includes the actual founder characteristics of teams and historical financials.
This data is used as input in a random forest model. Thereby, our results cannot
directly provide evidence of potential biases among VC investors, which an
experiment could provide. However, our method provides insights about which
founder and financial characteristics influence ML predictions of the raising of more
than one round. Again this is relevant considering the increased usage of ML
algorithms in the VC space (Bonelli, 2022).
           Part 1. Serrano And Sweden Tech Ecosystem Part
Firm characteristics retrieved from the Serrano database have been matched with
                                                                            11
data scraped from the website Sweden Tech Ecosystem.  Location of startups, the
number of rounds raised and whether teams have serial founders have been scraped
for years 2010-2012. The time period has been chosen to allow enough time for all
organizations to raise multiple rounds of funding. Again success has been defined as
raising more than one round. Importantly, angel, seed, convertible, early VC, growth
equity VC, late VC, media for equity and series A-G rounds have all been treated as
                                                          12
funding rounds in the data scraping process.  Moreover, for transparency rounds
described ambiguously on the Sweden Tech Ecosystem website have been treated as
funding rounds. These rounds occasionally include for example smaller rounds
financed by incubators and accelerators. Debt, grants, acquisitions and IPOs have
not been treated as funding rounds. Implications of for instance the inclusion of early
angel and seed rounds are discussed in section VI.
    An aim of this paper is to contribute to the literature on decision making among
venture capitalists. Although, raising multiple rounds is not a direct measure of
success it can still be an indication of interest among venture capital investors.
Gompers (1995) highlights how venture capital investors can stage investments and
inject more capital in second funding rounds as a business has proven successful.
Consequently, raising more than one round can be a success indicator for startups.
Simultaneously, the inclusion of rounds raised from non professional VC firms such
as angels can be a limitation. For certain firms the second round might thus be the
first round raised from a professional VC. Therefore, this might impact the possibility
to draw conclusions related to raising multiple rounds as an indicator of success.
   We also acknowledge that in practice an organization could raise multiple rounds
                 13
and still fail.  Also a startup might raise only one round of funding and still be
                          14
relatively successful.  Further, since Sweden Tech Ecosystem is a website with the
purpose to for instance support VCs in investment screening it is relevant to analyze

11
  Sweden Tech Ecosystem is operated by Tillväxtverket, Svenska Institutet, Vinnova and Business
Sweden.
12
  Based on available categories for filtering on the Sweden Tech Ecosystem website.
13
  For example, Jawbone raised multiple rounds of funding from top VCs and still failed (Financial
Times, 2017).
14
  Startups might strategically use bootstrapping whereby business growth is financed by internal cash
flows rather than external capital (Forbes, 2019).
                             Founders And Financials 9

data from the website. Again in the paper all organizations have raised a minimum of
one funding round. However, it could be interesting to also investigate organizations
that did not raise any funding round. At the same time retrieving financial
information from the Serrano database for very small organizations that have not
raised any funding rounds could also be difficult. Also it would be relevant to take
into account the size of each funding round. However, because of scarcity of this data
especially for earlier rounds on the Sweden Tech Ecosystem website this aspect will
not be taken into account. This is a limitation since in reality raising two large rounds
differs from raising two smaller rounds. Data on the Sweden Tech Ecosystem
platform is collected through the usage of AI and API and public data sources are
continuously scanned (Vinnova, 2021). Therefore, there might be a selection bias for
the startups included on the Sweden Tech Ecosystem website since algorithms are
used to aggregate data. Consequently, all startups founded 2010-2012 that sometime
have raised a minimum of one round might not be visible on the website. However,
given that a VC investor might use the data on the website for decision making it is
still interesting to analyze.
    Firstly, filters have been set on the Sweden Tech Ecosystem website to show the
funding rounds for firms founded in 2010, 2011 and 2012 respectively. A filter to not
show non-tech firms has been set to ensure firms that are primary subjects for
venture capital investments are only shown, relating to the institutional
                15
background.  Data have subsequently been scraped for the organization name,
                                                                            16
location, founding year and the number of rounds raised.  Then the distance in
kilometers from Stockholm has been retrieved for the cities, with the help of Google
Maps. For organizations where location information has been missing for city level
from Sweden Tech Ecosystem this information has been retrieved through
Crunchbase. If a firm has raised more than one round this has been numerized as 1,
and otherwise the variable has been set to 0. Then, a filter to show organizations with
serial founders has been set. The variable serial founder has been set to 1 for the
organizations displayed on the Sweden Tech Ecosystem website when the serial
                                                 17
founder filter has been present.
   Two characteristics of the founding team were initially used in part one. Gompers,
Gornall, Kaplan, Ilya and Strebulaev (2020) have shown that VC investors view the
team as important for investment decisions. The authors also acknowledge the
importance of entrepreneurial experience and even a prior relationship to a VC for
founders. Additionally, Gompers, Kovner and Lerner (2010) find evidence of the
importance of geographic location relative to VC investments. Consequently, the
variables distance from Stockholm and prior founder experience are relevant to
include. These founder characteristics variables have been chosen both because of
their availability and relevance in relation to prior literature.

15
  This initial filtration could induce a selection bias that could impact the share of female founders.
Ewens and Townsend (2020) address how female founders are less unfavored with male investors
when in female focused industries. This potential selection bias is, however, not discussed further.
16
  The data for the organizations were scraped from the following website during the period retrieved
2-5 November 2023 (Sweden Tech Ecosystem is continuously updated and new firms not visible on
the website at the time of the data scraping process might have been added to the website):
https://sweden.dealroom.co/transactions.rounds/f/growth_stages/anyof_late%20growth_early%20growth_see
d_not_mature/launch_year_max/anyof_2012/launch_year_min/anyof_2010/rounds/not_GRANT_SPAC%20
PRIVATE%20PLACEMENT/slug_locations/allof_sweden/tags/not_outside%20tech
17
  Again this data was scraped during the period 2-5 november 2023
https://sweden.dealroom.co/transactions.rounds/f/founders_is_serial_founder/anyof_yes/growth_stages/anyo
f_late%20growth_early%20growth_seed_not_mature/launch_year_max/anyof_2012/launch_year_min/anyof
_2010/rounds/not_GRANT_SPAC%20PRIVATE%20PLACEMENT/slug_locations/allof_sweden/tags/not_outs
ide%20tech
                                      Founders And Financials 10

             It is also relevant to complement data on the founding team with financial
        information about each organization. The Serrano database retrieved from the
       Swedish House of Finance has been used to retrieve information about financial
        information. The financial characteristics included are a net sales ratio, ROE and
        quick ratio. For example, this relates to Kaplan, Sensoy and Strömberg (2009) that
        highlights the importance of the business vis-à-vis the team in investment decisions.
        These variables have been extracted for the year prior to the second funding round.
        When the second funding round is the same year as the founding year, data for the
        founding year is selected. VC investors might base decision making partly on recent
        historical financial performance of the firms. However, financial forecasts for the
        future might also affect decision making. For example, Puri and Zarutskie (2012)
        highlight the importance of the potential for scale for VC backed firms. Concurrently,
        the year prior to the year of the second round is the closest proxy for financial
        performance based on the availability in the Serrano database.
           When a firm visible on the Sweden Tech Ecosystem website has not been available
        in Serrano the observation has been removed. The potential selection bias that arises
        is discussed later. Further, when information about the target variables have been
        missing for any firm, this observation has also been omitted. It is acknowledged that
        this is a limitation, yet it is needed to enable machine learning analysis. For example,
        this follows Fuster et al. (2022) that drop missing values from the dataset in their
        paper.
            After the completion of the data cleaning 210 observations are part of the dataset
        for years 2010-2012 in part one excluding gender. The small size of our dataset is a
        further limitation of our study. The data is split into features (x) and target (y)
        variables as seen below in table 1 and subsequently it is split into a training and test
         data set. The training set is 70% of the data and the test set is 30% of the data.

                                      Table 1- Variables Part 1
Sweden Tech Ecosystem Serrano

Model specific                                                 x3: Net sales ratio (year before second round
y: More than one round (1=yes, 0=no)                                                𝑁𝑒𝑡 𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠 (𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟 𝑏𝑒𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑠𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑 𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑)
                                                           = 𝐴𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑦 𝑁𝑒𝑡 𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠 (𝑦𝑒𝑎𝑟 𝑏𝑒𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑠𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑 𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑)
x1: Distance from Stockholm in kilometers (continuous)
x2: Prior founder experience (1=yes, 0=no)                    x4: ROE (year before second round)
_________________________________________       𝐴𝑑𝑗𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑁𝑒𝑡 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑓𝑖𝑡/𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠
                                                                =   𝐴𝑑𝑗𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑡𝑦
Other variables
Organization Name                                         x5: Quick ratio (year before second round)
                                                                                                                                                                  𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠 − 𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑦
Year founded                                                 =    𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝐿𝑖𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑒𝑠
Location

Linkedin

Added Part 1 Including Gender
x6: Share of female founders (continuous 0-1)

           Variables and variable definitions for the logit and random forest model
                                         Founders And Financials 11

                      Table 2- Summary Statistics- Part 1 Excluding Gender

Column N = 210 Mode Median Mean Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Stan dev.

More Than One Round 1 1 0.680952 0 1 1 1 0.467221

Founded on Year 2012 2011 2011.085714 2010 2011 2012 2012 0.806025

Final Second Round Year 2015 2014 2014.538095 2013 2014 2016 2021 2.202864

Distance From Stockholm 0 71 233.315714 0 71 469 929 263.070826

Serial Founder 0 0 0.276190 0 0 1 1 0.448181

Quick Ratio 1.212903 1.1780836 3.954649 0.887594 1.780836 3.994718 45.266272 6.330634

Return on Equity 0 -0.244695 -0.970631 -0.908996 -0.244695 0.032905 1.246581 2.335764

Net Sales 0 658 5736.542857 32.25 658 3767 262777 20892.039069

Net Sales Ratio 0 0.229683 1.170728 0.012689 0.229683 1.066603 21.388328 2.764545

           Summary statistics of part 1, merged Sweden Tech and Serrano dataset excluding gender
       Summary statistics for the merged Serrano and Sweden Tech Ecosystem Data is
        displayed in table 2. This is the part one data excluding gender. First, it can be
        observed that more than half of the organizations in the dataset have raised more
        than one round. This is reflected by the mean of 0.68 for the more than one round
        dummy variable. 143 of the 210 observations in the dataset raised more than one
        round. The high level of success in raising more than one round is likely influenced
        by the initial conditions for the sample. All organizations on the funding round
        section of the Sweden Tech Ecosystem website used, have raised a minimum of one
        round. If organizations that had not raised any round had been taken into account
        the success level would likely have been lower. Second, only 27.62% of the
        organizations in the dataset have serial founders. Third, for distance from Stockholm
        the average distance from Stockholm in the dataset is 233.32 kilometers. The
        limitation in terms of the few observations per city in the sample is hereby noted
        (see Appendix A for details). The majority of the organizations in the sample are
        located in Stockholm, that is at zero distance from Stockholm. The bottom three
        quartiles of the organizations in the dataset raised their second round any time
         before 2016. This relates to our somewhat later stage focus of our paper.
            Based on the Serrano data it can be discerned that the firms on average have
         positive sales and liquidity. This is represented by positive mean values for the quick
         ratio and net sales numbers. However, simultaneously the profitability of the firms in
        the sample is on average negative, reflected by a negative average for the ROE
         variable. This is likely a reflection of the difficulties of startups to be profitable in
        their initial stages (Davila and Foster, 2007). Again the success metric used is
        whether startups have raised more than one funding round. The full dataset is
        relatively balanced in terms of the observations per year, with 60, 72 and 78
        organizations founded in years 2010, 2011 and 2012 respectively. See Appendix B for
         branch sector definitions and sales data for the different observations in our dataset
        in part one excluding gender per sector. It should be noted again that an initial
        filtration to not show non tech firms was made in the first data scraping of the
        Sweden Tech Ecosystem. However, this only removed three firms. This is likely since
        Sweden Tech Ecosystem in itself is a website focused on technology firms.
            Gender has then been scraped for the founders of the organizations in the dataset
        used in part one using Linkedin. The gender for all founders found on Linkedin have
        been noted. If no founders have been available on Linkedin other websites such as
        the companies own websites have been used to determine the gender of the founders.
                                       Founders And Financials 12

        Organizations where the founders have not been found either through a Linkedin
        search or through other websites such as a company’s own website and
        announcements about the firm, have been dropped. The original dataset in part one
        has been reduced to 191 observations after gender has been added to the dataset.
        That is 9% of the observations from part one excluding gender have been dropped.
         This is a limitation that reduces the reliability of our study. The dataset in part one
        including gender will be analyzed separately to the dataset in part one excluding
        gender. The inclusion of gender data relates literature by Ewens and Townsend
        (2020) and their investigation of male dominance and gender discrimination in the
        VC space.
                       Table 3- Summary Statistics- Part 1 Including Gender

Column N = 191 Mode Median Mean Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Stan dev.

More Than One Round 1 1 0.696335 0 1 1 1 0.461048

Founded on Year 2012 2011 2011.094241 2010 2011 2012 2012 0.795724

Final Second Round Year 2015 2014 2014.560209 2013 2014 2016 2021 2.258385

Distance From Stockholm 0 16.7 220.759162 0 16.7 469 929 260694917

Serial Founder 0 0 0.293194 0 0 1 1 0.456423

Quick Ratio 1.212903 1.782296 3.874490 0.909262 1.782296 4.041283 45.266272 5.925131

Return on Equity 0 -0.289300 -0.978976 -0.901756 -0.289300 0.074449 1.246581 2.411250

Net Sales 0 621 5772.267016 32.5 621 4074 262777 21721.599945

Net Sales Ratio 0 0.221997 1.191309 0.012931 0.221997 1.085014 21.288328 2.849457

Share Female Founders 0 0 0.100087 0 0 0 1 0.254868
           Summary statistics of part 1, merged Sweden Tech and Serrano dataset including gender
        After gender has been scraped for founders for the organizations in the dataset in
         part one, some observations are dropped. This is because it has been difficult to find
        the founders for these organizations online. Based on the gender statistics for the
        new version of the dataset in part one we see that the mean share of female founders
         is 0.10. Consequently, the data reflects highly male-dominant organizations on
        average. There are no substantial differences in the mean values of the other
        different variables in part one including gender compared to excluding gender.
            Firstly, data for organization name, location, funding round data and founding
        year was scraped from Sweden Tech Ecosystem. The data for the 370 organizations
       founded years 2010-2012 that have raised a minimum of one funding round and
                                                                                                    18
        were listed on Sweden Tech Ecosystem were initially scraped.

           18
            See footnote 15 for the section of the website used. Again the website is updated continuously and
          more organizations could be visible over time compared to the data scraping period 2-5 November
         2023.
                              Founders And Financials 13

                        Table 4. Filtering Decisions Overview

 Filtration Step Percentage Removed      Percentage Removed      Cumulative N Left
                           from total set             from previous set         370

 1- Serrano Matching 38.92% 38.92% 226

 2- Year and Branch 2.16% 3.54% 218

 3- Extreme values removed 2.16% 3.67% 210

 4- share of female founders 5.14% 9.05% 191
The table displays the filtration process for the part 1, merged Sweden Tech and Serrano dataset. First, a
matching of startups with the Serrano database was conducted and organizations not found in Serrano were
removed. Second, data lacking funding year or branch sector were removed. Third, extreme values with a
Z-score greater than three standard deviations from the mean were removed. The reasoning behind this is to
remove absolute extremes while retaining the variability and oddities that are present in start-up financials.
Fourth, organizations without gender data successfully scraped were dropped.
The filtration process for the part one dataset displayed in Table 4 implies that in
total 43.24% of the 370 organizations scraped from Sweden Tech Ecosystem have
been dropped for the dataset in part one excluding gender. In the dataset in part one
including gender 48.38% of the 370 observations have been dropped because of
missing data.
   Naturally the reduction of the dataset because of missing data has implications for
the interpretations of our results. Data might especially be missing for organizations
that have not succeeded in raising multiple funding rounds. Consequently, an
unintentional selection bias is inferred. This could be part of explaining the majority
of organizations categorized as having raised more than one round in the data. Thus,
it should be noted that the share of organizations having raised more than one round
might have been lower if data availability would have been higher.
                            Part 2. EQT Part
Firstly, we want to emphasize that part two is separate from part one and the data in
part two is different to and has been treated fully separate from that in part one. In
part two an aggregated dataset retrieved with the help of EQT is used for further
analysis.
     Exact details on the underlying data sources and method of data aggregation
cannot be provided for part two. This is a limitation since it reduces the replicability
of our study. While we do not have access to information about the data aggregation
process of the EQT data there is a risk of selection bias. Naturally, any automated
aggregation of different data sources might imply a filtration of the dataset.
Consequently, the dataset might not be representative of every startup in Sweden
during the chosen years. Unlike in part 1 we cannot provide the same degree of detail
about the definitions of the different variables. The access to exhaustive founder data
underlines the value of the collaboration with EQT. Further, considering that an aim
of our study is to contribute to the literature on decision-making among venture
capitalists, usage of data from Sweden’s largest venture capital firm is relevant to
analyze.
   Moreover, probability based models are used to determine gender of the founders
in the data. This is a further limitation of the data gathering process as it causes
uncertainty in the data that is difficult to account for. Conversely, the automated data
gathering aspect of the sample data in part two is of likeness to the reality, to such an
end that this would be the predominant data approach for VCs. Since, one purpose of
our study is to contribute to literature about decision making among venture
capitalists, this aspect of the data gathering process still can provide valuable
                              Founders And Financials 14

insights. How potential biases in data because of automated processes influence
machine learning classifications are relevant relative to the purpose of this paper.
     The relevant variables from the aggregated dataset include information about
founder gender, geographic location of organizations and the number of capital
rounds raised. The different datasets received from EQT have been merged into one
single file with the help of SQL to facilitate the empirical analysis. Furthermore, there
are observations where values are missing for certain characteristics, because of the
automatic aggregation of different data sources. These observations have been
removed to enable an analysis. Consequently, this is a limitation since certain
founding teams where information is incomplete will not be taken into account.
   The data has been filtered to only show Swedish founders and organizations. Also
the time period 2010-2015 was chosen to ensure the data is comparable. The
rationale of this decision is the need to ensure enough time has been provided for
organizations to raise more than one round of capital. Still we acknowledge that the
most recently founded organizations in the chosen time period might have had
difficulties to raise numerous rounds. An organization founded 2010 has had more
time to raise more than one round of capital relative to an organization founded
2015.
   Gender of founders are taken directly from the aggregated dataset. The
characteristic used for the EQT part of our paper is the percentage of female founders
in each founding team, a continuous variable from 0 to 1. Data for the city of the
organizations are available in the dataset. The distance in kilometers from Stockholm
for the organizations in the dataset has been determined similarly as in part one of
our paper.
   Also, data about prior founder experience has been scraped with the help of
Linkedin. A dummy variable has been used and prior founder experience of a
minimum of one founder in an organization has been equaled to 1, whereas no
founder with previous founder experience has been numerized as 0. The final proxy
for this is data engineered to be useful on an organizational level. Resulting in the
feature that organizations with at least one founder with previous founder experience
are set to 1 and otherwise are set to 0.
   Data for the number of rounds raised is part of the aggregated dataset. The success
metric used is whether an organization has raised more than one round of funding. A
dummy variable has been created where the value has been set to 1 for organizations
that have raised more than one round of financing. Otherwise the value of the
variable has been set to 0. The usage of only one success metric is a limitation of our
study.
   Naturally, the characteristics investigated in this study are limited and many other
factors could influence the number of rounds raised. The investigation of additional
success metrics for startups would be ideal. Naturally whether a startup reaches an
IPO and continuous measures of valuation would be relevant to complement the
number of rounds raised, in determining success. However, based on the available
data in the EQT dataset the success metric used in this part of the paper is whether
an organization raises more than one round of funding.
    A limitation of the analysis in part two is the lack of characteristics about financial
metrics of the organizations. Although these important financial variables are
omitted in part two, the analysis is still valuable. For instance, the analysis is relevant
from the perspective of VC decision making based on a limited number of founder
characteristics. What if VC investors place substantial importance on the team in
investment decisions as suggested by Gompers et al. (2020).
                                        Founders And Financials 15

                                 Table 5. Summary Statistics- Part 2

N = 296 Num_Male_     Num_Female_   Number_of_    Distance from   Number of      Serial Founder Female         Share of
          Founders       Founders       Rounds         Stockholm      founders with                   Dominant       female
                                                           (km)            prior                                            founders
                                                                              experience

Mean 1.363636 0.061818 1.447273 161.367636 0.654545 0.512727 0.007273 0.025091

Std 0.643996 0.269828 0.739410 240.640692 0.774082 0.500749 0.085125 0.109211

Min 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0

25% 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0

50% 1 0 1 0 1 1 0 0

75% 2 0 2 466 1 1 0 0

max 4 2 5 637 4 1 1 0.666667
            Summary statistics of part 2, EQT dataset
         There are 296 organizations in the sample of the dataset used in part two, after the
          process of data cleaning has been completed. Interestingly it can be observed that the
        average number of male founders in an organization in the sample is 1.36. In
         contrast, the average number of female founders per organization is only 0.06.
         Additionally, only 0.007 of organizations in the data are female dominated, that is,
          have a majority of female founders. Consequently, it is of interest to investigate the
         effects of usage of data reflecting overall male dominated startups for prediction of
         success. An interesting question is whether male founders consequently will be
          benefited or not vis-à-vis female founders in predictions of success.
             Furthermore, it can be observed that only the fourth quartile of the organizations
         in the data in part two has raised more than one round of funding. As a consequence,
         only 25% of the organizations are categorized as successful according to the
         definition of success in our paper. Again in this paper we define successful
         organizations as those able to raise more than one funding round. A dummy variable
         is used for the success metric and raising more than one round of financing is
         equaled to 1, whereas raising one round of financing is numerized to zero. Further it
         can be observed that the top two quartiles of organizations have a founder with prior
         founder experience. Moreover, the bottom two quartiles of organizations are also
        located in Stockholm, denoted by 0 under Distance from Stockholm (km). For
         transparency definitions for what is defined as a funding round cannot be provided
          for part two of the paper.
                      V. Empirical Implementation
         Ideally, we would have a comprehensive, exhaustive and accurate dataset of Swedish
         startups that seeked first round funding, relating to the priorly mentioned RCT. The
         data would distinguish different rounds (angel, incubator, VC), enabling an accurate
         definition of which rounds are venture capital and which are not. Furthermore, the
         data would include the distance from the start up to the venture capital firm, this
          given the findings that geographical location is a factor in success. Moreover, founder
         characteristics are of importance, especially university, given that specific venture
          capital labs or/and funding is set for specific universities. Conclusively, the dataset
          would contain an accurate array of financial, organizational and founders data.
              From such a dataset an adoption of progressively more advanced statistical
         models would be utilized to infer whether a company succeeds or fails in securing
         venture capital funding. The models, in our case, begin with a Logistic regression of
                              Founders And Financials 16

the binary classification of success and failure, and culminate in a Random Forest
ML method.
                            Logit Model
Similarly to Fuster et. al (2022) a random forest model is compared to a logit model.
The logit model represents a less sophisticated prediction technology compared to
random forest. In logit models the following link function is typical used:

                                                                            𝑔(𝑥)
                                     log ( 1−𝑔(𝑥) ) = x’β

See below for the advantages of a random forest model relative to a logit model for
the empirical implementation in our paper.
                      Random Forest Model
The following is a discourse of the empirical framework used to examine the
intersection of machine learning and venture capital firms. Machine learning models
are the product of their data.
   Utilizing the combined data from Sweden Tech ecosystem and Serrano,
progressively more advanced statistical models are utilized to infer whether a
company succeeds or fails in securing further venture capital funding rounds. The
                                                                            19
initial model is a simple logistic regression model , which is then superseded by a
random forest machine learning model (see Breiman (2001) and Ho (1998)).
    Random forest is a machine learning algorithm that works on the premise of
aggregated decision trees. In the context of binary classification, random forest is the
mode of the outputs of the decision trees. Decision trees are structures based on
nodes and branches. Nodes are questions or conditions that split the data, whereas
branches are the output of nodes and connect nodes in a downward fashion. The
purpose of each tree is to determine a classification through a series of
question/conditions (Nodes). Here ordering of nodes and condition choice is of
importance in the efficiency of determining a class (Breiman (2001); Hastie,
                                        20
Tibshirani and Friedman. (2009)).  To such an end the concept of gini impurity will
be proposed. Gini impurity is a measure of the frequency of incorrect classification of
a randomly chosen element if labeled randomly according to the distribution of
classes, and is defined as (James, Witten, Hastie, Tibshirani, and Taylor (2023);
Hastie et al. (2009)):

                                                              2  21
                                    Gini(S) = 1 - ∑ 𝑝
                                                                                                                                                                                              𝑖
Where Gini(S) is the impurity of set S, pi is the proportion of class i in S, and n is the
number of classes. In relation to the decision tree, we utilize Gini impurity for
optimizing node split (condition choices), with the goal to minimize Gini impurity
                                                       22
(James et al (2023); Hastie et al. (2009)).

19
  By technical nomenclature the model used is actually a logistic classification. This being the case as
the target variable (More than one funding round) is categorical (binary). To minimize confusion the
paper will stick to logistic regression.
20
  For example if one had to think about trying to guess a chosen number from numbers 1-10 using
only yes no questions. Naturally the first question would be larger/smaller than 5 as the set of possible
numbers would be halved.
21
  Rewritten from James et al. (2023) equation 8.6
22
  It would be remisive to not acknowledge that gini impurity is only one of many methods to optimize
node pruning. See James et al. (2023) for more
                               Founders And Financials 17

   Random forest inherently has a version of bootstrap aggregating (bagging).
Bootstrapping is the processing where multiple samples are drawn with replacement
from the original dataset. These new samples are known as bootstrapped samples.
Bagging is a machine learning ensemble technique that utilizes bootstrapped
samples to build independent models (decision trees) on the different bootstrapped
samples. The aggregation aspect of bagging is then that output of the overall model
(random forest) is the aggregated output of all the independent decision trees. For
binary classification specifically, this is the mode output of these trees as
             23
mentioned.  The aggregation also makes the random forest model much more
robust, making it usable on both clustered data and unclustered data (James et al.
(2023)).
   The pay off of using such a method is several fold. Consider first the averaging
effect on a set of observations and variance: Given a set of n independent
                                                     2
observations Z1… Zn, all having a variance of σ then the variance of the mean is var( )𝑍
     2
= σ /n. In other words, averaging a set of observations reduces variance. Applying
the same logic to a set of B bootstrapped samples is a great method in decreasing
variance and increasing test accuracy. We can define the bagging by denoting the
different predictor outputs as

which gives (James et al (2023); Hastie et al. (2009)):

                                                                       24

The final aspect of the random forest is building uncorrelated trees. Thus far each
node in each tree has been given the full set of predictors p (independent features
used to predict the dependent feature). Unpropitiously, aggregating several
correlated quantities (as our current trees are) fails in reducing variance
significantly, especially when compared to the aggregation of uncorrelated samples.
To achieve trees decorrelation, each node, when it is approaching a split samples a
random unique set of predictors m, where m ⊆ p. This ensures that the trees grown
are less correlated, especially in the case where there are dominant predictors. To
integrate this aspect in the above equation, we introduce: Θb - representing the
characteristics of the bth tree, as such, random forest is defined by: (James et al
(2023); Hastie et al. (2009)):

                                                                           25
The purpose of the random forest model over that of a more simple logistic model is
multipronged. The first and most prominent is the gain in flexibility. Random forests
are far more versatile in capturing complex data structures and correlations than
logistic regressions. The interactions between different features are automatically
captured by a random forest model. In contrast, for logit explicit specialization and
modeling of these interactions are needed (Hastie et al. (2009)).

23
  For continuous data predictions, that is regression, the mean is used instead of the mode
24
  The equation is most closely related to James et al. (2023)
25
  The equation is most closely related to Hastie et al. (2009)
                              Founders And Financials 18

   Further, It is especially the case that random forest scales well with higher
dimensionality. Logit does not scale as well with more dimensions relative to a
random forest model. This is due to an inherent feature selection where a large
number of features can be handled by a random forest model. A random subset of
features for each split is considered by each decision tree in the forest. Thereby,
irrelevant features are better handled by a random forest model (Hastie et al.
(2009)).
   The flexibility and dimensionality advantages discussed above imply that
underfitting is reduced through the usage of a random forest model. Moreover,
random forest is relevant for our data because of its possibility to handle variables
without dummy encoding, which logit is not capable of (James et al (2023); Hastie et
al. (2009)).
   Given success in VC being complex to map, simple logit models may not be
sufficient. As such, random forest is of interest given its often better capabilities in
determining underlying relations in complex data.
   Finally, our random forest model is built using the python package Oputna’s
                                                        26
parameter optimisation for the two dimensions.  In short, the optimisation finds the
ideal values for a set of random forest parameters to maximize accuracy and cross
validation accuracy.The choice of this optimization is later addressed.
   As priorly mentioned the ideal data set would come from a natural RCT where the
difference between treatment and control is simply the characteristics to be viewed.
In addition to this a healthily sized, exhaustive dataset is of importance, for both the
model and the significance of its output.
   From such a dataset, we would utilize both random forest and logistic regression
to make predictions concerning the importance and direction of each feature. From
here our method differs from the method in Fuster et. al (2022). While many of the
model evaluation metrics are the same, for example brier score, accuracy and ROC
AUC it is adapted to our setting both in the construction of the random forest and its
explanation.
   Firstly, in the construction of the random forest model, we tuned the model
parameters to maximize both accuracy and k-fold cross-validation accuracy.
                                                                27
Accuracy is defined as (TP+TN)/(TP+TN+FN+FP).  Cross-validation accuracy is
slightly more complex; dividing the model training set into k sections (in our case 7),
one fold is used for testing while the remaining k-1 (6) folds are used to train the
model. The overall cross-validation accuracy of the model is determined by averaging
the accuracies obtained from each individual round of testing, where each distinct
fold serves as the test set one time (M. Stone (1974) ; James et al (2023); López,
López and Crossa (2022)). The choice behind maximizing accuracy, is to mimic that
of a venture capital maximizing profit. Similarly, this logic holds for cross-validation
but serves the concept of minimizing the model’s overfitting susceptibility. From
these results, we then run a robustness test to determine any difference between the
ability of the two models. We utilize bootstrapping 100 samples of the test data to
determine accuracy and variance. Furthermore, we utilize a placebo test to verify the
ability of the two models.
    Further, similar to Fuster et al. (2022) the Brier score is used to evaluate the
models. The Brier score is defined as:

26
  See https://optuna.org/?fbclid=IwAR1ykIFE-rdfwX9YQIODd-66t7qMMeiOc81uCpRJJ9pEuwIkY2kz7ZuglA8
27
  TP = true positives, TN = true negatives, FP = false positives, FN = false negatives
                              Founders And Financials 19

where N is the number of predictions, fi represents predicted probability of the event
for instance i. fi takes on values from 0% to 100% based on the probability that i is
class 1. The actual outcome of instance i is represented by oi and takes on a value of 1
for success and 0 for failure. The lower the Brier score the more confident a model is.
For example if a model has threshold 50 and for instance i the model predicts 51%
that i belongs to, or is a success then it will be classified as success. This would be
reflected in the brier score for i as fi - oi being equal to 0.49. Whereas if the
probability would be 99% then the score would be 0.1.
                         SHAP Values
The second aspect is the interpretation of the models. Here we utilize Shapley
additive (SHAP) values, based on Lundberg and Lee (2017). In relation to ML, SHAP
values are implemented as a method to explain any instance (a model prediction
given a set of features) by dissecting the output into its features and the baseline
prediction. The baseline prediction: base value E[f(X)] is the average prediction of
the model across all possible inputs. It represents the prediction that would be made
without any specific information about a given instance. The classical Shapley values
are produced through the introduction of each feature into a conditional expectation
                                          28
function: fx(S) = E[f(X) | do(XS = xS)]  , here S is the subset of features conditioned on.
Shapley values have merit in the uniqueness of fulfilling three properties, namely;
local accuracy, consistency, and missingness (Lundberg, Erion, Chen, DeGrave,
Prutkin, Nair, Katz, Himmelfarb, Bansal and Lee, 2020). See appendix C for a
mathematical derivation of the SHAP formula. Culminating these properties results
in the game theory Shapley value formula presented by Lloyd Shapley . To apply
Shapley’s theory to machine learning Lundberg and Lee (2017) utilized Lloyd’s
Formula and postulated SHAP (Shapley additive) Values. In brevity SHAP values are
the Lloyd Shapley values of a conditional expectation function of the random forest
model - in our case. The final SHAP equation is:

                                                                                           29
The equation can be bisected into two aspects. The fraction represents (seen below)
the weighting of each subset S, and ensures fair attribution of each feature’s
importance. ∣M∣! is the number of ways one can order all features M, or the number
of sets of features one can form. This divides the number of ways to form a subset of
features S (∣S∣!) multiplied by the number of ways to arrange the remaining features
in the set M that are not in S (|M| - |S| - 1)! The fraction adjusts the weighting or
importance of each subset based on the probability of its occurrence out of all
possible subsets.

28
  Here the use of do-notation is to indicate that this is not an observation rather a direct
implementation. That is, do(XS = xS), should be interpreted as setting Xs to xs. This is the only
implication of this.
29
  The formula notation has been slightly altered from (Lundberg and Lee, 2017), to be consistent with
the paper's form.
                             Founders And Financials 20

The final aspect of the formula is simply the contribution of the ith feature. recall
from property 3 that the below expression would result in 0 in the case of no impact.

In short the final SHAP value ϕi(f, x) is the product of each feature i’s marginal
contribution and its occurrence or weight, sum over all possible features i in M,
where i ∈ M.
    SHAP facilitates the interpretation of ML model predictions. SHAP provides a
framework in which additive feature importance in a ML context can be discussed.
(Lundberg and Lee, 2017). This is relevant for our paper since we aim to investigate
which founder and financial characteristics that impact ML predictions. SHAP values
contribute to an understanding of the decision making process of the ML model in
predicting which organizations will raise more than one round.
              VI. Empirical Results And Analysis
           Part 1. Serrano and Sweden Tech Ecosystem Part
A tuned random forest model is implemented on the data in part one. The tuned
model is primed to maximize training accuracy and seven fold cross validation
training accuracy. The choice of such metrics is to minimize overfitting while
maximizing generalized accuracy. In this process numerous forests and trees have
been generated to determine the tuned random forest model with the best possible
parameters. For part 1 excluding the share of female founders data, the parameter
optimization determines the ideal number of trees to be 94, with a maximum depth
of two. Moreover, the optimisation determines that each node must have at least 18
samples to be eligible to conduct a split while also maintaining that any final node, a
leaf node, must have a minimum of three instances. These parameters produce low
risk of overfitting due to; the constraint depth of two (two node levels), the
requirement of 18 samples for a split- restraining splits on insufficient data-, and
finally the need for leaf nodes to have minimum three samples ensure that final
decision are also based on sufficiently sized dataset. The minimum leaf node’s size of
three is understandable given the distance for Stockholm variety. The implication of
these parameters being ideal indicates two possible aspects. The first is that the data
is easy to predict, thus a more simple model is ideal. The second is that the data has
complex patterns, but the model prioritizes minimizing overfitting and maximizing
generalizability. The second explanation could be due to the fact that capturing these
complex patterns is difficult and does not yield the confidence necessary to be worth
incorporating. Finally, a more simple logit model is then implemented on the same
data and the results for both models are showcased in table 6.
      Table 6- Random Forest Summary Overview- Part 1 Excluding Gender

 Model Accuracy Cross        Cross        Precision Recall F1 Score Brier Score ROC AUC
                                Validation     Validation                                                                 Score
                                Test           Train
                              Accuracy      Accuracy

 Logit 0.650794 0.634921 0.653061 0.684211 0.906977 0.78 0.212339 0.627907

 Random     0.730159 0.761905 0.666667 0.742143 0.953488 0.828283 0.199096 0.646512
  Forest
Overview of evaluation metrics for the logit and random forest models for part 1, merged Sweden Tech
Ecosystem and Serrano dataset excluding gender.
The accuracy of the logit model for the data in part one is 65.08% and 73.02% for the
tuned random forest model. The tuned random forest model also has higher cross
validation test and train accuracies than the logit model. Further, it can be observed
                              Founders And Financials 21

that both models display relatively high levels of F1 scores, which is a relevant metric
to evaluate in the case of unbalanced data, as in our case. The F1 score is a weighted
                                    30
average of precision and recall.  True positives in this context are startups that have
raised more than one round and were classified correctly. False positives are startups
that did not raise more than one round yet were predicted to have raised more than
one round. The F1 score is higher for the random forest model however.
    When predicting a class based on inputs, models will assign a probability to the
likelihood of that instance being a class. A threshold for these probabilities are also
chosen. To exemplify this, consider the situation where an input(s) x is predicted to
belong to the class A with probability 60%. This means that for any threshold below
60 will classify this point as class A, however once above 60%, the output will be B
(for binary classification). Brier score provides a measure of the accuracy of
classifications in relation to their relation to the model's predicted probability of said
classification. In short the Brier score is a measure of the model’s confidence when
predicting, where 0 is highly confident and 1 is the least confident. The Brier score
for both models are low (with random forest being the better of the two), highlighting
that both models are quite confident in their classifications. In conclusion the
Random forest exhibits superior performance to the logit model in predicting
whether startups will raise more than one round of funding, with better accuracy,
cross validation accuracy, F1 and Brier score.
 Figure 1: ROC Curves Part 1 Excluding   Figure 2: Precision Recall Curves Part
 Gender                              1 Excluding Gender

 Receiver operating characteristics curves for the       Precision-Recall curves for the logit and random
 logit and random forest model for part 1 excluding     forest model for part 1 excluding gender. The
 gender. A larger area under curve means the model    random forest model displays the best combinations
 is better at distinguishing between organizations       of precision and recall.
 that have and have not raised more than one round.
 It also reduces overfitting.

Similar to Fuster et al. (2022) ROC (receiver operating characteristics) curves are
also featured in our paper. These plot the true positive rate and the false positive rate
at every threshold. The optimal threshold is where the curve is bent the most toward
the north west corner. Here the true positive rate is maximized and the false positive
rate minimized (James, 2023). For example for the logit function in figure 1 it would
be at (0.4, 0.7).
    In addition to the ROC the AUC (area under curve) is also of importance. The
AUC represents degree or measure of separability. It displays how much the model is
capable of distinguishing between classes. In short a larger AUC means the model
displays greater effectiveness in distinguishing between successful and unsuccessful
startups (James, 2023).

30
  Precision = (TP)/(TP + FP), Recall = (TP)/(TP + FN)
                             Founders And Financials 22

    Figure 1 illustrates the ROCs and AUCs of the random forest and logit model.
While both models produce relatively modest AUC scores, it is clear that the tuned
random forest model is superior to the logit model with a larger AUC of 0.66 relative
to 0.63. The random forest model does not outstrip logit at every threshold, but is
superior when aggregating across all thresholds (seen by AUC). The low AUC scores
in relation to the above tabled scores, implies that while the model performs well at
the optimized threshold, it is poor when considered against all thresholds. The
reasoning behind this is due to the assumption that the amount of venture capital
invested is the same over our sample period. With this assumption the model has not
been tuned for cross-threshold performance. The assumption is faulty and further
literature should review the performance across thresholds. The model is also
impacted as in actuality for years 2010-2012, 2010 had the highest VC investment
followed by 2011, 2012 (Härd, 2022). As such companies in 2010 may have had an
easier time getting investment, but may also have received more in their first rounds.
Ideally this data would be available for the model and is something that should be
further researched.
   Precision and recall curves are present in Figure 2. The ideal model maximizes
both precision and recall simultaneously resulting in a precision recall curve that is
bent outward north east in Figure 2. Based on figure 2 the tuned random forest
model is closer to the ideal indicating a lower rate of false positives, something we
wish to avoid.
    Given the above it is fair to assert that the random forest model is the better
choice. While the focus of the following analysis will be on SHAP values for random
forest, traditional values will also be analyzed.
    The Random forest model exhibits 66.67% true positives, 7.93% true negative,
1.59% false negatives and 23.81% false positives. Appendix D Panel I visualize these
in a heat map. The Feature importances are ordered as follows: the net sales ratio has
the largest reliance at 32.66%. This is followed by the quick ratio at 28.33%, ROE at
25.21%, serial founder at 7.12% and lastly distance from Stockholm at 6.67%
weighting. Thus far the presented results have not been evaluated against the data
distribution and collection, which have major implications.
    The inclusion of funding rounds pre professional VC investments in part one of
our paper likely influence the results. Literature by Howell (2020), highlights how
the winning of a startup competition can serve as a certification that signals a high
quality of an organization to VC investors. Howell’s results underlines that a higher
percentage of startups raise capital from angels and VCs combined, compared to VC
investments alone. Consequently, the inclusion of early pre VC funding rounds in the
data might explain the large share of successes. In table 2 it is shown that 68.1% of
observations in the data in part one excluding gender represent organizations that
have raised more than one round of funding. It is likely that this number would be
smaller if early pre VC rounds would have been excluded in the data gathering
process. In appendix D, panel I it can be observed that the vast majority of the
observations in the test data are classified as successes by the tuned random forest
model in part one. This, for example, leads to quite a large number of false positives,
namely 15. False positives in this context are firms that have raised only one round,
yet that are classified as having raised more than one round. This reduces the
precision of the model totaling at 74.21%. At the same time the recall remains at a
higher level of 95.35%. The fact that there is only one false negative in the test
dataset, means this false negative does not impact recall to the same extent as the 15
false positives influence the precision number. There might be a number of other
explanations why the majority of observations are successes. For example, financial
                             Founders And Financials 23

information in the Serrano database might be missing for firms that have failed to
raise multiple rounds. This potential selection bias could have resulted in certain
startups that had raised only one round being omitted from the final dataset.
However, the inclusion of early angel and seed rounds might be another reason. An
early angel round might serve as signaling through certification similarly to winning
a startup competition as presented by Howell. Relating to this, Hellman and Thiel
(2015) highlight how the angel market works as a screening mechanism for
subsequent VC dealflow. In short the high share of successes influences the machine
learning prediction with a majority of observations categorized as successes.
Although, we should acknowledge that these potential explanations for our results
cannot be established with certainty.
     In Appendix E partial dependence plots for the different characteristics in the
tuned random forest model in part one are displayed. The partial dependence plots
only showcase the magnitude of the marginal contribution to success prediction, not
the direction. In panel I it can be seen that the marginal contribution to the ML
prediction of the ROE variable is highest for values below 0% ROE. This is likely a
reflection of the difficulty for most startups to be profitable. Both those that fail and
succeed might struggle with profitability which could influence the input data and
hence the success prediction, either negatively or positively. In panel II it can be
observed that the marginal effect for the success prediction is the strongest at around
a net sales ratio of 0. Panel III highlights that for quick ratio the contribution to the
prediction of success is the strongest for values above about 1. Interestingly, panel IV
suggests the marginal effect for the prediction is the strongest for values of distance
from Stockholm at zero. Panel V underlines that prior founder experience has a
higher marginal effect for the prediction of success when compared to lack of prior
experience.
    While the above traditional analysis are of use, SHAP values allow for a better
understanding of the direction of magnitudes that each plot may have.
        Figure 3. Absolute Mean SHAP Value- RF Part 1 Excluding Gender

Absolute mean SHAP values for random forest part 1, excluding gender. The larger the bar the larger the
absolute mean SHAP value of the variable. The larger the absolute mean SHAP value the larger the magnitude
of the contribution of a feature to the ML prediction of raising more than one round. Here class 1 represents
success whereas class 0 represents failure.
Figure 3 indicates that the net sales ratio has had the largest overall impact on the
success prediction. However, it is not possible to establish whether the effect is
negative or positive based on Figure 3. Interestingly the financial metrics of the firms
in the sample has the highest overall impact on the success prediction. The
characteristics of the founding team, namely serial founder and distance from
Stockholm has the least overall impact on the success predictions of the tuned
random forest model. It should be reiterated that SHAP values relate to correlational
effects and not causal effects.
                             Founders And Financials 24

         Figure 4. SHAP values- Tuned RF Model Part 1 Excluding Gender

SHAP values for random forest part 1, excluding gender. A blue value indicates a low value of a variable and
red indicates a high value of a variable. Blue for distance from Stockholm indicates a 0 distance from
Stockholm and red a high distance from Stockholm. Red indicates a value of 1 for the serial founder variable
indicates a serial founder in a team and blue represents a value of 0 representing a lack of serial founders in a
team. A positive SHAP value means a positive contribution of a variable to the ML prediction of raising more
than one round.
Figure 4 outlines that high (red dots) and medium (purple dots) net sales ratios are
negatively correlated with success, while low ratios are more ambiguous. Another
observation is that the high and medium quick ratios are correlated with success,
while low quick ratios are weakly correlated with failure. While low ROEs are
correlated with success, high ROEs are more ambiguous. For the serial founder
variable it can be observed that organizations with a serial founder contribute
positively to the success prediction. This is likely influenced by the low number of
organizations with serial founders in the dataset. Lastly, for the distance from
Stockholm parameter the blue dots in Figure 4 that represent organizations from
Stockholm have slightly positive SHAP values. Most red dots, representing a high
distance from Stockholm, have negatively influenced the success prediction. Again it
should be noted that the magnitude of the contribution to the ML prediction for the
distance from Stockholm and serial founder variables are lower relative to the
financial metrics. Often there is a spread of low (net sales ratio and quick ratio) or
high (ROE) results in terms of the SHAP values. The spread is indicative of
complexity in financial analysis, indicating that the impact of each financial metric
on a startup's success can significantly vary between companies.
     The contribution of the net sales ratio and ROE variables can be related to
literature by Puri and Zarutskie (2012). For example, the authors study VC backed
and non VC backed startups. Results suggest scale to be an important firm attribute
that venture capitalists focus attention on. Specifically the authors point out the
importance of the scale potential rather than short-term profit. While we focus on
organizations that have raised a minimum of one round, organizations that have
raised multiple rounds are likely similar to the VC backed firms in the study. The
positive contribution of a low value of the ROE variable in figure 4 is aligned with the
relatively less importance of profitability for startups. However, figure 4 displays that
high sales numbers relative to the industry average negatively contributes to the
prediction. This hence does not suggest a larger scale, here more revenue relative to
the industry, contribute positively to the prediction of raising more than one round.
The negative SHAP values for high net sales levels in Figure 4 might be influenced by
the inclusion of early angel and seed rounds. This implies that the second round for
certain firms in the sample is in a relatively early phase of development. At early
stages many firms might receive financing based on the future potential rather than
past or current performance as suggested by Puri and Zarutskie (2012).
   The contribution of the quick ratio variable to the ML prediction can be related to
literature by Davila and Foster (2007). The authors point out that firms with negative
                             Founders And Financials 25

cash flow levels in early stages are usually those in need of venture capital. Further,
the authors point out that numerous private funding rounds are usually needed to
turn the cash flow of companies backed by VCs positive. Davila and Foster write that
financial planning can help organizations in the negotiation for new funding.
Financial planning helps with cash management in firms constrained in terms of
cash. The authors find that the usage of financial planning is not as substantial for
companies not funded by VCs compared to VC financed startups. It is also found that
HR and strategic planning are introduced earlier compared to financial planning in
non VC backed firms. We do not focus on the distinction between non VC backed and
VC backed startups. However, similar to VC backed firms adopting financial
planning to a greater extent compared to non VC backed firms, it might be the case
that firms that raise multiple funding rounds employ more sophisticated financial
planning systems. This might hence have increased the liquidity of these firms and
hence the quick ratio. This could reflect itself in the ML prediction where companies
with higher quick ratios might be benefitted.
   Bernstein et al. (2017) find evidence of the importance of the founding team and
human characteristics for the success of early stage ventures in attracting investors.
Figure 4 suggests a larger magnitude of the contribution of the financial
characteristics of firms to the ML prediction relative to the founder characteristics.
The authors conduct an experiment to establish causal effects. Unlike the authors we
focus on how the usage of founder and financial characteristics impact ML success
predictions. Still the authors acknowledge that the results do not indicate a lack of
importance of nonhuman assets. Instead the authors relate their results to Rajan
(2012). The importance of human capital in early development and the need for the
founder to make him or herself possible to replace is highlighted by Rajan (2012).
The rationale behind this need for replacement is the provision of control rights to
investors, hence enabling the raising of external financing, for example by a VC. The
relatively higher importance of for instance the net sales ratio to the founder team
variables is contrary to the results by Bernstein et al. (2017) on the importance of the
founding team to get investor interests. However, our results are likely influenced by
the focus on second round funding as the success metric. This implies the
organizations in our dataset are at a relatively later stage of development compared
to very early stage ventures. It could be that firms have moved from differentiation,
closer to standardization in the language of Rajan (2012).
     The inclusion of prior founder experience relates to literature by Gompers,
Kovner, Lerner and Scharfstein (2010). Gompers et al. (2010) highlight that prior
successful entrepreneurial experience displays greater likelihood of future success.
Our results only indicate whether a founder has prior founder experience and not the
success of that entrepreneurial experience. However, the importance of prior founder
experience has also been addressed by Gompers et al (2020) that raise
entrepreneurial experience as one of the factors representing the team in the decision
making process of VCs. The authors specifically underline the importance of a prior
relationship with a particular VC for entrepreneurs. The results in figure 4 for the
serial founder variable indicate a positive effect for prior founder experience and a
slight negative effect for a lack thereof. From the perspective of the direction of the
SHAP values, the red dots that represent prior founder experience are aligned with
literature that highlights the importance of prior founder experience. In short the ML
predictions favor founders with prior founder experience.
   The slightly positive SHAP values for a zero kilometer distance from Stockholm in
Figure 4 could reflect the dominance of Stockholm startups in the dataset. However,
                             Founders And Financials 26

simultaneously it might also be indicative of the importance of being near a hub for
VC investments to attract capital.
   Chen, Gompers and Kovner (2010) find geographical clustering in three US cities
among US venture capital firms. Chen et al. (2010) find that the degree of
localization is higher within the VC industry compared to the rest of the financial
industry. In figure 4 somewhat positive SHAP values for a low distance from
Stockholm are shown. Moreover, a high distance from Stockholm, represented by red
dots, has negative SHAP values. This implies that a low distance from Stockholm
positively contributes to the prediction of raising more than one round. At the same
time, a higher distance from Stockholm negatively influence this prediction. This
might be a reflection of Stockholm as a VC cluster in Sweden, which can influence the
ML prediction through the input data. Our results are aligned with findings by Chen
et al. (2010). This could potentially also relate to the importance of networks and
referrals in VCs generation of deals highlighted by Gompers et al. (2020). Stockholm
based startups might be more networked compared to non Stockholm based
organizations. This might explain the positive contribution to the prediction of a low
distance from Stockholm. Further, the similarity between Stockholm based founders
and VCs could potentially relate to Ewens and Townsend’s (2020) discussion about
homophily. If VCs are more inclined to invest in those similar to themselves this
might also entail geographic location of the startup and consequently the founders.
From this perspective one would expect organizations located near Stockholm as a
hub for venture capital to attract more attention from VC investors and consequently
potentially raise more funding rounds. This in turn might have increased the number
of organizations located in Stockholm in the dataset. Again a ML prediction is a
product of its input data.
  Tian (2011), presents a monitoring hypothesis that implies that monitoring costs
are reduced for firms located close geographically to VCs. As a consequence, Tian
claims VC investors might conduct less funding rounds. On the contrary
organizations located far from VCs might receive staged investments because of the
higher monitoring costs. The result presented by the author supports this hypothesis.
Tian reports a regression with the number of funding rounds as the dependent
variable and different independent variables for distance measures. Unlike Tian, our
paper does not include the distance between individual VCs and organizations.
However, we use a variable that represents the distance from Stockholm of
organizations. This can be valuable in a Swedish context where the majority of
venture capital is raised by firms in Stockholm. Naturally other VC clusters might
exist in Sweden which highlights a limitation of our study. The results presented in
part 1 of our paper only takes into account whether a startup has raised more than
one round of funding. In reality a VC might stage investments in more than two
rounds. Also the inclusion of early seed and angel rounds negatively influence the
possibility to draw conclusions about VC staging in our paper. Our results indicate
that a high distance from Stockholm negatively influences the success prediction.
This is contrary to Tian’s monitoring hypothesis where one would expect a large
distance from Stockholm to positively influence the prediction of raising more than
one round.
                              Founders And Financials 27

              Figure 5 - Dependence Plots- Part 1 Excluding Gender

 Panel I. Distance from Stockholm Panel II. Serial Founder

 Panel III. Quick Ratio Panel IV. Return on equity

                                Panel V. Net Sales Ratio
Figure 5 displays dependence plots for the different variables used in the random forest model for part 1
excluding gender. Positive SHAP values imply a positive contribution of a variable to the ML prediction of
raising more than one round.
Figure 5 showcases dependence plots for the different independent variables used in
the random forest model in part one, excluding gender. In panel I it can mainly be
observed that most of the SHAP values are positive for a distance of 0 kilometers
from Stockholm. For most of the distances above 0 distance from Stockholm the
SHAP values are negative. Somewhat of a downward trend in the SHAP values as the
distance from Stockholm increases can be observed. Thus, for larger distances, the
distance from Stockholm variable negatively impacts the success prediction of the
tuned random forest model in part 2. Panel II depicts SHAP values in relation to the
serial founder feature. The binary feature exhibits a positive correlation; the serial
founder attributed is correlated with success. Moreover, data in Panel III expounds
the relation between quick ratio and SHAP values. While the concentration around 0
is difficult to classify, it appears that the SHAP values increase as the quick ratio
increases. Panel IV indicates higher ROE negatively contributes to the ML prediction
of raising more than one round. Panel V suggests that the net sales ratio for the
                             Founders And Financials 28

organizations with the lowest sales ratio close to zero contribute positively to the
success prediction.
   The percentage of female founders has been added to the random forest model in
part one. Table 7 displays an overview for the model in part one including gender. It
should be noted that certain observations have been dropped for the model including
gender as described in section IV. The estimators (in this case weak learner trees) in
the cross validation process for the model in part one including gender are 245, with
a maximum depth of 14 levels or questions, used for splitting.
      Table 7. Random Forest Summary Overview- Part 1 Including Gender

 Model Accuracy Cross        Cross        Precision Recall F1 Score Brier Score ROC AUC
                                Validation     Validation                                                                 Score
                                Test           Train
                              Accuracy      Accuracy

 Logit 0.689655 0.640873 0.684211 0.703704 0.95 0.808511 0.216152 0.554167

 Random     0.775862 0.640873 0.729323 0.775510 0.95 0.853933 0.173163 0.772917
  Forest

Overview of evaluation metrics for the logit and random forest models for the part 1, merged Sweden Tech
Ecosystem and Serrano dataset including gender.
The accuracy and cross validation train accuracy increases for both the tuned
random forest and logit model. The tuned random forest model has a train cross
validation accuracy of 72.93%, and hence appears superior to the logit model. The F1
score is also higher for the tuned random forest model at a value of 85.39%. Also the
F1 score is higher for both the tuned random forest model and the logit model that
includes gender compared to the models that exclude gender. This is mainly due to a
reduced precision of the models that negatively impact the F1 score. The Brier score
is also lower for the random forest model which is positive for the confidence of the
model's prediction.
 Figure 6. ROC Curves RF Part 1           Figure 7. Precision Recall Curves Part 1
 Including Gender                       Including Gender

 Receiver operating characteristics curves for the       Precision-Recall curves for the logit and random
 logit and random forest model for part 1 including     forest model for part 1 including gender. The
 gender. A larger area under curve means the model    random forest model displays the best combinations
 is better at distinguishing between organizations       of precision and recall.
 that have and have not raised more than one round.
 It also reduces overfitting.

As showcased in Figure 6 the tuned random forest model including gender has a
notably larger AUC than the logit model. Further, the precision recall curve for the
tuned model indicates that the tuned model has superior combinations of precision
and recall.
                             Founders And Financials 29

   See Appendix F for the confusion matrix together with the explanatory weights for
the tuned random forest model in part one including gender. Similarly to the model
excluding gender the majority of the observations in the test set have been classified
as successes for the model including gender (see panel I). This is likely influenced by
the fact that the majority of the observations in the data are represented by
organizations that have raised more than one round. Panel II interestingly shows
that the financial characteristics all have the highest explanatory weight for the tuned
random forest model including gender. Distance from Stockholm is the founding
team variable with the highest explanatory weight. The share of female founders and
the serial founder variables both have the lowest explanatory weight of the model.
   Interestingly the team is the most important factor for decision making for many
VCs as highlighted by Gompers et al. (2020). At the same time our results for part
one indicate that founder team characteristics have the least explanatory weight for
ML success predictions. Literature by Kaplan et al. (2009) that highlights the
importance of the business relative to the team for investment decisions is relevant in
this context. Over time the authors show a tendency for founder replacement over
time. Our results indicate that the financial characteristics of firms influence the ML
predictions the most. This might be influenced by the somewhat later stage focus in
our paper, with a focus on second round funding. As a firm matures the original
founders might be less important relative to the financials of the business. However,
still the limitation in terms of not distinguishing between early angel and seed
rounds and later stage VC is hereby noted. This aspect of our data gathering process
makes these interpretations more difficult since for certain firms the second round
might represent a seed or the first early VC round.
   Appendix G displays partial dependence plots for the model in part one including
gender. The interpretations of panel I, II and IV are relatively similar to the
interpretations of the partial dependence plots for the tuned random forest model in
part one excluding gender. However, the contribution to the ML prediction is the
strongest for values slightly above 0 and the magnitude of the contribution then
declines as the quick ratio increases in panel III. For the distance from Stockholm
variable the magnitude of the effect of the variable on the prediction is strongest for
distances above 600 kilometers, followed by distances between 0 and about 400
kilometers. The effect has the lowest magnitude for values between 400 and about
600 kilometers. The partial dependence plot for the share of female founder variable
indicates the magnitude of the effect is the strongest for 0 to 0.2 share of female
founders. Then the magnitude of the contribution to the prediction declines as the
share of female founder variable increases. This is likely influenced by the low
number of startups in the sample with a high share of female founders.
         Figure 8. Absolut Mean SHAP Value- RF Part 1 Including Gender

Absolute mean SHAP values for random forest part 1, including gender. The larger the bar the larger the
absolute mean SHAP value of the variable. The larger the absolute mean SHAP value the larger the magnitude
of the contribution of a feature to the ML prediction of raising more than one round. Here class 1 represents
success whereas class 0 represents failure.
                             Founders And Financials 30

In Figure 8 it can be observed that ROE has the largest impact on the ML predictions
for the model in part 1 including gender. This is followed by the net sales ratio and
quick ratio for the financial metrics. The change is likely due to dropped values that
might have altered the results slightly. However, when gender is added to the model
it can be seen that the share of female founder variable has the lowest impact on the
predictions of the model. Again Figure 8 can only be used to draw conclusions about
the magnitude of the impact of the different variables. In order to discuss the
direction of these impacts see Figure 9
         Figure 9. SHAP values- Tuned RF Model Part 1 Including Gender

SHAP values for random forest part 1, including gender. A blue value indicates a low value of a variable and
red indicates a high value of a variable. Blue for distance from Stockholm indicates a 0 distance from
Stockholm and red a high distance from Stockholm. Red indicates a value of 1 for the serial founder variable
indicates a serial founder in a team and blue represents a value of 0 representing a lack of serial founders in a
team. A blue value also represents a 0% share of female founders in a founding team and red a 100% share of
female founders. A positive SHAP value means a positive contribution of a variable to the ML prediction of
raising more than one round.
The directions for the SHAP values for ROE and net sales are relatively similar to the
model excluding gender. For quick ratio it can be observed that high quick ratios
negatively contribute to the ML prediction, which is the opposite to the model
excluding gender. The effect of the distance from Stockholm variable is more difficult
to interpret in figure 9 compared to in figure 4. The direction for the serial founder
variable is similar to the model without gender. However, it appears as though the
magnitudes are greater for the model including gender. Figure 9 shows that a high
share of female founders, represented by red dots, negatively influence the success
prediction of raising more than one round. At the same time the low share of female
founders, represented by blue dots has a SHAP value of 0 or at slightly above 0.
    The results on the effect of the share of female founder variable in figure 9 relate
to prior literature that highlights how female founders are disadvantaged in the
context of investor interest. In the figure, fully female teams contribute negatively to
the success prediction in the tuned random forest model. Fully female teams in
figure 9 are represented by red dots, whereas fully male teams are represented by
blue dots. Although the magnitude of the contribution is low the direction is still
negative for female teams. That is it contributes negatively to the ML prediction that
organizations raise more than one funding round. Ewens and Townsend (2020) for
instance proxy interest among venture capitalists as whether a startup’s profile is
shared on AngelList. In contrast, to the authors our results cannot provide evidence
of individual investors and their potential gender biases. However, our results can be
interpreted from the perspective of how historic data of founder characteristics
influences machine learning success predictions of organizations. Considering that
the adoption of machine learning in the venture capital context is expanding (Bonelli,
2022), these are interesting empirical results. Ewens and Townsend (2020) find that
                              Founders And Financials 31

female founders experience less success in attracting interest from male investors
compared to male founders. If a venture capitalist would rely on machine learning
predictions similar to those in our paper there is a risk that gender biases could
become institutionalized. The insignificance of gender for the ML prediction could
lead investors to deprioritize diversity in capital allocation. This could have negative
effects on equality in a VC context. This highlights the importance for critical
thinking in the context of usage of ML algorithms in a VC context. It should be
acknowledged that the ML model in our paper is likely less sophisticated than the
models used by established VCs. Naturally it is difficult to retrieve information about
the exact algorithms used by VCs since these are often proprietary.
   Figure 10 showcases dependence plots for the different characteristics in the part
one model including gender. Here focus is placed on analysis of the SHAP values for
the share of female founder variable. It appears as though the SHAP values are
slightly positive for a 0% share of female founders. Then it seems the SHAP values
decrease as the share of female founder variable increases. Thus, the results in figure
10 suggest a higher share of female founders contribute negatively to the ML
prediction of raising more than one funding round. This also relates to the above
discussion related to literature by for instance Ewens and Townsend (2020). The
authors also mention homophily as a potential explanation for the discrimination of
female founders. Relating to the institutional background, there are few VC firms
with female partners in Sweden. If the majority of VC partners that allocate capital
are male this can lead to inequality in who raises numerous capital rounds. From the
perspective of homophily it could be the case that male investors relate more to male
founders. This might have influenced the number of female founders that received
venture funding. This in turn might influence the ML prediction since the dataset is
male dominated. Again ML algorithms are a product of their input data.
               Figure 10. Dependence Plots- Part 1 Including Gender

 Panel I. Distance from Stockholm Panel II. Serial Founder

 Panel III. Quick Ratio Panel IV. Return on equity
                             Founders And Financials 32

 Panel V. Net Sales Ratio Panel VI. Share of Female Founders

Figure 1o displays dependence plots for the different variables used in the random forest model for part 1
including gender. Positive SHAP values imply a positive contribution of a variable to the ML prediction of
raising more than one round.
Although our method is based on Fuster et al. (2022) some fundamental differences
naturally influence the results. The difference in quality in terms of our substantially
smaller dataset has already been noted. Essentially the authors use data more
representative of a broader population. Additionally, Fuster et al. (2022) differ since
they analyze mortgage data in contrast to the startup and founder data analyzed in
our paper. While the authors for instance use default of mortgage as the target
variable our target variable is whether organizations raise more than one round.
Furthermore,the inclusion of more non-financial factors relative to Fuster et al.
(2022) adds more complexity to the model in our paper.
     Then Fuster et al. (2022) differ in their usage of triangulation to investigate
potential inequalities in predictions of default. Triangulation in Fuster et al. (2022) is
where ML models might indirectly infer effects of race when not explicitly included
in the model. For example, zip codes tied with income, or even frequented
stores/purchases could have different correlations with different ethnic groups. The
implications of this is that a form of unintentional inferred discrimination could
become present in models. The absence of this method for our paper is due to the
limited possibility of triangulation. To elaborate, distance from Stockholm is a one
dimensional metric, were it to include direction and distance, that is a specific
location, the risk of triangulation would increase, however this is not the case. The
Serial founder factor bears risk of triangulation, to the extent that discrimination
exists in the very aspect of having already founded a company. As such this factor
could cause model triangulation, but only if there is significant startup
discrimination to begin with. The serial founder argument can also be extended to
the financial metrics.
   Here, our approach differs since we unlike Fuster et al. (2022) use SHAP values to
investigate how different characteristics impact ML predictions. Then we attempt to
analyze which founder profiles are benefited by the ML algorithm, from the
perspective of geographical location, prior founder experience and gender.
    Given these differences it should still be noted that Fuster et al. (2022) similar to
the results in part 1 of this paper find that the random forest outperforms the logit
model. Similar to the authors we find higher accuracy for the random forest model
compared to the less sophisticated logistic regression. Fuster et al. (2022)
implements two random forest models, one with a race variable and one without.
Here our approach differs since it implements the model with and without gender.
Both models have an AUC of 0.86, when rounded in Fuster et al. (2022). This is
                             Founders And Financials 33

around 0.1-0.2 higher than the AUC for our default and random forest models in
part one. The author’s higher AUC is in part related to a markedly larger dataset. The
data includes millions of observations. Additionally, we only use datasets with 210
and 191 observations in part 1. The authors analyze the credit market and US
mortgages where data is much more structured and available compared to the
private venture capital scene analyzed in our paper.
     The inclusion of SHAP values can be related to Griffin et al. (2023). Utilizing a
tree based algorithm (which random forest is) called Gradient Boosting Decision
Trees (GBDT), the authors analyze dealer markups in the municipal bond market.
The machine learning method is implemented to understand and predict markup
behavior based on factors such as dealer characteristics and practices. The authors
employ SHAP values to quantify contribution of different variables to predict markup
for a specific trade. In such a manner, we adopt and adapt the method of the authors
to the venture capital industry. In our paper the raising of more than one round is
predicted based on founder and financial characteristics.
                            Part 2. EQT Part
Based on the data in part two, a logit and tuned random forest model were
constructed. The tuned model is primed to out perform on the 7 fold cross validation
average accuracy similar to in part one. The number of estimators, that is decision
trees, used in the process amount to 465 trees, with a maximum depth of four levels
or questions, used for splitting, as in part one. Depth of four suggests that the model
is designed to capture some level of interaction but is restrained to prevent
overfitting. As such a lower depth secure is good against overfitting.
              Table 8. Random Forest Summary Overview - Part 2

 Model Accuracy Cross        Cross        Precision Recall F1 Score Brier Score ROC AUC
                                Validation     Validation                                                                 Score
                                Test           Train
                              Accuracy      Accuracy

 Logit 0.662921 0.652015 0.671921 0 0 0 0.196698 0.668966

 Random     0.719101 0.684982 0.729557 0.833333 0.172414 0.172414 0.190487 0.738218
  Forest

Overview of evaluation metrics for the logit and random forest models for the part 2, EQT data
The accuracy of the tuned random forest model, that treats the variable of female
dominant startup as a continuous measure is 71.19% as displayed in table 8. Taking
into account cross validation similar to Fuster et al. (2022), the cross validation test
accuracy is 65.2% for the logit model. As observed the tuned model has a higher cross
validation test accuracy at 68.49%. From this perspective the tuned random forest
model appears to be better at prediction relative to the default model from the
perspective of model accuracy. The Brier score is also slightly lower for the random
forest model, indicating it has somewhat more confidence in its predictions.
   Interesting observations can be made from the perspective of precision and recall
of the logit and tuned random forest models. In short the logit model in table 8
correctly predicts 0% of successful observations, of the observations classified as
successes. The recall of 0% of the logit model indicates that none of the actual
successes were predicted to be successes. This could likely be explained by the
skewness in the data as explained in section IV. The vast majority of observations in
the data in part two are categorized as not successful, that is represented by
organizations with only one round of funding. It is interesting to note how the model
incorrectly classifies observations as not successful from this perspective. For the
                             Founders And Financials 34

tuned random forest model the precision is high at 83.33%, with a low recall of only
17.24%. This can likely be explained by the skewed nature of the data. It is difficult to
attempt to compare the results in section one with those in section two because of the
differences in the datasets. Further, because of the limited information about the
data aggregation process and variable definitions in part two this also makes a
potential comparison difficult.
   The tuned random forest model at first appears somewhat better than the default
model. However, further analysis highlights that neither of the models perform very
well at the binary classification from the perspective of the F1 score. The F1 score is
relevant in this context for example, because of the skewness in the data. The F1
score of 0% for the logit model and 28.57% for the tuned random forest model can be
explained by the low recall of both models. This underlines the difficulty to create a
highly accurate binary classification model for skewed data.

 Figure 11. ROC Curves- Part 2            Figure 12. Precision Recall Curves-
                                         Part 2

 Receiver operating characteristics curves for the       Precision-Recall curves for the logit and random
 logit and random forest model for part 2. A larger     forest model for part 2. The random forest model
 area under curve means the model is better at          displays the best combinations of precision and
 distinguishing between organizations that have and    recall. Note that the line 0-1 for recall 0 is due to
 have not raised more than one round. It also reduces   logit model having a 0 recall, 0 precision and 0 fi
 overfitting.                                             score

ROC curves are also reported for part two in figure 11. Here the tuned random forest
model appears to be the preferred relative to the logit model with a larger AUC. The
interesting tradeoff between precision and recall can further be visualized with the
help of precision and recall curves (see Figure 12). The curve for the tuned random
forest model is closer to the north east section of the graph. That is the tuned model
appears better in this sense than the logit model. However, at the same time it is
clear that neither of the logit or tuned random forest models displays a great
combination of both precision and recall.
   As depicted in Appendix H, panel I the number of true positives amount to 5.62%
and the number of true negatives are 66.29%. The number of false negatives are
26.97% and the number of false positives are 1.12%. Further panel II in Appendix H
showcases that the percentage of female founders is the characteristic with the most
weight in terms of predicting success or failure. Specifically, the percentage of female
founders weighs 36.74%. The distance from Stockholm is the characteristic with the
second most weight, namely at 33.09%. This is followed by founders with prior
experience at a weight of 30.17%.
   The three graphs in appendix I show the average partial dependence for different
decision trees generated in the random forest method. The average partial
                             Founders And Financials 35

dependence is plotted against the three different characteristics used in part 2. The
plots show only the magnitude of the reliance on the feature, not whether the feature
is of positive or negative bearing. For example, in panel I of appendix I, three
especially notable peaks in partial dependence can be observed. These peaks are at
zero distance from Stockholm, at about 400 kilometers and at around 600
kilometers, distance from Stockholm. The partial dependence of percentage of
female founders is the highest for organizations with mixed teams. This is reflected
in panel II, appendix I, where the partial dependence value is the highest at around
50% female founders. Panel III outlines that when one or more founders with prior
experience is present in the figure, the weight of this feature is nearly 12% higher,
showing a more assured correlation between the feature and the success metric.
  Figure 13. Mean(|SHAP value|) (average impact on model output magnitude) -
                               Tuned RF - Part 2
´

Absolute mean SHAP values for random forest part 2. The larger the bar the larger the absolute mean SHAP
value of the variable. The larger the absolute mean SHAP value the larger the magnitude of the contribution of
a feature to the ML prediction of raising more than one round. Here class 1 represents success whereas class 0
represents failure.
SHAP values can help facilitate the understanding of different characteristics impact
on the prediction of the random forest model. Investigating the SHAP values in the
model is relevant to investigate the characteristics of most importance for the results
generated by the model. As observed in Figure 13, founders with prior experience
have the highest impact on the prediction of the random forest model, based on the
mean of the absolute SHAP value. This is followed by percentage Female founders
with the second highest mean SHAP value and lastly distance from Stockholm. In
short this implies that on average over all observations the magnitude of the
contribution is the largest for founders with prior experience and percentage of
female founders.
                    Figure 14. SHAP value - Tuned RF- Part 2

SHAP values for random forest part 2. A blue value indicates a low value of a variable and red indicates a high
value of a variable. Blue for distance from Stockholm indicates a 0 distance from Stockholm and red a high
distance from Stockholm. Red indicates a value of 1 for the serial founder variable indicates a serial founder in
a team and blue represents a value of 0 representing a lack of serial founders in a team. A blue value also
represents a 0% share of female founders in a founding team and red a 100% share of female founders. A
positive SHAP value means a positive contribution of a variable to the ML prediction of raising more than one
round.
From Figure 14 it can be discerned that prior founder experience, represented by the
red color on the first row, is nearly always useful for predicting success in part 2. This
                             Founders And Financials 36

is reflected by positive SHAP values for the red dots that contribute positively to the
success metric on the first row. It can also be seen that in contrast lack of prior
founder experience, represented by the blue dots on the same row in the figure,
negatively impacts the success prediction. Further, organizations with only male
teams are represented by the blue color and fully female teams are represented by
the red color on the second row in Figure 14. Mixed teams are represented by purple
dots. It can be seen that neither fully male nor fully female teams seem to benefit in
terms of success prediction, represented by the negative SHAP values. However, the
negative effect appears to be less strong for fully male teams compared to fully
female teams. The positive effect for success predictions is strongest for mixed teams,
represented by a positive SHAP value for the purple colored dots on the second row
near the value 0.4. Mixed teams are strongly tilted positively by near 0.4 in SHAP
value. Based on the third row for distance from Stockholm in Figure 14 it is difficult
to draw any clear conclusions.
    The literature by Ewens and Townsend (2020) can also be discussed relative to
the results in Figure 14. In Figure 14 fully female teams contribute negatively to the
success prediction in the tuned random forest model. That is it contributes negatively
to the prediction that organizations raise more than one round of financing.
However, the results in part two indicate that both fully female and fully male teams
contribute negatively to the success prediction of the organization. Based on Figure
14 this negative effect is stronger for fully female teams compared to male teams.
Although, one might try to explain this from the perspective of Ewens and
Townsend’s results, this should be done with caution. There are positive SHAP
values for what appears to be primarily mixed teams, represented by purple dots in
Figure 14 for the share of female founders characteristic.
   A similar discussion as in part 1 related to literature by Gompers et al. (2010) on
the importance of prior entrepreneurial experience could also be conducted here.
The SHAP values for the prior founder experience variable in Figure 14 is aligned
with the notion that prior entrepreneurial experience is important for future success.
   A comment about the quality of the data used in part two is important in relation
to the analysis of the results. The substantially smaller dataset used in our paper,
compared to for example Fuster et al. (2022) is a limitation of our study. Naturally
the difficulty to clearly establish conclusions about the impact of different
characteristics will be influenced by the quality of the data used. It should be noted
again that for instance important financial characteristics of firms are not included in
the analysis in part two. Consequently, the analysis of the results in part two should
be viewed as a discussion about potential explanations of the mechanisms
underpinning the results. Further, for example the skewed nature of the data will
influence the results. A vast majority of the observations are represented by
organizations categorized as not successful. Also, as previously mentioned the
dataset is highly male dominated. Therefore, this might explain why both fully male
and fully female teams as a characteristic negatively influence the machine learning
success predictions of the organizations. As depicted in Appendix H, panel I a
substantial portion of the predictions are categorized as not successful and relatively
many false negatives in the prediction negatively influences the recall of the tuned
random forest model. Our results highlight the importance of thoroughly examining
the input data used for predictions since it naturally impacts the success predictions.
For instance, if a venture capital investor would use a ML model with skewed data
without awareness of the associated risks this could negatively influence decision
making. It is difficult to discuss the potential reasons behind the low number of
successes in the dataset in part two because of the limited information of the data
                              Founders And Financials 37

aggregation process in part two. For instance, information about the definition of
what constitutes a funding round in part 2 is missing.
             Figure 15. Dependence Plots Part 2 Tuned Random Forest

 Panel I Panel II Panel III

Figure 15 displays dependence plots for the different variables used in the random forest model for part 2
including gender. Positive SHAP values imply a positive contribution of a variable to the ML prediction of
raising more than one round.
Figure 15, panel I further highlights the difficulty to draw conclusions about
geographical clustering in part 2. The SHAP values are relatively dispersed and it is
not evident that a low distance from Stockholm is associated with positive SHAP
values. This is what one would expect from the perspective of for instance literature
on VC clustering by Chen et al. (2010). Panel II and III confirm the above discussions
related to literature by Ewens and Townsend (2020) and Kovner et al. (2010).
                    VII. Robustness
The Dimension of robustness has already been touched upon earlier, however will be
more intensely viewed in this section. Robustness will be investigated in two
manners. First in model creation and second in model and result evaluation.
   Building a robust model is defined by how well the model performs when tasked
with an unseen set of data. To achieve a robust model we predominantly focused on
three methods, stratification, k-fold cross-validation, and hyperparameter
optimization.
    Stratification sampling is a technique utilized to ensure the diversity and
characteristics of a dataset are well represented in any sample of said dataset (Géron,
2019). This is utilized twice in our models, initially in our split of training and test
data, to make sure the proportion of successes to failures is the same. Additionally,
this was conducted for the k-fold cross-validation of the training data, meaning that
each fold shares the same or similar characteristics. For the cross-validation folds of
the test data, stratification was omitted to mimic real life data variance.
   When optimizing the hyperparameters of the model, certain restrictions were set
to minimize overfitting. Namely, the number of trees has to be between 50 and 550,
and have max depth between 1-15.
   The model evaluations underwent several robustness checks. The first is similar to
Fuster et al. (2022), where 100 bootstrapped samples are constructed from the test
set and the models (logit and random forest) were applied to predict upon the same
100 different samples. Additionally, a placebo test, where the feature values are
entirely random provides a method to determine whether the models “learn”. Here
one wishes to see a drop in accuracy indicative of the fact that the model has learnt
and is not only good at guessing. The placebo in addition to the 100 bootstrapped
                             Founders And Financials 38

samples provide ground for evaluating the stability of the model, if there is an aspect
of over-fitting or underfitting specifically, and comparison of the models.
   Table 9. Random Forest Robustness Summary Overview- Part 1 Excl. Gender
 Model Bootstrap Average      Placebo Accuracy Bootstrap Variance
                        Score                                         Score

 Logit 0.650476 0.587302 0.004071

 Random Forest 0.73 0.460317 0.003243
Robustness summary overview for the random forest model in part 1 excluding gender
Recall that in part 1 excluding gender, the random forest model outperforms the
logistic regression model across all metrics. This is evidenced by the random forest
achieving higher accuracy (0.730159) and cross-validation accuracy (0.761905) over
that of the logit model ‘s (0.650794; 0.634921). Both models exhibit learning
capabilities, their accuracy differing minorly to their bootstrapped accuracy (random
forest: 0.73, Logit: 0.650476) and their significantly lower placebo accuracy
(Random Forest: 0.460317, Logit: 0.587302). The random forest displays even lower
placebo accuracy which is indicative of a robustness to over-fitting, and reliability in
capturing true signals. Additionally, both for the random forest and the logit model,
the placebo score accuracies are lower than that of the naive model that only votes
the majority class yield as 68.34% accuracy (the target variable is skewed: 1: 149, 0:
69). This is indicative that the models are not just enhanced guessing machines, but
have, to some extent, absorbed underlying pattern data. Pursuant to the random
forest’s performance dominance, it also outstrips the logistic regression in terms of
recall (Random Forest: 0.953488, Logit: 0.906977), precision (Random Forest:
0.742143, Logit: 0.684211), and F1 score (Random Forest: 0.828283, Logit: 0.78).
These aspects accentuate random forest’s eminence in part 1 excluding gender.
      Table 10. Random Forest Robustness Overview- Part 1 Including Gender
 Model Bootstrap Average      Placebo Accuracy Bootstrap Variance
                        Score                                         Score

 Logit 0.693793 0.620690 0.003110

 Random Forest 0.772069 0.482756 0.002905
Robustness summary overview for the random forest model in part 1 including gender
In part 1 including gender, the random forest model is superior to the logistic
regression. The random forest has a higher accuracy (0.775862) and the same
cross-validation accuracy (0.640873) compared to the logit model‘s (0.689655;
0.640873). Both models exhibit learning capabilities, their accuracy with only some
differences to their bootstrapped accuracy (random forest :0.772069, Logit:
0.693793 and their lower placebo accuracy (Random Forest: 0.482756, Logit:
0.620690). However, it should be noted that the placebo accuracy for the logit model
is relatively similar to the normal accuracy, which is not positive. The placebo
accuracy for the random forest model is significantly lower. The lower placebo
accuracy for the random forest indicates a robustness to over-fitting, and that the
model reliably captures true signals. Additionally, both for the random forest and the
logit model, the placebo score accuracies are lower than that of the naive model that
only votes the majority class yield as 68.34% accuracy ( the target variable is skewed:
1: 149, 0: 69). This is indicative that the models to some extent absorb underlying
pattern data. The recall is the same for random forest and logistic regression here.
                             Founders And Financials 39

Random forest outperforms in terms of precision (Random Forest: 0.775510, Logit:
0.703704), and F1 score (Random Forest: 0.853933, Logit: 0.808511).
              Table 11. Random Forest Robustness Overview- Part 2
 Model Bootstrap Average      Placebo Accuracy Bootstrap Variance
                        Score                                         Score

 Logit 0.663371 0.471910 0.002262

 Random Forest 0.713146 0.685393 0.002157
Robustness summary overview for the tuned random forest model in part 2
Lastly in part 2, the random forest model is better than the logistic regression for all
evaluation metrics. The random forest has a higher accuracy (0.719101) and
cross-validation accuracy (0.684982) compared to the logit model ‘s (0.662921;
0.652015). Both models' accuracy only differ somewhat to their bootstrapped
accuracy (random forest : 0.712146, Logit: 0.663371). The random forest model
outperforms both in terms of precision, recall, and F1 score. The logit model has a
recall, precision and F1 score equal to 0% implying that the model is only predicting
failures. The fact that the data for this section is skewed in favor of failure, makes this
result not entirely alien, given the simplicity of the logit model. Finally, there is the
placebo score. The placebo accuracy is relatively high for the random forest model at
0.685393, although low for the logit model at 0.471910. The relatively similar
placebo accuracy to the normal accuracy for the random forest model in part two
accentuates the inability of the model to capture the true underlying features. This
highlights the fact that more complex models are not always the better choice. Here it
seems the logit model, while producing lower accuracy, has better captured the true
signals, while the random forest model has picked up nonsensical links between data
and predicting success. This highlights the fact that more complex model are not
always the more correct models.
                      VIII. Conclusion
In this paper, the implementation of machine learning models in predicting the
success in raising more than one funding round for Swedish startups is examined.
The analysis is relevant considering the increasing usage of machine learning
algorithms in venture capital screening. In part 1 financial data from Serrano is
merged with data over founding teams and funding rounds from Sweden Tech
Ecosystem. In part 2 data, provided by EQT, over founder characteristics and the
raising of second round funding is used.
   In part one excluding gender the tuned random forest model performs better than
the logit model, with a higher cross validation test accuracy of 76.19% relative to
logit’s 65.35%. Further, the overall tradeoff between precision and recall is better for
the tuned random forest model. The financial metrics have the strongest explanatory
weight for the predictions of the tuned random forest model both with and without
gender included. This is related to literature by for instance Kaplan et al. (2009) on
founder replacement over time and the importance of the business relative to the
founders for investments. Prior founder experience positively influences ML success
predictions of organizations in the dataset in part one. This relates to literature by
Gompers et al. (201o) and Gompers et al. (2020) on the importance of prior
entrepreneurial experience for future success. For part 1, excluding gender a low
distance from Stockholm slightly positively contributes to the prediction of raising
more than one round. This relates to findings by Gomers et al. (2010) on
geographical clustering in VC. For part 1 including gender a high share of female
                            Founders And Financials 40

founders negatively contributes to the prediction of raising more than one round.
This relates to literature by Ewens and Townsend (2020) that highlights difficulties
for female founders to get investor interest. A venture capitalist's reliance on the ML
prediction in this paper could lead to an institutionalization of biases. The low weight
of the founder characteristics and the negative contribution for a high value of the
share of female founder variable could lead to a deprioritization of diversity in
investment decisions and capital allocation.
   In part two of the paper we find that it is difficult to accurately predict success with
skewed data. The placebo accuracy in part 2 is relatively large, indicative of little
significant learning in part two. There are signs of advantages in terms of success
prediction for teams with serial founders on the team are found. This aligns with the
importance of prior entrepreneurial experience for future success highlighted by
Gompers et al. (2010). Mixed teams also contribute positively to the ML prediction in
part 2. The analysis in part 2 highlights the importance of a thorough examination of
the quality of data used for ML predictions.
    The datasets used in this study are relatively small. Analyzing data over founder
characteristics and startup success and evaluating random forest models, while
insightful, are of little statistical power in determining causality. However, our paper
provides contributions to the literature on decision making and the usage of machine
learning algorithms in a VC context. For future research potential biases in
investment selection for first round funding in a Swedish context could be
investigated through an experimental approach. Furthermore, additional founder
characteristics such as educational background could also be included. Moreover, it
would be interesting to investigate the effects of the removal of early angel and seed
rounds. Future studies can also consider the size of the rounds raised, not only the
number of rounds. It is also advisable for future research to control for the volume of
venture capital available during the years analyzed. Finally, in the future to
contribute to the robustness of the results of a similar study additional ML models
such as Xgboost could be employed similar to Fuster et al. (2022).
                              Founders And Financials 41

                 REFERENCES
Ahmadi, Jan, Dagens Industri, “Nya siffror: Kvinnor fick 0,5 procent av riskkapitalet 2021” (26
October 2022),
<https://www.di.se/hallbart-naringsliv/nya-siffror-kvinnor-fick-0-5-procent-av-riskkapitalet-2021/>
, retrieved 26 September 2023.
Antonio, Osval, López, Montesinos, Montesinos López, Abelardo and Crossa, José, “Multivariate
Statistical Machine Learning Methods for Genomic Prediction”, 2022, 111-121.
Arash Sangari, Tillväxtverket, “Sweden Tech Ecosystem”,
<https://tillvaxtverket.se/tillvaxtverket/seminarierochnatverk/natverkochsamverkan/nationellsamve
rkan/swedentechecosystem.1687.html>, retrieved 5 November 2023.
Bengtsson, Ola and Hsu, David H., “Ethnic matching in the US venture capital market,” (March 2015),
Journal of Business Venturing 30, 340.
Bernstein, Shai, Korteweg, Arthur, and Laws, Kevin, “Attracting Early-Stage Investors: Evidence from
a Randomized Field Experiment,” (April 2017), The Journal of Finance Vol. LXXII, No. 2, 509.
Bonelli, Maxime, “The Adoption of Artificial Intelligence by Venture Capitalists” (November 13,
2022), 1, 4, 8, 34.
Bradshaw, Tim, Financial Times, “Jawbone reaches end of the road as it goes into liquidation” (July 7,
2017), <https://www.ft.com/content/c146f144-62ad-11e7-8814-0ac7eb84e5f1>, retrieved 25
November 2023.
Breiman, Leo, 2001, Random forests, Machine Learning 45, 5–3.
Boström, Towe, Dagens Nyheter, “Kvinnorna osynliga för manliga kapitalister” (2022-01-15),
<https://www.dn.se/ekonomi/kvinnorna-osynliga-for-manliga-kapitalister/>, retrieved 26
September 2023.
Bubna, Amit, R Das, Sanjiv and Prabhala, Nagpurnanand, “Venture Capital Communities” (March
2020), Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis Vol. 55, No. 2, 621-622, 632.
Caesar, Julia and Leijonhufvud, Jonas, Dagens Industri, “Snabb ökning av andelen kvinnliga partners
i riskkapitalbolag” (31 August 2019),
<https://www.di.se/digital/snabb-okning-av-andelen-kvinnliga-partners-i-riskkapitalbolag/> ,
retrieved 19 November 2023.
Cao, Sean, Jiang, Wei, Wang, Junbo and Yang, Baozhong, “From Man vs. Machine to Man + Machine:
The Art and AI of Stock Analyses” (June 2022), Columbia Business School Research Paper.
Chen, Henry, Gompers, Paul, Kovner, Anna, Lerner, Josh, “Buy local? The geography of venture
capital” (2010), Journal of Urban Economics 67, 90-91.
Cremades, Alejandro, Forbes, “The Pros And Cons Of Bootstrapping Startups” (Jan 13, 2019),
<https://www.forbes.com/sites/alejandrocremades/2019/01/13/the-pros-and-cons-of-bootstrapping
-startups/?sh=24a51688273d>, retrieved 3 December 2023.
Currarini, Sergio, Jackson, Matthew O. and Pin, Paolo, “An economic model of friendship:
Homophily, minorities, and segregation” (July 2009), Econometrica Vol 77, No.4, 1003-1004.
Davila, Antonio and Foster George, “Management Control Systems in Early-Stage Startup
Companies”, The Accounting Review , Vol. 82, No. 4 (Jul., 2007), 910, 919-921.
Ewens, Michael and Townsend, Richard R., “Are early stage investors biased against women?” (March
2020), Journal of Financial Economics 135, 653-654, 656, 658-659, 661, 665, 672, 676.
Fuster, Andreas, Goldsmith-Pinkham, Paul, Ramadorai, Tarun and Walther, Ansgar, “Predictably
Unequal? The Effects of Machine Learning on Credit Markets” (February 2022), The Journal of
Finance Vol. LXXVII, No.1, 5-10, 17-26, 32, 42-43.
Géron, Aurélien, “Hands-on Machine Learning with Scikit-Learn, Keras, and TensorFlow - Concepts,
Tools, and Techniques to Build Intelligent Systems”, 2019, 56.
Gompers, Paul, Kovner, Anna, Lerner, Josh, Scharfstein, David, “Performance persistence in
entrepreneurship” (April 2010), Journal of Financial Economics 96, 18.
Gompers, Paul A., “Optimal Investment, Monitoring, and the Staging of Venture Capital” (1995), The
Journal of Finance Vol 50, No. 5, 1463-1467.
Gompers, Paul A., Mukharlyamov, Vladimir and Xuan, Yuhai, “The cost of friendship” (March 2016),
Journal of Financial Economics 119, 627, 634.
                             Founders And Financials 42

Gompers, Paul A., Gornall, Will, Kaplan, Steven N. and Strebulaev, Ilya A., “How do venture
capitalists make decisions?” (January 2020), Journal of Financial Economics 135, 170, 177.
Government Offices of Sweden, “Nytt uppdrag till Tillväxtverket ska stärka förutsättningarna för
kvinnors företagande” (17 March 2023),
<https://www.regeringen.se/pressmeddelanden/2023/03/nytt-uppdrag-till-tillvaxtverket-ska-starka
-forutsattningarna-for-kvinnors-foretagande>, retrieved 16 September 2023.
Griffin, John M., Hirschey, Nicholas and Kruger, Samuel, “Do Municipal Bond Dealers Give Their
Customers “Fair and Reasonable” Pricing?” (April 2023), The Journal of Finance, Vol. LXXVII, No.2,
887, 919-920.
Hastie, Trevor, Tibshirani, Robert and Friedman, Jerome, The Elements of Statistical Learning Data
Mining, Inference and Prediction (2009), 119-128, 309, 587-593.
Hellmann, Thomas and Thiele, Veikko, “Friends or foes? The interrelationship between angel and
venture capital markets” (2015), Journal of Financial Economics 115, 640, 642.
Ho, Tin Kam, 1998, The random subspace method for constructing decision forests, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 20, 832–844.
Hodgson, Leah, PitchBook, “Sweden leads, totals slip: Nordic VC trends for 2022 in 6 charts” (March
8 2023), <https://pitchbook.com/news/articles/nordic-vc-deals-exits-fundraising>, retrieved 1
October 2023.
Howell, Sabrina T., “Reducing information frictions in venture capital: The role of new venture
competitions” (2020), Journal of Financial Economics 136, 676 -679, 694.
Härd, Sverker, Tillväxtanalys, “Riskkapitalstatistik 2020 - venture capital” (January, 2022),
<https://www.tillvaxtanalys.se/download/18.3e9519917ddd5d304b70e78/1643310005214/Statistik_
2022_01_Riskkapitalstatistik_2020_venture_capital.pdf>, 11.
James, Gareth, Witten, Daniela, Hastie, Trevor, Tibshirani, Robert and Taylor, Jonathan, An
Introduction to Statistical Learning with Applications in Python (2023), 154-155, 331, 337-339, 343,
345-346, 382-390, 492.
Johansson, Ida, Göteborgs-Posten, “Fem procent av riskkapitalet hamnar i Göteborgsbolag –
"skrämmande siffror"” (16 Febuary 2020),
<https://www.gp.se/ekonomi/fem-procent-av-riskkapitalet-hamnar-i-g%C3%B6teborgsbolag-skr%C
3%A4mmande-siffror-1.24089400>, retrieved 26 September 2023.
Kaplan, Steven N., Sensoy, Berk A. and Strömberg, Per, “Should Investors Bet on the Jockey or the
Horse? Evidence from the Evolution of Firms from Early Business Plans to Public Companies” (23
January 2009), The Journal of Finance Vol. LXIV, No 1, 75, 112-113.
Kaplan, Steven N. and Sorensen, Morten, “Are CEOs different?” (March 9 2021), The Journal of
Finance Vol. LXXVI, No.4, 1773.
Kessler, Judd B., Low, Corinne, and Sullivan, Colin D., “Incentivized Resume Rating: Eliciting
Employer Preferences without Deception”, (November 2019), The American Economic Review 109,
3739-3740.
Kruppa, Miles and Lee, Dave, Financial Times, “Airbnb raises $1bn from new investors”,
<https://www.ft.com/content/0dff2d66-ca0f-4257-8a3d-867e6aa6544b>, retrieved 24 November
2023.
Lundberg, Scott M., Erion, Gabriel, Chen, Hugh, DeGrave, Alex, Prutkin, Jordan M., Nair, Bala, Katz,
Ronit, Himmelfarb, Jonathan, Bansal, Nisha, and Lee, Su-In, “From local explanations to global
understanding with explainable AI for trees” (Jan 2, 2020), Nature Machine Intelligence
Scott M. Lundberg and Su-In Lee, “A Unified Approach to Interpreting Model Predictions”, 2017.
M. Stone, “Cross-Validatory Choice and Assessment of Statistical Predictions.”, Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), vol. 36, no. 2, 1974.
Olsson Jeffery, Miriam, Di Digital, “Miljarderna fortsätter rulla in till män – dödläge för kvinnors
bolag” (24 July 2021),
<https://www.di.se/digital/miljarderna-fortsatter-rulla-in-till-man-dodlage-for-kvinnors-bolag/>,
retrieved 26 September 2023.
Omni, “Majoriteten riskkapital till Stockholm: ”Skrämmande” “ (16 Febuary 2020),
<https://omni.se/majoriteten-riskkapital-till-stockholm-skrammande/a/y3rgBx>, retrieved 26
September 2023.
                             Founders And Financials 43

 Optuna, “Optimize your Optimization”,
<https://optuna.org/?fbclid=IwAR1ykIFE-rdfwX9YQIODd-66t7qMMeiOc81uCpRJJ9pEuwIkY2kz7Z
uglA8>, retrieved 29 October.
Phelps, Edmund S., “The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism” (Sep 1972), The American
Economic Review Vol. 62, No.4, 659-661.
Puri, Manju and Zarutskie, Rebecca, “On the Life Cycle Dynamics of Venture-Capital and
Non-Venture-Capital-Financed Firms” (December, 2012), The Journal of Finance Vol. LXVII, No 6.,
2248, 2267.
Rajan, Raghuram G, "Presidential Address: The Corporation in Finance” (August 2012), The Journal
of Finance Vol. LXVII, No. 4, 1173-1176.
Stockholm Chamber of Commerce, “Därför är riskkapitalbolagen avgörande för Stockholms
startupscen” (3 April 2023),
<https://stockholmshandelskammare.se/nyheter/darfor-ar-riskkapitalbolagen-avgorande-stockholm
s-startupscen>, retrived 16 September 2023.
SVT, “Entreprenören: Här är fyra hinder för kvinnligt företagande” (16 August 2023),
<https://www.svt.se/nyheter/inrikes/entreprenoren-darfor-startar-farre-kvinnor-an-man-foretag>,
retreived 16 September 2023.
Sweden Tech Ecosystem, “Dashboard”, (2023),
<https://techecosystem.startupsweden.com/dashboard/f/geo/anyof_V%C3%A4stra%20G%C3%B6ta
land>, retrieved 2-5 November 2023.
Sweden Tech Ecosystem, “Funding Rounds”, (2023),
<https://sweden.dealroom.co/transactions.rounds/f/growth_stages/anyof_late%20growth_early%2
0growth_seed_not_mature/launch_year_max/anyof_2012/launch_year_min/anyof_2010/rounds/
not_GRANT_SPAC%20PRIVATE%20PLACEMENT/slug_locations/allof_sweden/tags/not_outside
%20tech>, retrieved 2-5 November 2023.
Sweden Tech Ecosystem, “Funding Rounds”, (2023),
<https://sweden.dealroom.co/transactions.rounds/f/founders_is_serial_founder/anyof_yes/growth
_stages/anyof_late%20growth_early%20growth_seed_not_mature/launch_year_max/anyof_2012/
launch_year_min/anyof_2010/rounds/not_GRANT_SPAC%20PRIVATE%20PLACEMENT/slug_loc
ations/allof_sweden/tags/not_outside%20tech>, retrieved 2-5 November 2023.
Swedish Private Equity & Venture Capital Association (SVCA), “The Economic Footprint of Swedish
Venture Capital and Private Equity” (November 2022),
<https://www.svca.se/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/The_Economic_Footprint_of_Swedish_VC_an
d_PE_Final-1.pdf>, retrieved 1 October 2023.
The Nobel Prize, “The Prize in Economic Sciences 2012”,
<https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/economic-sciences/2012/popular-information/>, retrieved 5
November 2023.
Tian, Xuan, “The causes and consequences of venture capital stage financing” (2011), Journal of
Financial Economics 101, 132-135, 140.
Vinnova, “New digital platform will strengthen Swedish tech companies” (12 October, 2021),
<https://www.vinnova.se/en/news/2021/10/new-digital-platform-will-strengthen-swedish-tech-com
panies/>, retrieved 24 November 2023.
Wallenberg, Björn and Caesar, Julia, Dagens Industri, “Kartläggning: Stockholm slukar
tillväxtpengarna – resten halkar efter: ”Skrämmande” “ (17 Febuary 2020),
<https://www.di.se/nyheter/kartlaggning-stockholm-slukar-tillvaxtpengarna-resten-halkar-efter-skr
ammande/>, retrieved 26 September 2023.
Weidenman, Per, “The Serrano Database for Analysis and Register-Based Statistics.” at Swedish
House of Finance Research Data Center. Accessed 11 03, 2023.
https://www.hhs.se/en/houseoffinance/data-center/
Zhang, Ye, “Discrimination in the Venture Capital Industry: Evidence from Field Experiments” (April
2, 2023), Stockholm School of Economics, 28-30.
                             Founders And Financials 44

                      Appendix

Appendix A. Location Data - Part 1 Excluding Gender
 Location Count Percentage
 Stockholm 93 44.285714

 Göteborg 18 8.571429

 Malmö 12 5.714286

 Lund 11 5.238095

 Umeå 10 4.761905

 Linköping 9 4.285714

 Kalmar 4 1.904762

 Uppsala 4 1.904762

 Solna 3 1.428571

 Sollentuna 2 0.952381

 Ronneby 2 0.952381

 Västerås 2 0.952381

 Östersund 2 0.952381

 Karlskrona 2 0.952381

 Gävle 2 0.952381

 Helsingborg 2 0.952381

 Boden 1 0.47619

 Karlstad 1 0.47619

 Sollefteå 1 0.47619

 Torsby 1 0.47619

 Katrineholm 1 0.47619

 Ljusdal 1 0.47619

 Karlskoga 1 0.47619

 Hudiksvalls kommun 1 0.47619

 Österåker 1 0.47619

 Bollebygds kommun 1 0.47619

 Tingsryd 1 0.47619

 Burlöv 1 0.47619

 Norrköping 1 0.47619

 Piteå 1 0.47619

 Växjö 1 0.47619

 Tanums Kommun 1 0.47619
                             Founders And Financials 45

 Täby 1 0.47619

 Värnamo 1 0.47619

 Skövde 1 0.47619

 Karlshamn 1 0.47619

 Simrishamn 1 0.47619

 Falkenberg 1 0.47619

 Båstad 1 0.47619

 Nyköping 1 0.47619

 Danderyd 1 0.47619

 Ludvika 1 0.47619

 Sundsvall 1 0.47619

 Skellefteå 1 0.47619

 Enköping 1 0.47619

 Lidingö 1 0.47619

 Kramfors 1 0.47619

 Fagersta 1 0.47619

Panel I- Counts of Cities With “Other” Category- Part 1 Excluding Gender

 Panel II- Log(Count) For Cities With “Other” Category- Part 1 Excluding Gender

Panel III- Log(Count) For Cities- Part 1 Excluding Gender
Panel I-III shows the count for different cities for part 1 data excluding gender. The data is dominated by
organizations located in Stockholm.
                             Founders And Financials 46

Appendix B. Sales Data - Part 1 Excluding Gender
10 = Energy & Environment
15 = Materials
20 = Industrial goods
22 = Construction industry
25 = Shopping goods
30 = Convenience goods
35 = Health & Education
40 = Finance & Real estate
45 = IT & Electronics
50 = Telecom & Media
60 = Corporate Services
98 = Other
99 = Missing

Panel I: Definition Branch Sectors

Panel II: Mean of Net Sales by Branch Sector

Panel III: Log of Average Net Sales by Branch Sector

Panel IV: Logarithmic Average Net Sales by Branch Sector And Final Second Round Year
Panel I-IV displays sales measures for the organizations in the dataset in part 1, excluding gender, by branch
sector.
                              Founders And Financials 47

Appendix C- Derivation SHAP Formula

Property 1: Local accuracy- or additivity in game theory- assert that the sum of
individual contributions of all features to the prediction should equal the actual
prediction of the model for that specific instance (Lundberg et al, 2020):

Where f is the machine learning model that maps input data to an output. x is the
input or instance. f(x) is the output of the machine learning model for instance x.
Furthermore, ϕ0(f) = E[f(z)], is the models prediction when without input denoted z.
ϕi(f,x) is the attribution of the ith feature in the input x towards the model’s output.
M is the total number of features.
   This ensures that SHAP values provide a consistent and complete decomposition
of the prediction, as well as an accurate and fair contribution of each feature to the
prediction.
    Property 2: consistency- monotonicity in game theory- explicates that if the
contribution of a feature (the difference in models output with and without the
feature) to the prediction increase or remains the same then its attribution (how
much feature i is responsible for the difference between the actual and expected
prediction = ϕi(f, x) ) should not decrease. Mathematically, for any differing models f’
and f this is represented as (Lundberg et al, 2020):

Here S is a subset of all features M, with S\i being the subset not including feature i.
     Property 3: Missingness, which is referred to as null effects in game theory
implies that if a feature i has no change on the function output (ϕi(f, x) = 0), then that
feature is considered to have impact score of 0. Mathematically this is (Lundberg et
al, 2020):

Culminating these properties results in the Game theory Shapley value formula
presented by Lloyd Shapley . To apply Shapley’s theory to machine learning
Lundberg and Lee (2017) utilized Lloyd’s Formula and postulated SHAP (Shapley
additive) Values. In brevity SHAP values are the Lloyd Shapley values of a
conditional expectation function of the random forest model - in our case. The final
SHAP equation is:

                                                                                                         31

31
  The formula notation has been slightly altered from (Lundberg and Lee, 2017), to be consistent with
the paper's form.
                             Founders And Financials 48

Appendix D- Tuned RF Model- Part 1 Excl Gender

 Panel I Panel II

Panel I showcases the confusion matrix for the ML prediction on the test dataset for the random forest model in
part 1, excluding gender. Panel I showcases that the vast majority of observations in the test set are classified as
successes. Panel II shows that net sales has the highest explanatory weight for the ML prediction for part 1
excluding gender. Distance from Stockholm in contrast has the lowest explanatory weight.
Appendix E- Partial Dependence Plots Part 1 Excl. Gender

                                           Panel II
 Panel I

 Panel III
                                        Panel IV
                             Founders And Financials 49

                                  Panel V
Partial dependence plots for random forest model part 1, excluding gender. The partial dependence represents
a value of the degree to which the random forest model depends on a variable for the ML prediction of raising
more than one round. Panel I showcase the partial dependence for ROE for example.
Appendix F- Tuned Random Forest Model Part 1 Including Gender

 Panel I. Panel II.

Panel I showcases the confusion matrix for the ML prediction on the test dataset for the random forest model in
part 1, including gender. Panel I showcases that the vast majority of observations in the test set are classified
as successes. Panel II shows that ROE has the highest explanatory weight for the ML prediction for part 1
including gender. Serial founder in contrast has the lowest explanatory weight.
                             Founders And Financials 50

Appendix G- Partial Dependence Plots Part 1 Including Gender

                                            Panel II: Net Sales Ratio
 Panel I: ROE

 Panel III: Quick Ratio Panel IV: Distance From Stockholm

                                        Panel VI: Share of Female Founders
 Panel V: Prior Founder Experience

Partial dependence plots for random forest model part 1, including gender. The partial dependence represents a
value of the degree to which the random forest model depends on a variable for the ML prediction of raising
more than one round. Panel I showcase the partial dependence for ROE for example.
                               Founders And Financials 51

Appendix H. Results Tuned Random Forest Model- Part 2

 Panel I: Confusion Matrix, of true success
                                            Panel II: Explanatory Weights - Tuned
 and predicted success of tuned rf model.
                                       Random Forest

Panel I showcases the confusion matrix for the ML prediction on the test dataset for the random forest model in
part 2. Panel I showcases that the vast majority of observations in the test set are classified as not successes.
Panel II shows that Share of female founders has the highest explanatory weight for the ML prediction for part
2. Serial founder in contrast has the lowest explanatory weight.

Appendix I. Partial Dependence Plots Part 2

 Panel I Panel II Panel III

Partial dependence plots for random forest model part 2. The partial dependence represents a value of the
degree to which the random forest model depends on a variable for the ML prediction of raising more than one
round. Panel I showcase the partial dependence for distance from Stockholm for example.