BUCK FOR THE BANG?

ABNORMAL RETURNS IN RESPONSE TO ARMS DONATION
ANNOUNCEMENTS DURING THE RUSSO-UKRAINIAN WAR

ADAM DABRAM

EDVIN DRIBE

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2023
Buck for the Bang? Abnormal Returns in Response to Arms Donation
Announcements During the Russo-Ukrainian War

Abstract:

   This paper examines defense industry stock market reactions to governmental
   announcements to donate weapons to Ukraine in response to the Russian invasion
   2022. We use daily stock return and donation announcement data and employ event
   study methodology to establish abnormal returns among a select number of defense
   industry firms. Our results indicate that announcements of arms donations generally
   do not explain variation in abnormal returns and that the explanatory value is low and
   insignificant. We also examine if the unique dynamics of the defense industry lead to
   a proximity relationship, i.e., that stock market reactions are stronger for
   announcements from the countries that are home to the select companies. While such
   a relationship is insignificant, our estimates indicate that markets react more strongly
   to such announcements. Our study relates to previous research on market reactions to
   difficult-to-interpret information, such as government announcements, and market
   reactions to war-related information. Our results conclude that markets do not react
   significantly to arms donation announcements in general. However, such information
   would suggest that future firm earnings would increase and that markets should
   respond in kind.

Keywords:

   Event study, abnormal returns, defense industry, difficult-to-interpret information,
   Russo-Ukrainian war

Authors:

   Adam Dabram (25500)
   Edvin Dribe (25305)

Tutor:

   Marieke Bos, Deputy Director, Swedish House of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Adam Dabram and Edvin Dribe, 2023

                                   1
1. Introduction

1.1. Aim of study

In February 2022, Russia launched a full-scale military invasion of Ukraine. Although at
war with each other since Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014, the intensity of the
                                                                                         th
conflict escalated into a full confrontation on February 24 , 2022. Initially, this resulted
in swift economic and political sanctions against Russia from the international
community. However, soon after the eruption of the conflict, many countries also chose
to support the Ukrainian war effort directly by donating weapons and military equipment.
Compared to the expected and uncontroversial financial and humanitarian support,
contributing arms to a country at war was a new and drastic measure for many European
countries.

Our paper uses the idea that a public announcement from a government to donate weapons
causes an immediate worsening of military capabilities and a need for new weapons to
replenish the arsenal. Naturally, this can potentially result in increased earnings for the
defense industry. At the firm level however, the many uncertainties around this make it
difficult to interpret the donation announcement. To assess whether the donation leads to
higher earnings, an investor needs to know if the donated weapons were usable, if they
are going to be replaced, by what they potentially might be replaced with, when such
replacement might happen, which company might get such an order and at what price.
While a donation of weapons signals the industry that orders will rise, investors can only
make so much of the information at the firm level, which is why the markets’ reactions
are uncertain. In analyzing these uncertainties, we are inspired by the framework
established by Pástor and Veronesi (2012), which study how equity markets react to
governmental policy announcements and the uncertainty of translating a political
announcement into firm earnings or valuation projections.

In response to the Russian invasion, equity markets reacted extensively within the defense
industry and in general. While interpreting the information about the invasion and war
developments is equally tricky as interpreting arms donation announcements, the former
is not the aim of this paper. It is, however, essential to remember that investors might
have foreseen future arms donation announcements when interpreting the invasion
announcement. This leads us to wonder to what extent investors anticipated the arms
donation announcements and to what extent the arms donation announcements provided
                                                                                                                                         st
the markets with new information. Since the Russian invasion, until July 31 , 2023, 273
announcements (at least) of military equipment and weapons donations to Ukraine have
been made on (at least) 169 unique days (Trebesch, Antezza, Bushnell, Bomprezzi, Frank,
Frank, Franz, Schramm, Weiser, Kharitonov, Kumar, Rebinskaya, and Schade, 2023).

                                   2
In making inferences about the donation announcements as a group, we are inspired by
the multiple-event study approach established by Shapiro, Switzer, and Mastroianni
(2011). This paper seeks to establish how defense industry equity markets reacted to these
announcements and if such reactions were significant. We therefore study how stock
markets, home to a set of the largest defense companies, react on days with arms donation
announcements compared to days without. We also seek to establish if such reactions are
more prevalent in response to announcements from the countries’ home to a select set of
companies than announcements in general, i.e., if there is a proximity relationship. More
specifically, the paper aims to answer the following research questions:
  I. Did defense industry equity markets show significant abnormal returns in
      response to arms donation announcements?
 II. Is the relationship between arms donation announcements and abnormal returns
       stronger for announcements from countries in which defense industry companies
        are listed than for all countries, i.e., is there a proximity relationship?

1.2. Research design

To make causal inference about the impact of arms donation announcements on defense
industry equity markets, the ideal setting would be to perform a randomized control trial
to see if investors price the studied stocks differently with a donation announcement than
without, all else equal. As this experiment is not feasible, we find the abnormal return of
the studied stocks and try to isolate the variation that the donation announcement can
explain. Ideally, this would be done using intraday stock return data and detailed timing
data of announcement, for example, by employing difference-in-difference or regression
discontinuity methodology. Lacking critical data, we instead answer the research
questions using classic event-study methodology as established by Fama, Fisher, Jensen,
and Roll (1969), Brown and Warner (1985), MacKinlay (1997), and Busse and Green
(2002) among others. As we seek to make inferences regarding a set of events rather than
an individual event, the methodology differs somewhat but is, in principle, a series of
repeated classical event studies. As stated above, we are inspired by the works of Pástor
and Veronesi (2012) and Shapiro et al. (2011) in designing our study.

We benchmark the stock returns against a proxy for the market portfolio, the S&P 500,
and compare the resulting abnormal returns, the share of firms showing positive abnormal
returns, and the share of days with significantly positive abnormal returns at the group
level for different sets of days. We also employ linear regression models where we regress
the abnormal return measures on a dummy variable for announcements: using global
announcements or only those originating in the companies’ home countries. In doing so,
we control for seasonality and weekday effect as well as for the proximity in time to the
beginning of the war and cumulative number of announcements. We use publicly
available daily stock return data for listed defense industry companies. We use a public
dataset of support given to Ukraine compiled as the Ukraine Support Tracker (Trebesch

                                   3
et al., 2023). In our baseline scenario, we study the subset of the 50 largest listed defense
companies in the U.S. and Europe for the first three months after the invasion. We
replicate our study and compare our results to scenarios where we study subsets of firms
from the 100 largest companies, with and without certain Asian countries (59 and 50
firms, respectively). In all three scenarios, we extend the three months studied in the
baseline scenario to six months after the invasion and for the entire period covered by our
support dataset (until 2023-07-31, roughly 18 months), respectively. While the support
dataset is extensive, we only use data on the principal categorization of donation packages
and announcement dates. To establish the potential proximity relationship between
announcements from the companies’ countries of listing and the abnormal returns, we
specifically study the reaction within the countries home to the examined defense
companies.

1.3. Results

Our study indicates that defense industry equity markets do not generally show abnormal
reactions to arms donation announcements. However, our results suggest that the studied
markets in which the defense industry companies are based react more strongly to
announcements from their home countries’ governments, indicating a proximity
relationship. This is potentially an effect of the unique market dynamics typical of the
defense industry. We reach these conclusions by noting that abnormal returns on average
are not higher or significantly different from zero on days with announcements than on
days without. However, the results are ambiguous upon considering different approaches
to the research questions and additional measures of abnormal returns. Further, we note
that while abnormal returns are not significantly different from zero when comparing days
with and without home announcements, the results indicate a difference between the two
groups. Although results are ambiguous, we find that average abnormal returns are
higher, the share of firms showing positive abnormal returns is higher, just as the share
of significant abnormal returns (overall and independent of sign) is higher for days with
home announcements than without. However, considering both announcements in home
countries and in general, the significance of results is a major vice in our study, with only
a tiny share of figures considered showing statistical significance. While our analytical
approach hints at some categorical differences between groups of dates, we find that the
variation attributable to these factors, after employing relevant controls in our linear
regression approach, is minimal. In general, results obtained using our baseline scenario
are confirmed by extension scenarios, including larger sets of days and firms considered.
We find that the results obtained using short event windows are robust to resampling,
while those using longer event windows generally are not.

                                   4
1.4. Literature review

This paper has two distinct focal points: equity markets’ reactions to public difficult-to-
interpret information and equity markets’ reactions to news related to war and conflict.
Although connected to the war, our paper aims to look at the donation announcements of
countries not engaged in the war and how they might cause defense industry equity
markets to react. Still, the effects of the war and conflict developments cannot be excluded
from the markets’ reactions during the war. As for the general setting, our study is close
to McDonald and Kendall (1994), which studied the effects of unpredictable political
events involving military actions on 16 U.S. defense firm stocks. The events studied are
such that they directly relate to involvement in military force by the United States, the
former Soviet Union, and their allies. They found statistically significant results showing
that the defense firms' stock prices increased after the relevant events. Regarding
methodology, Shapiro et al. (2011), which examines the effect of war-and-peace-related
events on defense stocks, has been a valuable source of inspiration for research design.
They studied over 60 firms using the Market Model with GARCH (1,1) error estimation
to estimate abnormal returns. Their study examines a wide array of events and
announcements, not only the outbreak of war and the making of peace. They found that
positive abnormal returns follow war-related announcements, whereas negative abnormal
returns follow peace-related announcements. Furthermore, we have taken inspiration
from their multiple-event study framework, enabling us to make inferences from a set of
events rather than individual events. Although inspired by their work, our paper excludes
the effects of war development and instead focuses on the donation announcement of
countries exogenous to the conflict.

Mitchell and Mulherin (1994) outline the basic framework for markets' reactions to public
announcements. They studied the relationship between Dow Jones & Co. news
announcements and stock market activity variables such as trading volume and returns.
They found that such a relationship exists and that the volume of such announcements
and stock market activity are directly related. Further, they discovered that firm-specific
announcements had a more significant effect than announcements regarding
macroeconomic news. More recently, Pástor and Veronesi (2012) studied how changes
in government policy affect stock market prices and returns. Most importantly, their
analysis includes the uncertainty surrounding government policy announcements:
political uncertainty and implication uncertainty. They find that policy announcements,
on average, cause stock prices to fall. They also find that the extent of the stock price
effect is related to the level of uncertainty. Their study of implication uncertainty of policy
announcements is very similar to the uncertainty we seek to examine concerning arms
donation announcements.

                                   5
The main contribution of our paper is to analyze market reactions to arms donation
announcements, which essentially are a new type of difficult-to-interpret information as
most Western nations have been reluctant to send weapons and equipment to war-waging
countries before the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Although armed conflicts have always
existed, publicly disclosed donations of weapons to a country at war is a new feature in
many respects. Our paper, therefore, seeks to establish if and how markets react to this
specific type of announcement. On a similar note, we aim to specifically analyze the
implication uncertainty of announcements, as established by Pástor and Veronesi (2012),
as we exclusively examine public announcements of certain decisions and deliverables.
Thus, as there is no political uncertainty to be considered by markets, investors need only
focus on the implication uncertainty of the announcement and interpret how the
implication might affect firm earnings. Further, we set out to examine the structures and
dynamics of the defense industry. Although historically an industry with strong national
ties and a high political involvement in procurement processes, the (European) defense
industry has been idle for the past three decades. As domestic production capabilities are
small to non-existent in many countries, previous industry dynamics might need to
change. Lastly, our paper contributes by analyzing new and recent data, examining
announcement data that is merely a few months old. In addition, the studied conflict is
current and ongoing, with little published literature available.

1.5. Structure of paper

This paper will begin with a theoretical overview and institutional background (Section
2, Background), where we discuss the dynamics within the defense industry and how the
Russo-Ukrainian war developed before and during the examined period. This section will
be followed by a description of the data employed in our study and which filtering
decisions have been made (Section 3, Data). The fourth section presents the chosen
methodology (Section 4, Methodology). After this, we present and analyze empirical
results and discuss what conclusions can be made (Section 5, Analysis). In this section,
we suggest some possible future research topics in response to our findings. In the final
section (Section 6, Robustness), we describe the measures taken to test and ensure the
robustness of the results.

                                   6
2. Background

2.1. The Russo-Ukrainian war

The Russian invasion of Ukraine on 2022-02-24 marked the beginning of a new phase of
the Russo-Ukrainian war. While the conflict began with the Russian annexation of
Crimea in 2014, the conflict has been comparatively idle in intensity during 2015-2021.
However, in the winter of 2021/2022, Russia began a series of large-scale exercises near
Ukraine. After having deployed extensive military capabilities so close to the Ukrainian
                                                                                                               th
border, Russia eventually invaded Ukraine with full force on February 24 . Although the
increased military activity was observed in the weeks before the invasion, the rapid
increase in scale and intensity of the conflict took many by surprise. The invasion not
only resulted in severe political and economic sanctions against Russia from the EU and
the U.S. but also worsened the security conditions in all of Europe. Essentially, the
invasion of Ukraine reset the level of economic integration between Russia and Europe
to that of the Cold War. While Russia did undertake economic and political liberalization
efforts after the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991, much of the development has been
reversed since Vladimir Putin’s 2007 speech at the Munich Security Conference. Since
then, the Russo-Georgian War of 2008, the Russian attempted intervention in Ukraine’s
signing of the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement in 2014, and subsequently the
beginning of the Russo-Ukrainian war (later that year), have worsened relationships and
security conditions between Russia and the Western world. Still, the invasion of 2022
marks a new era for European security policy with the return of war to Europe. The full
extent of the policy implications of the invasion is likely yet to come.

The security implications of the invasion are considered severe by many. Primarily, a
full-fletched war is taking place in a country that neighbors four EU and NATO countries.
Secondly, Russia has shown its will and capability to use military force to reach
geopolitical goals not only in the short term while maintaining deniability but also in the
long term and doing so in the open. Furthermore, virtually all European countries and the
United States have pledged support to Ukraine, a country at war, and committed
substantial financial, humanitarian, and military support to the Ukrainian war effort.
Although Russian military capabilities for other operations are more limited since the
invasion, a Russian victory would not only result in a changed geopolitical scene and a
shift in the power balance between East and West but also significantly worsen the
security situation for all European countries should Russian military assets be in closer
proximity. Finally, the invasion marks the end of a period that has lasted for three decades,
during which most European countries have decreased their defense spending, arsenals,
and arms production, resulting in a rapid increase in defense spending across Europe.

                                   7
2.2. Defense industry overview

Parallel with the rise and fall of hopes of Russian democratization, Europe has
experienced continuously increasing integration and seen gradual democratization and
integration of many former USSR and East-bloc republics, many of which have been
members of NATO and the EU for the better part of the current millennia. During this
period, defense spending has been lower than before, and the primary objective of
European armed forces has been to conduct overseas peacekeeping missions rather than
maintaining territorial defense at home. Worsened security conditions have, however, led
to a shift from an international focus to a national defense perspective for European armed
forces while drastically increasing defense spending (Svendsen & Bergmann, 2023).

One important implication of the prioritizations and lower defense spending during the
past three decades is developing and manufacturing land warfare equipment and weapons.
Although technological advances have been made and the defense industry has adapted
to the new world order, large-scale heavy equipment production has virtually ceased,
making ordering such equipment difficult as countries seek to expand their armies. For
example, the production possibilities of main battle tanks and heavy howitzers are
virtually non-existent in Europe, where defense industry executives have called for
binding orders and production capability investments from governments (Kayali et al.,
2023). One notable political action considering the production capacity issue is the EU
action to support ammunition production (“ASAP”), adopted to ensure the production
capacity of critical ammunition within the union (European Commission, 2023).

The defense industry is characterized by a high degree of protectionism and loyalty to
domestic companies and those of one’s allies. For strategic purposes, a nation, or a group
of nations within an alliance (e.g., NATO), requires a defense industry of such width as
to be able to supply its armed forces. Unless allied, acquiring weapons and defense
systems from another country is uncommon as it would strengthen the purchaser’s
strategic position, potentially to the producer's detriment in the event of conflict.

Significant economies of scale also characterize the industry due to large investments and
fixed costs in organizing production, incentivizing consolidation of production to a few
companies or locations. Much like the civilian aerospace industry, this has resulted in a
few large companies, each controlling large market shares. The consolidated production
organization also results in large, thus attractive, employment opportunities within a
single location. For various reasons, individual countries care greatly about the location
of production facilities. Therefore, employment opportunities and spillover effects are
implicitly or explicitly considered when awarding defense contracts, often resulting in a
strong preference for domestic industries.

This concept is called the military-industrial complex, attributed to former U.S. President
Eisenhower. For the reasons listed above, governments have a strong interest in the

                                   8
organization of the defense industry, resulting in a large share of state-owned and state-
controlled companies. (Gholz, 2011)

Significant investments associated with arms production result in defense contracts
exclusively involving the pre-ordering of equipment with deliveries several years in the
future. Often, governments negotiate specific terms around the location of production,
which allows foreign companies to compete with domestic companies as the positive
effects on employment are retained within the purchasing country. Hence, defense
companies rarely have equipment or weapons in inventory ready to sell. In times of
surging demand but low production capabilities, this leads to additional uncertainty
regarding delivery times and pricing.

2.3. Military Support to Ukraine

Military support to Ukraine has taken various forms, including grants, equipment,
training, and weapons. For many nations, contributing arms to a country at war for
purposes other than internationally sanctioned peacekeeping was unthinkable just a
couple of years ago. This changed in response to the Russian invasion, and at the time of
writing (December 2023), the military support given to Ukraine is valued at close to €100
billion (Trebesch et al., 2023). However, apart from the donations yielding results on the
Ukrainian battlefields, they raise questions about arsenals and their replenishment within
the donating countries. As a result, there is high uncertainty as to how defense industry
equity markets react to donation announcements.

Coming out of roughly three decades of comparatively low military spending (SIPRI
Military Expenditure Database, 2023), the worsened security conditions have resulted in
rapid increases in national defense budgets in Europe (SIPRI: World Military Expenditure
Reaches New Record High as European Spending Surges, 2023). The armed forces of
these nations will expand, and they will generally switch focus from international
missions to their traditional objective: territorial defense (Svendsen & Bergmann, 2023).
In combination, demand for weapons and military equipment has skyrocketed during the
past years, which defense industry shareholders have duly appreciated (Financial Times,
2023). Still, the announcements of arms donations since the invasion of February 2022
are examples of new information to which markets need to react.

                                   9
3. Data

3.1. Ideal dataset

To make inferences on the impact of arms donation announcements on defense industry
equity markets, we would ideally study stock return data on the intraday level.
Additionally, we would ideally find a quantitative measure of the importance of a
donation package, e.g., the dollar value of donated equipment or an estimated order value
of the corresponding replacements. The ideal announcement data would also include
detailed information about how and when the announcement was made, e.g., through
what media and at what hour or minute. Using this data, one possible approach would be
to use difference-in-difference or regression discontinuity methodology to examine the
immediate market reactions to the announcement. Thus, most other confounding events
that influence stock returns would be excluded as the announcement likely would be the
dominant source of new information relevant to the market at the time.

While intraday stock return data is publicly available or feasibly obtainable, we have not
accessed or compiled detailed data on the time aspect of announcements. Instead, we
resort to date-level (daily) data on announcements as presented in the Ukraine Support
Tracker (Trebesch et al., 2023). Without announcement data with corresponding quality,
return data on the intraday level provides little additional information. Hence, we resort
to daily stock return data, which is also publicly available at greater ease of access.

As for a quantitative measure of the importance of donations, more fundamental issues
than data collection and compilation are at play. While the support dataset employed has
tried to do just this, it is not apparent what the estimated value of a support package
implies for the examined companies. Except for the dataset's incomplete valuation
variables, the main concern is accounting for the likelihood of replacement and the market
price of the goods in question. The first aspect considers that many weapons and
equipment donated are obsolete, no longer in production, or replaced by other, better
options. One example is old equipment kept in reserve from a previous generation
because it was unnecessary to get rid of altogether, such as Swedish helmets and
protective vests. Another example is equipment which is so old that there is no existing
market for new products of its kind. The second aspect considers that while the support
package might be of great value to the Ukrainian war effort, its market price might be
meager. Estimating an approximate replacement value that accounts for these factors
would be ideal but is not feasible. While estimates of the values of support packages exist,
we have instead chosen to study how equity markets react to donation announcements in
their simplest form.

                                  10
3.2. Data selection

3.2.1. Defense companies’ stock returns

We examine daily publicly available stock data (Yahoo Finance) for a set of the largest
defense companies in the world. In determining this set, restrictions have been made for
practical reasons. We have chosen to rank and select companies based on their 2021 arms
sales figures using the SIPRI list of the 100 largest defense companies (SIPRI Arms
Industry Database, 2023). In our baseline scenario, we limit our study to the 50 largest
companies thereof. From these firms, we exclude Russian, Chinese, and Indian
companies (12 companies) for conflict-of-interest reasons. Additionally, Israeli
companies (three companies) have been excluded from the list as Israel has not provided
any military support and has explicitly prohibited its defense industry from selling
weapons to Ukraine. Because of the weak links between Japanese and South Korean
defense companies and European armed forces, the Japanese and South Korean
companies (2 companies) are also excluded. Lastly, as we aim to establish the equity
markets’ reaction to donation announcements, we exclude the non-listed companies (7
companies) remaining on the list. With these exclusions, 26 companies from six countries
(USA, UK, France, Italy, Sweden, Germany) remain. The companies with their 2021
arms sales figure are presented in the appendix (Table 10).

In addition to the baseline scenario, we also extend our analysis to study the entire scope
of the SIPRI dataset, i.e., the 100 largest companies. In doing so, we construct two lists
of firms: one including Asian countries and one excluding them. While still excluding
Russian, Chinese, and Indian companies (16 companies) as well as Israeli companies
(three companies), for reasons stated above, in both cases, we retain Japanese,
Singaporean, and South Korean companies in one of them. While one Taiwanese
company is on the list, it is excluded for not being listed. As in the previous, we lastly
exclude all non-listed companies still considered. For the case including Asian
companies, this excludes 21 additional companies, resulting in 59 remaining companies.
For the case excluding Asian companies, the nine companies from Japan, Singapore, and
South Korea are excluded initially. Subsequently, the non-listed companies are excluded
from the remaining list (21 companies). The case excluding Asian companies (except
Turkish) thus contains 50 companies. The extension cases are mainly used to compare
results for different datasets and check the robustness of results to data selection choices.
When applicable, these are presented in the appendix as discussed in the Analysis (Section
5) and Robustness (Section 6) sections.

                                  11
3.2.2. Support and donation announcement data

As the main focal point of this paper is to study the impact of arms donation
announcements, our support data is of paramount importance. To exhaustively collect
data on military support given to Ukraine, we examine the Ukraine Support Tracker
dataset, compiled by the Institute for the World Economy (Kiel), (Trebesch et al., 2023).
The dataset provides detailed insights into the support packages' value, category, and
status, allowing us to limit the analyzed support to donations of military equipment and
                                             th
weapons. We exclusively use the 13  release of the Ukraine Support Tracker, which
includes support packages announced between 2022-01-24 and 2023-07-31, published in
September 2023.

In total, the dataset includes 2,279 support elements grouped in 892 support packages.
We begin by limiting the dataset in terms of category. The categories defined are military,
financial, and humanitarian aid. Eliminating financial and humanitarian (as well as
uncategorized entries), 1,582 entries of military support remain (362 packages). The
dataset also defines subcategories of military support: “Assistance”, “Equipment”,
“European Peace Facility”, “Funding for Weapon Acquisition Program”, “Grant”,
“Military Equipment”, “Training”, “Training and Equipment”, “Weapons”, “Weapons
and Assistance”, “Weapons and equipment”, “Weapons, equipment, and assistance”. As
we seek to establish equity markets’ reaction to donations of weapons and equipment
currently inventoried in the donating countries, we exclude all subcategories except
“Weapons”, “Weapons and equipment”, and “Military Equipment”. In doing so, we retain
1500 entries (303 packages).

Having established which entries to examine, we seek to establish on which days the
packages above have been announced. We begin by excluding entries that lack a valid
date. Examples are entries with uncertain announcement days, missing values, or marked
“until” a specific date. This limitation excludes 261 entries (affects 30 packages). One
additional entry is excluded due to an obvious data error (date during 2024). This leaves
1238 entries in 281 packages. To exclude the impact of the invasion on equity markets,
we also exclude all entries announced on or before the date of the invasion, i.e., before
2022-02-25. This excludes 28 additional entries (8 packages). Net of exclusions, we retain
1210 entries (273 packages). These are made on a set of 215 days. However, although
one package typically contains only entries announced on one specific day, there are
exceptions to the rule. While impractical, we do not alter the package numbering from
the original setup. Instead, we only count the first date if several dates are given for a
particular package. Excluding these date multiples leaves 169 unique days on which
announcements have been made.

The 273 packages (announced on 169 unique days), with package ID, country of origin,
and date of announcement, are presented in the appendix (Table 11).

                                  12
3.2.3. Proximity relationship data

We also constructed a date series of announcement days within the home countries to
make inferences about the effect of announcements from countries in which the examined
countries are listed on the stock portfolio (proximity relationship). In the baseline
scenario, these countries are the U.S., U.K., France, Italy, Germany, and Sweden. Based
on the result presented previously, we exclude all packages that do not originate from the
countries above, leaving 52 packages (made on 44 unique days).

3.2.4. Announcement dummy variables

The data selection process for the support data enables us to match data on
announcements with abnormal return data. This way, we can explain variation in
abnormal returns with a binary (dummy) variable on whether an announcement was
made. Correspondingly, we construct a dummy variable for whether an announcement
was made in the examined companies’ home countries for a given day.

As we study a portfolio of stocks listed in several countries, we face the issue of
unsynchronized trading calendars, i.e., all markets examined are not always open
simultaneously, for example, due to differences in observance of public holidays. As
companies in the United States dominate the list of examined companies, we base our
date series on the days the U.S. markets were open. This automatically excludes regular
weekends, which are synchronized across markets, but also excludes U.S. federal
holidays, although they are not necessarily observed abroad.

As some dates in our sets of selected packages occur on bank holidays and weekends
(days on which the U.S. markets were not open), we need to adjust so that the information
provided on these days will impact markets first on a later date. We have adjusted for
regular weekends but no other U.S. banking holidays to do this. This means that if an
announcement in either set occurred on a weekend, we have denoted the following
Monday as the announcement day instead. Having made these adjustments, we have two
sets of dummy variables with 161 (all announcements) and 42 (home announcements
only) days, respectively, denoted as announcement days of their respective kind. These
sets of dummy variables with our general date series (U.S. banking days) are presented
in the appendix (Table 12).

3.3. Abnormal return data

In line with classical financial event study methodology, we seek to analyze abnormal
returns of the examined stocks. In doing so, we employ a series of measures described
and defined in the subsequent section (Section 4, Methodology).

                                  13
In obtaining this data, we use the daily stock returns according to the selection criteria
described above. We also use daily return data for the S&P500 index, which we use as
our benchmark in the following. As previously stated, we only examine data provided on
U.S. trading days. To obtain the abnormal returns according to model specifications
described in the subsequent section, we use a web-based R-package called
EventStudyTools (Wolf, Schimmer, Levchenko, and Müller, 2014). While all model
specifications and the research design are our own products, we would gratefully like to
acknowledge the importance of the R-package and programming resources employed in
our calculations. We have calculated four abnormal return measures for each day through
a repeated series of event studies of all U.S. trading days between 2022-02-25 and 2023-
07-31. This series of calculations has, in turn, been repeated for all three sets of
companies, as explained in the section above on the selection of defense companies’
return data.

For the baseline case, including data from the first three months after the invasion for a
set of 26 firms among the 50 largest defense companies, summary statistics are presented
in the table below (Table 1):

Table 1: Summary statistics for abnormal return data (using four event windows) for the
baseline scenario.

               Average Median Min Max SD n1 (Firms) n2 (Obs.)

              0.190% 0.115% -2.430% 6.280% 1.223% 26 64
 AAR

              0.550% 0.290% -3.320% 9.760% 2.352% 26 64
 CAAR (-1,1)

              1.052% 0.350% -3.610% 10.450% 3.328% 26 64
 CAAR (-3,3)

              1.438% 0.775% -4.720% 11.110% 3.991% 26 64
 CAAR (-5,5)

                                  14
  4. Methodology

  To answer the research questions, we employ event study methodology as established by
  Fama et al. (1969) and developed by (among others) MacKinlay (1997) and Busse and
  Green (2002). Essentially, we perform a series of event studies for all U.S. trading days
                                                                           st
  since the Russian invasion until July 31 , 2023. In doing this, we obtain a measure of the
  abnormal returns of the examined stocks benchmarked against a general index. We then
  analyze the calculated abnormal return measures through linear regressions and by
  examining the results for different groups of days, depending on whether arms donations
  were announced.

  As expressed in the first research question (below), we attempt to establish if and to what
  extent there were abnormal returns among a select set of defense companies in response
  to governmental announcements to donate weapons and military equipment to Ukraine.
 I. Did defense industry equity markets show significant abnormal returns in response
     to arms donation announcements?

  More specifically, we answer this question by answering three sub-questions:

         i. Are daily abnormal returns among the largest defense companies significantly
             higher on days with arms donation announcements than on days without?
        ii. Is the share of daily abnormal returns, which are significantly positive, higher
             on days with arms donation announcements than on days without?
        iii. Is the share of firms presenting abnormal returns higher on days with arms
            donation announcements than on days without?

  As expressed in the second research question (below), we also seek to establish if the
  relationship between arms donation announcements and abnormal returns in the defense
  industry is more substantial for announcements from the examined firms’ home countries,
  called a proximity relationship. As the defense industry is characterized by unique
  dynamics with a high degree of governmental interest in the organization of the industry
  as well as a high degree of promotion of one’s defense industry for strategic purposes, we
  seek to establish if investors react stronger to announcements from countries in which the
  defense companies examined have their primary listing.

II. Is the relationship between arms donation announcements and abnormal returns
      stronger for announcements from countries in which defense industry companies are
       listed than for all countries, i.e., is there a proximity relationship?

  More specifically, we answer this question by examining if the relationships established
  in sub-questions i-iii are stronger for home announcement days than announcement days
  in general.

                                    15
We express this as follows:
     iv. Are the relationships expressed in i-iii stronger for days with arms donation
          announcements in the countries where the examined companies are listed
          (home) compared to days with arms donation announcements anywhere in the
           world (proximity relationship)?

To answer the first research sub-question (i), we compare the average AAR and CAAR
for the respective groups of days. We also employ a linear regression of the announcement
dummy variable on the abnormal return series. In doing so, we employ controls for
seasonality and weekday effects, as well as the novelty of the ongoing war and arms
donation phenomenon, to account for the markets’ expectations of future donations. To
answer the second (ii) and third (iii) research questions, we compare AR and CAR values
for the individual firms and summarize the results to analyze differences between the
respective groups of dates. As for the fourth (iv) research question, we reiterate the
analysis above for a subset of announcement dates (home announcements) and compare
it with the results obtained from the analysis of all announcement days.

Our baseline scenario only examines the first three months after the Russian invasion,
i.e., until 2022-05-25. We then extend our analysis to cover the first six months and the
entirety of the dataset, i.e., up until 2022-08-25 and 2023-07-31, respectively. This is
because we are mainly interested in how equity markets reacted to the donation
announcements while the information type was still a novelty and an example of difficult-
to-interpret information. While we expect that investors will better foresee future
announcements after the initial three months, we compare our findings with the extended
scenarios to find evidence for this.

4.1. Abnormal returns

In constructing our event study framework, we use the Market Model (MM) with
GARCH (1,1) error estimation, established by Engle (1982) and developed by Bollerslev
(1986). Although the securities we analyze are based in different countries and are part
of different national equity markets, we benchmark all returns against the U.S. S&P 500
index to get a common framework. As most companies examined are based in the U.S.,
and the value of aid (weapons and equipment) given by the U.S. (€42.1 billion) is nearly
as large as all other such aid (€52.8 billion) (Trebesch et al., 2023), the S&P 500 gives,
in our opinion, the best possible fit.

4.1.1. Abnormal return measures

We define abnormal return (𝐴𝑅𝑖,𝑡) as the difference between the actual stock return (𝑅𝑖,𝑡)
and the expected return (𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽𝑖𝑅𝑚,𝑡). The expected return is, in turn, calculated based
on the relationship between the stock in question and a chosen reference index and the
actual return of the latter (𝑅𝑚,𝑡).

                                  16
The relationship between a stock and its reference index is expressed through the
parameters 𝛼𝑖 and 𝛽𝑖, which are estimated using historical return data for 120 days ending
ten days before the event studied, as suggested by MacKinlay (1997).

The abnormal return for a single stock can hence be expressed as:
                                    𝐴𝑅𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑅𝑖,𝑡 − (𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽𝑖𝑅𝑚,𝑡)

When considering several firms for the same event, we also define average abnormal
return (AAR) as the arithmetic average of the abnormal returns of the firms considered.
This can be compared to the abnormal return of an equally weighted portfolio of the
considered companies. The average abnormal return for a group of firms can hence be
expressed as:

                                                                     𝑁
                               1
                                 𝐴𝐴𝑅𝑡 =   ∑ 𝐴𝑅𝑖,𝑡
                                            𝑁
                                                    𝑖=1
As events can both last and impact markets for a longer period than a trading day, we
define the cumulative abnormal return (CAR) as the sum of abnormal returns over the
chosen event window. The event window is expressed as a starting date (𝑡1) and end date
(𝑡2) with respect to the event day. The event day is expressed as (0), while the event
window beginning three days before and ending three days after the event is expressed as
(-3,3). The cumulative abnormal return can hence be expressed as:

                                                                             𝑡2
                                  𝐶𝐴𝑅𝑖(𝑡1, 𝑡2) = ∑ 𝐴𝑅𝑖,𝑡
                                                                 𝑡=𝑡1
Like the previous, we also define the cumulative average abnormal return (CAAR) as
the average cumulative abnormal returns (CAR) for a given event window for a group
of firms considered. The relationship between the CAAR and the CAR for a given event
window corresponds to the relationship between the AAR and the AR for a given event
day. Hence, the cumulative abnormal return can be expressed as:

                                                                 𝑁
                             1
                             𝐶𝐴𝐴𝑅𝑡 =   ∑ 𝐶𝐴𝑅𝑖(𝑡1, 𝑡2)
                                         𝑁
                                                 𝑖=1
As acknowledged previously, we use software developed by EventStudyTools (Wolf et
al., 2014) to calculate the AR, AAR, CAR, and CAAR values described above. In doing
so, we have employed the same definitions of these measures described by the software
providers (Wolf et al., 2022).

                                  17
4.1.2. Event study setup

We perform an event study for each trading day in the examined time frame for four
different event windows. In the empirical analysis, we make a comparison between these
measures, as in Shapiro et al. (2011): (-5,5), (-3,3), (-1,1), and (0). When analyzing the
broader windows (-5, 5), (-3, 3), and (-1, 1), we examine the cumulative average abnormal
return (CAAR). In contrast, we examine the average abnormal return (AAR) of the
respective event days when analyzing the narrower time frame (0). The CAAR measures
are traditionally used to determine if there has been, and if so, account for, any
information leakage before the event and if the market has reversed its reaction on the
days following the event. Although many of our examined events overlap, the CAAR can
serve as a comparison and robustness check of the AAR.

4.1.3. Statistical t-tests

To determine the statistical significance of the results, we use the Generalized Rank T-
test, established by Kolari & Pynnönen (2011). Using this non-parametric test, we need
not make any distribution assumptions. Furthermore, the test controls for cross-sectional
and serial correlation of returns and any event-induced volatility. In our linear regression
approach (described below), we instead use a regular T-test to determine statistical
significance. We systematically employ a 5 % significance level to determine the
statistical significance of our results.

4.2. Analytical approach

4.2.1. Differences across groups

As we study many similar events and try to make inferences from the announcements
categorically, we compile the results of the individual event studies by computing average
CAAR and average AAR for all the banking days (on which the U.S. markets were open)
between 2022-02-25 and 2023-07-31. Using this data, we analyze how different
categories of announcements explain variation in returns. In this process, we analyze
averages for all days recorded in the dataset (161 days) and all days with announcements
in the six countries that are home to large defense companies (U.S., U.K., France, Italy,
Sweden, and Germany) (42 days). We also compute a percentage of days when the
abnormal returns were significant according to the Generalized Rank T-test. Furthermore,
we examine the average share of firms showing positive AR or CAR values for each
group of days.

                                  18
4.2.2. Linear regression model

A more insightful approach to analyze the abnormal returns calculated is to regress (OLS)
a dummy variable for either announcements in the world or the subset of countries on our
time series of AAR and CAAR measures. We let 𝛼𝑖 denote our dependent variable i.e.,
one of the following abnormal return measures for a specific trading day 𝑖: AAR (0),
CAAR (-1,1), CAAR (-3,3), or CAAR (-5,5). Our independent variable is a dummy
variable for whether there is an arms donation announcement recorded on the day 𝑖 or not
(anywhere in the world), called 𝐴𝐴𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦𝑖.

We then control for the time passed since the invasion on 2022-02-24 for each day 𝑖,
𝐷𝑎𝑦𝑠𝑆𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑒𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖 , and the cumulative number of announcements until that day (𝑖),
𝐶𝑢𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠𝑖. In addition, we control for month and weekday
variation, using a total of 15 dummy variables. One of the main contributions of this paper
to the literature is the study of a novel type of difficult-to-interpret information. However,
this feature eventually also becomes old news. Because the efficient market hypothesis
implies that investors price future earnings according to all publicly available
information, this suggests that investors also foresee future donation announcements. As
the phenomenon becomes more common, investors will likely become better at expecting
future announcements. This will, in turn, cause the market reactions to decrease. To
mitigate this, we chose to account for both the proximity in time to the start of the invasion
and the cumulative number of announcements. The two final groups of control variables
are commonly employed in financial research to account for known effects on returns
within stock markets.

Our regression model with controls can thus be expressed as:

𝛼𝑖 = 𝛽1𝐴𝐴𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦𝑖 + 𝛽2𝐷𝑎𝑦𝑠𝑆𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑒𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖 + 𝛽3𝐶𝑢𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠𝑖
                + 𝛽4𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑖 + 𝛽5𝑇𝑢𝑒𝑠𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑖 + 𝛽6𝑊𝑒𝑑𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑖 + 𝛽7𝑇ℎ𝑢𝑟𝑠𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑖
                + 𝛽8𝐽𝑎𝑛𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑦𝑖 + 𝛽9𝐹𝑒𝑏𝑟𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑦𝑖 + 𝛽10𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑐ℎ𝑖 + 𝛽11𝐴𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑙𝑖 + 𝛽12𝑀𝑎𝑦𝑖
                + 𝛽13𝐽𝑢𝑛𝑒𝑖 + 𝛽14𝐽𝑢𝑙𝑦𝑖 + 𝛽15𝐴𝑢𝑔𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑖 + 𝛽16𝑆𝑒𝑝𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑖
                + 𝛽17𝑂𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑖 + 𝛽18𝑁𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖

We obtain a similar expression by replicating the regression model above but changing
the independent variable (announcement dummy) only to record announcements from the
countries where the studied companies have their primary listing, so-called home
countries. Here, the independent variable is expressed as 𝐻𝐴𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦𝑖. The regression
model can then be expressed as:

𝛼𝑖 = 𝛽1𝐻𝐴𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦𝑖 + 𝛽2𝐷𝑎𝑦𝑠𝑆𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑒𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖 + 𝛽3𝐶𝑢𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠𝑖
                + 𝛽4𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑖 + 𝛽5𝑇𝑢𝑒𝑠𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑖 + 𝛽6𝑊𝑒𝑑𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑖 + 𝛽7𝑇ℎ𝑢𝑟𝑠𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑖
                + 𝛽8𝐽𝑎𝑛𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑦𝑖 + 𝛽9𝐹𝑒𝑏𝑟𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑦𝑖 + 𝛽10𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑐ℎ𝑖 + 𝛽11𝐴𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑙𝑖 + 𝛽12𝑀𝑎𝑦𝑖
                + 𝛽13𝐽𝑢𝑛𝑒𝑖 + 𝛽14𝐽𝑢𝑙𝑦𝑖 + 𝛽15𝐴𝑢𝑔𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑖 + 𝛽16𝑆𝑒𝑝𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑖
                + 𝛽17𝑂𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑖 + 𝛽18𝑁𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖

                                  19
4.3. Design flaws

Scrutinizing the above, the study has two crucial design flaws. First, the sample size
(baseline scenario) of companies is small: only 26 companies. While these 26 companies
account for 58% of the arms sales of the 100 largest companies, the securities' inherent
idiosyncrasy will impact the event study results. Second, the generous categorization of
announcement days leads to a large share of the total trading days being classified as
announcement days. Essentially, this also means that the announcements themselves
cannot be examined separately and that the data includes a lot of “noise”, leading to
omitted variable bias.

The small sample size has both practical and econometric problems. As for practical
issues, we consider the fact that the sample mainly includes large companies where
marginal changes in prospective orders likely will not affect the companies’ valuation.
Furthermore, many of the sampled companies’ revenues stem from aerospace products
such as airplanes and aerial weapons systems (e.g., missiles and robots). The fact that
virtually no air force systems have been donated to Ukraine and that doing so has been
an openly debated topic means that these companies should not react as strongly as
companies whose main revenues stem from land warfare weapons and equipment.
Regarding econometric issues, the small sample size mainly results in larger standard
errors (we consistently use regular standard errors), increasing the threshold of results to
be considered statistically significant. This makes the results more conservative and
restricts our ability to make causal inferences from the results. As for the significance
measure, the Generalized Rank T-test is nonparametric and does not require any
normality distribution assumptions. Thus, the significance measure should have adequate
validity.

The omitted variable bias is a more fundamental concern that directly conflicts with the
assumption that no other events occur during the event window, which is required to use
conventional event study methodology. The study does not in any way account for the
conflict developments, countries’ security conditions, realized arms sales, political
initiatives, or other conflict eruptions during the examined period. Likely, these omitted
variables would explain some of the variation in the defense industry's abnormal returns.
To increase the validity of the results, these factors should be controlled for. However,
quantifying political and military developments is a difficult feat. Also, there likely have
been countless occurrences of firm-specific information reaching the markets for which
neither has been controlled. When interpreting the results, it should be remembered that
arms donation announcements cannot explain all variation in abnormal returns. Instead,
it is the aim of the study to examine if they significantly explain some variation, and to
which degree they do.

                                  20
Furthermore, as the research questions inquire whether there is an abnormal reaction on
announcement days, we essentially try to explain all variation in abnormality using a
binary argument. This is unrealistic, especially as many trading days (days examined) are
also announcement days. By design, a dummy variable will not be able to explain all
variation in market reactions over time.

In the baseline scenario, we examine 64 trading days. During 42 (66 %) of these days,
there have been announcements, 13 (20 %) of which were in the home countries. This is
in comparison to the six-month extension scenario with 127 trading days, 67 (53 %)
announcement days, of which 16 (13 %) were in the home countries, and the entire
dataset, with 358 trading days, 161 (45 %) announcement days of which 42 (12 %) in the
home countries.

To assess the effect donation announcements have on defense industry equity markets, a
more appropriate approach would be to analyze the effect of the importance, size, or
volume of announcements on abnormal reactions. This would allow us to explain the
variation in market reactions using one or several independent variables, which likely
would yield a higher explanatory value. However, quantifying the importance, size, or
even estimated value is difficult due to fundamental valuation issues and, in our case,
omitted data in the available datasets. While attempts to make such estimates of both
importance and value have been made in the Ukraine Support Tracker dataset, the data is
unfortunately incomplete with respect to this (Trebesch et al., 2023).

                                  21
5. Analysis

5.1. Empirical results

5.1.1. Linear regression approach

The table below (Table 2) presents results from a linear regression for four different
abnormal return measures. The model uses a dummy variable to establish whether a
recorded donation announcement occurred on that day. This independent variable is
regressed on the respective abnormal return measure while controlling for weekday and
seasonality effects, the number of previous announcements, and the days that have passed
since the invasion. The AAR and CAAR estimates are all non-significantly different from
zero. This indicates that abnormal returns are neither significantly higher nor significantly
lower on days with recorded donation announcements than on days without.

Table 2: Results from OLS regression of four AAR and CAAR (daily) on a dummy
variable of announcements (any), controlled for number of previous announcements,
number of days since the invasion, weekday, and seasonality (monthly). T-test.

                   AAR CAAR (-1,1) CAAR (-3,3) CAAR (-5,5)

 Estimate -0.199% 0.420% 0.732% 0.625%

 Upper 95% CI 0.357% 1.393% 1.995% 2.273%

 Lower 95% CI -0.756% -0.553% -0.531% -1.022%

 SE 0.284% 0.496% 0.644% 0.841%

 P-value 0.49 0.40 0.26 0.46

As presented in Tables 13 and 14 (appendix), we also run the same model presented in
Table 2 over longer periods (six months and entire time series). While three out of eight
abnormal return measures in these models show a positive significant effect, the results
are still ambiguous. Thus, there is no general support in either scenario for the alternative
hypothesis that the regression coefficient is positive and significant at the 5% level.
Comparing these results with models that examine a set of 50 of the top 100 largest
defense industry companies, both with and without Asian companies (see Section 3,
Data), according to the setup above, we find additional support for what has been stated
previously. As in the baseline scenario, no abnormal return measures show a significantly
positive regression coefficient (Tables 15-17, appendix).

                                  22
The following table (Table 3) presents results from a similar model to the above. Here,
we replace the dummy variable for announcements in general with a dummy variable for
home announcements. In doing so, we seek to draw conclusions about a potential
proximity relationship.

Table 3: Results from OLS regression of four AAR and CAAR (daily) on a dummy
variable of announcements (home countries), controlled for number of previous
announcements, number of days since the invasion, weekday, and seasonality (monthly).
T-test.

                   AAR CAAR (-1,1) CAAR (-3,3) CAAR (-5,5)

 Estimate 0.230% 0.560% 0.504% -0.186%

 Upper 95% CI 0.972% 1.781% 2.134% 1.919%

 Lower 95% CI -0.512% -0.661% -1.125% -2.290%

 SE 0.379% 0.623% 0.832% 1.074%

 P-value 0.55 0.37 0.55 0.86

Also in this case, none of the abnormal return measures are significantly different from
zero. This indicates that on days with recorded donation announcements in the home
countries of the 26 selected companies, abnormal returns are neither significantly higher
nor significantly lower than on days without. Thus, no statistically significant conclusions
can be drawn regarding the strength of these relative differences. Comparing the point
estimates between Tables 2 and 3, we see that the AAR coefficient examining home
announcements is positive, while the corresponding figure for announcements in general
is negative. While insignificant, this suggests some proximity relationship, although its
extent cannot be ascertained. We observe similar results as in the previous case when
extending the study to longer periods (six months and entire series) as well as when
expanding the list of companies. These results are presented in Tables 18-19 and 20-22
(appendix). As previously, some abnormal return measures show a significantly positive
regression coefficient for the home announcement dummy. Still, most coefficients are not
significantly different from zero, and results are ambiguous due to the lack of significance
and variation in the sign of point estimates. All considered, we conclude that while no
effect can be established with the required certainty, we observe more positive estimates
when observing home announcements’ effect on abnormal returns than for
announcements in general. This indicates that there possibly is some proximity
relationship.

                                  23
5.1.2. Categorical comparison approach (sign focus)

Proceeding with analyzing differences in aggregate data grouped on account of
announcement type, we attempt to draw general conclusions from examining the results
directly. While the regression models in the previous apply rigorous control measures to
exclude variation attributable to other phenomena, the following approach is more liberal.
Here, we compare the average AAR and CAAR values for different groups of dates and
the average number of firms showing positive and negative AR/CAR values (Tables 4
and 5).

Table 4: Average AAR/CAAR (daily, %), average number of firms in sample, average
number of firms reporting positive and negative AR/CAR respectively, for three
categories of observations (all days, days with announcements (any), days without
announcements).

              Average       Average n1 Average     Average     Description
             AAR/CAAR               Pos firms    Neg firms

                                                                             All days
 AAR 0.19% 25.97 13.94 12.03

                                                                                                        -||-
 CAAR (-1,1) 0.55% 25.97 13.52 12.45

                                                                                                        -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 1.05% 25.97 13.59 12.38

                                                                                                        -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 1.44% 25.97 14.08 11.89

                                                                         Days with any
 AAR 0.20% 26.00 13.50 12.50
                                                                   announcement
                                                                                                        -||-
 CAAR (-1,1) 0.72% 26.00 13.81 12.19

                                                                                                        -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 1.28% 26.00 13.93 12.07

                                                                                                        -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 1.64% 26.00 14.33 11.67

                                                                          Days without any
 AAR 0.18% 25.91 14.77 11.14
                                                                   announcement
                                                                                                        -||-
 CAAR (-1,1) 0.23% 25.91 12.95 12.95

                                                                                                        -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 0.61% 25.91 12.95 12.95

                                                                                                        -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 1.05% 25.91 13.59 12.32

                                                                          Difference between
 Diff AAR     0.02% 0.09 -1.27 1.36          days with and without
 (All)                                                                      any announcements

                                  24
The results above show that while the AARs are positive on days with announcements,
they are almost equally large on days without. Considering that about half the examined
trading days are announcement days, the observed abnormal returns for the entire sample
show an average of the two. We consider the difference between the categorical averages
negligible. This suggests that the group of days with donation announcements does not
show higher average abnormal returns than days without. Considering the regression
results, this confirms our previous conclusions. While the AAR values show little
differences, the CAAR values tell another story, showing higher abnormal returns for
announcement days than days without. As in the previous, we conclude that results are
ambiguous. However, when analyzing days with home announcements compared to days
without, we do observe an effect. Results corresponding to those above are presented in
the table below (Table 5).

Table 5: Average AAR/CAAR (daily, %), average number of firms in sample, average
number of firms reporting positive and negative AR/CAR respectively, for three
categories of observations (all days, days with home announcements, days without home
announcements).

                Average                      Average Pos   Average      Description
                                 Average n1
               AAR/CAAR              firms        Neg firms
                                                                         All days
 AAR 0,19% 25,97 13,94 12,03

                                                                                                            -||-
 CAAR (-1,1) 0,55% 25,97 13,52 12,45

                                                                                                            -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 1,05% 25,97 13,59 12,38

                                                                                                            -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 1,44% 25,97 14,08 11,89

                                                                   Days with home
 AAR 0.71% 26.00 14.46 11.54
                                                                      announcement
                                                                                                            -||-
 CAAR (-1,1) 1.54% 26.00 14.23 11.77

                                                                                                            -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 1.83% 26.00 14.85 11.15

                                                                                                            -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 1.58% 26.00 14.00 12.00

                                                                   Days without home
 AAR 0.06% 25.96 13.80 12.16
                                                                      announcement
                                                                                                            -||-
 CAAR (-1,1) 0.30% 25.96 13.33 12.63

                                                                                                            -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 0.85% 25.96 13.27 12.69

                                                                                                            -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 1.40% 25.96 14.10 11.86

                                                                              Difference between
                                                                       days with and
 Diff AAR       0.66% 0.04 0.66 -0.62
                                                                     without home
 (Home)
                                                                       announcements

                                  25
From the results above, we see a clear difference between the groups of dates. While we
note that the sample size is very small (only 13 home announcements considered), this
supports our previous findings that the data suggests some proximity relationship. What
is said about the AAR values is, in all cases, supported by the corresponding CAAR
values. This contradicts the previous ambiguity of results, further supporting the
suggestion of a proximity relationship. Both tables above present the average number of
firms considered (n1). This is to show that the calendar synchronization issue described
previously has a minimal effect on the data analysis.

Contributing further ambiguity, the share of firms showing positive abnormal returns is
larger for non-announcement days than announcement days (Table 4). Correspondingly,
the share of firms showing negative abnormal returns is smaller for non-announcement
days than for announcement days. This further supports our conclusion that
announcements, in general, do not have a clear impact on abnormal returns, neither
positive nor negative. However, in the second table (Table 5), we see confirmation of our
previous suggestions of a proximity relationship. As can be seen from the table, the
average share of firms showing positive abnormal returns (AR/CAR) is higher on days
with home announcements than on days without.

Comparing these results to the extension scenarios, the picture painted above is
confirmed. Examining the longer periods (six months, entire time series), we find support
for the partial conclusions above, as seen in Tables 23 and 24 (appendix). Essentially,
abnormal returns are slightly higher for days with announcements compared to other sets
of days, and there is generally a notable difference between abnormal returns on days
with home announcements compared to days without home announcements. It is worth
noting that average AAR/CAAR values in Tables 23 and 24 are generally closer to zero
compared to Table 4, and for longer periods, the difference from zero decreases. This is
natural and can be explained by the fact that markets increasingly expect future
announcements when they subsequently become more common practice. This is one of
our motives for controlling for both days since the invasion and the cumulative number
of announcements, which we do in our regression models (presented previously). While
some minor differences exist between the scenarios, including a larger set of firms (both
with and without Asian companies) and the baseline scenario, these results concur with
the conclusions drawn from the baseline scenario (presented above). Support for this
statement can be found in Tables 25 – 27 (appendix).

5.1.3. Categorical comparison approach (significance)

In addition to the categorical comparison of average abnormal returns (AAR/CAAR) and
the average share of firms showing positive abnormal returns (AR/CAR), we continue
the analytical approach with a categorical comparison of the sign and significance of the
results presented. While the regression model approach is more insightful as to the
significance, a crude comparison of the share of days with significant (specifically

                                  26
significantly positive) average abnormal returns (AAR/CAAR) gives insights into the
distribution of important events (according to the markets) across groups of days.
Baseline scenario data on the significance and sign of the measures above is presented
below in Tables 6 and 7 (corresponding structure to the tables above). While we use a
regular T-test to establish significance in the regression approach, we analyze the more
conservative and appropriate Generalized Rank T-test in the categorical comparison
approach. These are calculated while obtaining the abnormal returns as previously
described (see Section 4, Methodology)

Table 6: Distribution (%) of observations (daily AAR/CAAR values) with respect to sign
and significance (5%) for three categories of observations (All days, days with any
announcement, and days without any announcement), with categorical differences
(percentage points). Generalized Rank T-test.

                        1         2 % Pos. &      % Neg. &     Description
                   % Pos.           % Sign.             3               4
                                                   Sign.          Sign.
                                                                            All days
 AAR 55% 9% 6% 3%
                                                                                                                -||-
 CAAR (-1,1) 58% 11% 8% 3%
                                                                                                                -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 56% 5% 3% 2%
                                                                                                                -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 58% 3% 3% 0%
                                                                       Days with any
 AAR 52% 12% 7% 5%         announcement
                                                                                                                -||-
 CAAR (-1,1) 57% 10% 5% 5%
                                                                                                                -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 55% 5% 2% 2%
                                                                                                                -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 57% 2% 2% 0%
                                                                       Days without any
 AAR 59% 5% 5% 0%         announcement
                                                                                                                -||-
 CAAR (-1,1) 59% 14% 14% 0%
                                                                                                                -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 59% 5% 5% 0%
                                                                                                                -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 59% 5% 5% 0%
                                                                                Difference between
                                                                        days with and
 Diff AAR      -7% 7% 3% 5%
                                                                        without any
 (Any)
                                                                         announcements

    1) Percent of observations (days) with a positive AAR/CAAR value
    2) Percent of observations (days) with a significant (5%) AAR/CAAR value
    3) Percent of observations (days) with a significant positive AAR/CAAR value
    4) Percent of observations (days) with a significant negative AAR/CAAR value

                                  27
From the table above (Table 6), we again see that there is no coherent support for the
suggestion that announcements generally impact abnormal returns positively. Overall,
announcement days show a lower share of positive average abnormal returns
(AAR/CAAR). However, the group shows a slightly higher share of significant returns,
both overall and independent of the sign. The ambiguity presented herein confirms
previous suggestions. We also conclude that only a tiny fraction of results is significant.

Table 7: Distribution (%) of observations (daily AAR/CAAR values) with respect to sign
and significance (5%) for three categories of observations (All days, days with home
announcement, and days without home announcement), with categorical differences
(percentage points). Generalized Rank T-test.

                        1         2 % Pos. &     % Neg. &     Description
                   % Pos.          % Sign.             3               4
                                                 Sign.          Sign.
                                                                         All days
 AAR 55% 9% 6% 3%
                                                                                                            -||-
 CAAR (-1,1) 58% 11% 8% 3%
                                                                                                            -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 56% 5% 3% 2%
                                                                                                            -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 58% 3% 3% 0%
                                                                   Days with home
 AAR 62% 31% 23% 8%        announcement
                                                                                                            -||-
 CAAR (-1,1) 54% 8% 8% 0%
                                                                                                            -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 62% 8% 8% 0%
                                                                                                            -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 46% 0% 0% 0%
                                                                   Days without home
 AAR 53% 4% 2% 2%        announcement
                                                                                                            -||-
 CAAR (-1,1) 59% 12% 8% 4%
                                                                                                            -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 55% 4% 2% 2%
                                                                                                            -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 61% 4% 4% 0%
                                                                              Difference between
                                                                      days with and
 Diff AAR     9% 27% 21% 6%
                                                                   without home
 (Home)
                                                                       announcements

    1) Percent of observations (days) with a positive AAR/CAAR value
    2) Percent of observations (days) with a significant (5%) AAR/CAAR value
    3) Percent of observations (days) with a significant positive AAR/CAAR value
    4) Percent of observations (days) with a significant negative AAR/CAAR value

                                  28
As partially concluded from the regression analysis and categorical comparison approach,
we find support for a proximity relationship also using this approach. In the table above
(Table 7), we see that the group of home announcement days shows a higher share of days
with positive average abnormal returns (AAR) and a higher share of days with significant
results, both overall and independent of the sign.

While the CAAR values generally support what the AAR values suggest, some
exceptions exist. Due to the lack of robustness (see Section 6, Robustness), our
conclusions are not impacted by this more than by recognizing some ambiguity of the
results. While the higher share of days with significantly negative abnormal returns
contradicts the suggestion that markets home to defense industry companies react
stronger and more positively to their home countries’ announcements than others’, the
difference is small. More importantly, the shares of days with significant and significantly
positive abnormal returns are notably higher. This supports the suggestion that home
announcements cause a more positive reaction and that such a reaction is stronger
independent of sign.

As in the previous, the comparison with the extension scenarios concurs with what has
been said above. Results corresponding to those above (Tables 6 and 7), using the
extended time frames (six months, entire time series), are presented in the appendix
(Tables 28 and 29). These results support the suggestion of a proximity relationship even
more, as the share of days with significantly negative abnormal returns is lower for home
announcement days than other days. As for the extension scenarios considering a larger
set of firms, there are no noteworthy differences compared to the above (Tables 30-32,
appendix).

The issue of statistical significance is illustrated in the figures below (Figures 1 & 2).
From these, we learn that the 5% significance level generally leads to quite large margins
of error, such that most observations cannot be said to be significantly different from zero.
            AAR, All announcements, n1 = 26, n2 = 42
        0.15

          0.1

        0.05

    AAR
          0

        -0.05

          -0.1
        2022-02-23 2022-03-15 2022-04-04 2022-04-24 2022-05-14 2022-06-03
                                       Date

Figure 1: AAR for all announcement days with 95% confidence intervals. Generalized
Rank T-test. n1: Number of firms in sample, n2: Number of events (days) in sample.

                                  29
            AAR, Home announcements, n1 = 26, n2 = 13
         0.15

           0.1

         0.05

    AAR
          0

         -0.05

          -0.1
        2022-02-23 2022-03-15 2022-04-04 2022-04-24 2022-05-14 2022-06-03
                                          Date

Figure 2: AAR for home-announcement days with 95% confidence intervals. Generalized
Rank T-test. n1: Number of firms in sample, n2: Number of events (days) in sample.

As can be understood from the figures above, the results are ambiguous. To draw
conclusions from the observations, we therefore resort to the methods previously
described to summarize the results. However, the inherent uncertainties and ambiguities
should not be hidden.

5.2. Discussion

Overall, our study does not find significant evidence that abnormal returns on
announcement days are larger than on days without such announcements. Although we
find some abnormal returns, they are scarce and not significant enough to find statistically
significant evidence for the suggestion that abnormal returns are higher on such days.
However, we find support for a proximity relationship by examining home
announcements. These results are less ambiguous and generally show notable differences
and positive regression coefficients, although they lack statistical significance. Our study
also incorporates methods to ensure that these results are robust to resampling. This
means that no significant relationship exists when testing randomly sampled
announcement and home announcement days on the regressions. The permutation test in
support of this is found in Section 6, Robustness.

Ambiguity, as well as low significance of results, is still a major flaw of our results. This
implies that it is difficult to confidently credit abnormal returns to the occurrence of
donation announcements, both for announcements in general and for home
announcements.

                                  30
Similar studies, such as that of Shapiro et al. (2011), found that (with some ambiguity)
there is evidence that suggests that defense companies generate abnormal returns in
response to war-related news. This differs from our results, which cannot make such a
conclusion confidently. Ambiguity of the results, as well as low significance levels, affect
this. Some possible explanations for these differences in results may relate to the type of
announcement studied. Widening the perspective, we do not find significant results
supporting abnormal returns in response to the events studied, which is not very common
in the published literature.

To conclude, we cannot establish a statistically significant relationship between defense
companies' abnormal returns and the occurrence of arms donation announcements.
Neither can we establish such a relationship between the abnormal returns of defense
companies and the occurrence of donation announcements in their home countries.
However, we observe a difference between abnormal returns when comparing the two
sets (announcements in general as opposed to home announcements), indicating the
existence of a proximity relationship. Results are still ambiguous and insignificant,
questioning the validity of what is suggested above.

5.3. Extension of study

To make causal inferences about the effect of arms donation announcements on the
defense industry equity markets’ reactions, other measures of market reactions, such as
abnormal volume and abnormal volatility, should also be considered. Therefore, one
possible extension of the study is to reiterate the analysis above with abnormal volume
and volatility measures as a complement to abnormal returns. As the study aims to
determine the degree of equity markets’ reactions to donation announcements, we do not
only seek to know the price at which the market valued the new information but also to
know the degree to which the information was new, led to new interpretations of previous
information, as well as the degree to which markets had already priced in the arms
donations. In answering this, employing the above methods to volume and return
volatility data would be of great value.

In describing our ideal dataset (Section 3, Data) we also suggest that the study feasibly
could be extended by using more highly enriched data. Provided data on detailed timing
of announcements can be collected, employing similar methods as used in this paper for
intraday stock return data and intraday event windows, one could replicate the event study
approach used in this paper. However, using either a difference-in-difference or
regression discontinuity approach would be preferable with access to such data. This
would likely correct many of the design flaws in the setup of our study.

                                  31
While we in this paper study the impact of arms donation announcements without
consideration of their importance to the market, a more insightful approach to
understanding how markets react to this type of information would be to control for just
this. By either using a dollar estimate of the packages’ value or a qualitative measure
(importance grade) as a control, the explanatory value could potentially increase.
Qualitative measures could for example include analysis of news reports or be based on
defense industry expert opinions.

Lastly, the study could be extended to make other considerations around the sample of
companies examined. By including more companies, some endogeneity issues could be
mitigated. Further, by value-weighting the AAR and CAAR measures according to
market capitalization, arms sales (total), or arms sales of land warfare equipment
specifically, these aggregate measures would better describe the abnormal reaction of the
defense industry equity markets overall.

                                  32
6. Robustness

As presented in the empirical analysis above, we run two multiple linear regression
models to estimate the effect of our constructed dummy variables for announcement days
on abnormal returns (for each abnormal return measure). In doing so, we also employ a
series of controls to exclude a set of supposed sources of variation. To check the validity
of our results, we perform a series of placebo tests, or a permutation test, where we
resample dates randomly from the period examined in equal proportion of dates as above
(placebo test). We then performed 1000 resampling iterations for each placebo test
(permutation test). In doing this, we check if abnormal returns observed in our set of
announcement days differ from those observed on a random set of days. From the tables
below (Tables 8 & 9), we can conclude that only a small fraction of iterations (of the 1000
resampling iterations made) show a significant and positive coefficient estimate, meaning
that the results above are not entirely due to chance. We can also conclude that the average
estimates of the random date samples are very close to zero, indicating that only a small
portion of the variation in abnormal returns is due to chance.

Table 8: Permutation test results of 1000 iterations of placebo tests for OLS regression
models of a dummy variable of announcements (any) regressed on four abnormal return
measures.

                AAR CAAR (-1,1) CAAR (-3,3) CAAR (-5,5)

 Estimate 0.005% -0.033% 0.022% 0.013%

 % Significant
 positive 3% 2% 3% 3%

Table 9: Permutation test results of 1000 iterations of placebo tests for OLS regression
models of a dummy variable of announcements (home) regressed on four abnormal return
measures.

                AAR CAAR (-1,1) CAAR (-3,3) CAAR (-5,5)

 Estimate -0.014% 0.007% 0.001% 0.011%

 % Significant
 positive 4% 2% 2% 3%

                                  33
The purpose of the placebo and permutation tests is to establish if the results observed in
the previous are due to chance (noise). To establish the likelihood of the results mainly
including noise, we analyze the distribution of coefficients in the placebo tests through
the figures below. The first figure (Figure 3) shows the distribution of coefficients for the
regression model with a dummy variable of announcements in general as the independent
variable. In contrast, the second figure (Figure 4) shows the distribution of coefficients
for the corresponding model for home announcements. In each case, the figure shows the
coefficient distribution of models run using the AAR measure of abnormal returns. The
corresponding figures for tests, as in the first figure for the three CAAR measures, can be
found in the appendix (Figures 5-7). Correspondingly, the additional figures for the
second figure below can also be found in the appendix (Figures 8-10). As in the previous,
the models are run on data from our baseline scenario (first three months, 26 firms among
the 50 largest defense companies).

                AAR (0), AllAnnouncementDummy

 140
 120
 100
  80
  60
  40
  20
   0

Figure 3: Distribution of coefficients of 1000 iterations of placebo test of linear regression
model where a dummy variable for announcements (any) is regressed on abnormal returns
using the AAR measure.

As seen above, the coefficient values are approximately normally distributed around zero.
This implies that the results contain little noise compared to a distribution with a larger
share of coefficients in the tails of the distribution function. In turn, this implies that the
results presented are robust and are not simply due to chance. The distribution figures for
the CAAR-based models, which consider event windows of between three and eleven
days, will tell another story, as shown in Figures 5-7 (appendix). This discrepancy likely
exists because of the wide event windows, measuring the cumulative abnormal returns,
having little variation. This causes the resampling to have little effect as the abnormal
returns recorded for each event considers returns from several days around this. This
suggests that the CAAR measures are not robust to resampling and that the usefulness of
these measures is limited and questionable.

                                  34
However, because the primary purpose of using them in this paper is to compare them
with the AAR results, this does not alter the previous analysis or conclusions. Also, the
method of having several measures of abnormal returns increases comparability with
previous event study literature.

              AAR (0), HomeAnnouncementDummy

 120

 100

  80

  60

  40

  20

   0

Figure 4: Distribution of coefficients of 1000 iterations of placebo test of linear regression
model where a dummy variable for announcements (home) is regressed on abnormal
returns using the AAR measure.

While a similar argument for robustness can be made for Figure 4 (above) as for Figure
3 (previous), we note that the distribution curve assumes a flatter shape and that
observations are more prevalent in the tails. However, the distribution function still
assumes a close-to-normal distribution shape and is centered around zero. Also in this
case, are these suggestions contradicting what is suggested by the distribution figures of
the CAAR measures. These are presented in the appendix (Figures 8-10).

                                  35
7. References

Bollerslev, T. (1986). Generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity
     [Article]. Journal of Econometrics, 31(3), 307–327. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-
     4076(86)90063-1

Brown, S. J., & Warner, J. B. (1985). Using daily stock returns: The case of event
     studies [Article]. Journal of Financial Economics, 14(1), 3–31.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-405X(85)90042-X

Busse, J. A., & Clifton Green, T. (2002). Market efficiency in real time [Article].
     Journal of Financial Economics, 65(3), 415–437. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-
     405X(02)00148-4

Engle, R. F. (1982). Autoregressive Conditional Heteroscedasticity with Estimates of
     the Variance of United Kingdom Inflation [Article]. Econometrica, 50(4), 987–
     1007. https://doi.org/10.2307/1912773

European Commission. (2023). Act in Support of Ammunition Production (ASAP).
     European Union. https://defence-industry-space.ec.europa.eu/eu-defence-
     industry/act-support-ammunition-production-asap_en

Fama, E. F., Fisher, L., Jensen, M. C., & Roll, R. (1969). The Adjustment of Stock
     Prices to New Information [Article]. International Economic Review
     (Philadelphia), 10(1), 1–21. https://doi.org/10.2307/2525569

Gholz, E. (2011). Eisenhower versus the Spin-off Story: Did the Rise of the Military–
     Industrial Complex Hurt or Help America’s Commercial Aircraft Industry?
     [Article]. Enterprise & Society, 12(1), 46–95.
     https://doi.org/10.1017/S1467222700009733

Kayali, L., Bayer, L., & Posaner, J. (2023, June 14). Europe’s military buildup: More
     talk than action. Politico. https://www.politico.eu/article/europe-military-industry-
     defense-buildup-war/

Kolari, J. W., & Pynnonen, S. (2011). Nonparametric rank tests for event studies
     [Article]. Journal of Empirical Finance, 18(5), 953–971.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jempfin.2011.08.003

MacKinlay, A. C. (1997). Event Studies in Economics and Finance [Article]. Journal of
     Economic Literature, 35(1), 13–39.

McDonald, J. E., & Kendall, W. R. (1994). Measuring the economic effects of political
     events: War and the U.S. defense industry [Article]. Journal of Applied Business
     Research, 10(1), 57.

                                  36
Mitchell, M. L., & Mulherin, J. H. (1994). The Impact of Public Information on the
     Stock Market [Article]. The Journal of Finance (New York), 49(3), 923–950.
     https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.1994.tb00083.x

Pástor, L., & Veronesi, P. (2012). Uncertainty about Government Policy and Stock
     Prices [Article]. The Journal of Finance (New York), 67(4), 1219–1264.
     https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2012.01746.x

Shapiro, D. M., Switzer, L. N., & Mastroianni, D. P. N. (2011). War And Peace: The
     Reaction Of Defense Stocks [Article]. Journal of Applied Business Research,
    15(3), 21. https://doi.org/10.19030/jabr.v15i3.5668

SIPRI Arms Industry Database. (2023). SIPRI.
     https://www.sipri.org/databases/armsindustry

SIPRI Military Expenditure Database. (2023). SIPRI.
     https://www.sipri.org/databases/milex

Steer, G., & Pfeifer, S. (2023, February 23). Defence industry shares soar on western
     backing for Ukraine. Financial Times.

Svendsen, O., & Bergmann, M. (2023). Transforming European Defense: A New Focus
      on Integration.

Trebesch, C., Antezza, A., Bushnell, K., Bomprezzi, P., Frank, A., Frank, P., Franz, L.,
     Schramm, S., Weiser, L., Kharitonov, I., Kumar, B., Rebinskaya, E., & Schade, C.
     (2023). The Ukraine Support Tracker: Which countries help Ukraine and how?
     (2218). https://www.ifw-kiel.de/publications/ukraine-support-tracker-data-20758/

Wolf, M., Schimmer, M., Levchenko, A., & Müller, S. (2022). Introduction to the Event
     Study Methodology. Retrieved November 28, 2023, from
     https://www.eventstudytools.com/introduction-event-study-methodology

Wolf, M., Schimmer, M., Levchenko, A., & Müller, S. (2014). EventStudyTools
     (Research Apps). S:T Gallen. http://www.eventstudytools.com

World military expenditure reaches new record high as European spending surges.
     (2023, April 24). SIPRI. https://www.sipri.org/media/press-release/2023/world-
     military-expenditure-reaches-new-record-high-european-spending-surges

Yahoo Finance. (n.d.). Retrieved November 28, 2023, from https://finance.yahoo.com/

                                  37
Appendix

AI-Disclosure

For the purposes of this paper, we have used artificial intelligence and machine learning
tools in the following ways:

    1. R-code improvement and error diagnostics, using ChatGPT (3.5) provided by
        OpenAI.
   2. Grammatical checks and spelling corrections, using Grammarly provided by
       Grammarly Inc.

Tables

Table 10: The 100 largest defense companies ranked by 2021 arms sales (million USD)
according to SIPRI Arms Industry Database (2023), firm name, country of origin, 2021
arms sales figure, whether the company is listed or not (or not at all considered in our
study, marked with hyphen), whether the company is included in our baseline dataset or
not, and symbol used to acquire stock return data (ticker).

         Company Country Arms Sales (Mn   Listed    Baseline   Symbo
 Rank
                                                     USD, 2021)         (Y/N/-)    (Y/N)      l
 (2021)
         Lockheed Martin Corp. United    60340 Y Y LMT
 1
                                        States
         Raytheon Technologies United    41850 Y Y RTX
 2
                                        States
         Boeing United    33420 Y Y BA
 3
                                        States
         Northrop Grumman     United    29880 Y Y NOC
 4
           Corp.                     States
         General Dynamics      United    26390 Y Y GD
 5
           Corp.                     States
         BAE Systems United    26020 Y Y BA.L
 6
                             Kingdom
         NORINCO China 21570 - N
 7
         AVIC China 20110 - N
 8
         CASC China 19100 - N
 9
         CETC China 14990 - N
 10
         CASIC China 14520 - N
 11
         Leonardo Italy 13870 Y Y LDO.
 12
                                                                MI

                                   1
        L3Harris Technologies United    13360 Y Y LHX
13
                                      States
        CSSC China 11130 - N
14
        Airbus Trans-     10850 Y Y AIR.P
15
                         European                                A
        Thales France 9770 Y Y HO.PA
16
        Huntington Ingalls       United     8570 Y Y HII
17
           Industries                  States
        Leidos United    8030 Y Y LDOS
18
                                      States
        Dassault Aviation       France 6250 Y Y AM.P
19
       Group                                                   A
        CSGC China 5910 - N
20
        Peraton United     5810 N N
21
                                      States
        Booz Allen Hamilton United    5600 Y Y BAH
22
                                      States
        Honeywell International United     5150 Y Y HON
23
                                      States
        Safran France 5050 Y Y SAF.P
24
                                                     A
        Amentum United    5020 N N
25
                                      States
        Rolls-Royce United     4970 Y Y RR.L
26
                            Kingdom
        MBDA Trans-     4960 N N
27
                                European
         Elbit Systems Israel 4750 - N
28
        Naval Group France 4740 N N
29
         United Aircraft Corp. Russia 4450 - N
30
        Rheinmetall Germany 4450 Y Y RHM.
31
                                                          DE
        CACI International United     4330 Y Y CACI
32
                                      States
        General Electric United    4140 Y Y GE
33
                                      States
        Saab Sweden 4090 Y Y SAAB-
34
                                                                          B.ST
        Mitsubishi Heavy       Japan 4060 Y N 7011.T
35
           Industries
         United Shipbuilding      Russia 4020 - N
36
         Corp.
         Tactical Missiles Corp. Russia 3990 - N
37
         Israel Aerospace         Israel 3870 - N
38
           Industries

                                  2
        Science Applications     United     3550 Y Y SAIC
39
           International Corp.         States
       KBR United    3530 Y Y KBR
40
                                      States
        Textron United    3350 Y Y TXT
41
                                      States
         Hindustan Aeronautics India 3300 - N
42
        Babcock International    United     3100 Y Y BAB.L
43
        Group                Kingdom
        KNDS Trans-     3030 N N
44
                                European
         Rafael Israel 3010 - N
45
        Fincantieri Italy 2980 Y Y FCT.M
46
                                                                                                                    I
        CEA France 2940 N N
47
         United Engine Corp. Russia 2910 - N
48
        General Atomics United     2810 N N
49
                                      States
        Hanwha Aerospace South     2550 Y N 012450
50
                               Korea                                         .KS
        Oshkosh Corp. United    2530 Y N OSK
51
                                      States
        Bechtel Corp. United     2470 N N
52
                                      States
        TransDigm Group United    2400 Y N TDG
53
                                      States
        Kawasaki Heavy        Japan 2400 Y N 7012.T
54
           Industries
        ThyssenKrupp Germany 2390 Y N TKA.D
55
                                                               E
        ASELSAN Türkiye 2160 Y N ALSE
56
                                                                                   LS.IS
        ST Engineering Singapore 2160 Y N S63.SI
57
        ManTech International   United    2080 N N
58
          Corp.                     States
        Jacobs Engineering      United     2040 Y N J
59
         Group                   States
        NCSIST Taiwan 1970 N N
60
        Serco Group United     1870 Y N SRP.L
61
                            Kingdom
        Sierra Nevada Corp. United     1860 N N
62
                                      States
         Bharat Electronics India 1830 - N
63
        CNNC China 1810 - N
64

                                  3
        Korea Aerospace        South     1800 Y N 047810
65
         Industries               Korea                                            .KS
        BWX Technologies United    1650 Y N BWXT
66
                                      States
        Teledyne Technologies United    1640 Y N TDY
67
                                      States
        Vectrus United     1630 N N
68
                                      States
        Hensoldt Germany 1610 Y N HAG.
69
                                                          DE
        Eaton United    1600 Y N ETN
70
                                      States
        LIG Nex1 South     1590 Y N 079550
71
                               Korea                                         .KS
        QinetiQ United     1510 Y N QQ.L
72
                            Kingdom
        Aerojet Rocketdyne United     1470 N N
73
                                      States
        Fluor Corp. United     1430 Y N FLR
74
                                      States
        Parsons Corp. United     1430 Y N PSN
75
                                      States
        PGZ Poland 1430 N N
76
        Fujitsu Japan 1410 Y N 6702.T
77
        Curtiss-Wright Corp. United     1380 Y N CW
78
                                      States
        UkrOboronProm Ukraine 1330 N N
79
       CAE Canada 1280 Y N CAE
80
        Moog United    1250 Y N MOG-
81
                           States                                     A
        Hanwha Corp. South     1240 Y N 000880
82
                               Korea                                         .KS
         UralVagonZavod Russia 1200 - N
83
        Turkish Aerospace Türkiye 1200 N N
84
         Russian Helicopters Russia 1200 - N
85
        Amphenol Corp. United    1200 Y N APH
86
                                      States
        Melrose Industries United     1190 Y N MRO.
87
                           Kingdom                                  L
        Kongsberg Gruppen Norway 1170 Y N KOG.
88
                                                          OL
        IHI Corp. Japan 1160 Y N 7013.T
89
        Ball Corp. United    1090 Y N BALL
90
                                      States

                                  4
        Navantia Spain 1080 N N
91
        The Aerospace Corp. United     1030 N N
92
                                      States
        Pacific Architects and    United     980 N N
93
          Engineers                 States
        ViaSat United    980 Y N VSAT
94
                                      States
        Mercury Systems United    960 Y N MRCY
95
                                      States
       Howmet Aerospace United    950 Y N HWM
96
                                      States
        Austal Australia 940 Y N ASB.A
97
                                                     X
        Ultra Electronics Group United     920 N N
98
                            Kingdom
        Diehl Germany 870 N N
99
        Meggitt United     850 N N
100
                            Kingdom

                                  5
Table 11: Packages considered according to selection criteria from the Ukraine Support
             th
Tracker 13  release (Trebesch et al., 2023), with package ID, donating country, and
recorded announcement date.

             Country Date
 ID
              Austria 2022-03-13
 ATM1
              Australia 2022-03-01
 AUM1
              Australia 2022-10-25
 AUM10
              Australia 2023-02-24
 AUM11
              Australia 2023-06-26
 AUM12
              Australia 2022-03-20
 AUM2
              Australia 2022-03-31
 AUM3
              Australia 2022-04-08
 AUM4
              Australia 2022-04-08
 AUM5
              Australia 2022-04-27
 AUM6
              Australia 2022-05-19
 AUM7
              Australia 2022-07-04
 AUM8
              Belgium 2022-02-26
 BEM1
              Belgium 2022-12-16
 BEM10
              Belgium 2023-01-27
 BEM11
              Belgium 2023-03-16
 BEM12
              Belgium 2023-05-12
 BEM13
              Belgium 2023-06-16
 BEM14
              Belgium 2022-03-22
 BEM2
              Belgium 2022-05-06
 BEM3
              Belgium 2022-07-15
 BEM4
              Belgium 2022-08-25
 BEM5
              Belgium 2022-09-16
 BEM6
              Belgium 2022-09-17
 BEM7
              Belgium 2022-10-28
 BEM8
              Belgium 2022-11-25
 BEM9
              Bulgaria 2022-04-07
 BGM1
              Bulgaria 2022-12-09
 BGM3
              Bulgaria 2023-07-13
 BGM4

                                   6
            Canada 2022-03-03
CAM10
            Canada 2022-03-09
CAM11
            Canada 2022-10-12
CAM12
            Canada 2022-11-14
CAM13
            Canada 2022-11-14
CAM14
            Canada 2022-11-16
CAM15
            Canada 2023-01-18
CAM16
            Canada 2023-01-27
CAM17
            Canada 2023-02-24
CAM18
            Canada 2023-02-24
CAM19
            Canada 2023-03-15
CAM20
            Canada 2023-04-11
CAM21
            Canada 2023-04-21
CAM22
            Canada 2023-04-21
CAM23
            Canada 2023-05-25
CAM24
            Canada 2023-06-10
CAM25
            Canada 2023-07-13
CAM26
            Canada 2022-02-27
CAM6
            Canada 2022-02-28
CAM7
            Canada 2022-03-01
CAM8
            Canada 2022-03-03
CAM9
             Czech Republic 2022-02-26
CZM1
             Czech Republic 2022-03-30
CZM11
             Czech Republic 2022-04-05
CZM12
             Czech Republic 2022-04-05
CZM13
             Czech Republic 2022-04-06
CZM14
             Czech Republic 2022-05-23
CZM16
             Czech Republic 2022-05-29
CZM17
             Czech Republic 2022-10-05
CZM18
             Czech Republic 2022-10-19
CZM19
             Czech Republic 2022-02-26
CZM2
             Czech Republic 2022-11-04
CZM20
             Czech Republic 2023-01-09
CZM22

                                  7
             Czech Republic 2023-02-23
CZM23
             Czech Republic 2023-02-23
CZM24
             Czech Republic 2023-02-23
CZM25
             Czech Republic 2023-04-05
CZM26
             Czech Republic 2023-05-10
CZM27
             Czech Republic 2023-06-27
CZM28
             Czech Republic 2022-02-27
CZM3
             Czech Republic 2023-06-27
CZM30
             Czech Republic 2023-06-27
CZM31
             Czech Republic 2023-06-27
CZM32
             Czech Republic 2023-06-27
CZM33
             Czech Republic 2023-07-07
CZM34
             Czech Republic 2023-07-07
CZM35
             Czech Republic 2023-07-07
CZM36
             Czech Republic 2022-03-03
CZM4
             Czech Republic 2022-03-09
CZM5
             Czech Republic 2022-03-09
CZM6
             Czech Republic 2022-03-10
CZM7
            Germany 2023-07-11
DEM1
            Germany 2023-07-11
DEM2
            Germany 2022-10-02
DEM3
            Denmark 2022-04-21
DKM1
            Denmark 2023-05-02
DKM10
            Denmark 2023-05-02
DKM11
            Denmark 2023-05-02
DKM12
            Denmark 2023-01-07
DKM7
            Denmark 2023-05-02
DKM8
            Denmark 2023-05-02
DKM9
            Denmark 2023-01-19
DMK7
             Estonia 2023-02-26
EEM10
             Estonia 2023-03-16
EEM11
             Estonia 2023-04-20
EEM12
             Estonia 2023-06-22
EEM13

                                  8
             Estonia 2023-06-22
EEM14
             Estonia 2022-04-06
EEM3
             Estonia 2022-08-18
EEM4
             Estonia 2022-08-18
EEM5
             Estonia 2022-10-07
EEM6
             Estonia 2022-12-01
EEM7
             Estonia 2022-12-22
EEM8
             Estonia 2023-01-19
EEM9
             Greece 2022-05-26
ELM2
             Greece 2022-09-18
ELM3
             Greece 2023-02-14
ELM4
             Greece 2023-04-06
ELM5
             Spain 2022-03-02
ESM1
             Spain 2022-10-06
ESM10
             Spain 2022-10-13
ESM11
             Spain 2022-11-02
ESM12
             Spain 2023-01-25
ESM14
             Spain 2023-02-01
ESM15
             Spain 2023-05-25
ESM16
             Spain 2022-03-11
ESM2
             Spain 2022-03-29
ESM3
             Spain 2022-04-21
ESM4
             Spain 2022-06-05
ESM5
             Spain 2022-06-28
ESM6
             Spain 2022-07-12
ESM8
             Spain 2022-08-24
ESM9
             Finland 2022-02-27
FIM1
             Finland 2023-02-23
FIM10
             Finland 2023-03-23
FIM11
             Finland 2023-04-21
FIM12
             Finland 2023-05-25
FIM13
             Finland 2023-07-06
FIM14
             Finland 2022-05-05
FIM2

                                  9
             Finland 2022-06-10
FIM3
             Finland 2022-09-01
FIM4
             Finland 2022-11-17
FIM7
             Finland 2022-12-22
FIM8
             Finland 2023-01-20
FIM9
             France 2022-04-23
FRM1
             France 2023-05-15
FRM10
             France 2023-07-11
FRM11
             France 2022-06-30
FRM2
             France 2022-10-07
FRM3
             France 2022-11-18
FRM4
             France 2022-12-12
FRM5
             France 2023-01-04
FRM6
             France 2023-01-05
FRM7
             France 2023-02-03
FRM8
             France 2023-03-28
FRM9
             Croatia 2022-02-28
HRM1
             Croatia 2022-11-16
HRM2
             Croatia 2022-12-21
HRM3
             Croatia 2023-02-23
HRM4
             Iceland 2022-12-21
ISM3
             Iceland 2023-05-15
ISM6
             Iceland 2023-05-23
ISM7
             Iceland 2023-06-16
ISM9
             Italy 2022-02-28
ITM1
             Italy 2023-04-16
ITM10
             Italy 2023-05-30
ITM11
             Italy 2022-04-22
ITM2
             Italy 2022-05-10
ITM3
             Italy 2022-07-27
ITM4
             Italy 2022-10-17
ITM5
             Italy 2023-01-13
ITM7
             Italy 2023-02-15
ITM8

                                 10
             Japan 2022-03-04
JPM1
             Japan 2022-04-19
JPM2
             Japan 2022-08-04
JPM3
             Japan 2023-03-30
JPM4
             South Korea 2022-03-01
KOM1
             South Korea 2022-04-13
KOM2
             South Korea 2022-05-26
KOM3
             Lithuania 2022-10-11
LTM10
             Lithuania 2022-12-04
LTM13
             Lithuania 2023-01-19
LTM15
             Lithuania 2023-01-23
LTM16
             Lithuania 2023-03-16
LTM17
             Lithuania 2023-04-05
LTM18
             Lithuania 2023-06-28
LTM19
             Lithuania 2022-03-23
LTM2
             Lithuania 2023-07-18
LTM20
             Lithuania 2023-07-24
LTM21
             Lithuania 2023-07-24
LTM22
             Lithuania 2023-07-24
LTM23
             Lithuania 2022-04-21
LTM3
             Lithuania 2022-05-25
LTM4
             Lithuania 2022-07-10
LTM5
             Lithuania 2022-07-20
LTM6
             Lithuania 2022-07-28
LTM7
             Lithuania 2022-09-07
LTM8
            Luxembourg 2022-02-28
LUM1
            Luxembourg 2022-03-28
LUM2
            Luxembourg 2023-02-15
LUM5
            Luxembourg 2023-02-15
LUM6
            Luxembourg 2023-06-16
LUM7
             Latvia 2022-08-15
LVM3
             Latvia 2022-08-15
LVM4
             Latvia 2023-01-18
LVM5

                                 11
             Latvia 2023-04-21
LVM6
             Netherlands 2022-02-26
NLM1
             Netherlands 2023-02-07
NLM11
             Netherlands 2022-04-19
NLM2
             Netherlands 2022-06-16
NLM3
             Netherlands 2022-06-28
NLM4
            Norway 2022-02-28
NOM1
            Norway 2022-10-02
NOM3
            Norway 2023-02-14
NOM4
            Norway 2023-02-16
NOM5
            Norway 2023-02-16
NOM6
            Norway 2023-02-16
NOM7
            Norway 2023-02-16
NOM8
             New Zealand 2022-03-21
NZM1
             New Zealand 2022-04-11
NZM4
             New Zealand 2022-05-23
NZM6
             Poland 2022-04-29
PLM2
             Poland 2022-07-25
PLM3
             Poland 2022-12-13
PLM4
             Poland 2023-01-27
PLM5
             Poland 2023-01-27
PLM6
             Poland 2023-03-16
PLM7
             Poland 2023-05-24
PLM8
             Portugal 2022-02-26
PTM1
             Portugal 2023-04-22
PTM10
             Portugal 2022-04-12
PTM2
             Portugal 2022-04-30
PTM3
             Portugal 2022-05-08
PTM4
             Portugal 2022-05-18
PTM5
             Portugal 2022-10-14
PTM7
             Portugal 2023-01-20
PTM8
             Portugal 2023-02-02
PTM9
            Romania 2022-02-27
ROM1

                                 12
            Romania 2022-04-19
ROM2
            Sweden 2022-02-27
SEM1
            Sweden 2023-01-19
SEM10
            Sweden 2023-01-10
SEM11
            Sweden 2022-06-02
SEM4
            Sweden 2022-08-28
SEM8
            Sweden 2022-11-16
SEM9
             Slovenia 2022-06-16
SIM2
             Slovenia 2022-07-29
SIM3
             Slovenia 2022-09-20
SIM4
             Slovenia 2023-04-20
SIM6
             Slovakia 2023-02-27
SKM11
             Slovakia 2023-03-17
SKM12
             Slovakia 2023-04-17
SKM13
             Slovakia 2023-06-07
SKM14
             Slovakia 2022-02-27
SKM2
             Slovakia 2022-02-26
SKM3
             Slovakia 2022-03-03
SKM4
             Slovakia 2022-04-08
SKM6
             Slovakia 2022-06-16
SKM7
             Slovakia 2022-08-23
SKM8
             Slovakia 2022-12-12
SKM9
             Turkey 2022-08-22
TRM2
             United Kingdom 2022-06-30
UKM10
             United Kingdom 2022-10-13
UKM11
             United Kingdom 2022-10-13
UKM12
             United Kingdom 2022-11-09
UKM13
             United Kingdom 2022-11-19
UKM14
             United Kingdom 2022-11-23
UKM15
            United Kingdom 2023-01-14
UKM16
             United Kingdom 2022-03-09
UKM2
             United Kingdom 2022-03-09
UKM3
             United Kingdom 2022-03-23
UKM4

                                 13
             United Kingdom 2022-03-24
UKM5
             United Kingdom 2022-04-08
UKM6
             United Kingdom 2022-04-09
UKM7
             United Kingdom 2022-05-19
UKM8
             United Kingdom 2022-05-03
UKM9
             United States 2022-02-25
USM1
             United States 2022-12-06
USM10
             United States 2022-12-06
USM11
             United States 2022-04-25
USM2
             United States 2022-04-01
USM3
             United States 2022-09-30
USM7
             United States 2022-12-06
USM8
             United States 2022-09-30
USM9

                                 14
Table 12: Series of dates considered in the entire series with constructed dummy
variables of announcements (any) and home announcements.

                    DUMMY ALL DUMMY HOME
 Date
                          0 0
 2022-02-24
                          1 1
 2022-02-25
                          1 1
 2022-02-28
                          1 0
 2022-03-01
                          1 0
 2022-03-02
                          1 0
 2022-03-03
                          1 0
 2022-03-04
                          0 0
 2022-03-07
                          0 0
 2022-03-08
                          1 1
 2022-03-09
                          1 0
 2022-03-10
                          1 0
 2022-03-11
                          1 0
 2022-03-14
                          0 0
 2022-03-15
                          0 0
 2022-03-16
                          0 0
 2022-03-17
                          0 0
 2022-03-18
                          1 0
 2022-03-21
                          1 0
 2022-03-22
                          1 1
 2022-03-23
                          1 1
 2022-03-24
                          0 0
 2022-03-25
                          1 0
 2022-03-28
                          1 0
 2022-03-29
                          1 0
 2022-03-30
                          1 0
 2022-03-31
                          1 1
 2022-04-01
                          0 0
 2022-04-04
                          1 0
 2022-04-05
                          1 0
 2022-04-06

                                  15
                         1 0
2022-04-07
                         1 1
2022-04-08
                         1 1
2022-04-11
                         1 0
2022-04-12
                         1 0
2022-04-13
                         0 0
2022-04-14
                         0 0
2022-04-18
                         1 0
2022-04-19
                         0 0
2022-04-20
                         1 0
2022-04-21
                         1 1
2022-04-22
                         1 1
2022-04-25
                         0 0
2022-04-26
                         1 0
2022-04-27
                         0 0
2022-04-28
                         1 0
2022-04-29
                         1 0
2022-05-02
                         1 1
2022-05-03
                         0 0
2022-05-04
                         1 0
2022-05-05
                         1 0
2022-05-06
                         1 0
2022-05-09
                         1 1
2022-05-10
                         0 0
2022-05-11
                         0 0
2022-05-12
                         0 0
2022-05-13
                         0 0
2022-05-16
                         0 0
2022-05-17
                         1 0
2022-05-18
                         1 1
2022-05-19
                         0 0
2022-05-20
                         1 0
2022-05-23
                         0 0
2022-05-24

                                 16
                         1 0
2022-05-25
                         1 0
2022-05-26
                         0 0
2022-05-27
                         1 0
2022-05-31
                         0 0
2022-06-01
                         1 1
2022-06-02
                         0 0
2022-06-03
                         1 0
2022-06-06
                         0 0
2022-06-07
                         0 0
2022-06-08
                         0 0
2022-06-09
                         1 0
2022-06-10
                         0 0
2022-06-13
                         0 0
2022-06-14
                         0 0
2022-06-15
                         1 0
2022-06-16
                         0 0
2022-06-17
                         0 0
2022-06-21
                         0 0
2022-06-22
                         0 0
2022-06-23
                         0 0
2022-06-24
                         0 0
2022-06-27
                         1 0
2022-06-28
                         0 0
2022-06-29
                         1 1
2022-06-30
                         0 0
2022-07-01
                         1 0
2022-07-05
                         0 0
2022-07-06
                         0 0
2022-07-07
                         0 0
2022-07-08
                         1 0
2022-07-11
                         1 0
2022-07-12
                         0 0
2022-07-13

                                 17
                         0 0
2022-07-14
                         1 0
2022-07-15
                         0 0
2022-07-18
                         0 0
2022-07-19
                         1 0
2022-07-20
                         0 0
2022-07-21
                         0 0
2022-07-22
                         1 0
2022-07-25
                         0 0
2022-07-26
                         1 1
2022-07-27
                         1 0
2022-07-28
                         1 0
2022-07-29
                         0 0
2022-08-01
                         0 0
2022-08-02
                         0 0
2022-08-03
                         1 0
2022-08-04
                         0 0
2022-08-05
                         0 0
2022-08-08
                         0 0
2022-08-09
                         0 0
2022-08-10
                         1 0
2022-08-11
                         0 0
2022-08-12
                         1 0
2022-08-15
                         0 0
2022-08-16
                         0 0
2022-08-17
                         1 0
2022-08-18
                         0 0
2022-08-19
                         1 0
2022-08-22
                         1 0
2022-08-23
                         1 0
2022-08-24
                         1 0
2022-08-25
                         0 0
2022-08-26
                         1 1
2022-08-29

                                 18
                         0 0
2022-08-30
                         0 0
2022-08-31
                         1 0
2022-09-01
                         0 0
2022-09-02
                         0 0
2022-09-06
                         1 0
2022-09-07
                         0 0
2022-09-08
                         0 0
2022-09-09
                         0 0
2022-09-12
                         0 0
2022-09-13
                         0 0
2022-09-14
                         0 0
2022-09-15
                         1 0
2022-09-16
                         1 0
2022-09-19
                         1 0
2022-09-20
                         0 0
2022-09-21
                         0 0
2022-09-22
                         0 0
2022-09-23
                         0 0
2022-09-26
                         0 0
2022-09-27
                         0 0
2022-09-28
                         0 0
2022-09-29
                         1 1
2022-09-30
                         1 1
2022-10-03
                         0 0
2022-10-04
                         1 0
2022-10-05
                         1 0
2022-10-06
                         1 1
2022-10-07
                         0 0
2022-10-10
                         1 0
2022-10-11
                         1 0
2022-10-12
                         1 1
2022-10-13
                         1 0
2022-10-14

                                 19
                         1 1
2022-10-17
                         0 0
2022-10-18
                         1 0
2022-10-19
                         0 0
2022-10-20
                         0 0
2022-10-21
                         0 0
2022-10-24
                         1 0
2022-10-25
                         0 0
2022-10-26
                         0 0
2022-10-27
                         1 0
2022-10-28
                         0 0
2022-10-31
                         0 0
2022-11-01
                         1 0
2022-11-02
                         0 0
2022-11-03
                         1 0
2022-11-04
                         0 0
2022-11-07
                         0 0
2022-11-08
                         1 1
2022-11-09
                         0 0
2022-11-10
                         0 0
2022-11-11
                         1 0
2022-11-14
                         0 0
2022-11-15
                         1 1
2022-11-16
                         1 0
2022-11-17
                         1 1
2022-11-18
                         1 1
2022-11-21
                         0 0
2022-11-22
                         1 1
2022-11-23
                         1 0
2022-11-25
                         0 0
2022-11-28
                         0 0
2022-11-29
                         0 0
2022-11-30
                         1 0
2022-12-01

                                 20
                         0 0
2022-12-02
                         1 0
2022-12-05
                         1 1
2022-12-06
                         0 0
2022-12-07
                         0 0
2022-12-08
                         1 0
2022-12-09
                         1 1
2022-12-12
                         1 0
2022-12-13
                         0 0
2022-12-14
                         0 0
2022-12-15
                         1 0
2022-12-16
                         0 0
2022-12-19
                         0 0
2022-12-20
                         1 0
2022-12-21
                         1 0
2022-12-22
                         1 0
2022-12-23
                         0 0
2022-12-27
                         0 0
2022-12-28
                         0 0
2022-12-29
                         0 0
2022-12-30
                         0 0
2023-01-03
                         1 1
2023-01-04
                         1 1
2023-01-05
                         0 0
2023-01-06
                         1 0
2023-01-09
                         1 1
2023-01-10
                         0 0
2023-01-11
                         0 0
2023-01-12
                         1 1
2023-01-13
                         1 1
2023-01-17
                         1 0
2023-01-18
                         1 1
2023-01-19
                         1 0
2023-01-20

                                 21
                         1 0
2023-01-23
                         0 0
2023-01-24
                         1 0
2023-01-25
                         0 0
2023-01-26
                         1 0
2023-01-27
                         0 0
2023-01-30
                         0 0
2023-01-31
                         1 0
2023-02-01
                         1 0
2023-02-02
                         1 1
2023-02-03
                         0 0
2023-02-06
                         0 0
2023-02-07
                         0 0
2023-02-08
                         0 0
2023-02-09
                         0 0
2023-02-10
                         0 0
2023-02-13
                         1 0
2023-02-14
                         1 1
2023-02-15
                         1 0
2023-02-16
                         0 0
2023-02-17
                         0 0
2023-02-21
                         0 0
2023-02-22
                         1 0
2023-02-23
                         1 0
2023-02-24
                         1 0
2023-02-27
                         0 0
2023-02-28
                         0 0
2023-03-01
                         0 0
2023-03-02
                         0 0
2023-03-03
                         0 0
2023-03-06
                         0 0
2023-03-07
                         0 0
2023-03-08
                         0 0
2023-03-09

                                 22
                         0 0
2023-03-10
                         0 0
2023-03-13
                         0 0
2023-03-14
                         1 0
2023-03-15
                         1 0
2023-03-16
                         1 0
2023-03-17
                         0 0
2023-03-20
                         0 0
2023-03-21
                         0 0
2023-03-22
                         1 0
2023-03-23
                         0 0
2023-03-24
                         0 0
2023-03-27
                         1 1
2023-03-28
                         0 0
2023-03-29
                         1 0
2023-03-30
                         0 0
2023-03-31
                         0 0
2023-04-03
                         0 0
2023-04-04
                         1 0
2023-04-05
                         1 0
2023-04-06
                         0 0
2023-04-10
                         1 0
2023-04-11
                         0 0
2023-04-12
                         0 0
2023-04-13
                         0 0
2023-04-14
                         1 1
2023-04-17
                         0 0
2023-04-18
                         0 0
2023-04-19
                         1 0
2023-04-20
                         1 0
2023-04-21
                         1 0
2023-04-24
                         0 0
2023-04-25
                         0 0
2023-04-26

                                 23
                         0 0
2023-04-27
                         0 0
2023-04-28
                         0 0
2023-05-01
                         1 0
2023-05-02
                         0 0
2023-05-03
                         0 0
2023-05-04
                         0 0
2023-05-05
                         0 0
2023-05-08
                         0 0
2023-05-09
                         1 0
2023-05-10
                         0 0
2023-05-11
                         1 0
2023-05-12
                         1 1
2023-05-15
                         0 0
2023-05-16
                         0 0
2023-05-17
                         0 0
2023-05-18
                         0 0
2023-05-19
                         0 0
2023-05-22
                         1 0
2023-05-23
                         1 0
2023-05-24
                         1 0
2023-05-25
                         0 0
2023-05-26
                         1 1
2023-05-30
                         0 0
2023-05-31
                         0 0
2023-06-01
                         0 0
2023-06-02
                         0 0
2023-06-05
                         0 0
2023-06-06
                         1 0
2023-06-07
                         0 0
2023-06-08
                         0 0
2023-06-09
                         1 0
2023-06-12
                         0 0
2023-06-13

                                 24
                         0 0
2023-06-14
                         0 0
2023-06-15
                         1 0
2023-06-16
                         0 0
2023-06-20
                         0 0
2023-06-21
                         1 0
2023-06-22
                         0 0
2023-06-23
                         1 0
2023-06-26
                         1 0
2023-06-27
                         1 0
2023-06-28
                         0 0
2023-06-29
                         0 0
2023-06-30
                         0 0
2023-07-03
                         0 0
2023-07-05
                         1 0
2023-07-06
                         1 0
2023-07-07
                         0 0
2023-07-10
                         1 1
2023-07-11
                         0 0
2023-07-12
                         1 0
2023-07-13
                         0 0
2023-07-14
                         0 0
2023-07-17
                         1 0
2023-07-18
                         0 0
2023-07-19
                         0 0
2023-07-20
                         0 0
2023-07-21
                         1 0
2023-07-24
                         0 0
2023-07-25
                         0 0
2023-07-26
                         0 0
2023-07-27
                         0 0
2023-07-28

                                 25
Table 13: Results from OLS regression of four AAR and CAAR (daily) on a dummy
variable of announcements (any) over a six-month period, controlled for number of
previous announcements, number of days since the invasion, weekday, and seasonality
(monthly). T-test.

                   AAR CAAR (-1,1) CAAR (-3,3) CAAR (-5,5)
 Estimate -0.079% 0.538% 0.810% 0.468%
 Upper 95% CI 0.281% 1.094% 1.561% 1.420%
 Lower 95% CI -0.440% -0.018% 0.059% -0.484%
 SE 0.184% 0.284% 0.383% 0.486%
 P-value 0.67 0.06 0.04 0.34

Table 14: Results from OLS regression of four AAR and CAAR (daily) on a dummy
variable of announcements (any) over the entire time series. Controlled for number of
previous announcements, number of days since the invasion, weekday, and seasonality
(monthly). T-test.

                   AAR CAAR (-1,1) CAAR (-3,3) CAAR (-5,5)
 Estimate -0.130% 0.059% 0.421% 0.267%
 Upper 95% CI 0.066% 0.386% 0.857% 0.789%
 Lower 95% CI -0.325% -0.268% -0.016% -0.256%
 SE 0.100% 0.167% 0.223% 0.267%
 P-value 0.19 0.72 0.06 0.32

Table 15: Results from OLS regression of four AAR and CAAR (daily) on a dummy
variable of announcements (any) over a three-month period for 50 of the top 100 largest
defense companies excluding Asia. Controlled for number of previous announcements,
number of days since the invasion, weekday, and seasonality (monthly). T-test.

                   AAR CAAR (-1,1) CAAR (-3,3) CAAR (-5,5)
 Estimate -0.242% 0.172% 0.470% 0.245%
 Upper 95% CI 0.220% 1.068% 1.717% 1.911%
 Lower 95% CI -0.704% -0.724% -0.777% -1.421%
 SE 0.236% 0.457% 0.636% 0.850%
 P-value 0.31 0.71 0.46 0.77

                                  26
Table 16: Results from OLS regression of four AAR and CAAR (daily) on a dummy
variable of announcements (any) over a six-month period for 50 of the top 100 largest
defense companies excluding Asia. Controlled for number of previous announcements,
number of days since the invasion, weekday, and seasonality (monthly). T-test.

                   AAR CAAR (-1,1) CAAR (-3,3) CAAR (-5,5)
 Estimate -0.079% 0.899% 0.824% 0.183%
 Upper 95% CI 0.895% 1.988% 2.020% 1.494%
 Lower 95% CI -1.054% -0.189% -0.371% -1.128%
 SE 0.497% 0.555% 0.610% 0.669%
 P-value 0.87 0.11 0.18 0.78

Table 17: Results from OLS regression of four AAR and CAAR (daily) on a dummy
variable of announcements (any) over the entire time series for 50 of the top 100 largest
defense companies excluding Asia. Controlled for number of previous announcements,
number of days since the invasion, weekday, and seasonality (monthly). T-test.

                   AAR CAAR (-1,1) CAAR (-3,3) CAAR (-5,5)
 Estimate -0.083% 0.342% 0.389% 0.086%
 Upper 95% CI 0.270% 0.773% 0.891% 0.643%
 Lower 95% CI -0.436% -0.088% -0.112% -0.471%
 SE 0.180% 0.220% 0.256% 0.284%
 P-value 0.64 0.12 0.13 0.76

Table 18: Results from OLS regression of four AAR and CAAR (daily) on a dummy
variable of announcements (home countries) over a six-month period. Controlled for
number of previous announcements, number of days since the invasion, weekday, and
seasonality (monthly). T-test.
                   AAR CAAR (-1,1) CAAR (-3,3) CAAR (-5,5)
 Estimate 0.306% 0.920% 0.992% 0.288%
 Upper 95% CI 0.862% 1.760% 2.147% 1.736%
 Lower 95% CI -0.249% 0.081% -0.163% -1.160%
 SE 0.283% 0.428% 0.589% 0.739%
 P-value 0.28 0.03 0.09 0.70

                                  27
Table 19: Results from OLS regression of four AAR and CAAR (daily) on a dummy
variable of announcements (home countries) over the entire time series. Controlled for
number of previous announcements, number of days since the invasion, weekday, and
seasonality (monthly). T-test.
                   AAR CAAR (-1,1) CAAR (-3,3) CAAR (-5,5)
 Estimate 0.392% 0.435% 0.132% -0.280%
 Upper 95% CI 0.693% 0.943% 0.820% 0.535%
 Lower 95% CI 0.092% -0.072% -0.556% -1.096%
 SE 0.153% 0.259% 0.351% 0.416%
 P-value 0.01 0.09 0.71 0.50

Table 20: Results from OLS regression of four AAR and CAAR (daily) on a dummy
variable of announcements (home countries) over a three-month period for 50 of the top
100 largest defense companies excluding Asia. Controlled for number of previous
announcements, number of days since the invasion, weekday, and seasonality
(monthly). T-test.

                   AAR CAAR (-1,1) CAAR (-3,3) CAAR (-5,5)
 Estimate 0.089% 0.343% 0.179% -0.476%
 Upper 95% CI 0.707% 1.469% 1.773% 1.634%
 Lower 95% CI -0.528% -0.783% -1.416% -2.585%
 SE 0.315% 0.575% 0.813% 1.076%
 P-value 0.78 0.55 0.83 0.66

Table 21: Results from OLS regression of four AAR and CAAR (daily) on a dummy
variable of announcements (home countries) over a six-month period for 50 of the top
100 largest defense companies excluding Asia. Controlled for number of previous
announcements, number of days since the invasion, weekday, and seasonality
(monthly). T-test.

                   AAR CAAR (-1,1) CAAR (-3,3) CAAR (-5,5)
 Estimate 0.188% 0.668% 0.835% 0.184%
 Upper 95% CI 1.692% 2.351% 2.659% 2.182%
 Lower 95% CI -1.316% -1.016% -0.989% -1.814%
 SE 0.767% 0.859% 0.931% 1.020%
 P-value 0.81 0.44 0.37 0.86

                                  28
Table 22: Results from OLS regression of four AAR and CAAR (daily) on a dummy
variable of announcements (home countries) over the entire time series for 50 of the top
100 largest defense companies excluding Asia. Controlled for number of previous
announcements, number of days since the invasion, weekday, and seasonality
(monthly). T-test.

                   AAR CAAR (-1,1) CAAR (-3,3) CAAR (-5,5)
 Estimate 0.369% 0.537% 0.195% -0.050%
 Upper 95% CI 0.914% 1.202% 0.970% 0.804%
 Lower 95% CI -0.177% -0.128% -0.580% -0.904%
 SE 0.278% 0.339% 0.396% 0.436%
 P-value 0.19 0.11 0.62 0.91

                                  29
Table 23: Average AAR/CAAR (daily, %), average number of firms in sample, average
number of firms reporting positive and negative AR/CAR respectively, for five categories
of observations with categorical differences (percentage points), for a six-month period.

                Average      Average N Average Pos   Average Neg  Description
               AAR/CAAR               firms        firms
 AAR 0,07% 25,98 13,44 12,54 All days
 CAAR (-1,1) 0,17% 25,98 13,09 12,89 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 0,27% 25,98 12,75 13,23 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 0,27% 25,98 12,67 13,31 -||-
 AAR 0,06% 26,00 13,13 12,87 Days with any
                                                                      announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 0,69% 26,00 13,60 12,40 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 0,81% 26,00 13,54 12,46 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 0,70% 26,00 13,12 12,88 -||-
 AAR 0,07% 25,95 13,78 12,17 Days without any
                                                                      announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) -0,40% 25,95 12,52 13,43 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) -0,33% 25,95 11,87 14,08 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) -0,20% 25,95 12,17 13,78 -||-
 AAR 0,62% 26,00 14,44 11,56 Days with home
                                                                      announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 1,42% 26,00 14,81 11,19 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 1,64% 26,00 15,19 10,81 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 1,29% 26,00 13,75 12,25 -||-
 AAR -0,01% 25,97 13,30 12,68 Days without home
                                                                      announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) -0,01% 25,97 12,84 13,14 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 0,07% 25,97 12,40 13,58 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 0,13% 25,97 12,51 13,46 -||-
 Diff AAR       -0,02% 0,05 -0,65 0,70 Difference between
 (All)                                                                     days with and
                                                                         without any
                                                                       announcements
 Diff AAR       0,63% 0,03 1,14 -1,11 Difference between
 (Home)                                                              days with and
                                                                     without home
                                                                       announcements

                                  30
Table 24: Average AAR/CAAR (daily, %), average number of firms in sample, average
number of firms reporting positive and negative AR/CAR respectively, for five categories
of observations with categorical differences (percentage points), for the entire time series.

                Average      Average N Average Pos   Average Neg  Description
               AAR/CAAR               firms        firms
 AAR 0,03% 25,96 13,28 12,68 All days
 CAAR (-1,1) 0,09% 25,96 13,10 12,86 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 0,16% 25,96 12,94 13,01 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 0,21% 25,96 12,75 13,21 -||-
 AAR 0,00% 25,97 12,91 13,06 Days with any
                                                                      announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 0,33% 25,97 13,18 12,79 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 0,53% 25,97 13,75 12,22 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 0,51% 25,97 13,30 12,66 -||-
 AAR 0,06% 25,95 13,58 12,37 Days without any
                                                                      announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) -0,10% 25,95 13,03 12,92 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) -0,15% 25,95 12,29 13,66 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) -0,04% 25,95 12,29 13,66 -||-
 AAR 0,47% 26,00 15,10 10,90 Days with home
                                                                      announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 0,77% 26,00 14,50 11,50 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 0,68% 26,00 14,60 11,40 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 0,68% 26,00 13,43 12,57 -||-
 AAR -0,02% 25,95 13,04 12,91 Days without home
                                                                      announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 0,00% 25,95 12,91 13,04 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 0,09% 25,95 12,72 13,23 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 0,14% 25,95 12,66 13,30 -||-
 Diff AAR       -0,07% 0,02 -0,68 0,70 Difference between
 (All)                                                                     days with and
                                                                         without any
                                                                       announcements
 Diff AAR       0,49% 0,05 2,06 -2,01 Difference between
 (Home)                                                              days with and
                                                                     without home
                                                                       announcements

                                  31
Table 25: Average AAR/CAAR (daily, %), average number of firms in sample, average
number of firms reporting positive and negative AR/CAR respectively, for five categories
of observations with categorical differences (percentage points), for a three-month period
and for a set of 50 of the top 100 largest defense industry companies excluding Asian
companies, limited according to the data section.

               Average       Average N Average      Average      Description
               AAR/CAAR              Pos firms    Neg firms
 AAR 0,17% 49,92 26,41 23,52 All days
 CAAR (-1,1) 0,49% 49,92 26,78 23,14 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 0,94% 49,92 26,50 23,42 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 1,29% 49,92 27,33 22,59 -||-
 AAR 0,15% 49,95 25,90 24,05 Days with any
                                                                    announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 0,58% 49,95 27,17 22,79 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 1,08% 49,95 26,55 23,40 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 1,36% 49,95 27,05 22,90 -||-
 AAR 0,20% 49,86 27,36 22,50 Days without any
                                                                    announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 0,34% 49,86 26,05 23,82 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 0,68% 49,86 26,41 23,45 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 1,17% 49,86 27,86 22,00 -||-
 AAR 0,53% 50,00 26,92 23,08 Days with home
                                                                    announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 1,23% 50,00 27,69 22,31 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 1,50% 50,00 27,85 22,15 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 1,22% 50,00 26,46 23,54 -||-
 AAR 0,07% 49,90 26,27 23,63 Days without home
                                                                    announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 0,31% 49,90 26,55 23,35 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 0,80% 49,90 26,16 23,75 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 1,31% 49,90 27,55 22,35 -||-
 Diff AAR       -0,05% 0,09 -1,46 1,55 Difference between
 (All)                                                                    days with and
                                                                        without any
                                                                     announcements
 Diff AAR       0,45% 0,10 0,65 -0,55 Difference between
 (Home)                                                             days with and
                                                                    without home
                                                                     announcements

                                  32
Table 26: Average AAR/CAAR (daily, %), average number of firms in sample, average
number of firms reporting positive and negative AR/CAR respectively, for five categories
of observations with categorical differences (percentage points), for a six-month period
and for a set of 50 of the top 100 largest defense industry companies excluding Asian
companies, limited according to the data section.

                Average      Average N Average Pos   Average Neg  Description
               AAR/CAAR               firms        firms
 AAR 0,05% 49,91 25,78 24,13 All days
 CAAR (-1,1) 0,14% 49,91 25,46 24,45 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 0,21% 49,91 24,78 25,13 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 0,19% 49,91 24,63 25,28 -||-
 AAR 0,05% 49,96 25,72 24,24 Days with any
                                                                      announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 0,62% 49,96 26,66 23,30 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 0,71% 49,96 26,09 23,87 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 0,59% 49,96 25,28 24,67 -||-
 AAR 0,06% 49,87 25,85 24,02 Days without any
                                                                      announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) -0,39% 49,87 24,13 25,73 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) -0,35% 49,87 23,32 26,55 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) -0,27% 49,87 23,90 25,97 -||-
 AAR 0,49% 50,00 27,31 22,69 Days with home
                                                                      announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 1,17% 50,00 28,69 21,31 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 1,46% 50,00 28,56 21,44 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 1,07% 50,00 26,19 23,81 -||-
 AAR -0,01% 49,90 25,56 24,34 Days without home
                                                                      announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) -0,01% 49,90 25,00 24,90 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 0,03% 49,90 24,23 25,67 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 0,06% 49,90 24,41 25,50 -||-
 Diff AAR       -0,01% 0,09 -0,13 0,22 Difference between
 (All)                                                                     days with and
                                                                         without any
                                                                       announcements
 Diff AAR       0,51% 0,10 1,75 -1,65 Difference between
 (Home)                                                              days with and
                                                                     without home
                                                                       announcements

                                  33
Table 27: Average AAR/CAAR (daily, %), average number of firms in sample, average
number of firms reporting positive and negative AR/CAR respectively, for five categories
of observations with categorical differences (percentage points), for the entire time series
and for a set of 50 of the top 100 largest defense industry companies excluding Asian
companies, limited according to the data section.

               Average       Average N Average      Average      Description
               AAR/CAAR              Pos firms    Neg firms
 AAR 0,02% 49,90 25,36 24,54 All days
 CAAR (-1,1) 0,06% 49,90 25,18 24,72 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 0,10% 49,90 24,89 25,02 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 0,12% 49,90 24,72 25,18 -||-
 AAR 0,00% 49,91 25,29 24,61 Days with any
                                                                    announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 0,30% 49,91 25,89 24,02 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 0,44% 49,91 26,10 23,81 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 0,38% 49,91 25,35 24,55 -||-
 AAR 0,03% 49,90 25,42 24,48 Days without any
                                                                    announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) -0,13% 49,90 24,60 25,30 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) -0,17% 49,90 23,89 26,01 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) -0,08% 49,90 24,20 25,70 -||-
 AAR 0,41% 49,95 28,67 21,29 Days with home
                                                                    announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 0,70% 49,95 27,93 22,02 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 0,64% 49,95 26,93 23,02 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 0,63% 49,95 25,60 24,36 -||-
 AAR -0,04% 49,90 24,92 24,97 Days without home
                                                                    announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) -0,02% 49,90 24,81 25,08 -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 0,03% 49,90 24,61 25,28 -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 0,06% 49,90 24,60 25,29 -||-
 Diff AAR       -0,03% 0,01 -0,12 0,13 Difference between
 (All)                                                                    days with and
                                                                        without any
                                                                     announcements
 Diff AAR       0,44% 0,06 3,75 -3,69 Difference between
 (Home)                                                             days with and
                                                                    without home
                                                                     announcements

                                  34
Table 28: Distribution (%) of observations (daily AAR/CAAR values) with respect to
sign and significance (5%) for five categories of observations, with categorical
differences (percentage points), for a six-month period. Generalized Rank T test.

                          1         2
             % Pos.      % Sign.      % Pos. &  % Neg. &  Description

                                                                         3                    4
                                                  Sign.           Sign.
 AAR 54% 11% 5% 6% All days
 CAAR (-1,1) 51% 14% 8% 6% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 46% 5% 2% 3% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 43% 4% 2% 2% -||-
 AAR 52% 12% 4% 7% Days with any
                                                                        announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 52% 12% 6% 6% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 54% 4% 1% 3% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 45% 3% 3% 0% -||-
 AAR 57% 10% 5% 5% Days without any
                                                                        announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 50% 17% 10% 7% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 38% 5% 2% 3% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 40% 5% 2% 3% -||-
 AAR 63% 25% 19% 6% Days with home
                                                                        announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 56% 13% 13% 0% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 63% 6% 6% 0% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 44% 0% 0% 0% -||-
 AAR 53% 9% 3% 6% Days without home
                                                                        announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 50% 14% 7% 7% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 44% 5% 1% 4% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 42% 5% 3% 2% -||-
 Diff AAR (All) -4% 2% -1% 2% Difference between
                                                                       days with and
                                                                       without any
                                                                         announcements
 Diff AAR      9% 16% 16% 0% Difference between
 (Home)                                                               days with and
                                                                    without home
                                                                         announcements

    1) Percent of observations (days) with a positive AAR/CAAR value
    2) Percent of observations (days) with a significant (5%) AAR/CAAR value
    3) Percent of observations (days) with a significant positive AAR/CAAR value
    4) Percent of observations (days) with a significant negative AAR/CAAR value

                                  35
Table 29: Distribution (%) of observations (daily AAR/CAAR values) with respect to
sign and significance (5%) for five categories of observations, with categorical
differences (percentage points) for the entire time series. Generalized Rank T test.

                         1         2
            % Pos.     % Sign.     % Pos. &  % Neg. &  Description
                                                       3              4
                                               Sign.          Sign.
 AAR 55% 13% 6% 7% All days
 CAAR (-1,1) 51% 14% 7% 7% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 51% 14% 5% 9% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 46% 10% 5% 5% -||-
 AAR 51% 14% 7% 7% Days with any
                                                                   announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 51% 12% 6% 6% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 56% 12% 6% 6% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 47% 7% 6% 1% -||-
 AAR 58% 12% 6% 6% Days without any
                                                                   announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 51% 15% 8% 8% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 46% 16% 5% 11% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 46% 13% 5% 8% -||-
 AAR 67% 19% 17% 2% Days with home
                                                                   announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 60% 17% 12% 5% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 52% 10% 7% 2% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 48% 7% 7% 0% -||-
 AAR 53% 12% 5% 7% Days without home
                                                                   announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 50% 13% 6% 7% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 50% 15% 5% 9% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 46% 11% 5% 6% -||-
 Diff AAR      -7% 2% 1% 1% Difference between
 (All)                                                                  days with and without
                                                                 any announcements
 Diff AAR      14% 7% 12% -5% Difference between
 (Home)                                                           days with and without
                                                              home announcements

    1) Percent of observations (days) with a positive AAR/CAAR value
    2) Percent of observations (days) with a significant (5%) AAR/CAAR value
    3) Percent of observations (days) with a significant positive AAR/CAAR value
    4) Percent of observations (days) with a significant negative AAR/CAAR value

                                  36
Table 30: Distribution (%) of observations (daily AAR/CAAR values) with respect to
sign and significance (5%) for five categories of observations, with categorical
differences (percentage points), for a three-month period and for a set of 50 of the top 100
largest defense industry companies excluding Asian companies, limited according to the
data section. Generalized Rank T test.

             % Pos. % Sign. % Pos. &  % Neg. &  Description
                                               Sign.          Sign.
 AAR 56% 8% 5% 3% All days
 CAAR (-1,1) 58% 5% 3% 2% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 52% 5% 5% 0% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 56% 3% 3% 0% -||-
 AAR 52% 10% 5% 5% Days with any
                                                                   announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 57% 2% 0% 2% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 48% 5% 5% 0% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 55% 2% 2% 0% -||-
 AAR 64% 5% 5% 0% Days without any
                                                                   announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 59% 9% 9% 0% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 59% 5% 5% 0% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 59% 5% 5% 0% -||-
 AAR 62% 23% 15% 8% Days with home
                                                                   announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 54% 0% 0% 0% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 46% 8% 8% 0% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 46% 0% 0% 0% -||-
 AAR 55% 4% 2% 2% Days without home
                                                                   announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 59% 6% 4% 2% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 53% 4% 4% 0% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 59% 4% 4% 0% -||-
 Diff AAR      -11% 5% 0% 5% Difference between
 (All)                                                                  days with and without
                                                                 any announcements
 Diff AAR      7% 19% 13% 6% Difference between
 (Home)                                                           days with and without
                                                              home announcements

                                  37
Table 31: Distribution (%) of observations (daily AAR/CAAR values) with respect to
sign and significance (5%) for five categories of observations, with categorical
differences (percentage points), for a six-month period and for a set of 50 of the top 100
largest defense industry companies excluding Asian companies, limited according to the
data section. Generalized Rank T test.

             % Pos. % Sign. % Pos. &  % Neg. &  Description
                                                Sign.          Sign.
 AAR 57% 10% 4% 6% All days
 CAAR (-1,1) 51% 9% 5% 4% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 44% 8% 3% 5% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 44% 6% 2% 4% -||-
 AAR 55% 12% 4% 7% Days with any
                                                                    announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 55% 6% 3% 3% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 48% 7% 4% 3% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 45% 4% 3% 1% -||-
 AAR 60% 8% 3% 5% Days without any
                                                                    announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 47% 12% 7% 5% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 40% 8% 2% 7% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 43% 8% 2% 7% -||-
 AAR 63% 25% 19% 6% Days with home
                                                                    announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 56% 6% 6% 0% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 50% 13% 13% 0% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 44% 0% 0% 0% -||-
 AAR 57% 8% 2% 6% Days without home
                                                                    announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 50% 9% 5% 5% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 43% 7% 2% 5% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 44% 7% 3% 5% -||-
 Diff AAR      -5% 4% 1% 2% Difference between
 (All)                                                                days with and
                                                                   without any
                                                                     announcements
 Diff AAR      6% 17% 17% 0% Difference between
 (Home)                                                           days with and
                                                                without home
                                                                     announcements

                                  38
Table 32: Distribution (%) of observations (daily AAR/CAAR values) with respect to
sign and significance (5%) for five categories of observations, with categorical
differences (percentage points), for the entire time series and for a set of 50 of the top 100
largest defense industry companies excluding Asian companies, limited according to the
data section. Generalized Rank T test.

              % Pos. % Sign. % Pos. &  % Neg. &  Description
                                                Sign.          Sign.
 AAR 52% 10% 4% 6% All days
 CAAR (-1,1) 50% 11% 6% 5% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 48% 11% 6% 5% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 45% 11% 7% 5% -||-
 AAR 52% 11% 4% 7% Days with any
                                                                   announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 53% 11% 6% 5% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 48% 12% 7% 5% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 45% 11% 8% 3% -||-
 AAR 52% 10% 5% 5% Days without any
                                                                   announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 48% 12% 7% 6% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 47% 11% 6% 6% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 45% 12% 6% 6% -||-
 AAR 67% 17% 14% 2% Days with home
                                                                   announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 60% 12% 10% 2% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 48% 10% 7% 2% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 45% 7% 7% 0% -||-
 AAR 50% 9% 3% 6% Days without home
                                                                   announcement
 CAAR (-1,1) 49% 11% 6% 6% -||-
 CAAR (-3,3) 48% 12% 6% 6% -||-
 CAAR (-5,5) 45% 12% 7% 5% -||-
 Diff AAR      0% 2% 0% 2% Difference between
 (All)                                                                  days with and without
                                                                 any announcements
 Diff AAR      16% 7% 11% -4% Difference between
 (Home)                                                           days with and without
                                                              home announcements

                                  39
Figures

                CAAR (-1,1), AllAnnouncementDummy

 90
 80
 70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
  0

Figure 5: Distribution of coefficients of 1000 iterations of placebo test of linear regression
model where a dummy variable for announcements (any) is regressed on abnormal returns
using the CAAR (-1,1) measure.

                CAAR (-3,3), AllAnnouncementDummy

 120

 100

  80

  60

  40

  20

   0

Figure 6: Distribution of coefficients of 1000 iterations of placebo test of linear regression
model where a dummy variable for announcements (any) is regressed on abnormal returns
using the CAAR (-3,3) measure.

                                  40
                CAAR (-5,5), AllAnnouncementDummy

 180
 160
 140
 120
 100
  80
  60
  40
  20
   0

Figure 7: Distribution of coefficients of 1000 iterations of placebo test of linear regression
model where a dummy variable for announcements (any) is regressed on abnormal returns
using the CAAR (-5,5) measure.

              CAAR (-1,1), HomeAnnouncementDummy

 80
 70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
  0

Figure 8: Distribution of coefficients of 1000 iterations of placebo test of linear regression
model where a dummy variable for announcements (home) is regressed on abnormal
returns using the CAAR (-1,1) measure.

                                  41
              CAAR (-3,3), HomeAnnouncementDummy

 140
 120
 100
  80
  60
  40
  20
   0

Figure 9: Distribution of coefficients of 1000 iterations of placebo test of linear regression
model where a dummy variable for announcements (home) is regressed on abnormal
returns using the CAAR (-3,3) measure.

              CAAR (-5,5), HomeAnnouncementDummy

 180
 160
 140
 120
 100
  80
  60
  40
  20
   0

Figure 10: Distribution of coefficients of 1000 iterations of placebo test of linear
regression model where a dummy variable for announcements (home) is regressed on
abnormal returns using the CAAR (-5,5) measure.

                                  42