Turning  With  The  Tide

A  time-series  study  conducted on the presence of herd  behaviour
in the Nordic financial markets

Evelina  Olsson
Carl Rex
Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2023
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

Turning with the tide  –  a time-series analysis conducted on the presence of herd
behaviour in Nordic financial markets

Abstract:
        This paper explores the  presence of herding behaviour  in the Nordic stock markets, i.e.
       the  tendency of investors to mimic each other and  follow the herd whilst disregarding
       their own  beliefs and abilities to  make rational investment decisions.  We examine  this
        effect during multiple  global financial crises  over the last 50 years  to  assess how both
        endogenous and exogenous shocks impact  herding behaviour.  Further, we  analyse
       differences in herding behaviour  between  times of growth  and  recessions  in the  Nordic
       stock  exchanges and  show  to what extent herding is affected by macroeconomic  factors.
        We find that herding is  detected within all  five  Nordic countries except for Norway, and
        that herding is more prominent during  bearish days on the  stock markets.  Additionally,
       we  conclude that  on an international level  an exogenous shock  generates more consistent
       support for herding, but  specific endogenous shocks  can to a greater extent create
         herding within a single country.  Controversially, we do not find sufficient support to
        assess  whether herding is more likely to  exist  in periods  preceding, during, or succeeding
        a crisis,  however,  herding is  recorded consistently  during longer periods in-between  large
        endogenous  shocks in the financial markets.

Key words:
        Herd behaviour, Nordic capital markets, Equity return dispersion, Investor sentiment

Authors:
        Evelina Olsson  (25276)
        Carl Rex  (25012)

Tutor: Riccardo Sabbatucci, Associate Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner: Adrien D’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Evelina Olsson & Carl Rex 2023

2
                                    Stockholm School of Economics

                                 1.  Introduction

 “Herding is a form of convergent social behaviour that can be broadly defined as the alignment of the thoughts or
   behaviours of individuals in a group (herd) through local interaction and without centralised coordination.”  -
           Herding in humans, RM Raafat,  N  6.2.3  –  Norway.  Chater,  C Frith  2009

Generally, the concept of herding behaviour refers to the tendency of people to mimic the
behaviours of others, disregarding their own beliefs and information. It is the alignment of
thoughts,  behaviours,  and actions among individuals within a group, colloquially known as a
‘herd’.  Experimental evidence in social psychology  on behaviour of individuals in groups  suggest
that individuals abide by  group decisions, even in instances in which the individual believes the
group to be wrong  (Asch, 1952).  In the context of financial markets, the presence of herding
occurs when investors choose to emulate the trading actions of others, disregarding their own
beliefs and  basing their investment decisions solely on the collective acts of  others.  In this sense,
herding suggests that investors  are  drawn to the consensus of the market,  implying that
individual returns  should  not  stray far away from the market return  (Christie & Huang,  1995).
Depending on the structure of herding, it  is argued to be  either a  rational or irrational form of
investor behaviour (Chang, Cheng & Khorana,  1999).  The irrational view  is focused on investor
psychology  where  investors follow others blindly,  disregarding their own beliefs (Devenow  &
Welch,  1996).  Contrastingly, the rational view  focuses on managers’ mimicking of each other  to
maintain reputational capital in the market, hence  relating to the classical principal-agent problem
(Scharfstein  &  Stein, 1990; Rajan, 1994). Some authors (Bikhchandani,  Hirshleifer  & Welch,
1990; Welch, 1992) refers to this behaviour as an informational cascade.

Considerable time and effort have been put into understanding investment  behaviour of market
participants  and its ensuing impact on security prices  by academic researchers.  This paper aims
to answer the questions  “Do Nordic investors engage in herding behaviour and, if so, does their propensity to
engage in such behaviour depend on the macroeconomic environment in which they operate  and the nature of any
turbulence?”.  It follows that our aim with this study  is  threefold. Firstly,  we examine the potential
presence of herding. This  is of interest as  in the presence of herding,  market efficiency is
arguably reduced as  investors  choose to invest  based on the collective actions of others rather
than  their  own  rational beliefs. As such,  the behaviour of market participants, and  by extension
asset prices, will no longer effectively reflect all available information and price accordingly.  For
instance,  Wermers (2002) finds that stocks that are bought by herds outperform stocks  are sold
by herds  by 4 percent over  a  6-month  period, an outperformance that is even more pronounced
amongst smaller stocks.

The second aim of  this study  is to  analyse  whether general economic environment can influence
the potential  presence of herding  in the Nordic capital markets.  We will examine  whether
herding is more likely to  occur  before, during,  or  after  periods of economic distress  in the
national  financial markets. We also  differentiate  between  bullish and bearish days, which are
defined as days  in  which the aggregate market return is positive  or  negative, respectively.  This
study  applies  two proposed  measures  of herding, discussed below,  across various time  frames.
These time frames  are defined  based on periods with limited economic growth, as determined by
the rate of the GDP growth in conjunction with  indices  development,  and during which
international  crisis  have occurred.  Specifically, this study  evaluates the presence of herding during
the 1990’s recession, the Dot-com  Pre,  the global financial crisis,  the Greek government-debt
crisis,  and the global Covid-19 pandemic.

Finally, the third aim of this study is to investigate whether investors’ propensity to engage in
herding behaviour is affected by  the nature of the event affecting the  macroeconomic

                                                                          3
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

environment.  Arguably, the periods included in this study represent both endogenous
disturbances (such  as the DotCom  period) as well as  exogenous  ones (Covid-19 pandemic).  We
use this to investigate whether there is a difference in investor sentiment depending on  the
nature of the chock, i.e. whether it is endogenous or exogenous  to the capital markets.

Many  proposals are given as to the reasons behind institutional investor herding. These include
reputational risk that may come from acting differently than others and having wrong, hence
causing investors to disregard their own information in favour of mimicking other investors’
behaviours (Scharfstein & Stein, 1990). Another reason proposed is given by Froot, Scharfstein,
and Stein (1992) and Hirshleifer, Subrahmanyam, and Titman (1994) who argue that investors
may herd  around market consensus  simply because  they receive correlated private information.
It is also possible that investors may share a similar aversion in the sense that they all dislike
stocks with certain characteristics such as low volatility Falkenstein (1996).  Herding has been
observed in extreme market conditions characterised by increased uncertainty (Kurz & Kurz-
Kim, 2013, (Schmitt & Westerhoff, 2017). Unarguably, the recent global pandemic of Covid
represented such a situation, with entire societies changing their ways  of living and working. It is
therefore interesting to examine the presence of herding during the pandemic, which is
something that the authors Ferreruela & Mallor  (2021)  have done in the context of the Spanish
and  Portuguese markets. The authors find evidence supporting the presence of herding in both
markets.  Hence, there  is indeed preceding literature investigating the presence of herding. Apart
from  Ferreruela & Mallor  (2021),  Chang, Cheng, & Khorana  (1999), finds presence of herding
for South Korea and Taiwan. There are, however,  also examples of  other results which are
inconsistent with the presence of herding, including Christie & Huang  (1995).

As above examples  illustrate, there is indeed previous literature examining herding in capital
markets.  However, this phenomenon has been scarcely researched in  a  Nordic-specific context.
Exceptions include Mobarek, Mollah & Keasey (2014) who examines herding in a European
context  between the years  2001-2012 and finds that herding effect is most pronounced in the
Nordic countries during the Eurozone crisis and in the continental countries during the global
financial crisis. We extend on this expanding the time frame and comparing between different
time periods as defined by macroeconomic factors.

This study  builds  on the work performed by Christie & Huang (1995)  who propose the use of
cross-sectional standard deviation to detect herding  in the United States from December 1925 to
December 1998.  This measure is said to capture the presence of herding behaviour by effectively
quantifying the degree to which asset returns increase and decrease along with the portfolio
return.  The authors argue that, if market participants supress their individual beliefs and
predictions about asset prices and base their  behaviours on that of others during periods of
market stress (i.e., herd), individual security returns will not deviate substantially from the market
return which would be reflected as lower values of the cross-sectional standard deviation.  Whilst
dispersions are predicted to be low in the presence of herd behaviour, they do not in their own
have implications for the presence of herding as low dispersions could be triggered by other
things  including a  lack of new information during a trading interval.  As is  presented by the
authors,  it is  therefore  not enough to simply search for periods of low dispersions and attribute
these to herding.  Equity dispersions share similarities with standard measures of volatility,  but
they bear an important distinction in that they employ the portfolio return rather than the
expected returns of individual assets. Rational asset pricing models predict that periods of market
stress induce increased levels  of dispersion,  which stands in stark contrast to herding of
individual returns around the market,  which would translate to particularly low levels of
dispersions during  periods of market stress.  It is worth mentioning that  Christie & Huang  (1995)
define periods of market stress as  times  with abnormally large average price movements and

4
                                    Stockholm School of Economics

differentiates between the hypothesis of herding and that of traditional rational asset pricing
models by constructing dummy variables defined  depending on whether market return is in the
upper or lower 5% (1%) of the return distribution.  Further, the authors also investigate
differences across industries and periods of market stress (which is defined as periods of
abnormally large price movements) and normal market conditions. Dispersions were found to
increase significantly during periods in which the average price changes were large. These results
imply  that individual returns do not cluster around the market return nor the industry returns,
speaking against the presence of herding.  We apply  the cross-sectional standard deviation
measure to the Nordic  countries but fail to  find support for the presence of herding before
conducting robustness checks.

Further, we consult and extend on  the work of  Chang, Cheng & Khorana  (1999)  and their
proposed  cross-sectional  absolute  deviation measure.  The empirical model proposed  by the
authors  builds on the provided demonstration that rational asset pricing models predict that
equity returns are not only an increasing function of the market return, but importantly also that
the  relation is linear. Provided that investors tend to herd during periods of large  aggregated  price
movements, the linear and increasing relation will no longer hold and can instead become
increasingly  non-linear or even decrease.  Chang, Cheng, & Khorana  (1999)  examine  the
investment behaviour from an international perspective  in both developed and developing
countries. They collect  data  on the U.S., Hong Kong, Japan,  South Korea, and  Taiwan  form the
1970s to the 1990s. They base their study on the herding measure  suggested by Christie &
Huang  (1995)  but  create  interesting and  important extensions.  They  propose a new  method for
detecting herding  based on a  non-linear regression specification,  the cross-sectional absolute
deviation (CSAD)  which  examines the relationship between  the overall market return and the
level of equity dispersion.  Besides applying the newly crafted  model  to their sample they also  test
for  shifts in herding  following  the  liberalization  of  Asian financial markets.  The authors find
results consistent with those of  Christie & Huang  for the U.S.  and Hong Kong but  find
significant  non-linear relationships in  the emerging markets  Taiwan and  South Korea,  indicating
a  presence of herding.

Chiang  and Zheng  investigate  herding behaviour in a global context  from 1988 to 2009  across  18
countries, but there is a notable absence of the  Nordic  markets.  The authors  develop  the cross-
sectional absolute deviation measure further by including  a dummy variable  which  divides the
data into two  subsets  depending on  whether the overall market is up or down.  They find
evidence of herding in advanced stock markets, excluding the U.S., and in Asian markets.
Moreover, the authors also investigate herding behaviour across periods of time characterised by
extraordinary circumstances.  They find that crisis trigger herding in the country of origin, and
then spreads to neighbouring countries.  Additionally, they also find evidence suggesting that
herding is, as intuition would suggest, more present in  turbulent  than it is during  tranquil  market
conditions.

We will extend on these previous  papers by  investigating herding  in a Nordic context, where
investor sentiment and behaviour may differ from the regions studied previously due to culture
or otherwise nation specific factors. Studying the Nordic markets is also of interest as the study
effectively is  done in an international context, but between nations which are neighbouring
countries engaging in cross-country cooperation  and which therefore  has great influence on the
economies of the other countries.  This  will allow us to answer the first aim of our research
question,  that is, whether herding is present in Nordic capital markets.

This study also  extends  on previous literature by extending the analysis to be conducted over a
longer time-period and includes data from 1986 and onwards.  We  also conduct our  analysis in

                                                                          5
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

different time periods and  include  one year prior as well as one year post each time frame
characterised by extraordinary circumstances to be able to draw conclusions regarding the
presence of herding under different market characteristics. That is, once the period which is
deemed to be the time during which turbulence can be observed in the different Nordic capital
markets is set, one year prior to that is also taken out as a separate period defined as the  pre period,
and one year after the period is deemed to be over is included as the  post period.  Additionally, we
also include “normal states” which we define by the time between the aforementioned periods of
receding economic growth, as well as a current period ranging from the end of the “post-Covid”
                            th
period until October 13  2023 where our dataset ends. This is done to address the second  and
third  aim of this study.  Because investing in a market in which herding behaviour occurs differs
from investing in an otherwise normal  market in the sense that a larger number of securities is
required to achieve the same level of diversification  (Chang, Cheng & Khorana, 1999), our
research contributes to the important understanding of underlying market characteristics for
Nordic investors.

6
                                    Stockholm School of Economics

                          2.  Data and  Methodology
3.1  Data

3.1.1 Data  Description

We obtain our data  from  the  Compustat  -  Capital IQ at the  Wharton Research Data Services
(WRDS)  at  University of Pennsylvania.  We collect  company names, daily  data on  closing prices,
global company key,  and  two  calculative  factors. These factors are used to calculate  daily market
returns using the definition provided by  WRDS. With these, the returns are  adjusted for stock
splits  and  includes  cash equivalent distributions and  reinvestments of dividends.  These factors
are the  “total daily return factor” and the “adjustment factor”, and the calculations are  performed  as
per  below.

                    (𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒  ÷ 𝐴𝑑𝑗𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡  𝐹𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟) × 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛  𝐹𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟
 (:𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔  𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒!"#$%&'( *+,  ÷ 𝐴𝑑𝑗𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡  𝐹𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟!"#$%&'( *+,  ; × 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛  𝐹𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟!"#$%&'( *+,)

To counter the potential survivorship bias that may occur we construct  five  survivor-bias free
datasets  by  including  every stock that has ever been listed from 1986-2023 on any of the Nordic
exchanges.  This enables us to  study the herding effect  around stocks that are no longer public or
have been liquidized,  during the time when they were listed.  We note that, due to data limitations
further discussed below, we are not able to collect data during the same dates for each country  as
there are national public  holidays and other factors which influence the  markets.  The specific
dates  used  for  each country  are presented in  table  1.

We  use  data on the daily closing price of the national indices for  all Nordic countries. These are
OMXS30, OMXC20, OBX, OMXH25  and OMXI10  (for Sweden, Denmark, Norway,  Finland,
and Iceland, respectively). These indices are constructed with the  n  (n  =  30, 20, 25, 25, 10) most
liquid companies listed in their respective exchanges.  We collect this  data  from Nasdaq Nordic
for all countries  excluding  Norway which is  instead  collected from Euronext,  as  Nasdaq  does not
have  operations in Norway.

Lastly, we have collected national GDP growth data for each of the countries  under observation
from  the  Organization  for Economic Co-Operation  and Development (OECD)  which is used to
define our time periods.

3.1.2 Definition of time periods

We  use daily  data of the national indices in conjunction with the GDP growth to define when a
time-period starts.  The periods we are interested in are the  1990’s recession, the DotCom  pre
period, the global financial crisis, the  Greek government-debt  crisis,  and the Covid-19 pandemic.
Additionally, we also include a current period. To determine when each period commences in
the individual countries, we investigate which quarters  have  negative growth  during a period in
which we are interested  (i.e., the periods mentioned  above)  and  specify  the  period  for our
analysis  as  when there  is  a vital amount of  negative  GDP growth  within  at least 1.5  years  without
significant positive GDP growth in between.  The gap between negative quarters is also of
interest and we limit the accepted length of a gap to be  two  quarters.  As such, we allow the GDP
to slightly increase  in-between  adjacent quarters  of negative growth.  This  increase  has  limited
implications regarding general economic well-being as  an  increase from an already abnormally
low level  would still be considered  part of a  generally receding market.  We  allow for  a positive

                                                                          7
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

growth  for no  more than two  consecutive  quarters.  Furthermore, we also take the country’s
index development into account.  We compare the  initial  GDP evaluation with the  growth in
figure 1  to find further support  for  our defined time periods.  Looking at figure 1 we note that,
compared to  several of  the periods as defined by the GDP  growth rates  solely  (presented in
figures 2-6),  the  indices growth  rates  indicate that economic recessions  start  at an  earlier  date.
This is  not surprising, as  we only have GDP growth  per  quarter,  which  means  that  the  GDP  data
may be lagged  compared to the daily  prices we have collected on the indices. This  poses  a
potential  issue  as  the data  may capture  macroeconomic  trends  “too  late”.  Therefore, we  define
all periods to counter the lags by  setting  the start date one quarter  earlier.

A  suitable  example for our period-definition-rule  is the period  for the global financial crisis of
2007-2009 in Sweden. Looking at figure 2,  there are  four  clearly  negative quarters  during  this
period, with the most prominent downwards spike  occurring in  late  2008.  Looking  closely,  we
note  that within this  one  year and  nine-month  period  from Q1  2008 to  Q3  2009  there are a total
of  six  negative quarters.  Hence, we  have a period defined of more than 1,5 years as well  as a
negative  GDP  quota of  66.67%.  Therefore, with the additional  countering for lagged values, the
2008 financial crisis period is defined with the start date of  2007-10-01 to 2009-09-30 (2007 Q4
to 2009 Q3).

However, a  few exceptions to this rule  have  been made.  Most are country-specific, further
discussed below,  but  in addition to such  adjustments  one major  exception is  made  with regards
to  the Covid-19 pandemic  period. This period is defined  as  Q1 2020  -  Q4  2020. This is done
since the  global  outbreak  was in Q1  2020, which is clearly depicted in figure 2  –  6.  Additionally,
the Covid-19 pandemic was also  unique in the sense that it was  a  sudden  exogenous  chock  to  all
financial markets,  rather than an endogenous one  occurring in one (or a few) and  then spreading
to others.  It  is therefore deemed to be more suitable to have the same start date for all countries,
regardless of country specific data. Moreover, we note that the Covid-19 pandemic did not end
by 2021, but for this study we set the period of Covid-19 to be the year  of  2020  which, according
to our rule,  implies that the  pre-  and post-periods are 2019 and 2021 respectively.  This is done as
it was the first year of the global pandemic, therefore arguably the period during which  market
uncertainty was at its peak.  The ‘Current’ period is also  commonly defined for all countries with
the start  date  of  Q1 2022  with Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, which is also an
exogeneous chock with no country-specific characteristics.  The period ends with our dataset, i.e.,
October 2023.

                                 Figure 1  –  Nordic indices growth

 Figure 1 represents the daily return of each of the national indices which represent the top traded securities on that day. Source:  Nasdaq
                                                    Nordic,  Euronext

8
                                    Stockholm School of Economics

Apart from the exceptions mentioned above, we set the time-periods  separately for each country
to account for the fact that  not all international events have affected the national markets during
the same  dates.  Because  our analysis is inherently dependent on  dividing the periods depending
on  factors that may influence  investor sentiment  (i.e., such as general economic  factors), the time
periods have been assessed individually for all countries included in the analysis  using the
quarterly GDP growth in conjunction with the national index development.  The actual periods
used in the analysis are provided in  table  1  in the appendix.  Below  are brief explanations
regarding the individual countries period  definitions.

                          Figure  2  –  Sweden quarterly GDP growth  (%)

    Figure 2 represents the quarterly percentual GDP growth. 0% quarterly growth  is represented by a dotted line. Source:  OECD

For Sweden, we note that  the first negative GDP growth (the development of which can be
found in Figure 2)  for this  sample  occurs in the beginning of 1990. Looking more closely at the
data, the first negative growth is more specifically in Q2. Therefore,  taking our  corrections of
lagged values into account we  use 1990 Q1  as  starting point for the more turbulent period which
was to follow due to the 1990’s recession. The development can also be observed, although not
as clearly, in figure 1 with the OMXS30 index  declining.  The end date has been set as  Q1  1993,
as the GDP growth following that quarter is positive for a longer  period. It should be noted,
however, that during the time-period which is included in the definition of the 1990’s crisis, there
have been some quarters which display a positive growth. Because the growth  is based on the
levels observed during the previous quarter, this provides limited insight as  it may have increased
from an already very low level. Therefore, for the period to be concluded as over, it is necessary
to see that the development is positive for several  succeeding  quarters, as defined by the period-
definition-rule described above.

For the DotCom  period, the same reasoning as above has been followed. That is, the starting
date for the period is set to be Q3  in 2000,  since Q4  displays negative GDP growth  which can be
seen in Figure 2.  Looking at figure 2, this period does not seem to have negative GDP growth.
However,  considering  that the previous years all had positive GDP growth we still find this
period interesting enough to examine given that it has some negative GDP  growth,  and  that the
growth rate has decreased significantly.  This is also clearly visible in Figure 1, with the OMXS30
index dropping significantly during this period.  The period is concluded to be over in Q1  2002,
as the development of the index as well as the  GDP growth begins to exhibit positive
development at that time.  For the global financial crisis, the  start date for the period under
observation in Sweden is set to be Q4  2007, which is clearly visible as a time with negative
development in Figure 1. Arguably more interesting to note is the end date, which is set to be Q3

                                                                          9
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

2009 as the development then turns to be positive  once again. For the Greek government-debt
crisis period, the starting date is set to be Q3  2011,  and the end date is set to be  Q2  2013.  As
aforementioned, the Covid and current periods are set to be the same for all countries included
in the study.

                         Figure  3  –  Denmark quarterly GDP growth  (%)

    Figure 3 represents the quarterly percentual GDP growth. 0% quarterly growth  is represented by a dotted line. Source:  OECD

The 1990’s recession for Denmark is defined as Q4 1991 – Q2 1993. Whilst we do note negative
GDP growth  during  the  sample before that,  it is excluded from this study  as  there  is  a  period of
more than two consecutive quarters with positive growth  in between. Hence,  it is a period  that
breaks our rule, and the first period  is  therefore  not  considered  part of the crisis we want to
examine.  Whilst there is  sporadic negative GDP growth  after 1993  as well, these occur after a
period of two quarters has passed and  are hence dismissed in  this  timeframe.  For the  DotCom
period, the starting date  has been set to Q4  2000  and  the end date is defined as Q2 2003. These
spikes are clearly visible in figure 3 during this period.

                          Figure  4  –  Norway quarterly GDP growth  (%)

    Figure 4 represents the quarterly percentual GDP growth. 0% quarterly growth  is represented by a dotted line. Source:  OECD

In Norway, we note that although the 1990’s did display some periods of negative GDP growth,
these did not reach our defined time-period  criteria. However,  Q2 1987  –  Q1 1989 is a period
that does fulfil our criteria. This is not surprising, as  this was a period of economic disturbances
in  Norway  (Moe, Solheim, & Vale,  2004).  This is therefore the period which we have chosen to

10
                                    Stockholm School of Economics

examine, and it is defined as the 1990’s crash for the purposes of this study.  For the other
periods defined for Norway, no exceptions to the rules specified previously have been made.

                          Figure  5  –  Finland quarterly GDP growth  (%)

    Figure 5 represents the quarterly percentual GDP growth. 0% quarterly growth  is represented by a dotted line. Source:  OECD

Above is the visual presentation of the Finnish GDP development.  Here, we have chosen to
disobey  our rule in one instance, with the other periods following the logic previously presented.
Specifically,  the negative  growth recorded in  Q3  2010  is  excluded as it has been affected by the
large and positive development during the previous quarter. Hence, we make an exception and
exclude it as we deem that it is not part of the period which we wish to analyse.

                          Figure  6  –  Iceland quarterly GDP growth  (%)

    Figure 6 represents the quarterly percentual GDP growth. 0% quarterly growth  is represented by a dotted line. Source:  OECD

We note that the  left-hand side of the graph  displaying the Icelandic GDP growth  differs in
visible characteristics compared to the others, as well as to itself during more recent years. Due
to lack of reliable data, this period contains estimated GDP growth from OECD rather than the
actual development. Whilst this is unwanted, it bears little significance to us as the data we have
for the Icelandic stock exchange is also limited in the earlier years, and hence the first period  we
analyse for Iceland is  the  DotCom  period.

An  exception to  our  rule has been made  with regards to  the Greek government-debt crisis, as it
is  also excluded from investigation in Iceland. This is  due to  the Icelandic financial crisis, which
was an effect of the global financial crisis of 2008-2009  and  which  had a severe impact on

                                                                         11
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

Iceland’s economy.  The aftermath of the 2008 crash led to the default of  Iceland’s  three largest
privately owned banks  which destabilised the economic environment for several years
(Önnudóttir, Helgason, Harðarson, & Thórisdóttir,  2021). Therefore,  we have chosen to exclude
the  Greek  government debt crisis since this occurs during a period where all three of these  crises
would have an effect  in  Iceland. Hence, we have chosen to  include all this in the Icelandic crisis
period which is defined as  Q4 2007  –  Q1  2012.

3.1.3  Data Limitations  and Manipulation

Limitations in the data include  a lack of observations  for Iceland prior to  1995, which  excludes
Iceland from  the analysis of the 1990s recession.  Furthermore, Denmark’s  main index  was
switched from OMXC20 to OMXC25 in 2015  and  therefore contains no data prior to 2015,
which is why we have chosen to use the OMXC20 as the benchmark instead, despite it no longer
being  the main index of the Danish stock exchange.  Whilst this may bear limited implications, an
index which includes a larger number of assets would  be preferred for our purposes, as we aim
to  examine market characteristics.  Further,  data on OMXI10 is  limited  with regards to its sample
size (both the number of stocks included as well as the dates during which data is available)  due
to  reasons  unknown.

Additionally, data  for quarterly GDP growth  is not available for all countries  during  the entire
time-period. OECD provides estimations for some periods during which data is limited or non-
existent. These periods are as follows:
Sweden: Q1 1986  –  Q4 1992,
Denmark: Q1 1986  –  Q4 1994,
Finland:  Q1 1986  –  Q4 1989,
Iceland: Q1 1986  –  Q4  1994.

Cleaning the data also exposed  an underlying issue with the samples  as  some companies  were
listed in the dataset multiple times with different prices.  It  was concluded that  this  is explainable
by  certain companies  having multiple stocks  listed, as is  common for large corporations  to  have.
These issues were  present  in all countries  and  in some instances dropping the duplicates  would
not suffice since  a second version  of a stock  could  be listed  on a day  during which the first
version  was not. To combat these  issues and counter  potential  cases  of  unplausible  movements  a
restriction was added to the data to separate  the versions of the same stock into  two,  by giving
them suffixes  based on  the  starting date of  the next iteration  of the  Company Key  in the dataset.
The total number of  listed stocks at any time  across all countries  therefore increased  from  3178
to  5800.

Lastly, we note that a potential limitation of this study is the sheer sizes of the samples. Neither
country  included in the analysis  is very large and hence  the actions of  a  few investors may have a
profound  influence on the indices as well as the market return with which we have conducted
this study.  This  may limit the conclusions that can confidently be drawn.

3.2  Method

We commence by testing for  the presence of herding using the cross-sectional standard
deviation,

             ∑ #       "
                  !$%(#!$ # ̅)
       𝑠  =  #         ,                                                       (1)
               ($)

12
                                    Stockholm School of Economics

where  𝑟*  is the observed  return of firm  i, and  𝑟̅  is the cross-sectional average of the  n  returns in
the portfolio.  Further, we construct dummy variables, defined as per below, which we use to
capture the days of extreme market movements. This allows us to test the hypothesis proposed
by Christie & Huang (1995), that herding behaviour is more likely to emerge during periods of
market stress which is defined as  abnormal  market movements.  We  run the following regression:

                     ,        .
       𝑆+  =  𝛼  +  𝛽)𝐷+ +  𝛽-𝐷+ +  𝜀+                                             (2)

Here,  𝛼  denotes the average dispersion of the sample when excluding the regions covered by the
dummy variables, which are defined as:

  ,
𝐷+ =  1 if the market return on day  t  is in the lowest  5 (1)  percentile of the return distribution
and 0 otherwise and,

  .
𝐷+  =  1 if the market return on day  t  is in the highest  5 (1)  percentile of the return distribution.

Rational asset pricing models predict that periods of market stress induce increased levels of
dispersion because individual assets differ in their sensitivity to market return, contrasting to
herding of individual returns around the market which would translate to lower levels of
dispersion (Christie & Huang, 1995). Thus, we use this equation to distinguish between the two
hypothesises.

In addition to the analysis on the cross-sectional standard deviation regression presented above,
a second measure of herding is consulted namely the cross-sectional absolute deviation (CSAD)
as proposed by Chang, Cheng & Khorana.  This  builds on the provided demonstration that
rational asset pricing models predict that equity returns are not only an increasing function of the
market return, but importantly also that the relation is linear.  We  illustrate the relation between
the market return and CSAD using  a conditional version of the capital asset pricing model
(Jensen, Black & Scholes, 1972):

       𝐸+  =  𝛾/  +  𝛽*𝐸+(𝑅0  −  𝛾/),                                                  (3)

where  𝛾/  is the return of the zero-beta portfolio,  𝛽*  is the time invariant systematic risk measure
of security  i. Therefore, by setting  𝛽0as the systematic risk of an equally weighted market
portfolio yields:

            ∑ &
                   !$% 1!
       𝛽0  =       .                                                           (4)
              2
Moreover, expressing the absolute value of the deviation of security  i’s expected return in period
t  from the portfolio expected return as  |𝐷|*,+  =  |𝛽*  −  𝛽0|𝐸+(𝑅0  −  𝛾/)  allows for defining the
expected value of CSAD as per below:

                       ∑ & | |       &
                         !$% 5 !,(    ∑! $%|1!$ 1)|6((7)$8*)
       𝐸(𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷)+  =          =                     .                                (5)
                     2              2
We  show the increasing and linear relation between dispersions and  time varying expected
market returns as per below:

                     ∑ & |       |
        96(:;<5)(     !$% 1!$ 1) 6(
             "  =              >  0,                                          (6)
        96((7))          2

                                                                         13
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

         96(:;<5)(
              "  =  0                                                          (7)
        96((7))

To allow for the possibility that herding propensity may differ in the up-  and down-markets
respectively, the following specifications are made:

            .=          .=  .=       .=  .= -
       𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷+   =  𝛼  +  𝛾)  9𝑅0,+9 +  𝛾-  𝑅0,+  +  𝜀+                                 (8)
           5>?2         5>?2  5>?2     5>?2 5>?2-
       𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷+      =  𝛼  +  𝛾)     9𝑅0,+   9  +  𝛾-     𝑅0,+     +  𝜀+                   (9)

Where  𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷+  is the average  |𝐷|+  of each stock relative to the return of the equally weighted
                                .=        5>?2
market portfolio  𝑅0,+  in period  t  and  9𝑅0,+9  and  9𝑅0,+   9  are the absolute values of an equally
weighted realised return of all securities listed on the market on day  t  when the market is up or
down, respectively.

To estimate the dispersion levels across the sample the following simplification of equation (7) is
used with market return and CSAD used as proxies for the unobservable  𝐸+:𝑅0,+ ;  and
𝐸(𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷+):

            ∑ &
                   !$%@7!,($7+,(@
   𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷+  =                                                                         (10)
                2

This equation is based on the  notion that, as opposed to the CSSD measure, herding around the
market consensus  during periods with sharp price changes will cause the linear and increasing
relationship between market return and CSAD to destabilize into a non-linear and in some
instances a decreasing relationship. With this in mind,  we  implement a nonlinear specification:

                                   -
    𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷+  =  𝛼  +  𝛾)9𝑅A,+9  +  𝛾-:𝑅A,+;  +  𝜀+                                        (11)

We separate the markets based on bullish vs. bearish days to see if there are any differences to
investors’ propensity to herd, as suggested by  Chiang and Zheng (2010)  using  the regression:

                 '/                 '/             '/      2            '/       2
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷-  =  𝛼  + 𝛾.𝐷  B𝑅0,-B + 𝛾2(1 − 𝐷  )B𝑅0,-B + 𝛾3𝐷  :𝑅0,-;  + 𝛾4(1 − 𝐷  ):𝑅0,-;  +  𝜀-  (12)

Lastly, we conduct Breusch-Pagan tests for heteroscedasticity to examine  the robustness of our
models. Thereafter we also include supplemental White’s variance and covariance matrixes in
order to modify our regressions to adjust for heteroscedasticity.

14
                                    Stockholm School of Economics

                            3.  Main empirical analysis

4.1  –  Investigating the presence of Herding

4.1.1  –  Descriptive Statistics

Descriptive  statistics  are  presented in the appendix (table  2).  Firstly,  we note  that  the distribution
for  Norway, Finland, and Iceland all  display  high  skewness and kurtosis values for  their
respective  market returns  compared to Sweden and Denmark, implying  that  the sample data  for
these countries contains  a  relatively  larger quantity of extreme values  compared to  Sweden and
Denmark.  For Iceland, this  is also highlighted  by  much  larger  max-values  whilst the min-values
are less extreme.  Many of these max values are obtained  because of the  extreme daily returns  of
“penny stocks”,  coupled  with  there being  fewer  listed stocks  on  certain  days  during which the
penny stocks have had a  significant return.  Because we weigh our  daily aggregate  market returns
based on the number of stocks listed on a particular date, and not the  absolute value of these
returns, such instances impact our upper extreme values significantly.

Furthermore, the mean and median are both  very close to zero  for all countries, which is not
surprising as one would expect that the daily market returns for  the market are not  going to be
extreme. The biggest  deviation from this is  the mean of Iceland  of  0.002  which is twice as large
as its median, indicating the presence of a more extreme upper half than lower in terms of
returns.  Examining the mean and maximum values, Iceland has the largest maximum value but
not  the lowest minimum value, further supporting the presence of more extreme values in the
upper half of the distribution  of returns.

We note that the skewness  levels are high for most of our variables.  Moreover, skewness for
CSSD and CSAD are more similar in between the different countries than the measures are for
the other variable  (market return).  The  measure for Denmark is  approximately half as  large
compared to the  next smallest observation for the other countries.  Iceland exhibits the highest
skewness for both CSSD and CSAD.  The mean  for  Iceland and Denmark is the same for CSSD
and their medians  are  also  similar, at 0.032 for Iceland and 0.033 for Denmark.  The substantial
difference in skewness is therefore interesting  and  as we also note a significant difference in their
respective  max values,  we conclude that  Denmark is far more symmetrically distributed around
its median, which is highlighted by its skewness level.  The same conclusions are drawn from the
CSAD measure, where we note larger but similar relations between the sizes of the  descriptive
statistics.  Furthermore,  for the descriptive statistics for market return we note  that Denmark and
Finland  exhibit significantly more symmetric distributions around their respective medians, with
2.92 and  2.37  in skewness for the countries,  respectively.  The same can be noted for these two
countries kurtosis values for their market returns, where they exhibit significantly lower values.
We do note that the kurtosis for all countries and statistics is positive, reflecting that our data has
a leptokurtic distribution rather than a normal one.  The values for which the kurtosis is the
lowest  compared to the other countries for the same variable are the ones where skewness is
relatively low.  This is expected given that a lower skewness  would  resemble a normal distribution
bell curve closer.

4.1.2  –  Cross-Sectional  Standard  Deviation analysis

We employ  equation 2 for the first part of the analysis  which  allows  for an analysis  on  dispersion
in  days of  extreme market movement, where  a  dispersion  lower than expected indicates  the
presence of herding. We graphically visualize the relationship between the market return and the

                                                                         15
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

CSSD measure.  Following the logic of  Christie & Huang  (1995),  we look for a descending line in
the ends of the graph  which  would  indicate  low dispersion during moments of extreme or
abnormal market movements  (i.e., the aggregate return of that day is in  the  top or bottom 5%
(1%) percentile.  To be able  to  conclude  that the relationship in the graphs supports the presence
of herding the ends of the “funnel-shaped” cloud  must  curve down as the market returns grow
more positive (negative).  The  relationships  between market return and CSSD  are  visualised in
the figures below.

16
                                             Stockholm School of Economics

        Figure 7  –  Sweden CSSD Cloud Graph                     Figure 8  –  Denmark  CSSD Cloud Graph

Figure 7 represents the daily CSSD as calculated in equation (1), and the            Figure 8 represents the daily CSSD as calculated in equation (1), and the
corresponding daily market return in absolute values for Sweden across the         corresponding daily market return in absolute values for  Denmark  across the
          complete sample period (1986-01-01 to 2023-10-13)                              complete sample period (1986-01-01 to 2023-10-13)

        Figure 9  –  Norway  CSSD Cloud Graph                     Figure 10  –  Finland CSSD Cloud Graph

Figure 9 represents the daily CSSD as calculated in equation (1), and the           Figure 10 represents the daily CSSD as calculated in equation (1), and the
corresponding daily market return in absolute values for  Norway  across the         corresponding daily market return in absolute values for Finland across the
          complete sample period (1986-01-01 to 2023-10-13)                              complete sample period (1986-01-02 to 2023-10-13)

                                    Figure 11  –  Iceland  CSSD Cloud Graph

                                   Figure 11 represents the daily CSSD as calculated in equation  (1), and the
                               corresponding daily market return in absolute values for  Iceland  across the  complete
                                                    sample period (1995-11-14 to 2023-10-13)

                                                                                17
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

The  relationship between the variables  depicts  a  funnel  shape  for all countries  around the zero
percent daily market return,  supporting  the rational asset pricing models.  We note  outliers south
of this  shape  for some countries (primarily  Iceland, Denmark,  and Norway, but less evident for
Sweden and Finland)  which  imply that although the market return was in the extreme upper or
lower tail of the distribution of market returns observed during the period, the  dispersion has
not increased  during these instances.  However, since  the majority  of the observations  in the
graphs pertaining to these countries  do  point to the aforementioned  general  “funnel shape”, and
because  there  are no  clear  descending  lines  from  the ends of the  graphs,  we cannot argue herding
is present at this stage.  For Iceland we can also  observe  that the observations below the
“herding-lines” are mostly due to CSSD values equal to 0, which can be explained due to the lack
of data on Iceland and the fact that equation (1)  divides by  n  –  1,  meaning that observations with
only  one  listed company will automatically return a CSSD equal to 0.  It should be noted that
Sweden  is  the only country where  the  descending line in the end of the negative  market  returns
could be argued for. The evidence of such descending line is not obvious, but  around  -0.5 on the
x-axis one could  argue the dispersions move in a descending trend,  pointing to potential
evidence of herding  on days with negative market return.

At first glance,  the  figures  point  to a lack of herding presence  in the complete sample using  the
CSSD measure  for all countries, but there are a few important things to note.  First, the results
point to noticeable differences in dispersion between countries. For instance, Finland and
Denmark seem to have less dispersion in general as  indicated by  the cluster being slightly flatter
and lower compared to  Sweden and Norway. Sweden also  has  greater dispersion at “normal”
movement days, since the “peak” of the plot is slightly more  crowded with observations  and
higher.  Moreover, we note  that Iceland’s dispersion is more scattered and seemingly more
random than the other countries’, which can partially be explained by the lower  number  of
companies listed in Iceland, due to the denominator taking on small values  and therefore will not
“stabilize” the CSSD value in instances where market return has been abnormal for one or a few
stocks.  Furthermore, it is also interesting to note that across all countries  (except Iceland), the
dispersion for days with slightly positive market returns are significantly higher than those days
with slightly negative returns,  as seen by the “points” of the graphs leaning to the right. This is
indicative of  a consensus  that investors  are more prone  take positions  different to that of the
market  on slightly bullish days as compared to slightly bearish days,  which  could  potentially
indicate  that  investors become more confident  with their own  abilities to make rational
investment decisions  and therefore chooses to steer away from  other  market  participants.
Arguably,  this effect  in turn creates a situation where herding around the market consensus in
slightly  bullish days  would be considered unfavourable given that dispersions are high and
scattered.

The regression model output based on equation (2) for the CSSD measure are reported in table
3-7 with both the 5% and 1%  quantile restrictions.  The results  confirm the  anticipation from the
graphs that  the presence of herding cannot be  confirmed using the CSSD measure  since the
estimations  are either  non-negative or non-significant  for all countries  based on both the 5%  and
1%  quantile restrictions.  This lack of negative and significant  𝛽  values  supports  the traditional
rational asset pricing  models and does not indicate  the presence of herding.  Analysing the
returned values of the regressions in the tables provide some insight as to why.  For almost all
periods/subsamples  both  the  𝛼B%  and  𝛼)%are  largely  significant,  whereas  only a few  of the
dummy variables  are significant.  We note that for Sweden’s Normal State 3 the  𝛼B%  and
𝑈DEEF#,B%are the same  (0.027) and significant at the 1% level. Therefore,  we conclude that for
this period the CSSD in aggregate is 0. This does not  hold true for any other country or period,
although we note that for some instances the coefficients are quite similar indicating a small
cross sectional standard deviation.  Hence, in general  the dummy variables  do not have  significant

18
                                    Stockholm School of Economics

impact on the dependent variable  CSSD.  The reason for this can be derived from the  issue with
the CSSD measure  as argued by Chang et al. (1999), which is  that it is too  restrictive. Given that
it focuses on the extremes of the return distribution, the  risk  that it  excludes  the  herding  effect in
different subsamples becomes  increasingly large when  the  quantile restrictions  become narrower.
For  the CSSD  measure  to detect herding, the dispersions  must  fit the requirements that it is
decreasing  specifically on  an extreme  movement, which disregards potential herding  in the
remaining  90%  (98%)  of the sample.

Furthermore,  the quantiles also  need to be defined within the subsample, since defining them
based on the complete sample  could  result in missing values for the dummy variables in some
periods  if  a  5% (1%) extreme movement  is missing within the sample.  This makes the CSSD
model  further  insignificant and  unapplicable since it fails to  compare the potential herding effect
between periods  in the sample.  Had the CSSD measure been less restrictive,  the model  could
potentially  detect herding  but since  the dummy  would stay  unactive in the entire subsample  the
value  would be  missing,  and the  dummy  is disregarded  for the subsample.  Comparably, with
quantiles defined within each subsample  as done in this analysis, the  estimations  for the  𝛽
coefficients are likely to  be  more  similar within  the  variables  for a wider range of the return
distributions,  resulting in insignificant  quantile restrictions.

The CSSD model  is therefore problematic  since  potential herding effects  around less extreme
movements  go unseen.  With this in mind,  not detecting herding with the CSSD measure is not
unexpected  and is in line with results of previous researchers e.g. Chang et al. (

                                                                         19
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

). These authors do manage  to  find support for  herding using other, less restrictive,  measures. It
is to those we turn to next.

4.1.3–  Cross-Sectional  Absolute  Deviation  analysis

The  cross-sectional absolute  deviation  measure does not  fixate  only  on  the upper  and lower
percentiles of the distribution of returns,  and therefore  inherently includes more observations in
the analysis.  The underlying assumption of the  CSAD  measure  that  it  quantifies the average
proximity of individual returns to the realized average, as  Chang et. al  proposes,  allows  us to test
for the presence of herding  based solely on the dispersion as opposed to testing the dummy
variables as previously explained by the CSSD measure.  Similar  to the CSSD graphs we are
looking for a relationship between the CSAD measure and the daily market returns where the
dispersion between the two  starts to decrease  as returns grow more extreme.  Whilst  the “funnel
shape” is not as  prominent  in these plots, the  indicative expected dispersion line  is visible. This is
the  line  we will  use to  examine a potential decreasing dispersion and non-linear relationship.

20
                                              Stockholm School of Economics

       Figure 12 – Sweden CSAD Cloud Graph                  Figure 13 – Denmark CSAD Cloud Graph

Figure 12 represents the daily CSAD as calculated in equation (10), and the      Figure 13 represents the daily CSAD as calculated in equation (10), and the
  corresponding daily market return in absolute values for Sweden across the         corresponding daily market return in absolute values for  Denmark  across the
          complete sample period (1986-01-01 to  2023-10-13)                            complete sample period (1986-01-01  to 2023-10-13)

       Figure 14 – Norway CSAD Cloud Graph                   Figure 15 – Finland CSAD Cloud Graph

Figure 14 represents the daily CSAD as calculated in equation (10), and the      Figure 15 represents the daily CSAD as calculated in equation (10), and the
 corresponding daily market return in absolute values for  Norway  across the         corresponding daily market return in absolute values for Finland across the
           complete sample period (1986-01-01 to 2023-10-13)                              complete sample period (1986-01-02 to 2023-10-13)

                                Figure 16 – Iceland CSAD Cloud Graph

                               Figure 16 represents the daily CSAD as calculated in equation (10), and the
                                corresponding daily market return in absolute values for  Iceland  across the  complete
                                                   sample period (1995-11-14  to 2023-10-13)

                                                                                21
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

Figure 12  –  16 provides visualisation of the  relationship  between the cross-sectional  absolute
deviation  and market return  for each of the Nordic countries.  We note  that these, compared to
the same displays for the CSSD measure,  are much more concentrated around  the respective
origo.  Even when accounting for the differences in the axis,  that is, that they portray a much
more restrictive interval for the CSAD measure, there are still notable differences in their shapes.
Specifically, the CSSD  figures display  greater  dispersions across all market returns,  as seen by
numerous  observations at y-values of  more than 0.1, whilst the CSAD figures  are consistently
not reaching  y-values of more than 0.005.  Important to note is that we have  restricted the axis,
and hence excluded some outliers,  to  be able to visualise any potential relationships. This has
been done for both the CSSD and the CSAD  graphs.  This allows for presentation of the data
uncorrupted by outliers,  so the plots are readable.  However, prior  to this adjustment the CSAD
figures  looked significantly  flatter  than the CSSD measures,  indicating  that this measure  suggests
a far lower dispersion from the daily market returns.

Comparing this to the figures in which the  relationship between the CSSD measure and the
market return is portrayed, we note that the concentration of observations is much higher for
CSAD.  Moreover, the point clouds are flatter for the Finnish and Icelandic point cloud, pointing
to  lower dispersions for the same return levels. As for the CSSD cloud graphs, we note that the
distribution of observations leans slightly towards right,  suggesting that investors are more prone
to take on additional risk then the  overall market return is slightly positive.  There are no
prominent indications suggesting a non-linear relationship in the “expected  dispersion line” for
any of the figures, however, one could argue  that there is a small indication for  this  feature in
Sweden’s plot (figure 12) in the negative side of the x-axis, suggesting that the CSAD measure
might  predict herding  around the negative market returns.

Table 8 in the appendix displays the results obtained for Sweden. We note a negative  (-0.032)
and significant  at the 5% level  value for the coefficient of  𝛼  for the complete sample.  Further,
the coefficient for  𝛾-  is noticeably positive and significant at the 1% level, supporting the theory
behind rational asset pricing models.  Other interesting observations regard a few of the
coefficients for the  𝛾-  variable, as  we note several large positive and significant at the 1% level
values. Specifically,  all three periods pertaining to the Covid-19 pandemic as well as the period
Normal state 4.  Comparing the large differences to other estimations in different periods of the
𝛾-  coefficient this  would  imply  that there are  distinct  outliers which increase the estimation
significantly.  Important to note is that these are “positive” outliers  with a large dispersion from
the market return, given that  they yield a non-negative  coefficient  estimation  which therefore
suggests they are located above the  line of  “expected dispersion”.  This, and the fact that  they are
significant  consequently means the  model  fails to  indicate  herding  in these periods, and instead
supports  the rational asset pricing model.  It is  also  of great  importance  to mention that these
large outliers are  mainly  recorded in the periods pertaining to the Covid-19 pandemic,  since  this
time  had a  severe  impact on the Swedish (and global) economy  as represented in both  figure (1)
and (12).  In the event of  a large recession in both  the stock market and GDP development  from
an  exogeneous shock of that size  it is not unlikely that  dispersions from the market return would
grow significantly large, especially on the negative side of the spectrum.

Across the entire table, there are limited observations which speak for the presence of herding,
in which instance we would expect the  𝛾-  variable to be negative and significant.  The  periods
that do indicate  a  herding behaviour  are the Greek crisis  post  period and the current state. As for
the other periods, we do not have evidence supporting the presence of herding  in Sweden  with
this  measure.  We also find that  the coefficients  on the linear  9𝑅0,+ 9  term for the current period is
positive and significant, which  is in line with  Chang, Cheng & Khorana’s  results where  𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷+

22
                                    Stockholm School of Economics

increases with  𝑅0,+.  Moreover, during the  Covid-periods  we note positive and significant values
           -
for the  𝑅0,+  coefficients, but negative and significant values for the  9𝑅0,+9  term.

Denmark  displays  some  similarities  to Sweden  (table 9). Whilst the large positive and significant
                  -
values  for the  𝑅0,+  term are not as large,  they are also significant at the 1% level. Moreover,
they also correlate in terms of the periods in which they are observed. For Denmark, we note
coefficients with these characteristics for the Covid-19  pre period, the Greek  post  and  pre
periods, the global financial crisis crash and  post  and the DotCom  post, respectively.
Interestingly, the large and positive (and significant at the 1% level) observation is also made for
the entire sample. Regarding the presence of herding, we note negative and significant
                                         -
observations of the coefficient for the  𝑅0,+  variable in  only three instances. Firstly, in the
period named Normal state  2  we observe a value of  -0.678 which is significant at the  10% level.
Secondly, in the Normal state 2 period, we have a value of  -2.832 which is significant at the 5%
level and, finally, in the current state we note  -3.047 which is also significant at the 5% level.  This
fails to support  that the presence of herding  is  most prominent during periods of abnormal
market conditions,  as it  therefore  should  not  occur to the same extent in periods which we have
deemed to be “normal”. However, we note that the Normal 2 period is one of the longest
periods  (1992/01/02  -  1999/09/29)  we have for our sample  and therefore it is not surprising
that this period manages to deliver values  of significance, nor that there may have been presence
of herding during  this time.  Moreover, we note some significant and positive values for the
9𝑅0,+9  coefficient but primarily negative ones.  Specifically, there are negative and significant
values in the  DotCom crash and  post  periods,  the Global financial crisis crash, the Greek  post
period,  and the Covid-19 pre period.  For the positive and significant estimations, these are not as
large in terms of absolute values and are never recorded at the 1% significance level.

In the Norwegian market, there is no period  in which  𝛾-  takes on a negative  and significant
value. Hence, no  support  is found  for the presence of herding.  Instead, we note positive and
significant values for  𝛾-  in  most  subsamples examined, supporting the rational asset pricing
model  and displaying similarities to the results already discussed for Sweden and Denmark. That
is,  CSAD in general increases  (decreases)  with the  realised average market return for each day.
Moreover, we find that most coefficients for  |𝑅0,+|  are negative and significant,  speaking against
the prediction that CSAD increases  (decreases)  linearly with  |𝑅0,+|.  This is in line with the
results reported by  Chang et al. (1999).  These results are not observed to the same extent for
Sweden and Denmark.  Hence, we  conclude that  Norway’s dispersions do, to a greater extent
relative to those of Sweden and Denmark, have a positive correlation to the market returns. That
is,  when the market return is larger in absolute terms, so is the dispersion.

For Finland, we note a negative and significant value of  𝛾-  for the  complete  sample.  This result
is consistent with  herding in  the  Finnish capital markets. We note, however, that there  is only
one subperiod  during which  similar results are observed, namely the Normal state 2 period
which is defined as  (1994/07/02  –  2000/06/29). Other than that,  we find no  negative and
significant coefficients  for the  𝛾-  variable.

Further, we note several positive and significant values for the  𝛾)  variable, supporting  the
prediction that  CSAD increases (decreases) linearly with  |𝑅0,+|.  These results are not in line with
the results reported by Chang et al. (1999). Given that the dispersion increases with the absolute
value of the market return, this result implies that, on aggregate, people choose to  invest
different from other investors to a larger extent on days when the market return is positive, and
less so when the market return is negative. This, however, does not imply much about the
presence of herding as we cannot connect these results with negative and significant values for

                                                                         23
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

the  𝛾-  variable  which are necessary as herding would be shown  by a  slower increasing, or even
decreasing, non-linear relationship which is not captured by the  9𝑅0,+9  coefficient.

The coefficient for the  |𝑅0,+|  is negative and significant at the 1% level for Iceland for the entire
sample.  We also note a positive and significant value for the  𝛾-  variable  for the entire sample, as
well  as for the  periods between the global financial crisis pre-period and Normal state 4.  These
results contrast  to those we would expect during periods with herding. However, we do observe
negative and significant values for the  𝛾-  variable during Normal state  2 and the DotCom  pre
period.

Another interesting observation is that  the  alpha variable is zero between the DotCom  post  and
the current period, spanning over  more than 17  years with the exceptions being the global
financial crisis crash  during which the observed coefficient was  -0.001 and  Normal state 4 during
which the observed coefficient was 0.001,  the latter  significant at the 1% level.

4.1.4  –  Cross-Sectional  Absolute  Deviation: Bullish vs. Bearish

In general, we note more extreme values  when conducting the analysis  based on  whether the
market, in aggregate, had positive or negative returns during a specific day  the results of which
are presented in tables  13-17. This is not unexpected  due to a couple of reasons. Firstly, when we
apply equitation 12  and conduct a regression based on it, we effectively divide the data into
much smaller subsamples as we utilise dummy variables which divide our data depending on the
market movements.  For simplicity, if we assume  that there are an equal number of bullish and
bearish days, this  will  give us twice as many and thus half as large  subsamples. Therefore, the
respective outliers in each subsample will carry much more weight relative to other observations.
Secondly, when sub-setting the sample based on the observations in this way,  the outliers are
bound to be more visible as they are now included in  dummy samples  containing only  positive
(negative)  values  where they are no longer  mirrored by outliers on the opposite side  of the
spectrum.  Hence, we will see larger (smaller)  values than we did  previously.

Bearing the above in mind, the very  large  (small) values obtained for several of the coefficients
pertaining to Sweden are explained. Looking back at the descriptive statistics we note that  the
standard deviation for  market return in  Sweden is the second largest. The only country with a
higher standard deviation is Iceland, which as previously discussed  is explained as the sample size
is much smaller and hence outliers affect the deviation much more intensely.  Whilst standard
deviation is not the same as cross-sectional absolute deviation, there are similarities, and this
deviation does explain the presence of the more extreme values observed.  This being the case for
Sweden could be as it is the largest sample that we have and hence, it is bound to have  more
extreme outliers because there are simply just more stocks and days during which such extreme
values can be observed.

For Sweden, we observe  negative and  significant values for the  9𝑅0,+9  coefficient both on days
during which market return is up and  down but  note that they are more prominent during bullish
days.  Specifically, during  Normal state 4 and the Covid periods these results are  especially
negative  whilst being  significant at the 1% level.  This occurs during the same period  as we have
largely positive and significant values for the  coefficients for the  𝛾G  variable, which are results
that reoccur in other periods and countries as well.

We noted previously that the CSAD measure implied the presence of herding in both Sweden
and Denmark during the current period.  This regression  allows us to  detect whether this herding

24
                                    Stockholm School of Economics

differs between bullish and bearish days.  Interestingly, we find that herding occurs during days of
positive market returns in Denmark, but during days of negative market returns in Sweden.
These results are significant at the  1% and 5% level, respectively. Hence, there seem to be a
difference in investor sentiment where Swedish investors are more prone to mimic the
behaviours of their  peers during bearish days  whereas Danish investors are more prone to such
behaviour during bullish days.  Further, we note that we find  support for the presence of herding
in Sweden during bearish days for the complete sample. However, this could be an effect of the
largely negative measure in the  current state.  Additionally, we also note that the negative and
significant coefficient obtained during the Greek crisis  post  period is still negative, however no
longer significant. This is likely due to the limited data that is included in the sub-sample created
with the dummy variables,  limiting the observations that the model has access to and hence its
ability to generate significant results.  Lastly, there are still some large and positive values included
in the results.

We observe a negative and significant value during positive periods for the 1990s crash in
Denmark during days of positive market returns, in line with the results discussed above.
However, during the Normal state  2 we do note results  suggesting the presence of herding
during days of negative market returns significant at the 10% level.  Moreover, there are several
periods during which the coefficients  for the  9𝑅0,+9  variable  is  negative and significant,  especially
when the overall market return is positive.

We note the absence of evidence supporting the presence of herding in Norway  which is in line
with the results obtained for the original CSAD measure.  There are several periods during which
the coefficients for the  9𝑅0,+9  variable  is  negative and significant, especially when the overall
market return is positive but here there are more  periods  when the market return is negative than
was observed for Denmark.

For Finland, we note a negative and significant at the 1% level value for the complete sample
during bullish days.  This is also in line with previously reported results. Moreover, we obtain
results supporting the presence of herding during bullish days in Normal state 2. We note the
absence of negative coefficients  during bearish days.  Moreover, we note that there are more
positive and significant values for the  9𝑅0,+9  variable in Finland than there  is  negative. Most of
these are observed during days in which the overall market return is positive.

Lastly, for  Iceland, we note a negative and significant at the 10% level coefficient for  the  𝛾H
coefficient  during the DotCom pre period. Interestingly, during the DotCom crash we note
negative and significant coefficients for both bearish and bullish days, whereas the pre-period
only had significance during days in which the complete market return was negative.  In Iceland,
during the Covid-19  pre period, we also note negative and significant coefficient during days in
which the overall market  is up.

4.2  –  Robustness tests

Due to findings of heteroscedasticity in the majority of the data using the Breusch-Pagan test we
have conducted White’s Variance and Covariance Matrixes on our samples in order to estimate
robust  versions of the regression  models.  Below are the analyses for the robust  regressions with
the adjustment for  potential heteroskedasticity.  Whilst it is of interest to conduct robustness
checks,  the analysis inherently comes with limitations as it alters the original model and hence,
one must be cautions with the interpretations thereof.  In our instance, we find that  there are
numerous observations  that are no longer significant but that previously were.  We do, however

                                                                         25
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

also find that the CSSD measure,  which failed to provide us with observations  of significance
suggesting herding  previously,  now suggests that  herding  is present.  The results and  their
differences in significance are presented and discussed below.

4.2.1  –  Robust CSSD

As seen in tables  18-22  there has been  a few considerable  changes  with regards to  the regression
based on equation 2.  The previous regression on the CSSD measure provided no evidence for
herding  in any of the markets or periods  under  examination  in this  study.  Whilst this mostly
holds  true  for the robust versions as well, there is now slight indication of herding presence in
the Swedish market for  two  subsamples  as  can be seen when looking at the 1% dummy low
variable’s coefficients.  These are the Greek government-debt crisis period and the  Covid-19 pre-
period. However, these two observations are quite different with the Greek pre period result
being significant at the 1% level whilst the Covid is significant in the 10% level. Moreover, the
Greek government  had  -0.011 whilst Covid was  -0.005, hence Covid is less negative as well.
What is interesting about these results are that they are in line with the  cloud graph analysis in
section 4.1.2 where we note a slight potential indication of a  descending line in the negative end
of the  graph.  Given the high levels of heteroscedasticity in the Swedish CSSD regression model
these results were unrecorded before, but with the additional test using White’s Variance and
Covariance Matrix we do find some, although  modest and limited,  indication of herding  in
Sweden  using the CSSD measure as well.  However, taking into consideration that this herding
effect was not captured until heteroscedasticity was accounted for, we  cannot  based solely  on
these results  conclude that  herding  is present.

We note similar results for Finland and Iceland.  Specifically, for Finland we note a negative (-
0.001) and significant at the 10% level value for the  lower dummy variable (1%) during the
Covid-19 post period. For Iceland,  similar results are obtained for  both  the  1% dummy variables
during the DotCom pre-period. These are  both  recorded as  -0.02 with significance at the 5%
level.  This could  imply that  the  data exhibits  perfect multicollinearity  for this period.  Whilst this
is quite an extraordinary result, it is not something that we are able to draw hard conclusions
based on as the data for Iceland is limited due to its size.

4.2.2  –  Robust CSAD

The coefficients for the  robust versions of the CSAD coefficients are provided in table  23  –  27.
We note that, for Sweden, the  coefficient for the  𝛾-  in the current period is no longer significant.
Hence, with the CSAD  measure, and when accounting and adjusting the model  with  regards to
heteroscedasticity, we no longer find support for the presence of herding.  However, for the
Greek  crisis  post  period we note that the significance of the  𝛾-  coefficient  has increased and is
now significant at the 10% level.  Moreover,  many of the large and positive observations
previously recorded are no longer significant.  There is however an exception during the Covid-
pre period.

For Denmark,  we note that the  negative and significant value for the  𝛾-  coefficient was  observed
in the current period at a 5% significance level.  This holds true after conducting the  White’s
Variance and Covariance Matrixes, with the same significance level, supporting the previous
results which suggested the presence of herding.  The same can be said for the Normal state 3
period.

In the Norwegian market, we find no support for the presence of herding using the CSAD
measure alone, which still holds true after conducting the robustness test.

26
                                    Stockholm School of Economics

For Finland, we no longer find evidence of herding. Hence, the negative and significant at the
10% level coefficient for  𝛾-  that  we observed for the  normal state 2  period  is no longer
significant. The same is true for  the  𝛾-  coefficient for the complete sample.  We do note that we
still have a  positive and significant at the 1% level value for the same coefficient in the current
state. This result supports the rational asset pricing models.

Lastly, for Iceland, we note that the  negative and statistically significant coefficient of  𝛾-  for the
Covid-19 pre and post periods  becomes  significant  at the 10%  level  after conducting robustness
checks,  which was not the case previously. However, for the  𝛾-  coefficient in the Normal 2  and
DotmCom  pre period, the  significance does not remain.

For  the  9𝑅0,+9  variables  we note that in general, for all countries, we have lost some significance
for several observations.  This is expected for the same reasons as discussed above.

4.2.3  –  Robust CSAD Bullish vs Bearish

The regression output for the robust CSAD  analysis on bullish and bearish days are found in
tables  28  –  32.  For Sweden, we note  the absence of  negative and significant values for the  𝛾H
coefficient,  failing to support  the presence of herding during the days in which the market in
aggregate exhibits negative returns in that subsample.  The same is true  for the  𝛾G  variable, and
hence we cannot speak for the presence of herding during days of positive market returns either.
The large and significant positive value observed for the  𝛾G  variable during the pre-period to
Covid-19 does remain.  We  note positive and significant values for  𝛾)  in  several  periods  –
supporting that CSAD increases with  9𝑅A,+9  on days in which the market exhibits positive
aggregate returns.  However, during the  Covid-19 pre period  the  coefficient  is negative and
significant at the 5% level, implying that  the dispersion decreases  when the absolute value of
returns during bearish days become more extreme.  Whilst this result  fails  to provide insight as to
the presence of herding as this  would  necessities that the dispersion increases at a lower rate or
                                                          -
even decreases which is measured by the coefficients on  𝑅A,+  variable.  For  𝛾-  we note  a
negative and significant value during the Normal state 4.  Sweden  also  exhibits  positive and
significant values for the coefficient of  𝛼  for the 1990’s recession  post  period, the DotCom crash
and  post  periods, the Greek crisis  post  period as well as the Covid-19 period.

For Denmark, we note negative and significant values for the  𝛾G  coefficient in the current
period, suggesting the presence of herding in days where the overall market return is positive.
Moreover, in the same period we note positive and significant values for the  𝛾-  coefficient,
suggesting that CSAD increases with  9𝑅A,+ 9  on days during which the overall market is down.
Hence, it supports the presence of herding in the current period  on days in which the market is
up but supports the prediction that CSAD increases with  9𝑅A,+9  on days during which the
market is down. Similarly, support for CSAD increasing with  9𝑅A,+9  during days in which the
market is up is found for the normal state 2  and  the current period. However, for the complete
sample both the  𝛾)  and  𝛾-  are negative and significant. Hence, we find no support for CSAD
increasing with the absolute value of the market return for Denmark in aggregate.

For Norway,  we note the absence of negative and significant values for the coefficients for the
    -
𝑅A,+  variable.  Hence, we find no support for herding during any period in which the market
return in aggregate is positive  nor negative.  Moreover,  during  several periods we note a  positive
and significant value for the coefficients of  9𝑅A,+ 9  during days in which the overall market return

                                                                         27
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

is positive.  We also note that we have in general a lot fewer significant estimations, which is most
evident in the more  recent period for the  𝛾G  variable.

For the capital market in Finland, we fail to find support for the presence of herding in either of
the different subsamples when the market is up (down) as evident by the absence of negative and
significant values  for the  𝛾G  (𝛾H) coefficient. We note that the  𝛾Gis positive and significant for
the current period, supporting the rational asset pricing model. In this  period,  it is also
noteworthy that we observe a negative and significant value for the  𝛾)  coefficient. We also note
positive and significant values for the coefficients for the absolute market return in the following
periods: normal state 1, 1990’s recession pre and during periods, normal state 2,  DotCom  pre
period  and  the global financial crisis.

                                                    -
We note a negative and significant value for the  :𝑅A,+;  coefficient during the DotCom crash
and the Covid-19  pre  period  in the Icelandic market  during days in which the market is up,
supporting the presence of herding. Further, we observe positive and significant values for the
absolute market return  variable  in the DotCom crash and  post  periods, the global financial crisis
                                                                                           -
crash, and the Covid-19 crash. Moreover, we note positive and significant values for the  :𝑅A,+;
coefficient when the market is down during  and the global financial crisis  post  period, and for
days in which the market is up for the global financial crisis crash period as well as the current
period.  Moreover, the largely positive and significant at the 1% level estimations for normal state
4 in both bearish and bullish days are no longer significant.

28
                                    Stockholm School of Economics

                     4.  Interpretation of empirical findings

The  results obtained by the CSSD measures fails to provide us with support for the presence of
herding. This is arguably not very surprising, as the measure in its nature  only focuses on herding
when market returns are  very extreme (i.e., in the first or fifth percentiles)  and therefore fails to
account for herding that may occur in  the middle range of market returns.  With the CSSD
measure we do find multiple positive and significant at the 1% level values  for the dummy
coefficients. This holds true for all  countries indicating  the lack of evidence for herding and
therefore the  initial standpoint  of rational asset pricing holds true.  Moreover, the  1% criterion
produces larger estimates  than the 5% criterion across all countries. Hence, we can conclude that
the predictions of rational asset pricing are most apparent when confined to the  1% most
extreme  market returns.  We found  dispersions to increase significantly  during periods of large
average price changes,  i.e.,  when the market return was  abnormally large  in absolute terms. This
implies that  individual returns do not cluster around the market return during periods of market
stress, and therefore speaks against the presence of herding.

We find support of herding  behavior  within several  of the countries in the Normal State 2
period. Specifically, we find this support with differing significant levels in Denmark, Finland,
and Iceland. This result  contradicts  that herding would be more prominent in times of market
stress  and economic downturns.  Apart from the  normal states we also find support of herding in
a few of the periods relating to different  market stresses. Within the Swedish sample we find
slight presence of herding in the  post  period of the Greek government-debt crisis, and in Iceland
we notice  a small significance during the pre-period of the DotCom crash as well. We do not
find any further support  around other  crises,  and we therefore cannot answer our  question
regarding if herding is more prominent  before or after severe stress.  There are several positive
and significant values for the  𝛾-  coefficient, some of which are larger than others. During the
Covid periods in Sweden we record the largest positive  estimations in any model, which all yield
a significance at the 1% level.  These results imply a strong and positive  relationship  between the
dispersion and market returns further supporting rational asset pricing.  It is of great importance
to note that  a lack of positive and significant coefficient estimates does not suggest that rational
asset pricing models are wrong,  however the presence  of them further proves their underlying
assumption within asset pricing.

When examining the results depending on bullish and bearish  days,  we note some differences to
the previously mentioned results.  Specifically, we now find support for herding  in the crisis
period of the 1990s recession in Denmark, the pre-period of Covid-19 in Iceland, and  we also
note that support for herding in Iceland during the Normal state 2 period is no longer present.
Regarding Iceland, the support for herding has also shifted from the period before the DotCom
crash to the crisis period.  We also note  that  a  majority of  the  support for herding is found in the
days related to negative market return across all countries, indicating that herding is more
prominent during days when the market recedes. This  suggests  that herding would be prominent
during days of negative market returns  because  investors are more prone to  mimic  the  behaviors
of their peers  in bad times.

We note that there are some differences in our results when conducting the regressions for
robustness with White’s variance and covariance matrix.  It is essential to keep in mind that whilst
these tests are favorable to run in order to  receive heteroscedastic-adjusted estimations, the
underlying regression has been altered with. The output interpreted in the robust versions
therefore no longer  represents  the  initial model specifications  which  must  be taken into account
when interpreting and analyzing the results. With that said, the robust model results yield some
interesting  values which  we  will  turn to next  to compare with the non-robust regression outputs.

                                                                         29
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

The most interesting findings are related to the CSSD measure. With the additional  adjustments
for heteroskedasticity we are now able to find, somewhat  limited,  but still prominent support for
herding using this measure.  As previously discussed, there are now two periods for Sweden and
one for Finland during which our data indicates that herding did occur. During the Greek
government-debt crisis, we find that the coefficient of the lower dummy variable at 1%
percentile is negative and significant at the 1%  level in Sweden.  This suggests that  herding occurs
during the days in which market return is particularly negative, which is in line with our
previously set out expectations.  Interestingly, we do find that herding occurs in the Covid-19 pre
period as well. Whilst we have defined this period as a “pre” period, it  can be questioned
whether this really applies to the pandemic as no one knew that it was coming and hence, there
was no way for investors to use this information and adapt their investments accordingly.
However, looking at figure 2 displaying the GDP growth for Sweden  we note that this period
does exhibit some quarters with negative growth. Hence, investors may have used this as
sentiment to opt their investments to better correlate with those of their peers.

For the CSAD measure, it becomes apparent that the robustness checks  have  removed  the
significance of some of the results reported with the normal  CSSD measure. As aforementioned,
this is not surprising and  does not inherently entail that these results were not correct.  The ones
that we do still obtain are, however, concluded to bear a higher importance as they are not only
significant using the measure on its own but also when conducting robustness checks.
Additionally, the two new significant values we obtain in Iceland  during the covid pre and post
periods are also interesting to bear in mind.  The fact that these were not recorded as significant
previously may be since the sample size was larger prior to it being adjusted with the robustness
checks, meaning that the returns that are left after such checks will bear more weight in the
model.  The covid pre period can be argued for with the same logic presented for CSSD in
Sweden, as Iceland  exhibits descending GDP growth during that time.

Having conducted the robustness checks, it is also  worth mentioning  that the previously
discussed significant results for Sweden are no longer significant.  As is the case for Finland.  For
Denmark, we note that there  is  still significance for some negative values of the coefficients for
          -
the  :𝑅A,+;  coefficient, particularly during days in which the overall market return is positive.
This suggests that investors’ propensity to herd becomes more prominent during days of positive
                                                                                           -
economic returns. For Iceland, the only negative and significant results reported for the  :𝑅A,+;
coefficient  are reported at the 5% significance level during the DotCom crash and the Covid pre
period, both of which during bullish days. Overall, the conclusions from this  test  would be that
investors herd more when returns are positive, suggesting that they may believe that others are
more informed than they themselves are and hence, they mimic their investments to try and get a
piece of the positive returns.  With these results, we conclude that  with regards to our second aim
of the research question,  herding is present in the Nordic capital markets and that its occurrence
is more likely during days of negative market return. Regarding the specific periods during which
it is observed, we cannot conclude that  it is more prominent during periods of economic
distress, as we have observed herding during periods which are deemed to be normal.  We do,
however conclude that herding is more prominent during bearish days.  Arguably, this effect
could have further implications for the capital markets as  the presence of herding  could contort
asset prices such that the market is no longer efficient. This would then make the general market
conditions even worse, and therefore  spur investors to engage in herding  further.

Finally, addressing the third part of our research question we find somewhat conflicting results.
We find that the  period during which we could find  most  evidence suggesting the presence of

30
                                    Stockholm School of Economics

herding  (within the crisis periods)  was  the DotCom crash  which would suggest that  endogenous
shocks bear the most importance. However,  all five of these  were  recorded in Iceland.
Therefore, it is deemed to be of interest that the  second most impactful period was the Covid-19
crisis  during which  Sweden, Finland and Iceland all  had  herding  in their respective financial
markets, supporting that exogenous shocks bear significance.  It  is also the only period where
more than  two  countries  had  herding in the same  crisis period.  This suggests that  in  a  Nordic
context, an exogenous shock  like the Covid-19 pandemic  is more likely to cause  herding
behavior within the  capital  markets  than an endogenous one.  However, we  acknowledge  that
endogenous shocks can have a larger impact in specific countries as  implied  by the  support
found  for herding in Iceland during the DotCom periods using multiple measures and  model
regressions.

                                                                         31
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

                                 5.  Conclusion

In this study, we find support for the presence of herding using the cross-sectional standard
deviation after conducting robustness checks.  We also find support when using the cross-
sectional absolute deviation, both pre and post robustness checks,  and  when  conducting the
analysis depending on whether overall market return is positive or negative on a specific day. We
find evidence supporting herding  in all countries except Norway.  Further, we find that herding is
more prominent during days in which the overall market return is negative.

Herding appears to not be influenced by macroeconomic factors to the extent that we previously
thought. Whilst we do find herding to be present during periods with negative national economic
growth, we also find evidence  supporting the presence of herding during periods defined as
normal. Hence, we are not able to  conclude that herding is more prominent during periods of
economic distress, as we fail to find that it is not as frequently observed during periods with
national economic growth.

Apart from  Iceland  in which we find most evidence supporting the presence of herding during
the DotCom crash, Covid-19 is by far the period during which most herding has occurred.
Hence, we conclude that  exogenous shocks to the financial markets are more significance in
terms of their influence on investors’ sentiment.

Finally,  one could extend on this study by  investigating whether it is possible to say anything
about the  overall market efficiency during periods in which herding appears to be present. By
utilizing a rational asset pricing model, it would be possible to test whether it is able to
successfully price assets during these times. With this, it would be possible to further underline
the findings of this study.

As final remarks,  we propose that potential extensions of this literature may benefit by including
a segmentation based on industries, hence looking for potential differences  therebetween  as we
consider it of interest to further map the characteristics herding, and because we believe  the
differences  in investor sentiment and culture  between industries  could cause significant
differences in herding prominence. Further, as mentioned under data  limitations,  because the
Nordic countries all have exchanges with  limited sizes, the  functionality  of the models  and their
degree of adoption  may improve by conducting the same analysis  on  a joint sample containing  all
Nordic  countries to ensure that there  are  sufficiently large samples available.  One could argue
that the sheer sizes of these makes institutional investors’  investments move the index in such a
way that they themselves impact it, and the market return used in this study, to such a large
extent  that it becomes  less meaningful to speak of herding in this sense.  This additional analysis
could then be compared to the  analyses  of the individual countries in order to make the results
more robust.  Lastly,  it could also be of interest to explore potential  herding across international
borders. For instance, one could investigate  whether any of the Nordic countries herd around
the U.S. or Chinese markets.

32
                                    Stockholm School of Economics

                            References

Asch, Solomon E. 1952.  Social Psychology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Bikhchandani, S., Hirshleifer, D., & Welch, I. (1992). A Theory of Fads, Fashion, Custom, and
Cultural Change as Informational Cascades.  Journal of Political Economy, 100(5), 992-1026.

Chang, E. C., Cheng, J. W., & Khorana, A. (1999). An examination of herd behavior in equity
markets: An international perspective.  Journal of Banking & Finance, 24(10), 1651-1679.

Chiang, T. C., & Zheng, D. (2010). An empirical analysis of herd behavior in global stock
markets.  Journal of Banking & Finance, 34(8), 1911-1921.

Christie, W. G., & Huang, R. D. (2019). Following the Pied Piper: Do Individual Returns Herd
around the Market?  Financial Analysts Journal, 51(4), 31-37.

Devenow, A., & Welch, I. (1996). Social Learning and Herding: Rational Herding in Financial
Economics.  European Economic Review, 40(3-5), 603-615.

Falkenstein, E. G. (1996). Preferences for Stock Characteristics As Revealed by Mutual Fund
Portfolio Holdings.  The Journal of Finance, 51(1), 111-135.

Ferreruela, S., & Mallor, T. (2021). Herding in the bad times: The 2008 and COVID-19 crises.
The North American Journal of Economics and Finance, 58, 101531.

Froot, K. A., Scharfstein, D. S., & Stein, J. C. (1992). Herd on the Street: Informational
Inefficiencies in a Market with Short-Term Speculation.  The Journal of Finance, 47(4), 1461-1484.

Hirshleifer, D., Subrahmanyam, A., & Titman, S. (1994). Security Analysis and Trading Patterns
When Some Investors Receive Information Before Others.  The Journal of Finance, 49(5), 1665-
1698.

Jensen, M. C., Black, F., & Scholes, M. S. (1972). The Capital Asset Pricing Model: Some
Empirical Tests.  SSRN.

Kurz, C., & Kurz-Kim, J.-R. (2013). What determines the dynamics of absolute excess returns on
stock markets?  Economics Letters, 118(2), 342-346.

Moe, T. G., Solheim, J. A., & Vale, B. (Eds.). (2004).  The Norwegian Banking Crisis.  The
Norwegian Bank.

Mobarek, A., Mollah, S., & Keasey, K. (2014). A cross-country analysis of herd behavior in
Europe.  Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money, 32, 107-127.

Raafat RM, Chater  N, Frith C. Herding in humans. Trends Cogn Sci. 2009 Oct;13(10):420-8.
Epub 2009.

Rajan, R. G. (1994). Why Bank Credit Policies Fluctuate: A Theory and Some Evidence.  The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(2), 399-441.

Scharfstein, D. S., & Stein, J. C. (1990). Herd Behavior and Investment.  The American Economic
Review, 80(3), 465-479.

                                                                         33
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

Welch, I. (1992). Sequential Sales, Learning, and Cascades.  The Journal of Finance, 47(2), 695-732.

Önnudóttir, E.H., Helgason, A.F., Harðarson, Ó.T., &  Thórisdóttir, H. (2021). Electoral Politics
in Crisis After the Great Recession: Change, Fluctuations and Stability in Iceland (1st ed.)
Routledge

AI disclaimer

Artificial intelligence  (AI)  has been used in the writing of this thesis. Specifically, ChatGPT has
been used as  aid  when  writing the code with which  the  study  has been made. This includes
rewriting already existing code to better fit with our purposes, as well as help formulate
completely new code based on certain inputs provided.  No other help has been received and no
other AI tools have been used in the writing of this thesis.

34
                                       Stockholm School of Economics

                           Appendix

                                    Table  1:  Definition of time  periods
Normal 1
                                                                     During
Sweden                                             1986/01/01 - 1988/12/30
Denmark                                           1986/01/01 – 1987/03/30
                                                                                                                  1
Norway                                               Excluded
Finland                                              1986/01/02 - 1998/12/30
                                                                                                                  2
Iceland                                                   Excluded

Early 1990’s recession
                               Pre                           During                          Post
Sweden                1988/12/31 - 1989/12/31             1990/01/01 - 1993/03/31             1993/04/01 - 1994/04/01
Denmark               1987/03/31 - 1988/03/31             1988/04/01 - 1990/12/31             1991/01/01 - 1992/01/01
Norway                1986/03/31 - 1987/03/31             1987/04/01 - 1989/03/31             1989/04/01 - 1990/04/01
Finland                1988/12/31 - 1989/12/31             1990/01/01 - 1993/06/30             1993/07/01 - 1994/07/01
                                                           3
Iceland                     Excluded

Normal 2
                                                                     During
Sweden                                             1994/04/02 - 1999/06/29
Denmark                                            1992/01/02 - 1999/09/29
Norway                                             1990/04/02 - 1999/12/30
Finland                                              1994/07/02 - 2000/06/29
Iceland                                              1995/11/14 - 1997/12/30

The dot-com pre
                               Pre                           During                          Post
Sweden                1999/06/30 - 2000/06/30             2000/07/01 - 2002/03/31             2002/04/01 - 2003/04/01
Denmark               1999/09/30 - 2000/09/30             2000/10/01 - 2003/06/30             2003/07/01 - 2004/07/01
Norway                1999/12/31 - 2000/12/31             2001/01/01 - 2003/06/30             2003/07/01 - 2004/07/01
Finland                2000/06/30 - 2001/06/30             2001/07/01 - 2003/03/31             2003/04/01 - 2004/04/01
Iceland                1997/12/31 - 1998/12/31             1999/01/01 - 2003/06/30             2003/07/01 - 2004/07/01

Normal 3
                                                                     During
Sweden                                             2003/04/02 - 2006/09/29
Denmark                                            2004/07/02 - 2006/09/29
Norway                                            2004/07/02 - 2006/09/29
Finland                                              2004/04/02 - 2006/09/29
Iceland                                                 2004-07-02 - 2006/09/29

Global financial crisis of 2007-2009
                               Pre                           During                          Post
Sweden                2006/09/30 - 2007/09/30             2007/10/01 - 2009/09/30             2009/10/01 - 2010/10/01
Denmark               2006/09/30 - 2007/09/30             2007/10/01 - 2009/06/30             2009/07/07 - 2010/07/07
Norway                2006/09/30 - 2007/09/30             2007/10/01 - 2009/06/30             2009/07/01 - 2010/07/01
Finland                2006/09/30 - 2007/09/30             2007/10/01 - 2009/12/31             2010/01/01 - 2011/01/01
Iceland                2006/09/30 - 2007/09/30             2007/10/01 - 2012/03/31             2012/04/01 - 2013/04/01

   1
    Excluded due to limited data between 1986/01/01 and 1986/03/30
   2
    Excluded due to no data available prior to 1995/11/14
   3
     Excluded due to no data available prior to 1995/11/14

                                                                           35
                                       Stockholm School of Economics

Greek government debt-crisis
                               Pre                           During                          Post
Sweden                2010/06/30 - 2011/06/30             2011/07/01 - 2013/06/30             2013/07/01 - 2014/07/01
Denmark               2010/03/31 - 2011/03/31             2011/04/01 - 2012/12/31             2013/01/01 - 2014/01/01
Norway                2011/03/31 - 2012/03/31             2012/04/01 - 2013/12/31             2014/01/01 - 2015/01/01
Finland                2010/09/30 - 2011/09/30             2011/10/01 - 2015/03/31             2015/04/01 - 2016/04/01
                                                           4
Iceland                     Excluded

Normal 4
                                                                     During
Sweden                                             2014/07/02 - 2018/12/30
Denmark                                            2014/01/02 - 2018/12/30
Norway                                             2015/01/02 - 2018/12/30
Finland                                              2016/04/02 - 2018/12/30
Iceland                                              2013/04/02 - 2018/12/30

Covid-19 pandemic
                               Pre                           During                          Post
Sweden                2019/01/01 - 2019/12/31             2020/01/01 - 2020/12/31             2021/01/01 - 2021/12/31
Denmark               2019/01/01 - 2019/12/31             2020/01/01 - 2020/12/31             2021/01/01 - 2021/12/31
Norway                2019/01/01 - 2019/12/31             2020/01/01 - 2020/12/31             2021/01/01 - 2021/12/31
Finland                2019/01/01 - 2019/12/31             2020/01/01 - 2020/12/31             2021/01/01 - 2021/12/31
Iceland                2019/01/01 - 2019/12/31             2020/01/01 - 2020/12/31             2021/01/01 - 2021/12/31

Current
                                                                     During
Sweden                                            2022/01/01 - October 2023
Denmark                                           2022/01/01 - October 2024
Norway                                            2022/01/01 - October 2025
Finland                                             2022/01/01 - October 2026
Iceland                                             2022/01/01 - October 2027
   Table  1  provides specifications  of the different time periods used in the analysis. It displays the periods  under
   investigation  as “pre”, “during” and “post” the different turbulent periods, respectively.  For the “Normal States”
   and the “Current” period  the  dates are presented under “during” as these periods do not have a “pre” or “post”
   period given that they are defined as the periods in-between  the  shocks to the market we are examining.

                   Table  2: Descriptive statistics  –market return, CSSD and CSAD

      Market return
       Country        Mean      Median       Max        Min         SD       Skewness      Kurtosis
    Sweden              0.001         0.000         0.958         -0.375         0.019         17.888        1050.812
    Iceland              0.002         0.001         2.638         -0.184         0.035         58.362        4022.438
    Denmark             0.001         0.001         0.288         -0.099         0.012         2.920         66.029
    Finland              0.001         0.001         0.232         -0.080         0.008          2.366         86.914
    Norway              0.001         0.001         0.786         -0.236         0.013         21.394        1284.204

    CSSD
       Country        Mean      Median       Max        Min         SD       Skewness      Kurtosis
    Sweden              0.014        0.011         4.173         0.000         0.054         68.674        5285.039
    Iceland              0.049        0.031         67.675         0.000         0.758         78.885        6694.723
    Denmark            0.049        0.033         7.981         0.000         0.203         22.537        627.215
    Finland              0.026        0.023         3.149         0.000         0.041         52.852        3585.566
    Norway             0.028        0.024         4.472         0.000         0.058         56.984        3949.000

   4
    Excluded due to longer period of economic recession already included in the “Global financial crisis of 2007-2009”

  36
                                          Stockholm School of Economics

      CSAD
          Country        Mean      Median       Max        Min         SD       Skewness      Kurtosis
       Sweden              0.003        0.000         16.585         0.000         0.202         82.151        6751.540
       Iceland              0.576        0.001        4572.944        0.000         47.027         94.088        9086.641
       Denmark            0.043        0.001         63.647         0.000         1.044         41.128        2056.550
       Finland              0.002        0.001         9.868         0.000         0.104         87.737        8137.477
       Norway             0.004        0.001         19.952         0.000         0.212         87.183        8029.292

     In table  2, the descriptive statistics for  the daily market return, CSSD and CSAD, are displayed  based on the
      complete samples for each country.  The  statistics  calculated are  the mean, median,  maximum-value, minimum-value,
      standard deviation,  skewness and kurtosis.  The CSSD measure is calculated using equation (1):
              #        "
             ∑ !$%(#!$ #̅ )
     𝑠  =  #         ,
             ($)
      And the CSAD measure is calculated using equation (10):
              %
                ∑" &''𝑅",!  − 𝑅$,!'
     𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷!  =
                           𝑁

                                        Table  3:  Sweden CSSD

                            𝛼5%     𝐷7&8#"  5%       𝐷9//#"  5%    𝛼           𝐷7&8#"  1%   𝐷9//#"  1%
                                                             .%

Total Sample

Coefficient                           0.036   ***        0.004             0.256   ***      0.039   ***         0.013          0.998   ***
T-stat                               17.457             0.403             28.355           21.676              0.702          55.978

Normal State 1

Coefficient                           0.019   ***        0.009             0.011           0.019   ***         0.021          0.022
T-stat                               47.941             5.074              6.365           51.657              5.656           5.936

1990s Recession Pre

Coefficient                           0.015   ***        0.004             0.035           0.016   ***         0.005          0.124   ***
T-stat                               11.517             0.755             6.057           14.667              0.455          12.462

1990s Recession Crash

Coefficient                           0.024   ***        0.011             0.029   ***      0.026   ***         0.017   ***      0.037
T-stat                               48.677             4.919             13.604           50.248              3.465           7.488

1990s Recession Post

Coefficient                            0.032   ***        -0.002             0.024           0.033   ***         -0.008           0.034   ***
T-stat                                 31.122             -0.516              5.563           32.403              -0.890            3.604

Normal State 2

Coefficient                           0.021   ***        0.009             0.009           0.021   ***         0.029   ***      0.021
T-stat                               67.986             6.758             7.145           74.106             10.447           7.360

DotCom Pre

Coefficient                           0.035   ***        0.008             0.055   ***      0.037   ***         0.005          0.113   ***
T-stat                               27.926             1.446             10.304           30.451              0.407           9.861

DotCom Crash

Coefficient                           0.041   ***        0.010   ***        0.021           0.042   ***         0.019   **       0.036
T-stat                               62.703             3.695              7.494           65.614              3.125           6.057

DotCom Post

Coefficient                           0.046   ***        0.019   ***        0.038           0.048   ***         0.061          0.036   **
T-stat                               36.922             3.540              7.137           38.693              5.274           3.136

Normal State 3

Coefficient                           0.027   ***        0.002             0.027   ***      0.027   ***         0.003          0.084   ***
T-stat                               45.263             0.658             10.447           52.045              0.669          16.892

Global Crisis Pre

Coefficient                            0.028   ***       -0.002             0.028           0.029   ***         0.000           0.106   ***
T-stat                                 21.509             -0.264              4.900           25.528              -0.044           10.247

Global Crisis Crash

Coefficient                           0.043   ***        0.011   **         0.020           0.044   ***         0.031   ***      0.034
T-stat                               48.372             2.948              5.088           51.465              3.853           4.267

                                                                             37
                                          Stockholm School of Economics

Global Crisis Post

Coefficient                           0.046   ***        0.002             0.035           0.048   ***         0.001          0.009
T-stat                               28.154             0.291              5.105           29.232              0.048           0.585

Greek Crisis Pre

Coefficient                            0.049   ***       -0.001             0.021           0.050   ***         0.000           0.030   **
T-stat                                39.232             -0.207              4.092           40.895              0.028           2.623

Greek Crisis Crash

Coefficient                            0.060   ***        -0.002             0.118   ***       0.063   ***         -0.011           0.249   ***
T-stat                                24.771             -0.191             11.355           27.374              0.000           11.589

Greek Crisis Pre

Coefficient                            0.046   ***        -0.003             0.024   ***       0.047   ***         -0.001           0.001
T-stat                               29.995             0.000              3.780           31.285              0.000           0.086

Normal State 4

Coefficient                           0.033            0.004             0.205   ***      0.035   ***         0.004          0.825   ***
T-stat                                6.862             0.199              9.841           8.512              0.099          20.438

Covid-19 Pre

Coefficient                             0.038            -0.002              0.197           0.040              -0.005           0.771   ***
T-stat                                5.661             0.000              6.962           8.382              0.000          17.475

Covid 19 Crash

Coefficient                           0.046            0.024             0.588           0.048   *          0.017          2.692   ***
T-stat                                1.493             0.181              4.497           1.919              0.075          11.573

Covid 19 Post

Coefficient                             0.044    *         -0.007              0.571           0.049              -0.007           2.269   ***
T-stat                                2.527             0.000              7.735           4.527              0.000          22.777

Current State

Coefficient                            0.131            -0.072             3.042   ***       0.232   ***         -0.186           4.970   ***
T-stat                                 7.067             -0.903             38.401            8.571              -0.716           19.101
     This table reports the estimated coefficients for the  OLS  regression  on Eq (2):
                    )       +
     CSSD(  =  α +  β'D( +  β*D( +  ε(,
            -  .
      where  D, (D, )  equals 1 if the market return on day t lied in the extreme lower  (upper) tail of the return distribution,
      and 0 otherwise. The 5% and 1% refers to the percentage of observations in the upper and lower tail of the market
      distribution.  Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
      * The coefficient is  significant at the 10% level
       ** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
       *** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                                    Table 4:  Denmark CSSD

                            𝛼5%     𝐷7&8#"  5%       𝐷9//#"  5%    𝛼           𝐷7&8#"  1%   𝐷9//#"  1%
                                                             .%

Total Sample

Coefficient                           0.024   ***        0.007   ***        0.028   ***      0.025   ***         0.012   **       0.099   ***
T-stat                               55.165             3.783             14.933           60.213              3.028          24.404

Normal State 1

Coefficient                           0.014   ***        0.006             0.009   ***      0.014   ***         0.011          0.015
T-stat                               63.838             5.988              9.778           67.753              5.627           7.204

1990s Recession Pre

Coefficient                           0.012   ***        0.008             0.008           0.013   ***         0.015          0.015
T-stat                               32.134             4.760              5.050           34.379              4.174           4.187

1990s Recession Crash

Coefficient                           0.018   ***        0.019   ***        0.012           0.019   ***         0.023          0.018   ***
T-stat                               35.875             8.777              5.724           37.224              4.688           3.659

1990s Recession Post

Coefficient                            0.021   ***        -0.001             0.022           0.022   ***         0.003           0.018
T-stat                                31.503             -0.225              8.124           31.169              0.429           2.731

Normal State 2

Coefficient                           0.019   ***        0.007             0.011   ***      0.019   ***         0.010          0.022   ***
T-stat                               70.948             6.127              9.775           75.421              3.963           8.597

DotCom Pre

Coefficient                           0.028   ***        0.009   **         0.016           0.028   ***         0.021   **       0.044
T-stat                               37.229             2.792              5.199           41.407              3.229           6.908

    38
                                          Stockholm School of Economics

DotCom Crash

Coefficient                           0.029   ***        0.006   *          0.032   ***      0.030   ***         0.009          0.072   ***
T-stat                               41.316             2.113             10.488           45.222              1.529          11.581

DotCom Post

Coefficient                            0.024   ***        0.006             0.131           0.025             -0.002           0.562   ***
T-stat                                3.707             0.216              4.815           4.734              0.000          11.479

Normal State 3

Coefficient                           0.022   ***        0.002             0.017   ***      0.022   ***         0.008   *       0.023
T-stat                               46.946             0.880              8.731           48.651              1.727           4.994

Global Crisis Pre

Coefficient                           0.021   ***        0.003             0.005   *        0.022   ***         0.007          0.006
T-stat                               36.853             1.133              2.039           38.693              1.383           1.117

Global Crisis Crash

Coefficient                           0.037            0.019             0.165           0.039             0.038           0.658   ***
T-stat                                5.300             0.629              5.384           6.325              0.656          11.244

Global Crisis Post

Coefficient                            0.037   ***        -0.002             0.064           0.038   ***         -0.002           0.198   ***
T-stat                                17.585             -0.192              7.230           21.508              0.000           11.953

Greek Crisis Pre

Coefficient                            0.036   ***        0.001             0.049           0.037   ***         -0.001           0.171   ***
T-stat                                16.751             0.096              5.400           19.933              -0.034           9.992

Greek Crisis Crash

Coefficient                           0.036   ***        0.005             0.028           0.037   ***         0.015   *       0.081   ***
T-stat                               38.538             1.227             6.982           43.039              1.886          10.040

Greek Crisis Post

Coefficient                           0.030            0.001             0.077           0.030   ***         0.006          0.344   ***
T-stat                                7.710             1.068              4.674           9.644              0.202          11.727

Normal State 4

Coefficient                           0.024   ***        0.007   ***        0.012           0.024   ***         0.013   **       0.034   ***
T-stat                               56.247             3.606              6.270           60.564              3.275           8.860

Covid-19 Pre

Coefficient                           0.022            0.003             0.077           0.023             0.000           0.333   ***
T-stat                                5.851             0.190              4.768           7.385              0.003          11.606

Covid 19 Crash

Coefficient                           0.027   ***        0.009   *          0.008   *        0.027   ***         0.023   **       0.013
T-stat                               29.857             2.515              2.076           31.889              2.916           1.694

Covid 19 Post

Coefficient                           0.027   ***        0.003             0.004           0.027   ***         0.002          0.005
T-stat                               37.276             1.068              1.384           39.294              0.274           0.843

Current State

Coefficient                           0.033   ***        0.003             0.005   *        0.033   ***         0.005          0.004
T-stat                               66.494             1.362              2.377           69.724              1.086           0.852
        This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression on Eq (2):
                    )       +
     CSSD(  =  α +  β'D( +  β*D( +  ε(,
            -  .
      where  D, (D, )  equals 1 if the market return on day t lied in the extreme lower (upper) tail of the return distribution,
      and 0 otherwise. The 5% and 1% refers to the percentage of observations in the upper and lower tail of the market
      distribution.  Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
       * The coefficient is significant at the 10% level
       ** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
       *** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                                     Table  5:  Norway CSSD

                            𝛼5%     𝐷7&8#"  5%       𝐷9//#"  5%    𝛼           𝐷7&8#"  1%   𝐷9//#"  1%
                                                             .%

Total Sample
Coefficient                           0.033            0.007             0.310   ***      0.035             0.014          1.407   ***
T-stat                                4.126             0.189              8.862           4.569              0.180          18.696

1990s Recession Bubble

Coefficient                           0.018   ***        0.013             0.008   **       0.019   ***         0.014   *       0.000
T-stat                                28.946             5.076              3.257           30.364              2.410           -0.057

                                                                             39
                                          Stockholm School of Economics

1990s Recession Crash

Coefficient                           0.022   ***        0.011             0.012           0.022   ***         0.019   ***      0.032
T-stat                               37.584             4.438              4.738           40.773              3.753           6.321

1990s Recession Recovery

Coefficient                           0.035   ***        0.007   *          0.009   **       0.036   ***         0.006          0.016   *
T-stat                               45.505             1.961              2.701           47.703              0.812           2.285

Normal State 2

Coefficient                           0.027   ***        0.011   ***        0.027   ***      0.028   ***         0.018          0.045   ***
T-stat                               89.557             8.684             21.107           94.123              5.997          15.166

DotCom Bubble

Coefficient                           0.036   ***        0.007             0.033           0.038   ***         0.012          0.032   **
T-stat                               33.021             1.609              7.140           33.613              1.173           3.092

DotCom Crash

Coefficient                           0.043   ***        0.007   *          0.025   ***      0.044   ***         0.013   *       0.034
T-stat                               64.609             2.406              8.802           67.485              2.183           5.503

DotCom Recovery

Coefficient                           0.036   ***        0.000             0.026           0.037   ***         0.000          0.019   *
T-stat                               38.845             0.041              6.559           39.162              0.000           2.086

Normal State 3

Coefficient                           0.026   ***        0.005             0.035           0.026   ***         0.016          0.126   ***
T-stat                               20.792             0.991             6.476           23.820              1.469          11.587

Global Crisis Bubble

Coefficient                           0.024   ***        0.002             0.028           0.024   ***         0.002          0.108   ***
T-stat                               18.263             0.291             5.002           22.127              0.225          10.836

Global Crisis Crash

Coefficient                           0.041   ***        0.021   **         0.054           0.044   ***         0.030   *       0.036   *
T-stat                               26.310             3.104              7.967           27.707              1.996           2.362

Global Crisis Recovery

Coefficient                           0.046            0.003             2.341           0.050             0.008          10.534   ***
T-stat                                0.383             0.006              4.666           0.526              0.009          11.871

Greek Crisis Bubble

Coefficient                           0.044            0.011             0.238   ***      0.048   ***         0.023          0.742   ***
T-stat                                7.713             0.441              9.975           12.051              0.631          19.951

Greek Crisis Crash

Coefficient                           0.034   ***        0.007             0.125   ***      0.035   ***         0.010          0.495   ***
T-stat                               10.145             0.464             8.568           14.248              0.406          21.035

Greek Crisis Recovery

Coefficient                            0.030   ***        0.009             0.420   ***      0.038             -0.004           1.339   ***
T-stat                                3.393             0.031             11.182           7.181              0.000          27.282

Normal State 4

Coefficient                           0.033            0.003             0.175           0.035             0.004           0.673   ***
T-stat                                6.376             0.137              7.839           7.552              0.089          15.057

Covid-19 Bubble

Coefficient                           0.033            0.001             0.095           0.034   ***         0.006          0.379   ***
T-stat                                7.258             0.043              4.984           8.939              0.167          10.839

Covid 19 Crash

Coefficient                           0.044   ***        0.012             0.083           0.045   ***         0.029          0.278   ***
T-stat                               12.272             0.813              5.567           14.696              1.020           9.714

Covid 19 Recovery

Coefficient                           0.033            0.004             0.740           0.034             0.003           3.345   ***
T-stat                                1.057             0.031              5.638           1.544              0.015          16.169

Current State

Coefficient                             0.043            -0.002              3.179           0.051              -0.007          14.562   ***
T-stat                                  0.288             -0.003              4.939            0.391              -0.005           11.727
        This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression on Eq (2):
                    )       +
     CSSD(  =  α +  β'D( +  β*D( +  ε(,
            -  .
     where  D, (D, )  equals 1 if the market return on day t lied in the extreme lower (upper) tail of the return distribution,
      and 0 otherwise. The 5% and 1% refers to the percentage of observations in the upper and lower tail of the market
      distribution.  Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
       * The coefficient is significant at the 10% level
       ** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level

    40
                                         Stockholm School of Economics

      *** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                                       Table  6:  Finland CSSD
                            𝛼5%     𝐷7&8#"  5%      𝐷9//#"  5%    𝛼          𝐷7&8#"  1%   𝐷9//#"  1%
                                                             .%

Total Sample

Coefficient                           0.025   ***       0.009   ***        0.042   ***      0.026   ***         0.016   **      0.151   ***
T-stat                               41.594            3.503             15.791           45.941              2.850          26.610

Normal State 1

Coefficient                           0.024   ***       0.010             0.018   ***      0.024   ***         0.016   ***      0.036   ***
T-stat                               52.250            4.931             9.298           55.811              3.845           8.474

1990s Recession Pre

Coefficient                           0.021   ***       0.007   ***        0.016           0.022   ***         0.006          0.019
T-stat                               46.681            3.522             8.330           46.023              1.446           4.323

1990s Recession Crash

Coefficient                           0.030   ***       0.011             0.018   ***      0.031   ***         0.017   ***      0.015   ***
T-stat                               65.274            5.754             8.862           67.773              3.651           3.307

1990s Recession Post

Coefficient                           0.025   ***       0.004             0.022           0.026   ***         0.002          0.017   *
T-stat                               33.740            1.142             7.000           33.975              0.324           2.441

Normal State 2

Coefficient                           0.025   ***       0.011             0.019   ***      0.026   ***         0.027          0.031
T-stat                               56.902            5.679             10.105           60.959              6.437           7.237

DotCom Pre

Coefficient                           0.035   ***       0.011   ***        0.012   ***      0.036   ***         0.012   *       0.010
T-stat                               46.218            3.454             3.784           47.956              1.782           1.524

DotCom Crash

Coefficient                           0.033   ***       0.005             0.019           0.034   ***         0.005          0.049
T-stat                               39.793            1.294             5.342           42.860              0.731           6.530

DotCom Post

Coefficient                           0.026   ***       0.005             0.027           0.028   ***         0.002          0.026   **
T-stat                               26.578            1.117             6.544           27.471              0.255           2.731

Normal State 3

Coefficient                           0.021   ***       0.004   **         0.007           0.021   ***         0.004          0.008   **
T-stat                               73.624            3.152             5.790           76.675              1.488           3.117

Global Crisis Pre

Coefficient                           0.021   ***       0.003   *          0.011           0.022   ***         0.007          0.022
T-stat                               44.867            1.699             5.374           47.497              1.568           5.202

Global Crisis Crash

Coefficient                           0.030   ***       0.011             0.016           0.031   ***         0.024          0.021
T-stat                               55.829            4.772             6.717           58.801              4.677           4.045

Global Crisis Post

Coefficient                           0.027   ***       0.001             0.034           0.027   ***         0.003          0.141   ***
T-stat                               14.844            0.099             4.453           17.736              0.226           9.954

Greek Crisis Pre

Coefficient                           0.025   ***       0.007             0.047           0.026   ***         0.011          0.143   ***
T-stat                               14.151            1.009             6.383           16.944              0.791           9.980

Greek Crisis Crash

Coefficient                           0.024   ***       0.005             0.044           0.024   ***         0.006          0.156   ***
T-stat                               13.957            0.665             6.039           15.575              0.389          10.584

Greek Crisis Post

Coefficient                           0.022   ***       0.007   **         0.009   ***      0.022   ***         0.012   *       0.023
T-stat                               39.063            2.883             3.722           42.123              2.472           4.641

Normal State 4

Coefficient                           0.021   ***       0.004   *          0.011           0.021   ***         0.011   **      0.032   ***
T-stat                               51.968            2.325             6.571           56.612              3.277           9.169

Covid-19 Pre

Coefficient                            0.024   ***       0.002             0.008   *        0.024   ***         -0.001          0.014
T-stat                               21.663            0.458             1.687           22.987              0.000           1.471

Covid 19 Crash

                                                                             41
                                         Stockholm School of Economics

Coefficient                           0.026   ***       0.012   ***        0.016           0.027   ***         0.019   *       0.012
T-stat                               30.501            3.346             4.576           32.026              2.484           1.531

Covid 19 Post

Coefficient                            0.023   ***       0.000             0.040           0.025   ***         -0.001          0.092   ***
T-stat                               19.572            0.053             8.019           21.944              0.000           8.903

Current State

Coefficient                           0.027   *        0.003             0.446   ***      0.029             0.006          1.912   ***
T-stat                                2.417            0.064             9.350           4.210              0.084          28.516
      This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression on Eq (2):
                   )       +
    CSSD(  =  α +  β'D( +  β*D( +  ε(,
            -  .
     where D, (D, )  equals 1 if the market return on day t lied in the extreme lower (upper) tail of the return distribution,
     and 0 otherwise. The 5% and 1% refers to the percentage of observations in the upper and lower tail of the market
     distribution.  Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
      * The coefficient is significant at the 10% level
      ** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
      *** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                                   Table 7: Iceland CSSD

                            𝛼5%     𝐷7&8#"  5%      𝐷9//#"  5%    𝛼           𝐷7&8#"  1%   𝐷9//#"  1%
                                                             .%

Total Sample

Coefficient                           0.012   ***       0.016             0.034   ***      0.013   ***         0.051          0.114   ***
T-stat                               17.311            5.294             11.277           19.609              8.049          17.888

Normal State 2

Coefficient                            0.003            0.004             0.014           0.004             -0.004           0.035
T-stat                                 5.428            1.321              4.890            6.669              -0.670           5.915

DotCom Pre

Coefficient                            0.001   *        0.008   **         0.006   *        0.002   ***         -0.002          -0.002
T-stat                                 2.149            2.691              2.212            3.373              -0.480           -0.393

DotCom Crash

Coefficient                            0.012   ***       -0.001             0.002           0.012   ***         -0.005           0.010   *
T-stat                                 29.176            -0.609              0.967           30.504              -1.304           2.576

DotCom Post

Coefficient                           0.013   ***       0.000             0.009           0.014   ***         0.003          0.011   **
T-stat                               29.418            0.036             4.881           30.621              0.654           2.599

Normal State 3

Coefficient                           0.013   ***       0.005   ***        0.012           0.013   ***         0.006   *       0.011   ***
T-stat                               38.598            3.526             8.361           40.396              1.867           3.535

Global Crisis Pre

Coefficient                           0.010   ***       0.004             0.012           0.010   ***         0.007          0.040   ***
T-stat                               18.052            1.511             5.121           21.087              1.580           9.007

Global Crisis Crash

Coefficient                           0.012   ***       0.064   ***        0.074   ***      0.016   ***         0.168   ***      0.160   ***
T-stat                               14.621           17.643             20.426          21.422             23.178          22.064

Global Crisis Post

Coefficient                           0.007   ***       0.010             0.023   ***      0.008   ***         0.021          0.051   ***
T-stat                               13.892            4.767             10.503           17.003              4.740          11.519

Normal State 4

Coefficient                           0.011   ***       0.016             0.077           0.011             0.053   *       0.337   ***
T-stat                                3.640            1.239             6.023           4.216              1.986          12.624

Covid-19 Pre

Coefficient                           0.011   ***       0.005   ***        0.007           0.012   ***         0.011   ***      0.006   *
T-stat                               33.168            3.558             4.850           34.878              3.427           1.791

Covid 19 Crash

Coefficient                           0.015   ***       0.012             0.012           0.016   ***         0.027          0.017   **
T-stat                               25.078            4.801             4.643           27.206              4.971           3.125

Covid 19 Post

Coefficient                           0.014   ***       0.012             0.014           0.015   ***         0.008          0.018   **
T-stat                               22.102            4.440             5.211           23.496              1.335           3.116

Current State

    42
                                         Stockholm School of Economics

Coefficient                           0.018   ***       0.010   **         0.029   ***      0.019   ***         0.016   *       0.068   ***
T-stat                               24.393            3.102             9.355           27.461              2.398          10.317
      This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression on Eq (2):
                   )       +
    CSSD(  =  α +  β'D( +  β*D( +  ε(,
            -  .
     where D, (D, )  equals 1 if the market return on day t lied in the extreme lower (upper) tail of the return distribution,
     and 0 otherwise. The 5% and 1% refers to the percentage of observations in the upper and lower tail of the market
     distribution.  Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
      * The coefficient is significant at the 10% level
      ** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
      *** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                                    Table 8:  Sweden CSAD

                                                        𝛼                   𝛾.            𝛾2

                               Total Sample

                        Coefficient                            -0.032    **            -2.804   *       673.830   ***
                           T-stat                                   -3.179                 -2.558             73.918

                                Normal State 1

                       Coefficient                           0.000               0.010   *        0.304   ***
                         T-stat                                 7.650                 1.916            3.577

                        1990s Recession Pre

                        Coefficient                            -0.001                0.196    *         1.659
                          T-stat                                  -1.336                 2.036             0.923

                                1990s Recession Crash

                         Coefficient                              0.000                 0.058            -0.030
                          T-stat                                   4.606                 5.999            -0.174

                         1990s Recession Post

                       Coefficient                            0.001               0.004            2.795   *
                         T-stat                                 4.859                 0.112            1.969

                        Normal State 2

                       Coefficient                            0.001   ***           -0.106   ***       4.443   ***
                          T-stat                                  17.755                -14.677            34.225

                       DotCom Pre

                         Coefficient                              0.003                -0.554            30.293
                          T-stat                                   3.980                 -4.396             6.956

                            DotCom Crash

                       Coefficient                           0.001   ***           0.044   ***       0.602   *
                         T-stat                                12.788                 3.430            2.238

                       DotCom Post

                         Coefficient                              0.002                -0.036            4.087
                          T-stat                                   6.135                 -0.875             4.632

                                Normal State 3

                        Coefficient                             0.000                0.217    **        -0.367
                           T-stat                                   -0.211                  3.046             -0.181

                         Global Crisis Pre

                         Coefficient                              0.000                 0.271            -3.123
                           T-stat                                   -0.099                  1.497             -0.450

                                 Global Crisis Crash

                       Coefficient                            0.002               0.065   *        0.384
                         T-stat                                 8.128                 2.166            0.574

                         Global Crisis Post

                        Coefficient                             0.001                0.537    *        -11.533
                          T-stat                                   0.674                 2.408            -1.565

                         Greek Crisis Pre

                        Coefficient                            0.002   ***           0.328   *       -11.137
                          T-stat                                   3.633                 2.058            -1.126

                                 Greek Crisis Crash

                       Coefficient                            0.002               0.117           84.417   ***
                         T-stat                                 0.685                 0.178            3.319

                         Greek Crisis Post

                                                                             43
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

                  Coefficient                            0.001   *            0.524   **       -18.210   *
                    T-stat                                   2.530                 3.227            -1.746

                        Normal State 4

                  Coefficient                            0.008   *            -4.585          452.813   ***
                    T-stat                                   2.348                 -5.370            14.275

                     Covid-19 Pre

                  Coefficient                            0.025   ***          -15.880   ***     1584.526   ***
                   T-stat                                10.033                 0.000            77.855

                        Covid 19 Crash

                  Coefficient                            0.402               -82.062   ***     1658.775   ***
                    T-stat                                  7.798                -16.493            61.926

                   Covid 19 Post

                  Coefficient                            0.099               -36.072   ***     1995.490   ***
                   T-stat                                 7.752                 0.000            82.425

                         Current State

                  Coefficient                            -1.056    ***          151.265   ***     -110.931   **
                    T-stat                                   -8.869                 18.694             -2.650
This table  reports the estimated coefficients  for  the  OLS  regression  on Eq (11):
                          *
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷!  =  𝛼 + 𝛾''𝑅$,! ' + 𝛾*5𝑅$,!6 +  𝜀!.
Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
* The coefficient is significant at the 10% level
** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
*** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                               Table 9:  Denmark CSAD

                                                   𝛼                   𝛾.            𝛾2

                        Total Sample

                  Coefficient                            0.016   ***           -5.048   ***      194.269   ***
                    T-stat                                  46.828               -101.957           383.653

                        Normal State 1

                 Coefficient                            0.000   ***           0.008            0.257
                   T-stat                                13.439                 4.017            4.971

                  1990s Recession Pre

                   Coefficient                              0.000                 0.018            -0.041
                    T-stat                                   6.727                 4.988            -0.506
                        1990s Recession Crash

                 Coefficient                           0.000               0.029   **        0.755   *
                   T-stat                                 4.205                 2.748            2.028

                   1990s Recession Post

                  Coefficient                             0.000    **            0.073            -0.684
                    T-stat                                   2.884                 4.194            -0.943

                        Normal State 2

                  Coefficient                             0.000                0.061            -0.678    *
                    T-stat                                   7.679                 6.940            -1.802
                 DotCom Pre

                  Coefficient                             0.001                -0.004            5.629    **
                    T-stat                                   6.746                 -0.114             3.163

                     DotCom Crash

                  Coefficient                             0.001                -0.234    ***       20.096
                    T-stat                                   4.100                 -3.444             7.839

                 DotCom Post

                  Coefficient                            0.004   ***           -1.912   ***      155.480   ***
                    T-stat                                  12.132                -26.809           294.726
                        Normal State 3

                  Coefficient                            0.000   *             0.134           -2.832   **
                    T-stat                                   1.973                 5.201            -2.728

                   Global Crisis Pre

                   Coefficient                              0.000                 0.019            -0.295
                    T-stat                                   6.842                 0.937            -0.334

44
                                    Stockholm School of Economics

                         Global Crisis Crash

                  Coefficient                            0.041   ***           -8.583   ***      216.952   ***
                    T-stat                                  13.561                -31.627           144.503

                   Global Crisis Post

                  Coefficient                             0.006                -2.013           132.785    ***
                    T-stat                                   5.272                 -8.244            16.720

                   Greek Crisis Pre

                  Coefficient                             0.006                -2.103           134.316    ***
                    T-stat                                   5.399                 -8.197            16.495

                         Greek Crisis Crash

                  Coefficient                             0.002                -0.478           47.716    ***
                    T-stat                                   7.720                 -5.451            10.134

                   Greek Crisis Post

                  Coefficient                            0.004   ***           -2.399   ***      296.200   ***
                   T-stat                                14.774                 2.406           236.710

                        Normal State 4

                 Coefficient                            0.001               0.061   *        1.492
                   T-stat                                 4.329                 1.822            0.995

                     Covid-19 Pre

                  Coefficient                            0.008   ***           -4.857   ***      406.853   ***
                   T-stat                                11.418                 0.000            91.451

                        Covid 19 Crash

                  Coefficient                            0.001   ***           0.045   *        -0.233
                    T-stat                                   3.662                 1.737            -0.497

                   Covid 19 Post

                  Coefficient                             0.001                0.105    *        -4.822
                   T-stat                                 4.770                 2.406            0.000

                         Current State

                  Coefficient                            0.001   ***           0.098           -3.047   **
                    T-stat                                  10.716                 4.462            -2.726
This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression on Eq (11):
                          *
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷!  =  𝛼 + 𝛾''𝑅$,! ' + 𝛾*5𝑅$,!6 +  𝜀!.
Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
* The coefficient is significant at the 10% level
** The  coefficient is significant at the 5% level
*** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                               Table 10:  Norway CSAD

                                                   𝛼                   𝛾.            𝛾2

                        Total Sample

                  Coefficient                            3.722   ***         -504.377   ***      782.110   ***
                    T-stat                                  27.121                -50.137           178.583

                  1990s Recession Pre

                  Coefficient                             0.000                0.024    ***       -0.047
                    T-stat                                   4.308                 3.715            -0.338
                        1990s Recession Crash

                 Coefficient                            0.000               0.019            0.082   *
                   T-stat                                 6.797                 4.810            2.326

                   1990s Recession Post

                  Coefficient                            0.001   ***           0.031   **       -0.043
                    T-stat                                  13.477                 3.240            -0.367

                        Normal State 2

                 Coefficient                           0.001   ***           0.052   ***       0.273
                   T-stat                                 9.964                 9.591            4.791
                 DotCom Pre

                  Coefficient                            0.001   *             0.140   **       -1.457
                    T-stat                                   2.310                 3.050            -1.296

                     DotCom Crash

                  Coefficient                            0.002   ***           0.081   ***       -0.182

                                                                         45
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

                    T-stat                                  11.345                 3.821            -0.378

                 DotCom Post

                  Coefficient                             0.001                0.121    **        -2.102
                    T-stat                                   4.921                 3.144            -1.518
                        Normal State 3

                  Coefficient                            0.008               -2.077   ***       79.148   ***
                    T-stat                                   6.612                 -9.829            16.141

                   Global Crisis Pre

                  Coefficient                             0.003                -1.022           66.537    ***
                    T-stat                                   4.664                 -7.503            11.716

                         Global Crisis Crash

                  Coefficient                             0.000                0.344    *        -2.821
                    T-stat                                   0.189                 2.004            -0.782
                   Global Crisis Post

                  Coefficient                            0.013               -4.674   ***      264.857   ***
                    T-stat                                  7.282                -22.527           2414.631

                   Greek Crisis Pre

                  Coefficient                            0.023               -6.888   ***      322.452   ***
                    T-stat                                  7.141                -14.719            43.312

                         Greek Crisis Crash

                  Coefficient                            0.005               -2.401   ***      246.952   ***
                    T-stat                                  7.029                -16.831           126.844
                   Greek Crisis Post

                  Coefficient                             0.005                -3.566           334.524    ***
                   T-stat                                 1.533                 0.000            51.675

                        Normal State 4

                  Coefficient                            0.017   ***           -6.607   ***      367.974   ***
                    T-stat                                  15.496                -37.311           501.094

                     Covid-19 Pre

                  Coefficient                            0.016   ***           -9.417   ***      843.177   ***
                   T-stat                                 9.533                 0.000            64.695
                        Covid 19 Crash

                   Coefficient                              -0.004                 1.248    *         -8.516
                    T-stat                                   -0.953                  2.387             -1.014

                   Covid 19 Post

                  Coefficient                            0.050   ***          -15.483   ***      618.068   ***
                   T-stat                                13.566                 0.000           407.260

                         Current State

                  Coefficient                            0.017   ***           -8.197   ***      660.044   ***
                    T-stat                                  3.499                -15.639           3324.440
This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression on Eq (11):
                          *
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷!  =  𝛼 + 𝛾''𝑅$,! ' + 𝛾*5𝑅$,!6 +  𝜀!.
Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
* The coefficient is significant at the 10% level
** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
*** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                                Table 11:  Finland CSAD

                                                   𝛼                   𝛾.            𝛾2

                        Total Sample

                  Coefficient                            -0.044    ***           7.102    ***       -6.891    ***
                    T-stat                                  -15.673                 25.455            -13.698

                        Normal State 1

                  Coefficient                             0.000                0.050    ***       -0.110
                    T-stat                                   7.326                 9.318            -1.499

                  1990s Recession Pre

                 Coefficient                            0.000               0.024   *        0.218
                   T-stat                                 7.393                 2.277            0.510

                        1990s Recession Crash

46
                                    Stockholm School of Economics

                 Coefficient                           0.001   ***           0.034   ***       0.235
                   T-stat                                10.215                 3.435            1.080

                   1990s Recession Post

                  Coefficient                            0.001   **           -0.001            2.432   *
                    T-stat                                   2.855                 -0.036             2.341

                        Normal State 2

                  Coefficient                            0.000                0.155   ***       -0.191   ***
                    T-stat                                   -1.464                 20.805            -18.024

                 DotCom Pre

                  Coefficient                             0.001                0.057    **        -0.459
                    T-stat                                   8.472                 2.722            -0.621

                     DotCom Crash

                 Coefficient                            0.001   ***           0.038            2.058
                   T-stat                                 3.481                 0.787            1.196

                 DotCom Post

                 Coefficient                            0.000               0.105   *        0.776
                   T-stat                                 1.631                 1.673            0.264

                        Normal State 3

                  Coefficient                            0.000   ***           0.029   **       -0.176
                    T-stat                                  11.005                 3.296            -0.584

                   Global Crisis Pre

                 Coefficient                            0.000               0.025   *        0.134
                   T-stat                                 8.090                 2.126            0.266

                         Global Crisis Crash

                 Coefficient                           0.001   ***           0.025   *        0.745
                   T-stat                                 9.064                 1.662            1.644

                   Global Crisis Post

                  Coefficient                            -0.001                0.235           10.783    *
                    T-stat                                  -0.550                 1.158             2.124

                   Greek Crisis Pre

                  Coefficient                            0.003   *            -0.764   **       41.761
                    T-stat                                   2.323                 -3.241             5.551

                         Greek Crisis Crash

                  Coefficient                            0.013   ***           -5.366   ***      306.227   ***
                    T-stat                                  18.291                -43.148           130.058

                   Greek Crisis Post

                 Coefficient                            0.000               0.024   *        0.103
                   T-stat                                 7.275                 1.885            0.210

                        Normal State 4

                  Coefficient                            0.000   ***           0.070   **       -0.199
                    T-stat                                   3.427                 2.851            -0.167

                     Covid-19 Pre

                  Coefficient                             0.000                0.195    *        -5.495
                    T-stat                                   0.808                 1.906            -0.995

                        Covid 19 Crash

                  Coefficient                            0.001   ***           0.057   **       -0.419
                    T-stat                                   3.487                 2.992            -1.354

                   Covid 19 Post

                  Coefficient                             0.001    *            -0.216           35.111
                   T-stat                                 1.688                 0.000            4.293

                         Current State

                  Coefficient                            0.018               -7.568   ***      443.896   ***
                    T-stat                                  6.885                -23.078           246.330
This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression on Eq (11):
                          *
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷!  =  𝛼 + 𝛾''𝑅$,! ' + 𝛾*5𝑅$,!6 +  𝜀!.
Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
* The coefficient is significant at the 10% level
** The  coefficient is significant at the 5% level
*** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                                                                         47
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

                                  Table 12:  Iceland CSAD

                                                    𝛼                   𝛾.            𝛾2

                        Total Sample

                  Coefficient                            0.014   ***           -2.460   ***      20.165   ***
                    T-stat                                  30.548                -68.852           373.846

                         Normal State 2

                  Coefficient                            0.000   *             0.014           -0.036   **
                     T-stat                                   -2.518                  5.134             -2.643

                  DotCom Pre

                  Coefficient                            0.000                0.015   *        -0.163   *
                     T-stat                                   -1.584                  2.589             -1.752

                      DotCom Crash

                   Coefficient                             0.000    ***           0.010            -0.041
                    T-stat                                   8.618                 5.439            -3.907

                  DotCom Post

                   Coefficient                             0.000                0.025    ***       -0.082
                    T-stat                                   4.506                 3.483            -0.201

                         Normal State 3

                   Coefficient                             0.000    ***           0.026            -0.232
                    T-stat                                   3.704                 6.303            -1.620

                   Global Crisis Pre

                   Coefficient                             0.000                -0.111            6.380    ***
                    T-stat                                   5.619                 -8.093            14.064

                          Global Crisis Crash

                  Coefficient                            -0.001                0.137   ***       0.739   ***
                    T-stat                                  -4.526                17.504            21.921

                    Global Crisis Post

                  Coefficient                            0.000   **           -0.056            8.664   ***
                   T-stat                                 3.155                 0.000            18.802

                         Normal State 4

                  Coefficient                            0.001   ***           -0.285   ***      18.376   ***
                    T-stat                                  16.793                -42.436           2574.104

                     Covid-19 Pre

                  Coefficient                            0.000   ***           0.029   ***       -0.804
                    T-stat                                   3.776                 3.871            -1.560

                        Covid 19 Crash

                  Coefficient                           0.000   ***           0.011           0.587   *
                   T-stat                                 3.828                 1.162            2.563

                   Covid 19 Post

                   Coefficient                             0.000                0.070    *        -0.278
                   T-stat                                 0.354                 2.367            0.000

                          Current State

                   Coefficient                             0.000    *            -0.008            5.862
                    T-stat                                   2.355                 -0.256             4.874
This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression on Eq (11):
                           *
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷!  =  𝛼 + 𝛾''𝑅$,! ' + 𝛾*5𝑅$,!6 +  𝜀!.
 Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
 * The coefficient is significant at the 10% level
 ** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
 *** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                            Table  13:  Sweden CSAD bullish vs bearish

                              𝛼               𝛾.                𝛾2              𝛾3               𝛾4

Total Sample

Coefficient                      -0.093   ***         13.844   ***         9.762             624.937   ***         -132.559   **
T-stat                           -9.295               11.111               5.094               68.046                -3.162
Normal State 1

48
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

Coefficient                      0.000              0.002              0.013   *           0.612               0.160
T-stat                          7.976               0.346              2.158               4.911               1.574

1990s Recession Pre

Coefficient                       0.001              -0.372    ***         -0.013              29.380    ***           0.202
T-stat                            1.263               -3.668               -0.145               10.337                0.126

1990s Recession Crash

Coefficient                        0.000               0.086              0.047    ***          -0.272               -0.351
T-stat                            4.300                7.799               3.519               -1.468                -1.061

1990s Recession Post

Coefficient                        0.001               -0.003              0.042               4.198    **           -1.761
T-stat                            4.930               -0.077               0.896                2.764                -0.854

Normal State 2

Coefficient                       0.001   ***          -0.024   **          -0.149   ***          1.120               6.019   ***
T-stat                           18.943               -3.284              -21.551                6.827               48.322

DotCom Pre

Coefficient                       0.002    ***          -0.628              -0.172              40.867    ***           6.103
T-stat                            3.621               -5.246               -1.109                9.420                1.019

DotCom Crash

Coefficient                      0.002   ***          0.001              0.021              2.768               0.387
T-stat                          14.554               0.070              1.559               5.707               1.402

DotCom Post

Coefficient                       0.002               0.096    *           -0.233              -0.044               10.493   ***
T-stat                           7.667                2.235              -5.168                0.000                9.402

Normal State 3

Coefficient                       0.000               0.033              0.056              16.597               -0.788
T-stat                           0.888                0.374               0.652                4.532               -0.347

Global Crisis Pre

Coefficient                       0.002    *           -0.730    **          -0.110              81.814               2.778
T-stat                            1.877               -2.608               -0.546                4.709                0.383

Global Crisis Crash

Coefficient                        0.002               0.154              -0.035               -1.247               2.604    **
T-stat                            8.173                4.584               -0.968               -1.610                2.827

Global Crisis Post

Coefficient                        0.001               0.735    **           0.289              -12.673               -7.421
T-stat                          0.499               3.053              1.034               0.000               0.000

Greek Crisis Pre

Coefficient                       0.002    ***          0.364    *           0.119              -7.009               -4.998
T-stat                           3.798                1.940               0.637               -0.507                0.000

Greek Crisis Crash

Coefficient                       0.013              -6.781   ***         -1.574   *          625.201   ***          40.554   *
T-stat                            5.460               -9.874               -2.509               16.964                1.790

Greek Crisis Post

Coefficient                       0.001    **           0.595    *           0.122              -19.723               -2.676
T-stat                          2.618               2.475              0.545               0.000               0.000

Normal State 4

Coefficient                       0.018   ***         -14.466   ***         -2.992             1337.085   ***          73.137   **
T-stat                            8.455               -21.810               -4.586               43.842                3.039

Covid-19 Pre

Coefficient                       0.017              -13.345   ***         -6.597             1537.365   ***         436.411   **
T-stat                           7.424               0.000              -4.136               83.221                3.073

Covid 19 Crash

Coefficient                       0.096   ***         -34.895   ***         -6.597             1479.170   ***          65.547   **
T-stat                            9.709               -27.559               -4.514              240.860                3.168

Covid 19 Post

Coefficient                       0.086             -34.993   ***        -21.576   ***        1986.720   ***         983.726   *
T-stat                          6.395               0.000              0.000              74.275               2.475

Current State

Coefficient                       -0.968              162.135    ***        155.653             -161.180             -4203.196    **
T-stat                            -7.388                20.247                4.289                -3.926                -2.899
This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression on Eq (12):
                ,-                ,-            ,-      *            ,-       *
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷!  =  𝛼 + 𝛾'𝐷  '𝑅$,!' + 𝛾*(1 − 𝐷  )'𝑅$,!' + 𝛾.𝐷  5𝑅$,!6 + 𝛾/(1 − 𝐷  )5𝑅$,!6  +  𝜀!

                                                                          49
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
* The coefficient is significant at the 10% level
** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
***  The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                          Table  14:  Denmark CSAD bullish vs bearish

                                   𝛼               𝛾.                𝛾2             𝛾3              𝛾4

  Total Sample

 Coefficient                          0.008   ***          -3.780   ***         -1.020   ***        193.234   ***         19.658   ***
  T-stat                               33.174               -88.332              -16.592             526.479               10.908

  Normal State 1

 Coefficient                         0.000   ***          0.007   *           0.002             0.506              0.315
 T-stat                             14.003               2.530              0.750              5.058               5.609

 1990s Recession Pre

 Coefficient                          0.000               0.016   ***          0.020              0.042              -0.112
  T-stat                               6.717                3.759               4.334               0.392               -1.104

  1990s Recession Crash

 Coefficient                           0.000    ***          0.048              0.048              -0.539    *           -0.025
  T-stat                                3.561                6.553               6.769              -2.334               -0.115

  1990s Recession Post

 Coefficient                           0.000    **           0.089              0.068    *          -1.063              -2.735
  T-stat                                2.732                4.982               2.153              -1.449               -1.259

  Normal State 2

 Coefficient                          0.000               0.047              0.063              0.753              -1.027   *
  T-stat                               7.975                4.086               5.935               1.072               -2.380

 DotCom Pre

 Coefficient                          0.001              -0.012              0.033              6.860   ***          1.354
  T-stat                               6.634               -0.328               0.714               3.557               0.453

  DotCom Crash

 Coefficient                           0.002               -0.535              -0.100             43.339    ***          3.577
  T-stat                                5.453                -7.189               -1.426              13.722                1.271

 DotCom Post

 Coefficient                          0.004   ***          -1.883   ***         -1.151            155.298   ***         82.061   **
  T-stat                               10.330               -24.745               -4.602             278.310                3.209

  Normal State 3

 Coefficient                          0.000   **           0.094   **          0.038              2.762              -0.538
  T-stat                               2.807                2.916               1.058               1.354               -0.414

  Global Crisis Pre

 Coefficient                           0.000               0.050              0.001              -2.618               0.417
  T-stat                               5.961                1.369               0.029              -0.822               0.406

  Global Crisis Crash

 Coefficient                          0.025   ***          -7.712   ***         -2.560            214.086   ***         46.404
  T-stat                                9.028               -25.500               -5.399             142.280                3.997

  Global Crisis Post

 Coefficient                           0.004               -1.725              -0.496             141.966    ***         15.683
  T-stat                                4.117                -7.576               -1.628              19.923                1.096

  Greek Crisis Pre

 Coefficient                           0.004    ***          -1.625              -0.481             139.814    ***         15.940
  T-stat                                3.909                -6.332               -1.584              18.601                1.116

  Greek Crisis Crash

 Coefficient                          0.002   ***          -0.682   ***         -0.218   *          86.074   ***         12.716   *
  T-stat                                9.375                -8.633               -2.566              18.261                2.585

  Greek Crisis Post

 Coefficient                          0.003   ***          -2.170   ***         -0.893            292.832   ***         78.921   **
 T-stat                             12.667               2.330              0.000             241.160               2.886

  Normal State 4

 Coefficient                         0.001              0.023              0.014             8.515   **          0.950
 T-stat                              4.791               0.524              0.378              3.271               0.570

  Covid-19 Pre

50
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

  Coefficient                          0.005              -3.983   ***         -1.657            393.838   ***         94.435   ***
  T-stat                               8.208                0.000              -4.618             102.810               3.450

   Covid 19 Crash

  Coefficient                          0.001   **           0.116   *           0.018             -2.964              0.210
  T-stat                               2.741                2.425               0.588              -1.332               0.401

  Covid 19 Post

  Coefficient                           0.001               0.127    *           0.064              -5.953              -2.590
  T-stat                              4.755               2.330              1.240              0.000               0.000

   Current State

  Coefficient                          0.001   ***          0.171              0.065    **          -7.532   ***         -1.469
  T-stat                               9.934                5.260               2.689              -3.330               0.000
This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression on Eq (12):
                ,-                ,-            ,-      *            ,-       *
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷!  =  𝛼 + 𝛾'𝐷  '𝑅$,!' + 𝛾*(1 − 𝐷  )'𝑅$,!' + 𝛾.𝐷  5𝑅$,!6 + 𝛾/(1 − 𝐷  )5𝑅$,!6  +  𝜀!
Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also  reported.
 * The coefficient is significant at the 10% level
 ** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
 *** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                           Table  15:  Norway CSAD bullish vs bearish

                              𝛼               𝛾.                𝛾2              𝛾3               𝛾4

Total Sample

Coefficient                       3.491   ***        -644.468   ***        -273.226   ***         839.739   ***        2318.983
T-stat                           25.219               -58.152              -12.211              176.249                6.802
1990s Recession Pre

Coefficient                       0.000               0.024    ***          0.024   **           -0.023               -0.088
T-stat                            4.292                3.402               2.962               -0.146                -0.439

1990s Recession Crash

Coefficient                      0.000              0.022   ***         0.014   **          0.090              0.108   **
T-stat                          6.559               3.885              2.907               1.063               2.812

1990s Recession Post

Coefficient                      0.001   ***          0.009              0.009              0.849   ***          0.049
T-stat                          14.726               0.785              0.734               3.447               0.360
Normal State 2

Coefficient                      0.000   ***          0.079   ***         0.040              0.181   **          -0.111
T-stat                           8.878               12.804               4.676                3.084               -0.665

DotCom Pre

Coefficient                        0.001    *            0.220              0.069               -2.236               -0.546
T-stat                           2.054                4.155               1.352               -1.573                0.000

DotCom Crash

Coefficient                       0.002   ***          0.095              0.078   **           0.010              -0.938
T-stat                          11.297               4.047               3.007                0.018               -1.361
DotCom Post

Coefficient                       0.001               0.091   *           0.019               0.904               -0.320
T-stat                          5.690               2.164              0.371               0.493               0.000

Normal State 3

Coefficient                       0.005              -1.784   ***         -0.646   **         101.764   ***          14.274   *
T-stat                            5.121               -9.571               -2.778               23.541                2.257

Global Crisis Pre

Coefficient                       0.003              -1.415   ***         -0.356   ***         114.590   ***          11.358   *
T-stat                            8.096               -17.082               -3.601               30.000                2.546
Global Crisis Crash

Coefficient                       0.001               0.261              0.112               7.639               -0.610
T-stat                           0.551                1.057               0.596                1.075               -0.157

Global Crisis Post

Coefficient                       0.007              -3.344   ***         -1.001   *          264.155   ***          31.623
T-stat                            4.977               -17.798               -1.908              2659.300                1.418

Greek Crisis Pre

Coefficient                       0.009              -4.048   ***         -1.105   *          300.280   ***          29.295
T-stat                            4.197               -11.163               -2.066               57.626                1.606

                                                                          51
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

Greek Crisis Crash

Coefficient                       0.003              -1.755    ***         -0.468              240.344    ***          30.086
T-stat                            4.178               -11.629               -1.275              122.990                1.065

Greek Crisis Post

Coefficient                        0.002               -2.490              -0.168              323.787    ***           9.983
T-stat                           0.473               0.000              -0.100               45.779                0.091

Normal State 4

Coefficient                       0.006   ***          -3.817   ***         -0.793             358.152   ***          19.276   ***
T-stat                           12.202               -42.617               -5.518              1008.941                3.562

Covid-19 Pre

Coefficient                       0.008              -6.766   ***         -1.894             806.329   ***         100.168   **
T-stat                           8.059               0.000              -4.201              111.890                2.993

Covid 19 Crash

Coefficient                       0.012    **           -4.780              -0.788              261.496    ***           9.471
T-stat                            3.088               -6.135               -1.452                9.902                1.169

Covid 19 Post

Coefficient                       0.045   ***         -15.866   ***         -9.587             619.283   ***         358.081
T-stat                          11.628               0.000              0.000              370.630               4.304

Current State

Coefficient                       0.007              -5.580    ***         -0.950              659.053    ***          27.640
T-stat                            1.603               -11.261               -0.678              3510.664                0.433
This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression on Eq (12):
                ,-                ,-            ,-      *            ,-       *
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷!  =  𝛼 + 𝛾'𝐷  '𝑅$,!' + 𝛾*(1 − 𝐷  )'𝑅$,!' + 𝛾.𝐷  5𝑅$,!6 + 𝛾/(1 − 𝐷  )5𝑅$,!6  +  𝜀!
 Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
 * The coefficient is significant at the 10% level
 ** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
 *** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                           Table  16:  Finland CSAD bullish vs bearish

                               𝛼              𝛾.                𝛾2             𝛾3              𝛾4

   Total Sample

  Coefficient                      -0.047    ***         10.615    ***         3.813   ***         -11.267    ***         -18.382
  T-stat                          -16.602               32.011               8.992              -20.609               -4.308
   Normal State 1

  Coefficient                     0.000   ***          0.025   ***         0.035              0.983              -0.089
  T-stat                          9.269               3.490              5.109               5.761               -1.110

  1990s Recession Pre

  Coefficient                      0.000   ***         -0.031    *          0.022   *           3.853              -0.216
  T-stat                          9.002              -2.176              1.981               4.910               0.000

   1990s Recession Crash

  Coefficient                     0.001   ***         0.043             0.008              0.000              1.015   *
  T-stat                         10.476               4.010              0.593              -0.001               2.332
  1990s Recession Post

  Coefficient                     0.000   *           0.007             0.035              2.696   *           -0.867
  T-stat                          2.572               0.218              0.819               2.446               -0.465

   Normal State 2

  Coefficient                      0.001              0.075    ***         -0.010              -0.097    ***          1.516   ***
  T-stat                           8.207               9.890              -1.003               -9.426               26.015

  DotCom Pre

  Coefficient                      0.001              0.090   ***         0.032              -1.696              0.384
  T-stat                          8.525               3.500              1.407              -1.649               0.457
  DotCom Crash

  Coefficient                      0.001   ***          0.081              0.027              2.069              -0.131
  T-stat                          3.454               1.472              0.477               1.017               -0.056

  DotCom Post

  Coefficient                     0.001   *           0.045             0.074              6.292   *           -2.282
  T-stat                          2.091               0.650              0.904               1.720               -0.597

   Normal State 3

  Coefficient                     0.000   ***         0.033   **          0.021   *           0.033              -0.177

52
                                    Stockholm School of Economics

  T-stat                         10.897               3.131              2.045               0.080               -0.482

  Global Crisis Pre

 Coefficient                     0.000   ***          0.002             0.020              2.422   ***         -0.329
 T-stat                         9.085               0.148              1.461               3.449               0.000
  Global Crisis Crash

 Coefficient                     0.001   ***         0.042   *          0.010              0.448              1.004   *
 T-stat                         9.008               2.368              0.603               0.770               1.756

  Global Crisis Post

 Coefficient                      -0.002               0.680    **          0.496               4.881              -16.870
  T-stat                          -1.508               2.891              1.323               0.921               0.000

  Greek Crisis Pre

 Coefficient                      0.004              -1.905             -0.499   *          117.834    ***         13.080   *
  T-stat                           4.501               -8.639              -2.540               14.340                2.042
  Greek Crisis Crash

 Coefficient                      0.009   ***         -5.020    ***         -2.118             304.451    ***         90.232
  T-stat                          13.523              -37.098              -7.711              133.250                5.529

  Greek Crisis Post

 Coefficient                     0.000              0.017             0.013              1.187              0.221
 T-stat                         7.307               0.850              0.903               1.191               0.426

  Normal State 4

 Coefficient                      0.001              -0.135   **          0.003              23.764              0.664
  T-stat                          5.630              -2.955              0.126               5.974               0.546
  Covid-19 Pre

 Coefficient                      0.000               0.288    **          0.109              -8.345              -6.394
  T-stat                          0.646               2.604              0.576               0.000               -0.382

  Covid 19 Crash

 Coefficient                      0.000    *           0.117    **          0.033              -2.107              -0.079
  T-stat                           2.445               3.198               1.487               -1.514               -0.232

  Covid 19 Post

 Coefficient                      0.002              -1.032    ***         -0.232   *          140.982    ***          9.455
 T-stat                         4.894               0.000              0.000              17.306               1.451
  Current State

 Coefficient                      0.005    **          -4.828    ***         -0.827             431.153    ***         22.499
  T-stat                           2.960              -19.569              -1.575              328.655                1.127
This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression on Eq (12):
                ,-                ,-            ,-      *            ,-       *
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷!  =  𝛼 + 𝛾'𝐷  '𝑅$,!' + 𝛾*(1 − 𝐷  )'𝑅$,!' + 𝛾.𝐷  5𝑅$,!6 + 𝛾/(1 − 𝐷  )5𝑅$,!6  +  𝜀!
Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
* The  coefficient is significant at the 10% level
** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
*** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                          Table  17:  Iceland CSAD bullish vs bearish

                            𝛼               𝛾.                𝛾2              𝛾3              𝛾4

  Total Sample

 Coefficient                    0.005   ***         -1.414   ***         -0.232   ***         19.469   ***          1.511   ***
  T-stat                        24.321              -72.140              -9.046              757.637               13.016

  Normal State 2

 Coefficient                    0.000               0.001              0.003               0.158               -0.012
  T-stat                         -0.006                0.181               0.928                4.553                -0.778

 DotCom Pre

 Coefficient                    0.000               0.012   *           0.017   **          -0.130              -0.199   *
  T-stat                         -1.609                1.905               2.655                -1.124                -1.739

  DotCom Crash

 Coefficient                    0.000               0.019              0.007   *           -0.188   **           -0.026   *
  T-stat                         7.441                5.745               2.531               -3.294                -2.120

 DotCom Post

 Coefficient                    0.000               0.030              0.008              -0.335               0.306
 T-stat                        4.732               4.167              0.665               0.000               0.280

  Normal State 3

                                                                         53
                                      Stockholm School of Economics

   Coefficient                    0.000   ***          0.030              0.013   *           -0.218               0.054
    T-stat                        3.861               6.092               2.570               -1.009                0.319

    Global Crisis Pre

   Coefficient                    0.000              -0.115   ***         -0.036   *           7.627   ***          1.309   *
    T-stat                         5.270               -9.250               -2.361               18.465                2.061

     Global Crisis Crash

   Coefficient                   0.000              0.130   ***         0.122   ***          0.952   ***          0.741   ***
    T-stat                        -3.927               11.195              12.513               13.286               19.561

    Global Crisis Post

   Coefficient                    0.000   **          -0.073             -0.071   *           9.159   ***          15.344   ***
    T-stat                        3.160               0.000              -2.155               19.098                3.483

     Normal State 4

   Coefficient                    0.000   ***         -0.255   ***         -0.122   ***         18.345   ***         12.533   ***
    T-stat                        11.179              -34.244              -9.588              2333.922               37.326

    Covid-19 Pre

    Coefficient                    0.000   ***          0.036              0.021   *           -1.320   *           -0.002
    T-stat                        3.783               4.180              2.270               0.000               0.000

     Covid 19 Crash

   Coefficient                   0.000   ***          0.014             0.002              0.666              0.730   **
    T-stat                        3.654               0.905              0.217               0.999               2.857

    Covid 19 Post

    Coefficient                    0.000               0.051              0.048              -0.345               4.128
    T-stat                        0.725               1.641              1.000               0.000               1.186

     Current State

   Coefficient                    0.000   ***         -0.130   ***         0.010              16.527   ***          0.508
    T-stat                        3.805               -3.859               0.351               10.684                0.417
  This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression on Eq (12):
                  ,-                ,-            ,-      *            ,-       *
  𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷!  =  𝛼 + 𝛾'𝐷  '𝑅$,!' + 𝛾*(1 − 𝐷  )'𝑅$,!' + 𝛾.𝐷  5𝑅$,!6 + 𝛾/(1 − 𝐷  )5𝑅$,!6  +  𝜀!
  Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
  * The  coefficient is significant at the 10% level
  ** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
  *** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                                  Table 18:  Sweden CSSD robust

                       𝛼5%     𝐷7&8#"  5%       𝐷9//#"  5%    𝛼.%        𝐷7&8#"  1%   𝐷9//#"  1%

Total Sample

Coefficient                      0.036   ***       0.004   **         0.256          0.039   ***         0.013   **      0.998
T-stat                        105.435            2.816             6.588          72.329              2.977          5.847

Normal State 1

Coefficient                      0.019   ***       0.009             0.011          0.019   ***         0.021   ***      0.022   **
T-stat                         49.008            4.601             5.028          52.632              3.905          2.688
1990s Recession Pre

Coefficient                      0.015   ***       0.004   *          0.035          0.016   ***         0.005          0.124
T-stat                         26.937            2.541             1.417          28.025              1.107          1.056

1990s Recession Crash

Coefficient                      0.024   ***       0.011             0.029          0.026   ***         0.017   ***      0.037   ***
T-stat                         54.665            5.335             6.192          50.752              3.582          3.879

1990s Recession Post

Coefficient                       0.032   ***       -0.002             0.024   **       0.033   ***         -0.008          0.034
T-stat                           32.272            -0.778              3.188           32.893              -1.598           1.202
Normal State 2

Coefficient                      0.021   ***       0.009   *          0.009          0.021   ***         0.029   *       0.021
T-stat                         88.564            2.431             6.061          92.084              1.702          4.124

DotCom Pre

Coefficient                      0.035   ***       0.008   ***        0.055   **       0.037   ***         0.005          0.113
T-stat                         45.120            3.455             2.834          38.938              0.772          1.125

DotCom Crash

Coefficient                     0.041   ***       0.010   **         0.021          0.042   ***         0.019   **      0.036   *
T-stat                         64.873            3.270             5.232          66.560              2.969          2.569

 54
                                         Stockholm School of Economics

   DotCom Post

   Coefficient                      0.046   ***       0.019             0.038   ***      0.048   ***         0.061          0.036   **
   T-stat                         46.188            1.518             3.932          42.097              0.937          2.771

     Normal State 3

   Coefficient                     0.027   ***       0.002             0.027   **       0.027   ***         0.003   *       0.084   *
   T-stat                         89.734            1.483             2.704          90.786              1.981          1.947

    Global Crisis Pre

   Coefficient                      0.028   ***       -0.002             0.028           0.029   ***         0.000          0.106
    T-stat                           49.602            -1.104              1.148           52.721              -0.088           0.847

     Global Crisis Crash

   Coefficient                      0.043   ***       0.011   **         0.020          0.044   ***         0.031   *       0.034
   T-stat                         47.928            2.752             6.373          51.869              2.108          3.958

    Global Crisis Post

   Coefficient                      0.046   ***       0.002             0.035          0.048   ***         0.001          0.009
   T-stat                         43.171            0.799             1.447          28.962              0.359          1.357

    Greek Crisis Pre

   Coefficient                      0.049   ***       -0.001             0.021   *       0.050   ***         0.000          0.030
   T-stat                          40.698            -0.272              2.394          40.527              0.213           5.017

     Greek Crisis Crash

   Coefficient                      0.060   ***       -0.002             0.118   **       0.063   ***         -0.011   ***      0.249   *
    T-stat                           43.935            -0.458              3.052           33.969              -3.430           1.732

    Greek Crisis Post

   Coefficient                       0.046   ***       -0.003             0.024   *        0.047   ***         -0.001          0.001
    T-stat                           32.002            -0.691              1.884           31.030              -0.152           0.131

     Normal State 4

   Coefficient                     0.033   ***       0.004   **         0.205   *       0.035   ***         0.004          0.825   *
   T-stat                         63.395            2.897             2.243          47.311              1.558          1.937

    Covid-19 Pre

   Coefficient                       0.038   ***       -0.002             0.197           0.040   ***         -0.005   *       0.771
    T-stat                           28.796            -0.717              1.578           21.746              -2.568           1.367

    Covid 19 Crash

   Coefficient                      0.046   ***       0.024             0.588          0.048   ***         0.017          2.692
   T-stat                         19.930            1.262             1.003          20.221              5.331          0.839

    Covid 19 Post

   Coefficient                       0.044   ***       -0.007             0.571           0.049    ***         -0.007          2.269
    T-stat                           21.452            -2.444              1.733           14.792              -1.177           1.728

     Current State

   Coefficient                      0.131   ***       -0.072             3.042   ***      0.232   ***         -0.186          4.970   ***
    T-stat                           12.635            -4.194             10.177           8.636              -6.859           8.623
    This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression after increasing robustness using White’s
     Variance and Covariance  Matrix  on Eq (2):
                   )       +
    CSSD(  =  α +  β'D( +  β*D( +  ε(,
           -  .
     where  D, (D, )  equals 1 if the market return on day t lied in the extreme lower  (upper) tail of the  return distribution,
     and 0 otherwise. The 5% and 1% refers to the percentage of observations in the upper and lower tail of the market
     distribution.  Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
     * The coefficient is  significant at the 10% level
     ** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
     *** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                                   Table 19:  Denmark CSSD robust

                            𝛼5%     𝐷7&8#"  5%      𝐷9//#"  5%    𝛼.%        𝐷7&8#"  1%   𝐷9//#"  1%

Total Sample

Coefficient                           0.024   ***      0.007   ***        0.028   ***      0.025   ***         0.012          0.099   **
T-stat                              169.782          10.056             3.614          171.961              6.376           2.598

Normal State 1
Coefficient                           0.014   ***      0.006             0.009           0.014   ***         0.011   *       0.015
T-stat                               67.756           4.109              7.131           69.867              2.382           4.086

1990s Recession Pre

Coefficient                           0.012   ***      0.008   **         0.008           0.013   ***         0.015          0.015   **

                                                                            55
                                         Stockholm School of Economics

T-stat                               33.157           3.173              4.899           34.318              4.211           2.909

1990s Recession Crash

Coefficient                           0.018   ***      0.019             0.012           0.019   ***         0.023          0.018   **
T-stat                               38.465           4.652              5.864           38.286              1.601           2.771
1990s Recession Post

Coefficient                            0.021   ***      -0.001             0.022           0.022   ***         0.003          0.018   *
T-stat                                33.612           -0.401              4.012           31.074              0.413           2.237

Normal State 2

Coefficient                           0.019   ***      0.007             0.011           0.019   ***         0.010          0.022   **
T-stat                               78.929           4.231              5.418           78.547              4.805           2.704

DotCom Pre

Coefficient                           0.028   ***      0.009   *          0.016   **       0.028   ***         0.021          0.044   *
T-stat                               41.094           2.000              2.777           43.692              0.919           2.126
DotCom Crash

Coefficient                           0.029   ***      0.006             0.032   **       0.030   ***         0.009   ***      0.072   *
T-stat                               63.280           4.819              3.017           55.912              3.444           1.804

DotCom Post

Coefficient                            0.024   ***      0.006             0.131           0.025   ***         -0.002          0.562
T-stat                                41.016           1.275              1.073           39.284              -1.034           0.833

Normal State 3

Coefficient                           0.022   ***      0.002             0.017   **       0.022   ***         0.008          0.023   *
T-stat                               57.017           1.225              3.244           49.690              4.156           1.757
Global Crisis Pre

Coefficient                           0.021   ***      0.003             0.005   ***      0.022   ***         0.007   **       0.006   **
T-stat                               35.600           1.545              3.775           38.350              2.915           2.851

Global Crisis Crash

Coefficient                           0.037   ***      0.019             0.165           0.039   ***         0.038          0.658
T-stat                               38.567           5.143              1.202           40.801              4.332           0.961

Global Crisis Post

Coefficient                            0.037   ***      -0.002             0.064   *        0.038   ***         -0.002           0.198
T-stat                                 36.521           -1.175              1.805           34.629              -1.012           1.094
Greek Crisis Pre

Coefficient                            0.036   ***      0.001             0.049           0.037   ***         -0.001          0.171
T-stat                                34.315           0.557              1.353           35.276              -0.320           0.870

Greek Crisis Crash

Coefficient                           0.036   ***      0.005   *          0.028   *        0.037   ***         0.015          0.081
T-stat                               49.645           1.717              2.341           50.324              1.539           1.624

Greek Crisis Post

Coefficient                           0.030   ***      0.001             0.077           0.030   ***         0.006   *       0.344
T-stat                               36.713           0.628              1.060           39.388              1.896           0.872
Normal State 4

Coefficient                           0.024   ***      0.007             0.012   **       0.024   ***         0.013   **       0.034   *
T-stat                               61.747           4.350              3.030           66.268              2.767           2.088

Covid-19 Pre

Coefficient                           0.022   ***      0.003             0.077           0.023   ***         0.000          0.333
T-stat                               39.027           1.331              1.073           41.625              0.051           0.853

Covid 19 Crash

Coefficient                           0.027   ***      0.009   **         0.008   **       0.027   ***         0.023   ***      0.013   *
T-stat                               29.047           2.800              3.295           31.671              3.930           2.237
Covid 19 Post

Coefficient                           0.027   ***      0.003   **         0.004   **       0.027   ***         0.002   ***      0.005   *
T-stat                               36.503           1.255              1.619           38.987              0.606           1.132

Current State

Coefficient                           0.033   ***      0.003   *          0.005   **       0.033   ***         0.005          0.004   *
T-stat                               64.664           1.989              2.970           69.338              1.072           1.846
     This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression after increasing robustness using White’s
    Variance and Covariance  Matrix on Eq (2):
                   )       +
    CSSD(  =  α +  β'D( +  β*D( +  ε(,
           -  .
    where D, (D, )  equals 1 if the market return on day t lied in the extreme lower (upper) tail of the return distribution,
     and 0 otherwise. The 5% and 1% refers to the percentage of observations in the upper and lower tail of the market
     distribution.  Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.

   56
                                             Stockholm School of Economics

          * The coefficient is significant at the 10% level
          ** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
          *** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                                       Table  20:  Norway CSSD robust

                           𝛼5%     𝐷7&8#"  5%            𝐷9//#"  5%    𝛼.%         𝐷7&8#"  1%   𝐷9//#"  1%

Total Sample

Coefficient                           0.033   ***             0.007   ***        0.310   *        0.035   ***         0.014          1.407   *
T-stat                              149.887                  8.547             2.033           114.052              7.399           1.866
1990s Recession Pre

Coefficient                           0.018   ***             0.013   ***        0.008           0.019   ***         0.014          0.000
T-stat                                32.897                   3.594              1.571            30.857              1.575           -0.021

1990s Recession Crash

Coefficient                           0.022   ***             0.011   **         0.012   **        0.022   ***         0.019   *       0.032   *
T-stat                               41.146                   3.111             2.745           42.642              1.955           2.073

1990s Recession Post

Coefficient                           0.035   ***             0.007   *          0.009   *        0.036   ***         0.006          0.016
T-stat                               46.039                   1.684             2.331           48.448              0.696           0.805
Normal State 2

Coefficient                           0.027   ***             0.011   ***        0.027   ***       0.028   ***         0.018          0.045
T-stat                              104.401                  9.613             8.833           97.111              7.092           5.499

DotCom Pre

Coefficient                           0.036   ***             0.007   *          0.033           0.038   ***         0.012          0.032   *
T-stat                               34.373                   2.395             4.020           33.466              1.490           2.567

DotCom Crash

Coefficient                           0.043   ***             0.007   **         0.025           0.044   ***         0.013   ***      0.034
T-stat                               64.781                   2.981             7.175           67.244              3.462           5.104
DotCom Post

Coefficient                           0.036   ***             0.000             0.026   **        0.037   ***         0.000          0.019
T-stat                                41.683                   0.066              3.194            39.083              -0.001           1.415

Normal State 3

Coefficient                           0.026   ***             0.005   *          0.035           0.026   ***         0.016   *       0.126
T-stat                               81.435                   2.448             1.511           77.108              1.769           1.037

Global Crisis Pre

Coefficient                           0.024   ***             0.002             0.028           0.024   ***         0.002          0.108
T-stat                               46.609                   1.286             1.151           50.109              0.571           0.873
Global Crisis Crash

Coefficient                           0.041   ***             0.021             0.054   *        0.044   ***         0.030   *       0.036   ***
T-stat                               42.357                   4.372             2.221           27.544              2.422           3.367

Global Crisis Post

Coefficient                           0.046   ***             0.003             2.341           0.050   ***         0.008          10.534
T-stat                               23.127                   0.725             1.037           17.058              0.768           0.857

Greek Crisis Pre

Coefficient                           0.044   ***             0.011             0.238   *        0.048   ***         0.023          0.742   *
T-stat                               24.970                   1.639             2.322           18.487              4.966           1.885
Greek Crisis Crash

Coefficient                           0.034   ***             0.007   *          0.125   *        0.035   ***         0.010   *       0.495   *
T-stat                               40.062                   1.863             1.956           38.557              1.919           1.908

Greek Crisis Post

Coefficient                           0.030   ***             0.009   **         0.420   *        0.038   ***         -0.004           1.339   **
T-stat                                28.517                   3.150              2.501            9.093              -0.629           3.160

Normal State 4

Coefficient                           0.033   ***             0.003   *          0.175   *        0.035   ***         0.004          0.673
T-stat                               58.533                   2.054             1.795           43.651              1.414           1.437
Covid-19 Pre

Coefficient                           0.033   ***             0.001             0.095           0.034   ***         0.006          0.379
T-stat                               33.222                   0.351             1.135           30.211              1.467           0.820

Covid 19 Crash

Coefficient                           0.044   ***             0.012   *          0.083           0.045   ***         0.029          0.278

                                                                                57
                                             Stockholm School of Economics

T-stat                               23.163                   2.501             1.434           24.566              7.063           0.870

Covid 19 Post

Coefficient                           0.033   ***             0.004   *          0.740           0.034   ***         0.003          3.345
T-stat                               34.654                   1.753             1.256           24.896              0.859           1.171
Current State

Coefficient                            0.043    ***             -0.002             3.179            0.051   ***         -0.007          14.562
T-stat                                 39.648                   -0.913              1.110            14.771              -1.248            0.982

Current State
                                                                                                                      -
Coefficient                            0.043   ***               0.002             3.179            0.051   ***         -0.007          14.562
T-stat                                 39.648                   -0.913              1.110            14.771              -1.248            0.982
          This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression after increasing robustness using White’s
        Variance and Covariance  Matrix on Eq (2):
                       )       +
        CSSD(  =  α +  β'D( +  β*D( +  ε(,
               -  .
         where D, (D, )  equals 1 if the market return on day t lied in the extreme lower (upper) tail of the return distribution,
          and 0 otherwise. The 5% and 1% refers to the percentage of observations in the upper and lower tail of the market
          distribution.  Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
         * The  coefficient is significant at the 10% level
          ** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
          *** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                                        Table  21:  Finland CSSD robust

                               𝛼5%     𝐷7&8#"  5%      𝐷9//#"  5%    𝛼.%        𝐷7&8#"  1%   𝐷9//#"  1%

       Total Sample

     Coefficient                           0.025   ***      0.009   ***        0.042   ***      0.026   ***         0.016          0.151   **
     T-stat                              191.521          11.029             3.712          193.983              4.755           2.730

       Normal State 1

     Coefficient                           0.024   ***      0.010   ***        0.018           0.024   ***         0.016   *       0.036
     T-stat                               58.303           3.656              4.811           57.098              1.954           4.308

     1990s Recession Pre

     Coefficient                           0.021   ***      0.007             0.016           0.022   ***         0.006   *       0.019   *
     T-stat                               47.105           5.408              5.669           45.988              2.413           2.458

       1990s Recession Crash

     Coefficient                           0.030   ***      0.011             0.018           0.031   ***         0.017   *       0.015   *
     T-stat                               71.615           4.239              4.987           68.977              2.001           1.842

     1990s Recession Post

     Coefficient                           0.025   ***      0.004   *          0.022   *        0.026   ***         0.002   *       0.017   *
     T-stat                               42.141           1.978              2.343           33.747              1.949           2.247

       Normal State 2

     Coefficient                           0.025   ***      0.011   **         0.019           0.026   ***         0.027          0.031   *
     T-stat                               74.045           2.620              4.838           72.512              1.388           2.066

     DotCom Pre

     Coefficient                           0.035   ***      0.011   ***        0.012           0.036   ***         0.012   ***      0.010   *
     T-stat                               45.176           3.621              5.481           47.600              3.651           1.859

      DotCom Crash

     Coefficient                           0.033   ***      0.005   *          0.019   **       0.034   ***         0.005          0.049
     T-stat                               41.852           2.462              2.813           45.475              0.754           1.575

     DotCom Post

     Coefficient                           0.026   ***      0.005             0.027   *        0.028   ***         0.002          0.026
     T-stat                               32.761           0.837              2.542           27.727              0.410           1.046

       Normal State 3

     Coefficient                           0.021   ***      0.004   ***        0.007   *        0.021   ***         0.004   *       0.008   *
     T-stat                               84.718           3.777              2.421           76.699              1.708           2.298

     Global Crisis Pre

     Coefficient                           0.021   ***      0.003   ***        0.011   **       0.022   ***         0.007          0.022   *
     T-stat                               45.777           3.350              3.233           47.975              6.486           1.916

       Global Crisis Crash

     Coefficient                           0.030   ***      0.011             0.016           0.031   ***         0.024          0.021
     T-stat                               55.055           4.935              8.248           58.618              4.618           4.669

     Global Crisis Post

      58
                                         Stockholm School of Economics

Coefficient                           0.027   ***      0.001             0.034           0.027   ***         0.003          0.141
T-stat                               28.689           0.343              1.139           30.754              0.813           0.877

Greek Crisis Pre

Coefficient                           0.025   ***      0.007   *          0.047           0.026   ***         0.011   *       0.143
T-stat                               27.678           2.581              1.628           28.478              1.798           0.892

Greek Crisis Crash

Coefficient                           0.024   ***      0.005   ***        0.044           0.024   ***         0.006   *       0.156
T-stat                               72.478           3.459              1.390           66.844              2.569           1.033

Greek Crisis Post

Coefficient                           0.022   ***      0.007   ***        0.009   *        0.022   ***         0.012          0.023
T-stat                               40.093           3.577              2.358           42.752              8.489           1.533

Normal State 4

Coefficient                           0.021   ***      0.004   **         0.011   *        0.021   ***         0.011   **       0.032
T-stat                               64.287           2.911              2.383           68.256              3.136           1.517

Covid-19 Pre

Coefficient                            0.024   ***      0.002             0.008   **       0.024   ***         -0.001          0.014
T-stat                                20.793           0.816              2.749           22.823              -0.574           1.491

Covid 19 Crash

Coefficient                           0.026   ***      0.012   **         0.016           0.027   ***         0.019   *       0.012   *
T-stat                               30.551           3.039              4.425           31.842              2.498           2.051

Covid 19 Post

Coefficient                           0.023   ***      0.000   **         0.040           0.025   ***         -0.001   *       0.092   *
T-stat                                34.469           0.108              2.132           26.528              -0.323           1.123

Current State

Coefficient                           0.027   ***      0.003   *          0.446   *        0.029   ***         0.006          1.912   *
T-stat                               37.345           1.688              2.104           19.455              1.364           2.443
     This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression after increasing robustness using White’s
    Variance and Covariance  Matrix on Eq (2):
                   )       +
    CSSD(  =  α +  β'D( +  β*D( +  ε(,
           -  .
    where D, (D, )  equals 1 if the market return on day t lied in the extreme lower (upper) tail of the return distribution,
     and 0 otherwise. The 5% and 1% refers to the percentage of observations in the upper and lower tail of the market
     distribution.  Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
     * The coefficient is significant at the 10% level
     ** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
     *** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                                    Table  22:  Iceland CSSD robust

                       𝛼5%    𝐷7&8#"  5%       𝐷9//#"  5%    𝛼.%        𝐷7&8#"  1%   𝐷9//#"  1%

      Total Sample

    Coefficient                   0.012   ***       0.016             0.034   **       0.013   ***         0.051           0.114   *
    T-stat                      94.475            6.198              2.677          85.128              4.869           1.852

      Normal State 2

    Coefficient                    0.003            0.004             0.014           0.004             -0.004           0.035
     T-stat                        7.733             1.023              1.520           7.875              -7.875            0.733

    DotCom Pre
    Coefficient                    0.001   ***       0.008             0.006           0.002   **         -0.002   **       -0.002   **
     T-stat                        3.673             0.786              1.107            3.327              -3.327           -3.327

     DotCom Crash

    Coefficient                    0.012    ***       -0.001             0.002           0.012   ***         -0.005           0.010
     T-stat                       31.093            -0.426              0.671           31.172              -0.861            1.198

    DotCom Post

    Coefficient                   0.013   ***       0.000             0.009   ***      0.014   ***         0.003           0.011   *
    T-stat                      30.091            0.033              3.622          30.522              1.440           1.716

      Normal State 3
    Coefficient                   0.013   ***       0.005   **         0.012          0.013   ***         0.006           0.011
    T-stat                      41.234            2.824              5.074          41.991              0.781           1.332

     Global Crisis Pre

    Coefficient                   0.010   ***       0.004   ***        0.012          0.010   ***         0.007   *        0.040
    T-stat                      29.665            3.548              1.348          30.757              2.579           0.892

                                                                            59
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

Global Crisis Crash

Coefficient                   0.012   ***       0.064             0.074           0.016   ***         0.168           0.160
T-stat                      28.976            6.091              8.036          25.050              5.087           6.524

Global Crisis Post

Coefficient                   0.007   ***       0.010   ***        0.023   **       0.008   ***         0.021   *        0.051
T-stat                      26.124            3.602              2.876          22.153              1.877           1.336

Normal State 4

Coefficient                   0.011   ***       0.016   ***        0.077          0.011   ***         0.053   **       0.337
T-stat                      67.564            3.474              1.373          63.928              2.630           1.191

Covid-19 Pre

Coefficient                   0.011   ***       0.005   **         0.007   ***      0.012   ***         0.011   *        0.006   *
T-stat                      34.176            2.717              3.895          34.982              1.660           2.362

Covid 19 Crash

Coefficient                   0.015   ***       0.012   **         0.012          0.016   ***         0.027   *        0.017   *
T-stat                      25.645            3.287              4.957          27.437              2.458           1.867

Covid 19 Post

Coefficient                   0.014   ***       0.012   **         0.014          0.015   ***         0.008   *        0.018   *
T-stat                      31.604            1.486              3.321          23.515              4.674           1.568

Current State

Coefficient                   0.018   ***       0.010   **         0.029   ***      0.019   ***         0.016   *        0.068   *
T-stat                      30.855            2.954              3.362          29.450              1.908           2.324
 This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression after increasing robustness using White’s
 Variance and Covariance  Matrix on Eq (2):
                )       +
 CSSD(  =  α +  β'D( +  β*D( +  ε(,
        -  .
 where  D, (D, )  equals 1 if the market return on day t lied in the extreme lower (upper) tail of the return distribution,
 and 0 otherwise. The 5% and 1% refers to the percentage of observations in the upper and lower tail of the market
 distribution.  Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
 * The coefficient is significant at the 10% level
 ** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
 *** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                                Table  23:  Sweden CSAD robust

                                                    𝛼                   𝛾.            𝛾2

                         Total Sample

                     Coefficient                               -0.032                 -2.804           673.830
                      T-stat                                   -0.153                 -0.062             0.763

                          Normal State 1

                   Coefficient                            0.000                0.010            0.304
                    T-stat                                 7.849                 1.207            1.374

                   1990s Recession Pre

                    Coefficient                             -0.001                 0.196            1.659
                     T-stat                                  -0.426                 0.358             0.081
                         1990s Recession Crash

                   Coefficient                             0.000                0.058    ***       -0.030
                     T-stat                                   5.095                 3.660            -0.103

                    1990s Recession Post

                  Coefficient                            0.001   ***           0.004            2.795
                    T-stat                                 3.518                 0.051            0.671

                   Normal State 2

                   Coefficient                             0.001    *            -0.106            4.443
                     T-stat                                   2.092                 -0.912             1.097
                  DotCom Pre

                    Coefficient                              0.003                -0.554            30.293
                     T-stat                                   1.401                 -0.865             1.016

                      DotCom Crash

                   Coefficient                            0.001                0.044            0.602
                    T-stat                                 4.554                 0.637            0.266

                   DotCom Post

                   Coefficient                             0.002    ***           -0.036            4.087

 60
                                    Stockholm School of Economics

                    T-stat                                   3.856                 -0.273             0.931

                        Normal State 3

                   Coefficient                              0.000                 0.217            -0.367
                    T-stat                                   -0.122                  1.231             -0.062
                   Global Crisis Pre

                   Coefficient                              0.000                 0.271            -3.123
                    T-stat                                   -0.097                  1.052             -0.396

                         Global Crisis Crash

                 Coefficient                           0.002   ***           0.065   *        0.384
                   T-stat                                11.042                 2.054            0.395

                   Global Crisis Post

                   Coefficient                              0.001                 0.537           -11.533
                    T-stat                                   0.617                 1.368            -1.337
                   Greek Crisis Pre

                  Coefficient                             0.002                0.328    *        -11.137
                    T-stat                                   5.666                 1.761            -1.141

                         Greek Crisis Crash

                  Coefficient                            0.002                0.117           84.417
                   T-stat                                 0.325                 0.043            0.478

                   Greek Crisis Post

                  Coefficient                            0.001                0.524   ***      -18.210   **
                    T-stat                                   3.987                 3.478            -3.092
                        Normal State 4

                   Coefficient                              0.008                -4.585           452.813
                    T-stat                                   0.708                 -0.768             1.078

                     Covid-19 Pre

                  Coefficient                            0.025   *           -15.880   *      1584.526   **
                    T-stat                                   2.226                 -2.484             3.159

                        Covid 19 Crash

                   Coefficient                              0.402               -82.062          1658.775
                    T-stat                                   0.896                 -0.929             0.995
                   Covid 19 Post

                   Coefficient                              0.099               -36.072          1995.490
                    T-stat                                   1.001                 -1.221             1.966

                         Current State

                    Coefficient                               -1.056                151.265           -110.931
                    T-stat                                   -0.964                  0.883             -0.061
This table reports the estimated coefficients for  the OLS regression after increasing robustness using White’s
Variance and Covariance Matrix on Eq (11):
                          *
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷!  =  𝛼 + 𝛾''𝑅$,! ' + 𝛾*5𝑅$,!6 +  𝜀!
Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
* The coefficient is significant at the 10% level
** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
*** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                              Table  24:  Denmark CSAD robust

                                                   𝛼                   𝛾.            𝛾2

                        Total Sample
                  Coefficient                            0.016   *            -5.048   *       194.269   **
                    T-stat                                   2.332                 -2.428             2.885

                     Normal1

                 Coefficient                           0.000   ***           0.008   *        0.257
                   T-stat                                10.646                 1.965            1.618

                  1990s Recession Pre

                  Coefficient                             0.000                0.018    ***       -0.041
                    T-stat                                   6.557                 3.917            -0.330

                        1990s Recession Crash
                 Coefficient                            0.000   **            0.029            0.755
                   T-stat                                 2.688                 0.907            0.453

                                                                         61
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

                   1990s Recession Post

                   Coefficient                              0.000                 0.073            -0.684
                    T-stat                                   1.242                 0.933            -0.141

                        Normal State 2

                  Coefficient                             0.000                0.061    ***       -0.678
                    T-stat                                   6.565                 3.807            -1.022

                 DotCom Pre

                   Coefficient                              0.001                -0.004            5.629
                    T-stat                                   5.092                 -0.057             0.993

                     DotCom Crash

                  Coefficient                             0.001    *            -0.234           20.096
                    T-stat                                   1.677                 -0.694             0.978

                 DotCom Post

                   Coefficient                              0.004                -1.912           155.480
                    T-stat                                   1.090                 -0.957             0.999

                        Normal State 3

                  Coefficient                            0.000                0.134   **       -2.832   *
                    T-stat                                   1.502                 2.705            -2.357

                   Global Crisis Pre

                   Coefficient                              0.000                 0.019            -0.295
                    T-stat                                   7.263                 1.307            -0.367

                         Global Crisis Crash

                   Coefficient                              0.041                -8.583           216.952
                    T-stat                                   1.011                 -0.981             1.000

                   Global Crisis Post

                   Coefficient                              0.006                -2.013           132.785
                    T-stat                                   1.183                 -0.891             0.943

                   Greek Crisis Pre

                   Coefficient                              0.006                -2.103           134.316
                    T-stat                                   1.181                 -0.910             0.945

                         Greek Crisis Crash

                  Coefficient                             0.002    *            -0.478           47.716
                    T-stat                                   2.398                 -0.906             1.117

                   Greek Crisis Post

                   Coefficient                              0.004                -2.399           296.200
                    T-stat                                   1.306                 -0.975             1.008

                        Normal State 4

                  Coefficient                            0.001                0.061            1.492
                   T-stat                                 3.976                 1.566            0.564

                     Covid-19 Pre

                   Coefficient                              0.008                -4.857           406.853
                    T-stat                                   1.038                 -0.982             0.995

                        Covid 19 Crash

                  Coefficient                             0.001                0.045    *        -0.233
                    T-stat                                   6.837                 2.036            -0.325

                   Covid 19 Post

                  Coefficient                             0.001                0.105    *        -4.822
                    T-stat                                   8.134                 2.459            -1.841

                         Current State

                  Coefficient                             0.001    ***           0.098            -3.047    **
                    T-stat                                  16.431                 4.134            -2.680
This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression after increasing robustness using White’s
Variance and Covariance Matrix on Eq (11):
                          *
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷!  =  𝛼 + 𝛾''𝑅$,! ' + 𝛾*5𝑅$,!6 +  𝜀!
Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
* The coefficient is significant at the 10% level
** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
*** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

62
                      Stockholm School of Economics

                  Table 25:  Norway CSAD robust

                                   𝛼                   𝛾.            𝛾2

Total Sample

Coefficient                              3.722               -504.377           782.110
T-stat                                   0.728                 -0.740             1.473

1990s Recession Pre

Coefficient                             0.000                0.024    **        -0.047
T-stat                                   4.425                 2.878            -0.274

1990s Recession Crash

Coefficient                           0.000               0.019   **        0.082   *
T-stat                                 5.870                 3.043            2.388

1990s Recession Post

Coefficient                              0.001                 0.031            -0.043
T-stat                                   7.029                 0.976            -0.043

Normal State 2

Coefficient                            0.001               0.052   *        0.273
T-stat                                 4.461                 2.069            0.522

DotCom Pre

Coefficient                            0.001   ***           0.140   *        -1.457
T-stat                                   3.387                 2.262            -1.156

DotCom Crash

Coefficient                            0.002   ***           0.081   ***       -0.182
T-stat                                  13.763                 3.789            -0.337

DotCom Post

Coefficient                             0.001                0.121    **        -2.102
T-stat                                   5.466                 2.825            -1.481

Normal State 3

Coefficient                              0.008                -2.077            79.148
T-stat                                   1.067                 -0.976             0.981

Global Crisis Pre

Coefficient                              0.003                -1.022            66.537
T-stat                                   1.171                 -0.925             0.930

Global Crisis Crash

Coefficient                              0.000                 0.344            -2.821
T-stat                                   0.201                 1.382            -1.028

Global Crisis Post

Coefficient                            0.013   *            -4.674   **       264.857
T-stat                                   2.589                 -3.036             5.445

Greek Crisis Pre

Coefficient                              0.023                -6.888           322.452
T-stat                                   1.039                 -1.030             1.287

Greek Crisis Crash

Coefficient                            0.005   *            -2.401   **       246.952
T-stat                                   2.160                 -2.763             6.899

Greek Crisis Post

Coefficient                             0.005                -3.566           334.524    ***
T-stat                                   0.423                 -0.939             3.453

Normal State 4

Coefficient                             0.017                -6.607           367.974    *
T-stat                                   1.471                 -1.641             2.353

Covid-19 Pre

Coefficient                              0.016                -9.417           843.177
T-stat                                   1.030                 -0.969             0.988

Covid 19 Crash

Coefficient                               -0.004                 1.248            -8.516
T-stat                                   -0.669                  1.087             -0.712

Covid 19 Post

Coefficient                              0.050               -15.483           618.068
T-stat                                   1.153                 -1.485             4.052

                                                              63
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

                         Current State

                   Coefficient                              0.017                -8.197           660.044
                    T-stat                                   0.721                 -1.547             7.138
This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression after  increasing robustness using White’s
Variance and Covariance Matrix on Eq (11):
                          *
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷!  =  𝛼 + 𝛾''𝑅$,! ' + 𝛾*5𝑅$,!6 +  𝜀!
Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
* The coefficient is significant at the 10%  level
** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
*** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                                Table 26:  Finland CSAD robust

                                                   𝛼                   𝛾.            𝛾2

                        Total Sample

                    Coefficient                               -0.044                 7.102            -6.891
                    T-stat                                   -0.613                  0.535             -0.038

                        Normal State 1

                   Coefficient                              0.000                 0.050            -0.110
                    T-stat                                   5.284                 3.964            -0.371

                  1990s Recession Pre

                  Coefficient                            0.000                0.024            0.218
                   T-stat                                 6.030                 1.254            0.224

                        1990s Recession Crash

                 Coefficient                           0.001   ***           0.034   *        0.235
                   T-stat                                 9.366                 2.529            0.713

                   1990s Recession Post

                  Coefficient                             0.001    ***           -0.001            2.432
                    T-stat                                   3.443                 -0.021             0.754

                        Normal State 2

                   Coefficient                              0.000                 0.155            -0.191
                    T-stat                                   -0.111                  0.846             -0.139

                 DotCom Pre

                  Coefficient                            0.001   ***           0.057   **       -0.459
                    T-stat                                   9.839                 2.718            -0.623

                     DotCom Crash

                  Coefficient                            0.001                0.038            2.058
                   T-stat                                 4.783                 0.540            0.535

                 DotCom Post

                 Coefficient                            0.000   *            0.105            0.776
                   T-stat                                 1.989                 1.156            0.120

                        Normal State 3

                  Coefficient                            0.000   ***           0.029   *        -0.176
                    T-stat                                   8.790                 1.675            -0.461

                   Global Crisis Pre

                  Coefficient                            0.000                0.025            0.134
                   T-stat                                 7.946                 1.584            0.150

                         Global Crisis Crash

                  Coefficient                            0.001                0.025            0.745
                   T-stat                                 7.421                 1.474            1.403

                   Global Crisis Post

                   Coefficient                             -0.001                 0.235            10.783
                    T-stat                                  -0.097                 0.101             0.089

                   Greek Crisis Pre

                   Coefficient                              0.003                -0.764            41.761
                    T-stat                                   1.200                 -0.876             0.925

                         Greek Crisis Crash

                   Coefficient                              0.013                -5.366           306.227
                    T-stat                                   1.032                 -0.989             1.000

                   Greek Crisis Post

64
                                    Stockholm School of Economics

                  Coefficient                            0.000                0.024            0.103
                   T-stat                                 4.971                 0.869            0.070

                        Normal State 4

                  Coefficient                             0.000    *             0.070            -0.199
                    T-stat                                   2.576                 1.327            -0.064

                     Covid-19 Pre

                   Coefficient                              0.000                 0.195            -5.495
                    T-stat                                   1.351                 1.382            -0.700

                        Covid 19 Crash

                  Coefficient                             0.001                0.057    *        -0.419
                    T-stat                                   4.977                 2.225            -0.557

                   Covid 19 Post

                  Coefficient                             0.001                -0.216    *        35.111
                    T-stat                                   0.773                 -0.342             0.618

                         Current State

                  Coefficient                            0.018   *            -7.568          443.896   ***
                    T-stat                                   2.414                 -4.174            25.401
This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression after increasing robustness using White’s
Variance and Covariance Matrix on Eq (11):
                          *
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷!  =  𝛼 + 𝛾''𝑅$,! ' + 𝛾*5𝑅$,!6 +  𝜀!
Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
* The coefficient is significant at the 10% level
** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
*** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                                 Table 27:  Iceland CSAD robust

                                                   𝛼                   𝛾.            𝛾2

                        Total Sample

                   Coefficient                              0.014                -2.460            20.165
                    T-stat                                   0.960                 -0.954             1.035

                        Normal State 2

                   Coefficient                              0.000                 0.014            -0.036
                    T-stat                                   -0.611                  0.706             -0.166

                 DotCom Pre

                   Coefficient                              0.000                 0.015            -0.163
                    T-stat                                   -1.268                  1.415             -1.268

                     DotCom Crash

                  Coefficient                             0.000                0.010    *        -0.041
                    T-stat                                   7.447                 2.120            -0.509

                 DotCom Post

                  Coefficient                             0.000                0.025    **        -0.082
                    T-stat                                   5.258                 2.920            -0.130

                        Normal State 3

                  Coefficient                            0.000   **            0.026   **       -0.232
                    T-stat                                   3.008                 3.048            -0.563

                   Global Crisis Pre

                   Coefficient                              0.000                -0.111            6.380
                    T-stat                                   1.132                 -0.862             0.941

                         Global Crisis Crash

                  Coefficient                            -0.001                0.137    *         0.739
                    T-stat                                  -1.642                 2.578             1.559

                   Global Crisis Post

                   Coefficient                              0.000                -0.056            8.664
                    T-stat                                   0.923                 -0.621             1.088

                        Normal State 4

                  Coefficient                            0.001               -0.285   *        18.376   ***
                    T-stat                                   1.453                 -1.646             3.448

                     Covid-19 Pre

                  Coefficient                             0.000                0.029            -0.804    *

                                                                         65
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

                    T-stat                                   5.453                 4.177            -1.733

                        Covid 19 Crash

                 Coefficient                            0.000               0.011            0.587   ***
                   T-stat                                 4.296                 1.481            3.404
                   Covid 19 Post

                  Coefficient                             0.000                0.070            -0.278    ***
                    T-stat                                   0.246                 0.950            -0.052

                         Current State

                   Coefficient                              0.000                -0.008            5.862
                    T-stat                                   1.042                 -0.057             0.714
This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression after increasing robustness using White’s
Variance and Covariance Matrix  on Eq (11):
                          *
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷!  =  𝛼 + 𝛾''𝑅$,! ' + 𝛾*5𝑅$,!6 +  𝜀!
Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
* The coefficient is significant at the 10% level
** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
*** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                         Table 28:  Sweden CSAD  bullish vs bearish  robust

                               𝛼               𝛾.                𝛾2              𝛾3              𝛾4

  Total Sample
  Coefficient                       -0.093              13.844              9.762              624.937             -132.559
  T-stat                           -0.504                0.268               0.511                0.646               -0.504

  Normal State 1

 Coefficient                      0.000              0.002              0.013              0.612              0.160
 T-stat                          6.825               0.149              1.073               0.994               0.601

 1990s Recession Pre

  Coefficient                       0.001               -0.372              -0.013               29.380               0.202
  T-stat                           0.652               -0.575              -0.116                0.659                0.134

  1990s Recession Crash
 Coefficient                       0.000               0.086    ***          0.047               -0.272               -0.351
  T-stat                           4.685                3.515               4.296               -0.716               -1.162

  1990s Recession Post

 Coefficient                       0.001    ***          -0.003              0.042               4.198               -1.761
  T-stat                           3.855               -0.033               0.834                0.865               -0.991

  Normal State 2

 Coefficient                       0.001    *           -0.024              -0.149               1.120    *            6.019
  T-stat                           2.375               -0.602              -0.947                1.730                1.046

 DotCom Pre
  Coefficient                       0.002               -0.628              -0.172               40.867               6.103
  T-stat                           1.510               -0.878              -0.669                1.058                0.782

  DotCom Crash

 Coefficient                     0.002   ***          0.001             0.021              2.768   **          0.387
 T-stat                         10.228               0.051              0.627               3.265               0.323

 DotCom Post

 Coefficient                       0.002    **           0.096              -0.233               -0.044              10.493
  T-stat                           2.964                1.048              -0.797               -0.028                0.925

  Normal State 3
 Coefficient                       0.000               0.033              0.056              16.597              -0.788
  T-stat                           0.379               0.070               0.468               0.454               -0.315

  Global Crisis Pre

  Coefficient                       0.002               -0.730              -0.110               81.814               2.778
  T-stat                           1.580               -0.842              -0.686                0.905                0.628

  Global Crisis Crash

 Coefficient                       0.002    ***          0.154    ***         -0.035              -1.247               2.604
  T-stat                           9.475                3.403              -0.682               -1.145                1.201

  Global Crisis Post
  Coefficient                       0.001               0.735              0.289              -12.673               -7.421
  T-stat                           0.255                0.559               0.775               -0.110               -0.643

66
                                    Stockholm School of Economics

  Greek Crisis Pre

  Coefficient                       0.002               0.364               0.119               -7.009               -4.998
  T-stat                           5.961                1.460               1.282               -0.515               -1.122

  Greek Crisis Crash

  Coefficient                       0.013               -6.781              -1.574              625.201               40.554
  T-stat                           1.274               -0.999              -0.915                1.199                0.841

  Greek Crisis Post

 Coefficient                       0.001               0.595    *           0.122              -19.723               -2.676
  T-stat                           5.039                2.089               0.778               -0.528               -0.155

  Normal State 4

 Coefficient                       0.018              -14.466              -2.992    ***        1337.085              73.137   *
  T-stat                           4.457               -4.207              -3.752                4.173                2.557

  Covid-19 Pre

 Coefficient                      0.017   *          -13.345   **         -6.597   *         1537.365   ***         436.411   *
  T-stat                           2.043               -2.607              -1.852                3.888                1.798

  Covid 19 Crash

  Coefficient                       0.096              -34.895              -6.597             1479.170               65.547
  T-stat                           0.973               -0.969              -0.789                0.992                0.424

  Covid 19 Post

  Coefficient                       0.086              -34.993             -21.576             1986.720              983.726
  T-stat                           0.782               -0.965              -0.766                1.832                0.761

  Current State

  Coefficient                       -0.968              162.135             155.653              -161.180             -4203.196
  T-stat                            -0.982                0.924               0.984                -0.088                -0.966
This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression after increasing robustness using  White’s
Variance and Covariance Matrix on Eq (12):
                ,-                ,-            ,-      *            ,-       *
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷!  =  𝛼 + 𝛾'𝐷  '𝑅$,!' + 𝛾*(1 − 𝐷  )'𝑅$,!' + 𝛾.𝐷  5𝑅$,!6 + 𝛾/(1 − 𝐷  )5𝑅$,!6  +  𝜀!
        /0
Where  𝐷   equals 1  if the  aggregate market return on any given day is positive  (>0).
Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
* The coefficient is significant at the 10% level
** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
*** The  coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                         Table 29:  Denmark CSAD  bullish vs bearish  robust

                                   𝛼               𝛾.               𝛾2              𝛾3              𝛾4

  Total Sample

 Coefficient                          0.008   **          -3.780   **         -1.020   *          193.234              19.658   *
  T-stat                                2.623                -3.019              -2.327                4.377                2.210
  Normal1

 Coefficient                         0.000   ***          0.007             0.002              0.506   *           0.315
 T-stat                              9.953               1.219             0.290               1.759               1.350

 1990s Recession Pre

 Coefficient                          0.000               0.016   **         0.020               0.042              -0.112
  T-stat                               4.744                2.747              1.008                0.209               -0.066

  1990s Recession Crash

 Coefficient                           0.000    *            0.048             0.048              -0.539    *           -0.025
  T-stat                                1.873                4.381              1.243               -2.080               -0.012
  1990s Recession Post

  Coefficient                            0.000                0.089              0.068               -1.063               -2.735
  T-stat                                1.261                0.925              1.168               -0.172               -0.617

  Normal State 2

 Coefficient                          0.000   ***          0.047             0.063   **           0.753              -1.027   *
  T-stat                               3.632                0.743              3.024                0.121               -2.290

 DotCom Pre

 Coefficient                           0.001               -0.012             0.033               6.860               1.354
  T-stat                               4.151               -0.114              0.340                0.750               0.153
  DotCom Crash

 Coefficient                           0.002    *            -0.535             -0.100              43.339               3.577
  T-stat                                1.913                -0.977              -0.737                1.175                0.934

                                                                         67
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

 DotCom Post

  Coefficient                            0.004               -1.883             -1.151              155.298              82.061
  T-stat                                1.079                -0.950              -0.859                1.001                0.844

  Normal State 3

 Coefficient                          0.000   *            0.094             0.038               2.762              -0.538
  T-stat                               1.698                0.906              1.124                0.265               -0.564

  Global Crisis Pre

 Coefficient                          0.000               0.050   *          0.001              -2.618              0.417
  T-stat                               6.878                1.733              0.061               -1.101               0.934

  Global Crisis Crash

  Coefficient                            0.025               -7.712             -2.560              214.086              46.404
  T-stat                                0.967                -0.945              -0.901                0.996                0.927

  Global Crisis Post

  Coefficient                            0.004               -1.725             -0.496              141.966              15.683
  T-stat                                1.282                -0.843              -0.743                0.943                0.548

  Greek Crisis Pre

  Coefficient                            0.004               -1.625             -0.481              139.814              15.940
  T-stat                                1.222                -0.830              -0.727                0.933                0.557

  Greek Crisis Crash

 Coefficient                           0.002    **           -0.682             -0.218              86.074              12.716   *
  T-stat                                3.092                -1.139              -1.292                1.434                1.665

  Greek Crisis Post

  Coefficient                            0.003               -2.170             -0.893              292.832              78.921
  T-stat                                1.402                -0.986              -0.872                1.036                0.858

  Normal State 4

 Coefficient                          0.001               0.023             0.014              8.515              0.950
 T-stat                              4.967               0.272             0.509               0.751               0.688

  Covid-19 Pre

  Coefficient                            0.005               -3.983             -1.657              393.838              94.435
  T-stat                                1.042                -0.973              -0.913                0.999                0.878

  Covid 19 Crash

 Coefficient                           0.001               0.116             0.018               -2.964               0.210
  T-stat                               5.618                1.596              1.193               -0.716               0.611

  Covid 19 Post

  Coefficient                            0.001                0.127              0.064               -5.953               -2.590
  T-stat                                7.965                1.906              2.248               -1.204               -1.577

  Current State

 Coefficient                           0.001    ***          0.171             0.065   ***          -7.532    **          -1.469
  T-stat                               14.353                4.010              3.031               -3.124               -1.456
This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression after increasing robustness using White’s
Variance and Covariance Matrix on Eq (12):
                ,-                ,-            ,-      *            ,-       *
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷!  =  𝛼 + 𝛾'𝐷  '𝑅$,!' + 𝛾*(1 − 𝐷  )'𝑅$,!' + 𝛾.𝐷  5𝑅$,!6 + 𝛾/(1 − 𝐷  )5𝑅$,!6  +  𝜀!
        /0
Where  𝐷   equals 1 if the aggregate market return on any given day is positive (>0).
Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
* The coefficient is significant at the 10% level
** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
*** The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                        Table  30:  Norway  CSAD bullish vs bearish robust

                                   𝛼               𝛾.                𝛾2             𝛾3              𝛾4

  Total Sample

  Coefficient                           3.491              -644.468             -273.226             839.739             2318.983
  T-stat                                0.719                -0.727               -0.702               1.388                0.574

 1990s Recession Pre

 Coefficient                           0.000    ***          0.024    *           0.024              -0.023              -0.088
  T-stat                                3.737                2.396               1.356              -0.156               -0.111
  1990s Recession Crash

 Coefficient                         0.000              0.022   *           0.014             0.090              0.108
 T-stat                              5.131               1.983              1.490              0.355               0.655

68
                                    Stockholm School of Economics

  1990s Recession Post

 Coefficient                          0.001               0.009              0.009              0.849              0.049
 T-stat                              8.766               0.185              0.427              0.348               0.079

  Normal State 2

 Coefficient                          0.000               0.079   **          0.040              0.181              -0.111
  T-stat                               5.767                3.219               4.872               0.386               -0.937

 DotCom Pre

 Coefficient                          0.001   *            0.220   *           0.069    *          -2.236              -0.546
  T-stat                                2.557                2.237               2.112              -1.084               -0.624

  DotCom Crash

 Coefficient                          0.002   ***          0.095   ***         0.078   ***         0.010              -0.938
  T-stat                              14.077                3.723               3.426               0.016               -1.531

 DotCom Post

 Coefficient                           0.001               0.091              0.019              0.904              -0.320
  T-stat                               5.836                1.343               0.532               0.213               -0.287

  Normal State 3

  Coefficient                            0.005               -1.784              -0.646             101.764              14.274
  T-stat                                1.104                -0.947               -0.983               0.933                1.040

  Global Crisis Pre

  Coefficient                            0.003               -1.415              -0.356             114.590              11.358
  T-stat                                1.221                -0.975               -0.932               0.992                0.916

  Global Crisis Crash

 Coefficient                           0.001               0.261              0.112              7.639              -0.610
  T-stat                               0.837                1.020               1.379               0.602               -0.465

  Global Crisis Post

 Coefficient                          0.007   *           -3.344   **          -1.001            264.155   ***         31.623
  T-stat                                2.197                -3.036               -1.590              11.922                1.628

  Greek Crisis Pre

 Coefficient                           0.009               -4.048              -1.105             300.280    *           29.295
  T-stat                                0.865                -0.958               -0.669               1.722                0.679

  Greek Crisis Crash

  Coefficient                            0.003               -1.755              -0.468             240.344              30.086
  T-stat                                1.167                -1.552               -0.612               5.390                0.710

  Greek Crisis Post

 Coefficient                           0.002               -2.490              -0.168             323.787    **           9.983
  T-stat                                0.138                -0.524               -0.050               3.083                0.064

  Normal State 4

 Coefficient                           0.006               -3.817              -0.793    *         358.152    ***         19.276
  T-stat                                4.250                -6.141               -1.982              14.919                0.829

  Covid-19 Pre

  Coefficient                            0.008               -6.766              -1.894             806.329              100.168
  T-stat                                1.097                -0.972               -0.946               1.011                0.939

  Covid 19 Crash

  Coefficient                            0.012               -4.780              -0.788             261.496               9.471
  T-stat                                1.105                -0.903               -0.900               0.934                0.920

  Covid 19 Post

  Coefficient                           0.045              -15.866              -9.587             619.283              358.081
  T-stat                                0.811                -0.996               -0.789               3.305                0.782

  Current State

 Coefficient                           0.007               -5.580              -0.950             659.053    ***         27.640
  T-stat                                0.484                -1.354               -0.353              14.201                0.331
This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression after increasing robustness using White’s
Variance and Covariance Matrix on Eq (12):
                ,-                ,-            ,-      *            ,-       *
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷!  =  𝛼 + 𝛾'𝐷  '𝑅$,!' + 𝛾*(1 − 𝐷  )'𝑅$,!' + 𝛾.𝐷  5𝑅$,!6 + 𝛾/(1 − 𝐷  )5𝑅$,!6  +  𝜀!
        /0
Where  𝐷   equals 1 if the aggregate market return on any given day is positive (>0).
Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
* The coefficient is significant at the 10% level
** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
*** The  coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                                                                         69
                                      Stockholm School of Economics

                          Table  31:  Finland  CSAD bullish vs bearish robust

                                  𝛼               𝛾.                𝛾2             𝛾3              𝛾4

Total Sample
Coefficient                            -0.047               10.615               3.813              -11.267              -18.382
T-stat                                -0.566                0.480                0.561               -0.032               -0.311

Normal State 1

Coefficient                          0.000               0.025              0.035   *           0.983              -0.089
T-stat                               5.476                0.990               1.992               0.945               -0.194

1990s Recession Pre

Coefficient                          0.000   ***          -0.031              0.022   *           3.853   **          -0.216
T-stat                                9.748                -1.642               2.277               2.892               -0.723

1990s Recession Crash
Coefficient                         0.001   ***          0.043   **          0.008             0.000              1.015
T-stat                              8.855               2.599              0.347              0.000               0.921

1990s Recession Post

Coefficient                          0.000   **           0.007              0.035              2.696              -0.867
T-stat                               2.988                0.104               1.246               0.654               -0.971

Normal State 2

Coefficient                           0.001    **           0.075    *           -0.010              -0.097               1.516
T-stat                                3.017                2.046               -0.135              -0.357                0.617

DotCom Pre
Coefficient                          0.001   ***          0.090   **          0.032             -1.696              0.384
T-stat                               9.686                3.069               1.446              -1.473               0.468

DotCom Crash

Coefficient                           0.001               0.081              0.027              2.069              -0.131
T-stat                               4.551                0.711               0.851               0.332               -0.133

DotCom Post

Coefficient                          0.001   **           0.045              0.074              6.292              -2.282
T-stat                               2.792                0.365               1.160               0.578               -1.130

Normal State 3
Coefficient                           0.000               0.033              0.021              0.033              -0.177
T-stat                               7.597                1.355               1.244               0.071               -0.189

Global Crisis Pre

Coefficient                           0.000               0.002              0.020              2.422              -0.329
T-stat                               8.484                0.089               1.208               1.329               -0.563

Global Crisis Crash

Coefficient                         0.001              0.042   *           0.010             0.448              1.004
T-stat                              7.230               2.429              0.424              1.018               0.955

Global Crisis Post
Coefficient                           -0.002                0.680               0.496              4.881              -16.870
T-stat                               -0.293                0.248               0.410               0.030               -0.400

Greek Crisis Pre

Coefficient                           0.004               -1.905              -0.499             117.834              13.080
T-stat                                1.189                -0.958               -0.995               0.986                1.045

Greek Crisis Crash

Coefficient                           0.009               -5.020              -2.118             304.451              90.232
T-stat                                1.034                -0.979               -0.970               0.998                0.972

Greek Crisis Post
Coefficient                          0.000               0.017              0.013              1.187              0.221
T-stat                              5.819               0.571              0.487              0.545               0.148

Normal State 4

Coefficient                           0.001               -0.135              0.003             23.764               0.664
T-stat                               4.444               -0.819               0.145               1.035               0.927

Covid-19 Pre

Coefficient                            0.000                0.288               0.109              -8.345               -6.394
T-stat                                1.110                1.568               1.528              -0.961               -1.332

Covid 19 Crash
Coefficient                           0.000               0.117    *           0.033   **          -2.107              -0.079

 70
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

T-stat                                5.537                2.422               2.642              -1.235               -0.452

Covid 19 Post

Coefficient                           0.002               -1.032    *           -0.232   **         140.982               9.455
T-stat                                1.359                -1.006               -0.808               1.210                0.779
Current State

Coefficient                           0.005               -4.828    ***         -0.827             431.153    ***         22.499
T-stat                                1.474                -3.462               -1.265              53.755                1.242
 This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression after increasing robustness using White’s
 Variance and Covariance Matrix on Eq (12):
                 ,-                ,-            ,-      *            ,-       *
 𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷!  =  𝛼 + 𝛾'𝐷  '𝑅$,!' + 𝛾*(1 − 𝐷  )'𝑅$,!' + 𝛾.𝐷  5𝑅$,!6 + 𝛾/(1 − 𝐷  )5𝑅$,!6  +  𝜀!
         /0
 Where  𝐷   equals 1 if the aggregate market return on any given day is positive (>0).
 Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also reported.
 * The coefficient is significant at the 10% level
 ** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
 ***  The coefficient is significant at the 1% level

                          Table  32:  Iceland  CSAD bullish vs bearish robust

                                    𝛼              𝛾.               𝛾2             𝛾3             𝛾4

    Total Sample

   Coefficient                           0.005              -1.414             -0.232             19.469              1.511
   T-stat                               0.951               -0.950             -0.796              1.068               1.556

    Normal State 2

   Coefficient                          0.000              0.001             0.003             0.158             -0.012
   T-stat                              -0.005               0.054             0.775              0.523              -0.258

   DotCom Pre

   Coefficient                           0.000               0.012             0.017             -0.130              -0.199
   T-stat                               -1.188                1.615              1.124              -1.061               -1.052

   DotCom Crash

   Coefficient                         0.000   ***          0.019    ***        0.007   *         -0.188   **         -0.026
   T-stat                               9.334               3.785             1.810              -2.583              -1.117

   DotCom Post

   Coefficient                          0.000              0.030    ***        0.008             -0.335              0.306
   T-stat                              5.710               3.472             1.011             -0.524              0.506

    Normal State 3

   Coefficient                         0.000   **          0.030   *         0.013             -0.218              0.054
   T-stat                              2.726               2.356             1.104             -0.275              0.090

   Global Crisis Pre

   Coefficient                           0.000              -0.115             -0.036              7.627              1.309
   T-stat                               1.164               -0.822             -0.790              0.918               0.958

    Global Crisis Crash

   Coefficient                         0.000              0.130   **        0.122             0.952   **          0.741
   T-stat                              -1.319               2.837             1.346              2.666              0.769

   Global Crisis Post

   Coefficient                          0.000              -0.073            -0.071             9.159             15.344    *
   T-stat                               1.135               -0.763             -1.054              1.131               1.655

    Normal State 4

   Coefficient                          0.000    *           -0.255    *         -0.122             18.345             12.533
   T-stat                               1.651               -2.546             -0.608              4.809               0.996

   Covid-19 Pre

   Coefficient                          0.000              0.036             0.021    *          -1.320    **          -0.002
   T-stat                               5.328               4.409             2.069              -2.703              -0.002

    Covid 19 Crash

   Coefficient                         0.000   ***         0.014            0.002             0.666             0.730   *
   T-stat                             3.936              0.681             0.241             0.597              2.441

   Covid 19 Post

   Coefficient                         0.000   ***         0.051            0.048             -0.345              4.128   *
   T-stat                              0.801               1.043             0.637             -0.081              0.408

    Current State

   Coefficient                         0.000   **          -0.130            0.010            16.527   *          0.508

                                                                          71
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

  T-stat                              2.620              -1.016             0.258              1.830              0.258
This table reports the estimated coefficients for the OLS regression after increasing robustness using White’s
Variance and Covariance Matrix on Eq (12):
                ,-                ,-            ,-      *            ,-       *
𝐶𝑆𝐴𝐷!  =  𝛼 + 𝛾'𝐷  '𝑅$,!' + 𝛾*(1 − 𝐷  )'𝑅$,!' + 𝛾.𝐷  5𝑅$,!6 + 𝛾/(1 − 𝐷  )5𝑅$,!6  +  𝜀!
        /0
Where  𝐷   equals 1 if the aggregate market return on any given day is positive (>0).
Heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics are also  reported.
* The coefficient is significant at the 10% level
** The coefficient is significant at the 5% level
*** The  coefficient is significant at the 1% level

72