CONSTRUCTING A SOCIAL
PROFITABILITY INDEX

SOCIALLY RESPONSIBLE INVESTING IN ELECTRIC UTILITIES

ODESSA BÄCKFORS

EBBA JERNMARK BURROWS

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2023
Constructing a Social Profitability Index: Socially Responsible Investing in
Electric Utilities

Abstract:

   Building on a theory about the Social Profitability Index (SPI), this paper is the first
   to construct an SPI in practice ranking investment opportunities based on social and
   financial returns within the electric utility industry. The social return is the investor-
   preference weighted social gain from avoiding carbon emissions by changing to
   renewable production technology in a firm. Using data from listed companies in the
    U.S. electrical utilities sector, we find that the SPI of a company is heavily dependent
   on its carbon intensity and moderately dependent on the company’s location. This
   makes different technologies suit different companies due to the influence that
   location has on renewable technology efficiency. In conclusion, investing in “sinful”,
   high carbon intensity electricity companies is optimal for socially responsible
   investors who can change part of the company technology through shareholder
   activism.

Keywords:

   Socially responsible investing, Social Profitability Index (SPI), Sustainability ratings,
   Shareholder activism, Green transition, ESG, Renewable electricity, Fossil fuel
    emissions, Carbon intensity, Sustainable investing.

Authors:

   Odessa Bäckfors (25093)
   Ebba Jernmark Burrows (25203)

Tutor:

   Marcus Opp, Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien D’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Odessa Bäckfors and Ebba Jernmark Burrows, 2023

                                   1
1 Introduction

Socially responsible investing (SRI), where environmental, social, and governance (ESG) issues are
incorporated into investment decisions, is on the rise (Sandberg et al. 2009). Although investments
in ESG-related assets are increasing (Matos 2020), estimated to reach a share of about 20% of all
assets under management in 2026 (Alexander 2022), socially responsible capital can be argued to
be scarce relative to conventional profit-seeking capital. Due to its scarcity, it is of large importance
for socially responsible investors and funds to efficiently allocate their capital to maximize the total
welfare (Oehmke and Opp 2023). In this paper, we make a contribution to the field of socially
responsible investing by being the first to implement an index called the Social Profitability Index
(SPI) for the electric utilities sector in the US for practical use. We show that, for socially responsible
(SR) investors looking to optimize both financial and social return, the optimal allocation of capital
is to invest in high carbon-intensive companies, conditional on assuring the funding is used by the
company for changing to cleaner technology. Out of the ESG components that can be included
in SRI decisions, we focus solely on the environment (E) and more specifically carbon emissions,
since global warming is one of the most critical challenges of today. Moreover, the Paris Agreement,
which is a legally binding treaty on climate change signed by 194 countries in 2016 (UNFCCC
2023), has as one of its main objectives to make finance flows consistent with a pathway towards
low greenhouse gas emissions (UNFCCC 2016). The electric utility sector is of high relevance to
study since it generates the largest amount of carbon emission: In 2022, 42% of total global sector
carbon emissions came from power, followed by that of industry, transport, and buildings (IER
2023).
    The purpose of this thesis is to put sustainable finance theory into practice by proposing a way
to construct a Social Profitability Index, which could guide SR investors in investment decisions.
Our thesis builds on Opp and Oehmke’s newly published paper, A Theory of Socially Responsible
Investment, where a Social Profitability Index is introduced in theory. SPI is an index suggesting
an optimal way for impact investors to rank investments and allocate capital in terms of both finan-
cial and social return, where the latter is defined in terms of the amount of negative externalities
avoided relative to the case of being funded by a purely profit-motivated investor maintaining sta-
tus quo. Despite the magnitude of the investment object’s current social costs, the SPI focuses on
the change in social costs that a socially responsible investor could achieve through shareholder
activism (Oehmke and Opp 2023).
    In this paper, we aim to answer the following research question:

    How can we construct a Social Profitability Index in practice that can rank investment oppor-
tunities based on optimizing the trade-off between financial cost and social benefit, and what are
the properties of the suggested index?

    We formulate the following hypotheses connected to our research question:

    Hypothesis 1: Companies with high carbon intensity will receive higher values in our SPI com-
pared to renewable energy companies.

                                       2
    Hypothesis 2: Sustainalytics’ Environmental Risk Scores will correlate with our SPI, where high
ERS will give high values in SPI.

    Our analysis shows that carbon intensity is positively correlated with SPI and that companies
with coal as their primary source for generating electricity receive the highest values in our SPI
on average. We can conclude that investments in ”sinful” fossil fuel companies with high carbon
intensity are the optimal choice for SR investors using the SPI as an investment criterion, subject
to the investor successfully making the companies switch to cleaner energy production through
shareholder activism. Furthermore, we find no correlation between the Environmental Risk Scores
(ERS) from Sustainalytics and SPI. Thus, we can conclude that ERS cannot be used as a substitute
for SPI since high Environmental Risk Scores do not necessarily translate to high values in SPI.
We can also conclude that our SPI is sensitive to the estimate of the Social Cost of Carbon (SCC)
(Nordhaus 2017), which is an input parameter used for pricing carbon emissions in our SPI and the
investors’ internalization of social costs (defined as g). Lastly, our analysis shows that companies
will choose different types of energy production technologies when SPI proclaims a change, which
is dependent on the current location, the SCC and g, and the investor’s preference for financial vis
á vis social return.

1.1 Creation of SPI
To create the SPI in practice, we have chosen to outline the social benefit by estimating the benefit
of avoiding carbon emissions and financial cost as the cost of implementing a change to greener
operations in a company. We only include companies from the electric utility sector in the index,
as this sector generates the largest amount of carbon emission. Furthermore, creating an SPI index
for the electric power industry is important due to the large and urgent need for investments in this
sector to enable the energy transition. $4 trillion is needed to reach net-zero emissions by 2050 and
clean energy investments must more than triple by 2030 to reach the goal (UNDP 2023). Although
investments in renewables are increasing, 82% of the world’s energy demand in 2022 was still met
by fossil fuels (IER 2023). At the same time, investments in fossil fuels have been rather stable since
2015 (Bocco 2023). Therefore, to reach the objectives of the Paris Agreement, it is not enough to
only increase fund flows to renewable energy companies; fund injections to dirty production also
have to decrease if we are to limit the global temperature increase. Creating an SPI that directly
involves fossil fuel companies instead of excluding them is thus highly relevant. The electric utility
sector is also a good choice of industry due to the direct connection between business activity and
emissions coupled with the small number of alternatives for electric power production. Also, the
product itself, which is energy produced, is directly comparable across companies.
    More specifically, companies producing electricity from the primary energy sources of coal,
natural gas, nuclear, hydro, wind, and solar will be included in the study to see the difference in
how fossil fuel investments compare to renewable investments, where nuclear is included in the
definition of renewables. When evaluating how much emission can be avoided, we compare the
current emission intensity to what could be achieved if the company switched part of their produc-
tion to renewable energy sources since the renewable energy sources emit substantially less CO2e
relative to non-renewables. For example, coal plants generate, on average, 75 times more life-cycle

                                       3
emissions when compared to electricity produced based on offshore wind (Schloemer et al. 2014).
We exclude the possibilities of improving the operations in terms of other measures such as reduc-
ing business travel since it will result in negligible CO2e emission savings. Moreover, we exclude
the opportunity of investing in more efficient fossil fuel plants since it will give minor reductions
of carbon emissions in comparison to switching to renewable energy plants and is costly.
    Furthermore, we narrowed down the study by only focusing on listed U.S. electricity-producing
companies. It is an interesting geographical market to study as the U.S. is the second largest polluter
of carbon emissions after China, where China stands for 26.4% of the global carbon emissions and
the US for 12.5% of the CO2e emission, based on data from 2021. In 2022, 31% of total U.S
energy-related CO2e emissions came from the electric power sector, and of these emissions, 98%
came from coal- and natural gas (EIA 2023b), showing that it is a market in urgent need of an energy
transition.

2 Related Literature

In this section, we give an overview of the literature to which our paper is connected. Our paper
contributes to the literature on socially responsible investing, such as Oehmke and Opp’s paper A
Theory of Socially Responsible Investment (Oehmke and Opp 2023), by filling the gap between the
theory and practical construction of the Social Profitability Index. Furthermore, we contribute to
the SRI field by proposing an index intended for SRI which is niched to the U.S. energy sector and
focused on carbon emissions, while most mainstream indices are more general by incorporating
several industries, geographical markets, and ESG factors. Additionally, unlike most other indices
and ratings within SRI that only take into account social return, our SPI optimizes both the financial
and social return. Lastly, our paper contributes to the field of shareholder activism, as our SPI is
intended for investors to make an impact by actively engaging with the companies, unlike most
mainstream indices and ratings which rely on impact through the financial market.

2.1 Socially Responsible Investing Today
As the interest and importance of SRI grows, the coverage of the topic in academia has subsequently
increased as seen from the growing number of studies published in academic journals within the
field of SRI (Renneboog, Ter Horst, and Zhang 2008) (Widyawati 2020). Although there is consen-
sus among academics on a theoretical level that SRI positively impacts companies’ sustainability
performance, there is an ongoing debate about how to practically implement ESG criteria when
making investment decisions (Sandberg et al. 2009). There is disagreement about which one of the
two major SRI strategies, screening and shareholder activism, generates the largest actual impact on
corporate practices. Screening can be divided into negative and positive screening, where negative
screening is based on excluding investments that do not satisfy chosen ESG criteria(s) while positive
screening reflects the selection of investments based on “best-in-class” performing assets. Share-
holder activism entails investors taking an active role and investing in assets to improve current
sustainability practices regardless of current ESG performance (Widyawati 2020). The mentioned
SRI strategies are a popular topic, where almost 25% of papers published in academic journals be-

                                       4
tween 2000-2009 mentioned activism, almost 14% mentioned the term “best-in-class”, and about
22% covered the strategy of “filter or screen” (Capelle-Blancard and Monjon 2012).
    Rivoli argues that screening is efficient through the effects on required returns and valuations,
provided that perfect market assumptions are relaxed. The argument is that firms are more re-
sponsive to SRI the steeper the slope of the demand curve is for the firm’s equity (Rivoli 2003).
In contrast, Sparks and Cowton argue that through the lens of large institutional investors, share-
holder activism is a more impactful method compared to passive engagement in terms of screening
(Sparkes and Cowton 2004). Other researchers, such as Oehmke and Opp, also agree with Sparks
and Cowton. Oehmke and Opp consider financial markets to be competitive, and because of this,
they argue that negative screening does not have a large impact on the cost of capital of companies
within “sin industries”, such as the oil and gas industry as they consider financial markets to be
competitive, and because of this, they argue that negative screening does not have a large impact
on the cost of capital of companies within “sin industries”, such as the oil and gas industry. Like-
wise, choosing to invest in “clean firms”, such as renewable energy companies, which essentially
is positive screening, they claim to not be efficient investment decision since these types of firms
already perform well from an ESG perspective. Thus, they argue that socially responsible capital
invested in these types of firms does not result in any change and could be better used elsewhere
(Oehmke and Opp 2023).
    Empirical studies on the effect of screening indices on corporate behavior have been done.
McKenzie, Rees, and Rodionova studied the effect of the introduction of FTSE4Good environ-
mental criteria, which was introduced in 2002, where companies had until 2005 to comply with
said index. The treatment group consisted of 377 FTSE4Good firms that failed to meet the new
criteria by 2002 but were included in the index, and the control group consisted of 652 non-FTSE
firms failing to meet the same criteria by the same point in time. The study concluded that firms at
risk of potential exclusion from the index were more likely to have complied with the FTSE4Good
environmental criteria by 2005, thus proving the efficiency of the index, and screening as a strategy
in terms of impact (Mackenzie, Rees, and Rodionova 2013).
    Various methods and indices have been developed when it comes to the practicality of investing
in a socially responsible way. Historically, and still today, negative screening is a prevalent strategy,
roughly 40% of professionally managed European assets applied negative screening during 2019,
which for instance could be the exclusion of so-called sin industries such as tobacco, weapons, and
oil. The popularity has arisen from the simple nature of the negative screening strategy and not
necessarily because it is the most efficient and impactful approach to socially responsible invest-
ing (Camilleri 2021). Another popular approach to SRI is to use ratings and indices to evaluate
companies. Several indices, rankings, and ratings (Corporate Sustainability Systems, CSS in short)
have been developed where corporate performance is rated based on sustainability, for example
the Dow Jones SustainabilityIndex and the SustainabilityYearbook. All rankings and ratings use a
score and some CSSs make use of bands to group companies with similar performance to simplify
comparisons. Moreover, the economic aspect is present in a large majority of the CSS concerning
the selection and/or evaluation of companies (Diez-Cañamero et al. 2020). Although the economic
aspect is part of the assessment, none of the indices and ratings focus on the optimal choice of in-
vestment based on the tradeoff between social return and financial return, providing a gap in the
previous mainstream supply of CSS (Camilleri 2021).

                                       5
   Another common rating is Sustainalytics ESG Risk Rating, where ESG Risk Scores are pro-
vided for different sectors and companies, where environmental, social, and governance risk scores
are separately presented. The Environmental Risk Scores assess the degree to which a company’s
economic value is at risk driven by environmental issues. Moreover, the rating employs a two-
dimensional framework that combines an assessment of a company’s exposure to industry-specific
environmental issues with an assessment of how well the company is managing those issues. The
final Environmental Risk Score is a measure of unmanaged risk on an absolute scale of 0-100, with a
lower score indicating less unmanaged ESG Risk. These risk scores function in a similar way to the
above-mentioned ratings and indices in terms of being suited for the screening strategy. The scores
can be found for most mid- and large-cap companies on Yahoo Finance. In this way, investors can
make informed socially responsible investments by using the ERS to pick the best-in-class firms
and avoid firms with high Environmental Risk Scores. At the same time, they receive returns data
from Yahoo Finance, enabling them to form their perception about the optimal choice from both a
financial and ESG perspective (Sustainalytics 2021).
    An index intended for SRI but which is not part of the mainstream indices and niched to one
sector is Bertolinelli et al.’s Social-Environmental Profitability Index (SEPI) (Bertolinelli, Pinti, and
Bonelli 2022). SEPI is used to classify and rank projects based on a ratio of impact to costs. Instead
of solely considering initial costs and lifetime costs for management and maintenance, the index
also includes social and environmental benefits. The SEPI is intended to be used for the optimal
allocation of public resources within the field of green infrastructure investments. To measure social
and environmental impact, the SEPI takes into account the market value for the amount of green
area per student, the market value for the amount of equipped area for sport/recreational/educational
activities, the market value of the paved area, trees ornamental value and the value of stocked and
absorbed CO2 by the lawn. The latter value is obtained by multiplying kg of stocked/absorbed CO2
by its price/kg on the European market based on the Emission Trading Scheme (ETS). The costs in
the SEPI are based on the cost of the school ground renovation project and the costs for managing the
school grounds per year, which are discounted. The SEPI index is one of few examples of indices
considering social and environmental impact and costs, which is similar to the SPI. However, SEPI
only focuses on public green infrastructure projects and the study is done on a small and specific
geographical area in Italy. Thus, we contribute to the discussed paper by focusing on another sector
and market.

2.2 Theoretical Framework
Oehmke and Opp (Oehmke and Opp 2023) explore how socially responsible funds can change
firm behavior by efficiently reducing externalities and propose a theoretical investment model that
combines social and financial return which they labeled the Social Profitability Index (SPI). This
theoretical model constitutes the basis for the SPI constructed in our paper.
    In Oehmke and Opp’s model, abundant profit-seeking capital and scarce socially responsible
capital are assumed. Moreover, the degree of the SR funds’ internalization of external social costs
is also assumed and varies between SR investors who are therefore willing to sacrifice financial
return in exchange for social. From these assumptions, the SPI index is formed and intended to
work as a way for SR investors to assess how to allocate SR capital optimally. In Oehmke and Opp’s

                                       6
model, a firm can choose between investing in dirty and clean production technologies, which we
in this thesis derive from the choice between renewable energy production and fossil-fuel energy
production. Moreover, Oehmke and Opp assume SR investors to have an impact mandate, meaning
that besides the financial return, the SR investors recognize the social costs of externalities generated
from not investing in a particular firm. In comparison, an SR investor with a narrow mandate
only recognizes social costs as the direct externalities generated by the firm they have invested in.
Oehmke and Opp highlight the importance of SR investors holding an impact mandate for SRI to
have a real effect. Moreover, they highlight the relevance of estimating the SPI in practice using
emission data from different production technologies, which we aim to do in our thesis.
    Having a narrow mandate as an SR investor could be connected to the rich literature about
screening strategies, as the objective is to invest in the firm with the smallest social costs generated
today. However, holding an impact mandate requires a more active approach. For an SR investor
with an impact mandate, it could be more beneficial to invest in a dirty fossil fuel company due
to the possibility of avoiding a larger extent of social costs given the financial return is sufficient.
However, investing with an impact mandate in a fossil fuel energy-generating company is condi-
tional on actively promoting clean technology. Thus the SPI could be said to belong to the literature
about shareholder activism. In summary, we contribute to the literature about shareholder activism
by constructing an investment index for SR investors with a broad impact mandate. We fill a gap
in the literature about indices, rankings, and ratings since the most commonly used CSSs are based
on screening strategies and targeted to SR investors with a narrow impact mandate.

3 Model Setup

In this section, we describe in detail how we construct our SPI. To begin with, our SPI has two main
parts: estimation of the financial costs and estimation of the avoided social cost of carbon due to
the change in company-induced emissions that the investor can (and wants to) accomplish.

3.1 Constructing the SPI
Our SPI is a linear combination of the financial cost and the social benefit, where the financial cost
is weighed with a weight of 1 for all investors and the social benefit is weighed with an investor-
specific constant g, the degree of the internalization of social costs. The range of g is [0, 1], assuming
a non-SR investor is indifferent to social costs (resulting in the lower bound g = 0), and that no
investor weighs the social cost of carbon more than the actual cost (resulting in the upper bound
g = 1). The weight of 1 on the financial cost is based on that investors all value their own money
equally. Effectively, g measures the willingness to sacrifice financial returns in exchange for social
return.

3.1.1 SPI definition
For an investment of I dollars, our SPI for company i is defined as in equation (1).

                                       7
                            maxt∈T (−g ∗ SCC ∗ ∆CO2eit − ICit)
                      SP Ii =                                                        (1)
                                                               Ii
    An SR investor will, through shareholder activism, replace part of the current electricity-producing
fleet in the company i with a more sustainable technology t ∈ T , where T is the set of optional
technologies available if the social gain of that change multiplied with the investor’s g is larger than
the cost of the replacement. In our paper the set of optional technologies available to implement,
T is T = {Wind power (Onshore) and Solar power (PV)}. We define the social gain as the total
decrease in CO2e emissions multiplied by the Social Cost of Carbon (SCC). The SCC is defined as
the discounted economic cost generated by an additional unit of CO2e emissions, quantifying the
climate change impact (Nordhaus 2017). The investment in a company i, denoted Ii, is upper bound
by the market cap of the company i, M Ci, and by the amount the investor is willing to invest. This
gives us:

                                       Ii = min(M Ci, I). (2)
    The term ICit is the investment cost in technology t for company i. To calculate this we need to
know how many MWh the investment will produce during its lifetime, ∆M W hit, which technology
the investment will be in, the cost of that technology, as well as the capacity factor of that technology
in the area that the company operates in. A capacity factor is a type of efficiency that measures how
much of the power generating capacity (usually measured in MW) a wind turbine or solar panel can
use in a particular location. The capacity factor can differ quite a lot in different geographical areas.
For example, a wind turbine produces much more electricity when placed in a windy area than in
a sheltered one. The capacity factor for technology t and company i, cit, that we use is the median
of all the reported capacity factors in the state(s) in which the company i operates. We make this
choice since we assume the areas with the best capacity factors will already be in use and we use
the median instead of the mean since it is not sensitive to outliers. Also, we have a cost measure at,
defined as the capacity in MW per dollar invested in a technology t (all costs included, for detail
see section 4.2). To translate the MW per dollar to MWh per dollar, we also need the lifetime Lt of
technology t in years, and the fact that there are 8, 760 hours in a year. We get an expression for the
investment cost of technology t for company i as follows:

                                    ∆M W hit
                              ICit =                                         (3)
                                         at ∗ 8760 ∗ cit ∗ Lt
   Now, we need an expression for the amount of energy that is optimal to replace, ∆M W hit. Our
first bound on that change is that the investor can not make the company invest more money in new
technology than the investment amount Ii. This gives us:
                       (        )−1
                                   1
             ∆M W hit ≤ Ii ∗                        = Ii ∗ at ∗ 8760 ∗ cit ∗ Lt. (4)
                                at ∗ 8760 ∗ cit ∗ Lt
   We also assume the change leaves the total produced MWh in a year, Ei, constant. So, the
investor cannot make a change so big that the company will produce more MWh in a year than it

                                       8
currently does, giving us the second condition

                                 ∆M W hit ≤ Ei ∗ Lt. (5)

    If the marginal benefit M Bit for an investor to act sustainable is positive, i.e. that the g-weighted
social benefit of changing technology is higher than the cost, the investor will make the biggest
change possible to the company with regards to the investment size. Directly from (4) and (5) we
then get:
              {
                            min (Ii ∗ at ∗ 8760 ∗ cit ∗ Lt, Ei ∗ Lt) if M Bit > 0,
           ∆M W hit =                                                    (6)
                           0 otherwise,
which combined with equation (3) would give us a new expression for ICit;
                  (         )
                              Ei
                                min  Ii,             if M Bit > 0,
                     ICit =            at ∗ 8760 ∗ cit                                   (7)
              
                              0 otherwise.
   Now, we have defined all expressions in (1) except ∆CO2eit, which is the change in CO2e emis-
sions a SR investor could bring. If the change is negative, we have fewer emissions than before and
therefore would be avoiding emissions by changing to the technology t, which explains the minus
sign before the g in equation (1). We calculate ∆CO2eit by multiplying the difference between the
current emission intensity (in tCO2e/MWh) of company i (EIi) and the emission intensity of the
new technology with the change in MWh the SR investor accomplish through shareholder activism.
Which results in the following:
                               (           )
                                                                    bt
                    ∆CO2eit = ∆M W hit ∗               − EIi  . (8)
                                               Lt ∗ 8760 ∗ cit
    The rightmost term is the emission intensity of the new technology, where bt is CO2e emissions
per MW for technology t (including manufacturing emissions and lifetime emissions), and Lt is the
lifetime of technology t in years. We use the same ∆M W hit as in equation (6). As before, 8760 is
the number of hours in a year and cit is our capacity factor. Then we have that:

                                                          bt
                                       Lt ∗ 8760 ∗ cit

is equal to the number of metric tonnes of CO2e emissions per produced MWh for the new technol-
ogy t in company i. Using equation (7) we can derive that the cost per produced MWh as:

                                       1
                                                                                      .
                                     at ∗ 8760 ∗ cit ∗ Lt

    Replacing 1 MWh in company i with energy from technology t therefore gives an investor the
following marginal benefit M Bit.

                                       9
                   (            )
                                                    bt                     1
            M Bit = g ∗ SCC ∗  EIi −          −          . (9)
                                         Lt ∗ 8760 ∗ cit     at ∗ 8760 ∗ cit ∗ Lt
    If M Bit is positive, the SPI will be positive, otherwise it will be equal to zero. Now we have
defined our SPI completely, and through equations (1), (2), (6), (7), (8), and (9) we can get a new
expression for SPI, see equation (10). A summary of the input data needed to calculate our SPI is
shown in Table 1.

                       maxt∈T (0, min (Ii ∗ at ∗ 8760 ∗ cit ∗ Lt, Ei ∗ Lt) ∗ M Bit)
             SP Ii =                                                               (10)
                                                               Ii

                                          Table 1: SPI input data

        Name Definition Type
         SCC Social Cost of Carbon ($/ metric tonnes CO2e) Global
         T Set of technologies an investor can change to Global
                  Degree of internalisation of social cost (g ∈ [0, 1], no
         g                                                     Investor
                   unit)
         I Investment size ($) Investor
                                                        Investor &
          Ii min(M Ci, I), the amount invested in company i ($)
                                                      Company
         M Ci Market Capitalization of company i ($) Company
         Ei Energy produced in a year by company i (MWh/year) Company
                  Emission intensity for company i (metric tonnes
        EIi                                                     Company
               CO2e/MWh)
                Median(capacity factors for technology t in the area  Company &
            cit
                   of company i) (∈ [0, 1], no unit)                       Technology
         at MW per dollar of a technology t (MW/$) Technology
                  tCO2e emissions per MW of technology t (including
          bt                                                                   Technology
                 manufacturing emissions) (metric tonnes CO2e/MW)
         Lt Lifetime of technology t (years) Technology

4 Data

In the following section, we describe the data used and provide a critical evaluation of the sources.

4.1 Company Data
To find our data, we look at all companies classified to the sector Utilities - Regulated Electric by
Yahoo Finance which is 32 companies in total. We require that the companies’ headquarters and
head of operations be in the U.S. The company must generate and sell electricity, where the majority

                                      10
should be generated through coal, natural gas, nuclear energy, solar power, hydropower, or wind
power. If the company has operations other than electricity generation, such as selling gas or owning
electric grids, this part of the business should be negligible. Furthermore, we require the companies
to have accessible information about their amount of sold electricity and the GHG emission Scope
1 and 2 data connected to its electricity generating operations. We have found that most large-cap
and mid-cap companies meet all requirements. When gathering data for Scope 2 emissions, we
chose location-based estimates as they are more accurate than market-based estimates. However,
some companies lack location-based estimates and thus we use the market-based estimates for these
companies. This could cause both under- and overestimation of the SPI values. On the other hand,
the difference between the estimates of Scope 2 emissions from the different methods is marginal;
additionally, the Scope 2 emissions are small in comparison to the companies’ Scope 1 emissions.
Hence, we consider this to be a small source of error regarding the accuracy of the data.
    For each company, the area in which the company operates (in terms of U.S. states), the amount
of net generated electricity in 2022, and the Scope 1 and 2 GHG emissions in 2022 are collected from
company reports. The energy produced and carbon emissions data are found in the companies’ CDP
Climate Change Questionnaires. CDP is a not-for-profit charity and provides the largest TCFD-
aligned (The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosure) environmental database in the
world (CDP 2023). One limitation of the CDP database itself is that it is not a requirement for the
data reported to be third-party verified, and no screening of the companies has been done yet of
the CDP responses submitted for the year 2022. The majority of companies use the GHG Protocol
for guiding their reporting which is an acknowledged standard (GHG 2023) but not all, making the
data points not fully comparable. In conclusion, third-party verified data that is reported according
to the same standard, such as the GHG protocol, would make the data more reliable.
    Next, the Scope 1 and 2 emissions are combined to a ”total” tCO2e emissions statistic. We ignore
Scope 3 emissions since they are not comparable across companies due to differences in business
operations. Additionally, the majority of emissions from electricity generation fall into Scope 1
and 2. Emissions in Scope 3 for electricity generating companies are made up of mostly emissions
from gas sold, which is out of our scope as we only consider the companies’ activity of generating
and selling their own-produced electricity. Including Scope 3 emissions would in that sense make
the input data less accurate. On the other hand, there are emissions from Scope 3 connected to the
activity of generating electricity that are not covered by the Scope 1 and 2 emissions. Ideally, the
relevant part of the companies’ Scope 3 emissions should be included, but that can only be done if
the Scope 3 reporting is detailed for all companies, which it is not.
    For every company where it is available, we collect Sustainalytics’ Environmental Risk Scores
which we find on Yahoo Finance (dated 1st of January 2023). All other company-related data is
from 2022, except the market capitalization (dated 22nd of November 2023, collected from Yahoo
Finance). One limitation of the Environmental Risk Scores data is that some of the companies in
our data set do not have scores.
    Our data set contains 24 companies in total, where 22 of them generate the majority of their
electricity based on fossil fuels (coal and gas) and the other two companies generate the majority
of their electricity from renewable sources (in this case wind). Since many companies use several
different types of energy sources for electricity generation we also look at the largest energy source
in each company. The distribution is shown in Figure 1a and we can see that 17 of the companies

                                        11
have fossil fuels as the largest energy source and seven companies have renewables or nuclear
power as the largest energy source. One limitation of our data sample is that it consists of only
24 companies in total as those were all companies from the sector Regulated Utilities meeting all
the requirements. A larger sample is to be preferred for increasing the reliability of the results.
The carbon intensity of the companies ranges from 0.047 tCO2e/MWh to 0.85 tCO2e/MWh as seen
in Figure 1b, with a mean of 0.44 (±0.20) tCO2e/MWh. The market cap ranges from $2.69B to
$75.9B with a median of $14.65B and mean $21.85B (±19.923B). For the companies that have
an Environmental Risk Score, the mean value is 13.9 ± 2.9. The eight companies without a risk
score are younger, greener, and smaller companies, but the in-group variation is larger than the
between-group variation.

   12

   10
                                                                                                          0.8
    8

                                                                                                          0.6
    6

    4
                                                                                                          0.4
                                                            tCO2e/MWh
    2
   No. of companies w. largest source
                                                                                                          0.2
    0
          Coal        Gas        Hydro       Nuclear       Wind

                                                                         Coal        Gas       Hydro      Nuclear       Wind
(a) Percentage of companies that have an energy source as
its largest. (b) Carbon intensity boxplot per largest energy source.

              Figure 1: Energy sources and carbon intensities for the companies in the dataset.

4.2 Technology data and Social cost of carbon
Since companies in different geographical areas within the renewable energy industry can have
very different possible efficiencies of their power plants, we need fine-grained data on the cost,
emissions, and capacity of each technology available to change. We restrict the possibilities of
change in technology to implementing either wind power or solar power, due to data accessibility.
The first measure we want is the generating capacity (MW) we get per dollar spent (at), including
fixed and running costs during the lifetime of the technology, appropriately discounted. This we get
from the U.S. National Renewable Energy Laboratory for both onshore wind power (NREL 2022a)
and photovoltaic (PV) solar power (NREL 2022b). The costs include everything from equipment,
land, and interconnection costs to legal fees, administration labor, and maintenance. Second, we
want the lifetime tCO2e emissions per MW (bt) and the lifetime of the technology (Lt), which we
find from the life-cycle GHG assessments for wind (Dolan and Heath 2012) and solar (Hsu et al.
2012) respectively. The data highlights a mean carbon intensity of 0.011 tCO2-eq/MWh for wind
and 0.048 tCO2-eq/MWh for solar in the U.S. So, solar power is generally more emission-intensive
than wind with a factor ∼ 4, but is also generally cheaper per produced MWh with a factor ∼ 0.75
(EIA 2023a). When comparing our dataset’s mean emission intensity, 0.44 ± 0.20 tCO2-eq/MWh,

                                      12
it is clear that fossil-powered electricity generation is much more carbon-intensive than renewable-
powered. In Table 2 we can see the technology data values we will use.

                                       Table 2: Technology data.

                      Tech at (MW/$) bt (tCO2e/MW) Lt (years)
                                     −7
                      Wind 3.81 · 10                578 20
                                     −7
                       Solar 4.45 · 10               2420 30

   To translate the technology-specific data to the expected MWh produced for each company
we use area-specific capacity factors. Capacity factors for both wind and solar power all around
the U.S. are provided by the U.S. National Renewable Energy Laboratory (Lopez 2023b) (Lopez
2023a). We use solar capacity factors from 2020 and wind from 2021, with ”reference access”
which means some areas are excluded because of environmental protections. Having capacity data
from 2022 would have improved the reliability of the data. Summary data and capacity factors by
geography are presented in Table 3 and Figure 2 respectively.

                                       Table 3: Capacity factor data.

                     Tech Min. Mean Median Max. Sd.
                       Wind 0.01 0.36 0.37 0.57 0.09
                       Solar 0.12 0.19 0.19 0.26 0.02

         Capacity factor                                         Capacity factor
                             0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5                              0.125 0.150 0.175 0.200 0.225 0.250
       (a) Wind Capacity Factors (Lopez 2023b). (b) Solar (PV) Capacity Factors (Lopez 2023a).

                             Figure 2: Capacity factors in the U.S. by location.

    Translating tCO2e emissions to a cost in USD, we use estimates of the Social Cost of Carbon
(SCC). The estimates can differ a lot since there is uncertainty about both the consequences of
climate change and how much emissions we will have in the future. We will use the cases presented
in Table 4, which are the 5% to 95% percentile values of the social cost of carbon calculated with
a near-term risk-free discount rate of 2% by Rennert et al. (Rennert et al. 2022), converted from

                                      13
2020 USD to 2022 USD with a cumulative inflation rate of 13% (USDL 2023). For comparison,
the mean primary market auction price of EU CO2 emission allowances was €79.62 ± 7.70/tCO2 in
2022 (EEX 2023), which corresponds to $83.6 ± 8.1/tCO2 using the 2022 mean closing exchange
rate.

                                  Table 4: SCC data (2022 USD)

                             Scenario SCC ($/tCO2e)
                               5th percentile 49.72
                              50th percentile 209.05
                             95th percentile 413

5 Empirical Analysis

One of our key findings is that companies with higher carbon intensity have a higher SPI, as seen in
Figure 3. This supports our hypothesis that fossil fuel electricity-producing companies are preferred
investment options for SR investors as opposed to greener companies generating electricity through
renewable sources. This is also in line with Oehmke and Opp’s theory about the SPI (Oehmke and
Opp 2023). As Figure 4 shows, all companies with coal as the largest energy type score higher in
the SPI compared to companies with wind or hydro as the largest energy source. Companies with a
carbon intensity larger than 0.5 tCO2e/MWh (42% of the sample) receive about 1.5 or higher value
in the SPI for this specific SCC and g. The value of the SPI is the return on investment. However,
since the value depends greatly on the uncertain term g∗SCC, it is more interesting how companies’
SPI compare to each other rather than the actual index value. For exploring how the SPI varies we
want a large enough g and SCC to have non-zero SPI values for most companies. Therefore, the
case where we have SCC= $209.05/tCO2e and g=1 will be presented. For results with a smaller g
we refer to Figure A3 in Appendix.
    The company with the largest carbon intensity, where the largest energy source is coal, also
receives the highest value in SPI. Looking at the mean SPI value, companies with coal as the major
energy source have the largest SPI mean value, followed by gas, followed by hydro, nuclear, and
then wind. Moreover, the only two companies in the data set with the majority of the energy gener-
ated being renewable received a 0 in the SPI, meaning it should be the last choice for SR investors
according to SPI. However, companies with gas as the largest energy source have a large spread
with SPI values from almost 0 to about 2.5 which is close to the company having the highest value
in the SPI.
    The SPI does not correlate perfectly with the carbon intensity, see Figure 3, but it is the most sig-
nificant factor. The rest of the variation is explained by the individual firm’s prerequisites, namely
capacity factors, and how a large part of the business energy generation is compared to market cap
(this affects only two companies in our sample).
    For a small investment (defined as an investment size low enough for the energy change con-
straint (5) not to be hit), a company’s carbon intensity and its technology capacity factors explain
all variation in the SPI. For non-zero SPIs, it is also through a linear relationship, as seen in Table

                                      14
                             0.8

                                                                                                    Coal
                      0.6
                                                                                           Gas
                                                                                            Hydro
                                                                                                        Nuclear
                                                                                      Wind
                             0.4
                tCO2e/MWh
                                                                                                                     Fossile
                           0.2                                                                           Renewable

                          0             1             2             3
                                              SPI

Figure 3: SPI values for individual companies compared to their carbon intensity (tCO2e/MWh). The SPI is
calculated for a small investment, SCC= $209.05/tCO2e, and g = 1. The two renewable energy companies
both have a zero SPI and carbon intensities of around 0.05, so they overlap in the graph.

5. The carbon intensity (tCO2e/MWh) has a positive coefficient in the regression shown, and the
capacity factor for the technology that is optimal to switch to is also positive, showing that a higher
capacity factor results in a higher SPI. The capacity factor for the non-optimal tech is not signifi-
                                                                                            2
cant. The results of the regression are expected due to our construction of the SPI. The R  value is
not equal to 1 in Table 5 due to rounding error. The magnitude of the carbon intensity and capacity
factors are similar but with a higher mean value for the carbon intensity, as mentioned in Section
4.2. The size of the regression coefficients thereby tells us that while carbon intensity matters the
most for the resulting SPI, the capacity factors are important.
    If the constraints (5) are hit, the SPI becomes lower as investment I goes up, until you hit the
market cap constraint in investment (2). The market cap and the amount of energy generated by
the companies have no overall correlation with the value in SPI even for bigger investments (see
Appendix, Figure A2). This is due to the energy change constraint not affecting most companies
and that the amount of energy generated is not significantly correlated with the carbon intensity.
    In contrast to our second hypothesis, we find that there is no correlation between a company’s
SPI and its Sustainalytics Environmental Risk Scores. The second hypothesis, of the ERS being
correlated with SPI is rejected at a 5% significance level, where we can see the result from Kendall’s
tau test in Table 6. Figure 5 illustrates this for our standard case. We use Kendall’s rank correlation
tau test since it does not test linearity, only monotonicity. The τB is the share of concordant pairs
minus the share of discordant pairs, so the result τB = 0.1 means the rank in ERS does not strongly
indicate a similar rank in SPI. Thus, higher Environmental Risk Scores can not be equated to a
good investment choice in terms of SPI but not a bad one either. The same result holds for different
values for SCC and different values of g. Carbon intensity is not either significantly correlated
to the Environmental Risk Scores, partly explaining the lack of correlation between SPI and ERS.
See Figure A1 and Table A1 in Appendix. The absence of a correlation between Sustainalytics
Environmental Risk Scores and the SPI could also be due to the ERS not solely being based on

                                      15
                 Table 5: Regression of non-zero SPI on input variables for standard case.

                                                      Dependent variable:
                                                        SPI

                                                                            ∗∗∗
           tCO2e/MWh 5.377   (0.160)
                                                                            ∗∗∗
            wind capacity factor:optimal tech wind 6.669   (0.514)
                                                                            ∗∗∗
            optimal tech solar:solar capacity factor 10.478   (1.632)
           wind capacity factor:optimal tech solar −0.515 (1.520)
           optimal tech wind:solar capacity factor −1.133 (1.818)
                                                                            ∗∗∗
           Constant −3.381   (0.393)
           Observations 21
               2
         R                                      0.994
                         2
           Adjusted R                                      0.992
            Residual Std. Error 0.090 (df = 15)
                                                                    ∗∗∗
            F Statistic 471.610   (df = 5; 15)

                                                              ∗         ∗∗          ∗∗∗
          Note:  p<0.1;  p<0.05;   p<0.01

carbon emissions. They include other environmental issues for the electricity industry that are not
included in our SPI, making SPI and the Environmental Risk Scores not fully comparable.

                        Table 6: Kendall’s rank correlation tau test for SPI and ERS.
                                Note: H1: true τB is not equal to 0.

                              τB T p-value
                                  0.1 66 0.6259

    Furthermore, our results show that the preferred choice of new technology is dependent on the
companies’ prerequisites in terms of location which results in different capacity factors. The choice
of what to invest in, or to not invest at all, also depends on the input variables in terms of SCC and g.
Figure 6a shows how many companies will invest in new technology for different values of g, and
the color represents what share of those companies chose solar power over wind for that change.
Figure 6b shows the SPI for different g for individual companies, with color depending on which
technology the company invests in. This is what the mean SPI and share of technologies in Figure
6a is calculated on.
   In total, 21 of 24 companies eventually get a non-zero SPI for g = 1 and SCC= $209.05/tCO2e,
and will make a change of technology. 3 companies will not make a change regardless of the value
of g due to not having a positive SPI value for any reasonable g and SCC. We see that our data sample
mainly tends toward choosing wind, but some chose solar. The increased share of solar power as g is
larger is only due to that more companies are getting a positive SPI and not that specific companies
prefer different technologies as a function of g. Therefore the emission intensity between the two
technologies is similar enough to make the cost the determining factor. Moreover, which technology

                                      16
                        3

                        2

                   SPI

                        1

                        0
                             Coal          Gas         Hydro        Nuclear        Wind

Figure 4: How the SPI differs depending on the largest energy source in a company. The jitter is individual
companies’ SPIs. The SPI is calculated for a small investment, SCC= $209.05/tCO2e, and g = 1.

                            20.0

                            17.5

                      15.0
                                                                                                       Coal
                                                                                             Gas
               ERS
                                                                                                           Nuclear
                         12.5                                                                      Wind

                            10.0

                           0              1              2              3
                                               SPI

Figure 5: Environtmental Risk Scores compared to SPI. The SPI is calculated for a small investment, SCC=
$209.05/tCO2e, and g = 1.

has the cost advantage is largely determined by the capacity factor in the area the company operates.
   For example, the companies with tickers OGE and PNM both have gas as the major energy
source, but since they are located in different states the choice of technology differs. OGE is located
in Oklahoma and Western Arkansas which is a naturally windy area, while PNM is located in New
Mexico which is a naturally sunny area (see the capacity factors in Figure 2). According to the SPI
shown in Figure 7, OGE should always change to wind for a g above 0.25, and for a g about 0.4
and higher PNM should always change to solar.

                                      17
   20

                                                                                         3
                                                                                Share w.
    15                                                                             solar as
                                                                              preferred                                                                               Preferred
                                                                             tech                                                                                  tech
                                                                                         2
   10                                                                    20%     SPI                                                                  Solar
                                                                    15%                                                                     Wind
                                                           10%                                                             NA
                                                                   5%       1
    5                                                               0%
   No. of companies w. SPI > 0

    0                                                                                   0
      0.00        0.25        0.50        0.75        1.00                0.00        0.25        0.50        0.75        1.00
                               g                                                                 g
(a) Number of companies with a positive SPI. The colour (b) SPI vs g for all companies, and the technology the com-
shows the proportion of companies that have chosen solar. panies change to.

   Figure 6: SPI and number of companies with a positive SPI for different g, for SCC=$209.05/tCO2e.

5.1 Robustness
A sensitivity analysis on cost and CO2e intensity of our technologies shows that with a ±20% factor
difference in our technology input variables at and bt, the changes are minimal. A cost reduction in
solar power means that a few more companies would choose solar power over wind power, and vice-
versa if the opposite was true. It also slightly shifts the SPI curve backward or forward depending
on the direction of the technology variable change. A CO2e intensity change matters even less.
Even when wind power’s carbon intensity is multiplied by a factor of five, reaching the level of
solar power’s carbon intensity, not many additional companies choose solar over wind power.
    Lastly, we found that SPI is largely dependent on the value of SCC as seen in Figure 8). For
example, an investor with g = 0.5 gets a value of 0 in the SPI for all companies if the SCC used is
$49.72 and a value of around 2 depending on the company if the SCC is estimated to be $466.69.
Moreover, the value-determining factor of avoided emissions is SCC ∗ g, so the importance of the
price of carbon for SPI value grows with g. When SCC is at $49.72, only the investors with a g
close to 1 will change a company’s technology as the return is not positive in comparison to the
status quo, which is not the case at higher estimates of SCC.

                                      18
                        3

                                                                   Company
                    2                                                             OGE
                                                                   PNM

                    SPI                                                           Preferred
                                                                                        tech
                        1
                                                                                                                   Solar
                                                                                         Wind

                        0
                         0.00          0.25          0.50          0.75          1.00
                                              g

Figure 7: SPI vs g for two similar companies operating in different areas with the technology an SR invest-
ment is in.

                        5

                        4


                   3                                                    SCC
                                                                                                        $466.69
                                                                                                        $209.05
                      Mean SPI2                                                                    $49.72

                        1

                        0
                         0.00          0.25          0.50          0.75          1.00
                                              g

                Figure 8: How the mean value of SPI depends on g for different SCC’s.

6 Discussion

In this section, we discuss the limitations of our model setup and suggest future extensions. Finally,
we provide a conclusion to our findings.

6.1 Limitations
Our SPI is mainly sensitive to the estimate of the Social Cost of Carbon. Since the estimates of SCC
differ largely in the literature and are subject to high uncertainty, it constitutes a source of error when
looking at the results from our SPI. Continued research within the field of pricing of carbon would

                                      19
result in more reliable results. If the true SCC is in the lower end of the values we investigated,
this would mean that an SR investor would be indifferent between investing in most companies,
only having a few companies having a non-zero SPI. The emission discrepancy in using life-cycle
assessment-based carbon intensities for wind and solar while getting the company carbon intensity
from Scope 1 and 2 emissions should not affect the results much. Assumptions about shareholder
activism effects and the SCC have a much bigger impact.
    Several assumptions limit the applicability of our SPI. First, we have not considered the point
in time when investments in PPE (Property, Plant & Equipment) have taken place in the companies
due to the complexity of finding this data. Thus, we have not considered the opportunity cost of
dismantling a plant that has been newly invested in, in comparison to dismantling a plant that is
about to be obsolete. However, as the large majority of the companies are old, the investments
in PPE probably occur regularly instead of at one point in time, reducing the possible impact on
between-company SPI as a consequence of our choice to neglect the timing of investments.
    Second, we assume that the SR capital invested following SPI will be used for replacing existing
fossil fuel plants with renewable energy plants. However, if the SR capital instead is used for
expanding to renewable sources on top of the regular supply of fossil fuel energy, the total pool
of fossil fuel energy in the world will stay unchanged. This would generate no reduction in global
warming, as divestments from fossil fuels are necessary to be able to reduce emissions. Thus, SR
investors must succeed in the boardrooms by divesting current fossil fuel operations in favor of
renewable energy.
    Third, we do not assume we replace all the carbon-intensive energy first. Instead, we assume
all energy in a company to have the same carbon intensity. This makes our SPI biased toward high-
carbon-intensity firms for smaller investments. An extension to the study could be to use more
detailed information about the energy configuration in a company to solve this problem.
    Lastly, when constructing our SPI we assumed the investor would be able to spend the whole
investment amount on investing in a new technology. However, this is equivalent to giving the
money away against the assurance that the company will use it to replace part of its electricity-
generating fleet, which is a strong simplification of what an actual investment process would be
like. More realistically, an investor would invest in the form of buying stocks or buying bonds, and
also make her own analysis about the financial return from holding the stock or bond. We have
not made an attempt to estimate alpha. Furthermore, when buying stocks and exerting shareholder
power through them, voting rules, company liquidity, the board, and other shareholders play an
important part in what type of changes an investor can accomplish. Future studies could look at
how efficiently the SPI could be applied in reality by making use of shareholder activism.

6.2 Concluding Remarks
Our results imply that for an SR investor with the possibility to impact company operations through
shareholder activism, investments in carbon-intensive companies are preferred over investments in
green firms when there exists an alternative technology that is cleaner than the current technology
of the carbon-intensive companies. This result can be explained by the large reduction of carbon
that can be achieved by changing to cleaner technology in a current carbon-intensive company. At
the same time, companies with natural gas as their largest energy source can be both good and bad

                                      20
investment choices according to our SPI. This can be explained by differences in the rest of the
companies’ energy mixes, where some companies are leaning more towards fossil fuels in general
and some lean more towards renewable or nuclear power. It can also be explained by the fact that
natural gas is a less carbon-intensive energy source in comparison to coal.
    In contrast to the mainstream indices today which take a screening approach to SRI and thus
suggest SR investors to invest in firms that are already ”best-in-class”, we show that SR investors
with an impact mandate should do the opposite according to our SPI. However, we cannot generally
say that a screening approach gives the opposite investment recommendation compared to SPI since
not all environmental indices correlate with carbon intensity, which we showed for Sustainalytic’s
Environmental Risk Scores.

                                      21
References

Alexander, Olwyn (2022). Exponential Expectations for ESG. URL: https : / / corpgov . law .
   harvard.edu/2022/11/17/exponential-expectations-for-esg/ (visited on 11/05/2023).
Bertolinelli, Marcellina, Lidia Pinti, and Serena Bonelli (2022). “Social Environmental Profitability
   Index (SEPI) and BIM to Support Decision-Making Processes in Public Green Infrastructure
    Investments”. In: New Metropolitan Perspectives. Ed. by Francesco Calabrò, Lucia Della Spina,
    and María José Piñeira Mantiñán. Springer International Publishing, pp. 1977–1989. ISBN: 978-
   3-031-06825-6.
Bocco, Roberta (2023). Clean energy investment to hit $1.7 trillion - and other energy stories. URL:
   https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2023/05/energy-news-renewables-investment-
   iea-30-may/ (visited on 11/30/2023).
Camilleri, Mark Anthony (2021). “The market for socially responsible investing: a review of the
    developments”. In: Social Responsibility Journal 17.3, pp. 412–428.
Capelle-Blancard, Gunther and Stéphanie Monjon (2012). “Trends in the literature on Socially Re-
    sponsible Investment: Looking for the keys under the lamppost”. In: Business Ethics: A Euro-
    pean Review 21.3, pp. 239–250. DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8608.2012.01658.x.
CDP (2023). CDP Homepage. URL: https://www.cdp.net/en (visited on 12/01/2023).
Diez-Cañamero, Borja et al. (2020). “Measurement of corporate social responsibility: A review of
    corporate sustainability indexes, rankings and ratings”. In: Sustainability 12.5, p. 2153.
Dolan, Stacey L. and Garvin A. Heath (2012). “Life Cycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions of Utility-
   Scale Wind Power”. In: Journal of Industrial Ecology 16.s1, S136–S154. DOI: https://doi.
    org/10.1111/j.1530-9290.2012.00464.x.
EEX (2023). EU ETS Auctions. URL: https://www.eex.com/en/market-data/environmental-
   markets/eua-primary-auction-spot-download (visited on 12/01/2023).
EIA (2023a). eia.gov. URL: https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/aeo/electricity_generation/
   pdf/AEO2023_LCOE_report.pdf (visited on 12/01/2023).
— (2023b). Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) - U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA).
   URL: https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.php?id=77&t=11 (visited on 11/30/2023).
GHG (2023). Corporate Standard | GHG Protocol. URL: https://ghgprotocol.org/corporate-
    standard.
Hsu, David D. et al. (2012). “Life Cycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions of Crystalline Silicon Pho-
    tovoltaic Electricity Generation”. In: Journal of Industrial Ecology 16.s1, S122–S135. DOI:
    https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-9290.2011.00439.x.
IER (2023). Fossil Fuels Remain Strong in 2022 Globally, Despite Increases in Renewable En-
   ergy. URL: https://www.instituteforenergyresearch.org/international-issues/
   fossil - fuels - remain - strong - in - 2022 - globally - despite - increases - in -
   renewable-energy (visited on 11/30/2023).
Lopez, Anthony (2023a). Solar Supply Curves, PV Reference Access. URL: https://www.nrel.
   gov/gis/solar-supply-curves.html (visited on 11/05/2023).
— (2023b). Wind Supply Curves, Reference Access Land-Based Wind 2023 Data. URL: https:
   //www.nrel.gov/gis/wind-supply-curves.html (visited on 11/05/2023).

                                      22
Mackenzie, Craig, William Rees, and Tatiana Rodionova (2013). “Do Responsible Investment In-
   dices Improve Corporate Social Responsibility? FTSE4Good’s Impact on Environmental Man-
   agement”. In: Corporate Governance: An International Review 21.5, pp. 495–512. DOI: https:
    //doi.org/10.1111/corg.12039.
Matos, P. (2020). ESG and Responsible Institutional Investing Around the World: A Critical Review.
   CFA Institute Research Foundation. ISBN: 9781944960988. URL: https://books.google.
    se/books?id=e8nnDwAAQBAJ.
Nordhaus, William D (2017). “Revisiting the social cost of carbon”. In: Proceedings of the National
   Academy of Sciences 114.7, pp. 1518–1523.
NREL (2022a). Land-Based Wind | Electricity | 2022 | ATB | NREL. URL: https://atb.nrel.
   gov/electricity/2022/land-based_wind (visited on 12/01/2023).
— (2022b). Utility-Scale PV | Electricity | 2022 | ATB | NREL. URL: https://atb.nrel.gov/
   electricity/2022/utility-scale_pv (visited on 12/01/2023).
Oehmke, Martin and Marcus M. Opp (2023). “A Theory of Socially Responsible Investment”. In:
   Swedish House of Finance Research Paper 20.2. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.
    3467644.
Renneboog, Luc, Jenke Ter Horst, and Chendi Zhang (2008). “Socially responsible investments:
    Institutional aspects, performance, and investor behavior”. In: Journal of Banking & Finance
    32.9, pp. 1723–1742.
Rennert, Kevin et al. (2022). “Comprehensive evidence implies a higher social cost of CO2”. In:
   Nature 610.7933, pp. 687–692.
Rivoli, Pietra (2003). “Making a Difference or Making a Statement? Finance Research and Socially
   Responsible Investment”. In: Business Ethics Quarterly 13.3, pp. 271–287. URL: http://www.
   jstor.org/stable/3857782 (visited on 11/11/2023).
Sandberg, Joakim et al. (2009). “The Heterogeneity of Socially Responsible Investment”. In: Jour-
    nal of Business Ethics 87.4, pp. 519–533.
Schloemer, Steffen et al. (2014). “Annex III: Technology-specific cost and performance parame-
    ters”. English. In: Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Ed. by O Edenhofer
    et al. Cambridge University Press, pp. 1329–1356. ISBN: 978-1-107-65481-5.
Sparkes, Russell and Christopher J. Cowton (2004). “The maturing of Socially Responsible Invest-
    ment: A review of the developing link with Corporate Social Responsibility”. In: Journal of
    Business Ethics 52.1, pp. 45–57. DOI: 10.1023/b:busi.0000033106.43260.99.
Sustainalytics (2021). sustainalytics.com. URL: https : / / www . sustainalytics . com / docs/
   %20knowledgehublibraries / default - document - library / sustainalytics _ esg -
    risk - rating _ methodology - abstract - (2 ) .pdf ? sfvrsn = 15b2cba1 _ 0 (visited on
    11/27/2023).
UNDP (2023). Energy Transition — undp.org. URL: https://www.undp.org/energy/our-
   work-areas/energy-transition (visited on 11/30/2023).
UNFCCC (2023). The Paris Agreement. URL: https : / / www . un . org / en / climatechange /
   paris-agreement (visited on 11/30/2023).
— (2016). unfccc.int. URL: https : / / unfccc . int / sites / default / files / resource /
   parisagreement_publication.pdf (visited on 11/30/2023).

                                      23
USDL (2023). CPI Inflation Calculator. URL: https : / / www . bls . gov / data / inflation _
   calculator.htm (visited on 12/01/2023).
Widyawati, Luluk (2020). “A systematic literature review of socially responsible investment and
    environmental social governance metrics”. In: Business Strategy and the Environment 29.2,
    pp. 619–637. DOI: 10.1002/bse.2393.

                                      24
Appendix

                             0.8

                             0.6

                                                                                                       Coal
                                                                                             Gas
                          0.4                                                                            Hydro
                                                                                                           Nuclear
                 CO2e/MWh                                              Wind

                             0.2

                                  10.0         12.5         15.0         17.5         20.0
                                         Environment Risk Score

    Figure A1: Sustainalytics’ Environment Risk Score of a company compared to it’s carbon intensity.

                      2.0e+08

                                                                             Coal
                     1.5e+08                                                                 Gas
                                                                                         Hydro
                                                                                                    Nuclear
                                                                                   Wind
                      1.0e+08

               Energy (MWh)
                                                                                                                 Fossile
                      5.0e+07
                                                                                             Renewable

                      0.0e+00
                           0             1             2             3
                                             SPI

Figure A2: Total produced energy for companies relative to SPI. No significant correlation. For small in-
vestment, SCC= $209.05/tCO2e, g = 1.

                                      25
    0.8                                                                                                   0.8

                                                                              Coal                                                                                      Coal
   0.6                                                               0.6
                                                                       Gas                                                                               Gas
                                                                        Hydro                                                                              Hydro
                                                                                 Nuclear                                                                                       Nuclear
                                                                   Wind                                                                          Wind
    0.4                                                                                                   0.4
  tCO2e/MWh                                                 tCO2e/MWh
                                                                                           Fossile                                                                                                  Fossile
    0.2                                                                           Renewable      0.2                                                                           Renewable

      0.0        0.5        1.0        1.5        2.0                        0.0         0.3         0.6         0.9
                             SPI                                                                   SPI
(a) SPI vs carbon intensity for g=0.75,                   (b) SPI vs carbon intensity for g=0.5,
SCC= $209.05/tCO2e, and a small investment.          SCC= $209.05/tCO2e, and a small investment.

                                                       0.8

                                                                                                                           Coal
                                   0.6
                                                                                                                Gas
                                                                                                                  Hydro
                                                                                                                                Nuclear
                                                                                                          Wind
                                                       0.4
                               tCO2e/MWh
                                                                                                                                                Fossile
                                                   0.2                                                                           Renewable

                                       0.00      0.01      0.02      0.03      0.04      0.05
                                                                SPI
                          (c) SPI vs carbon intensity for g=0.25,
                          SCC= $209.05/tCO2e, and a small investment.

                          Figure A3: SPI vs carbon intensity for a few different g.

                    Table A1: Kendall’s rank correlation tau test for tCO2e/MWh.
                                Note: H1: true τB is not equal to 0.

                         Variable τB T p-value
                          ERS 0.1167 67 0.5643
                          SPI 0.8998 - 8.591e − 10

                                      26