SHOWING OFF IN INITIAL
PUBLIC OFFERINGS

THE PROPORTION OF INSTITUTIONAL CORNERSTONE
INVESTORS IN IPOS AND THE STATE OF THE IPO MARKET

JOHAN BJÖRKMAN

SAMUEL LINDSTRÖM

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2023
Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings: The Proportion of Institutional Cornerstone
Investors in IPOs and the State of the IPO Market

Abstract:

   The paper analyzes the participation of institutional cornerstone investors in initial public
   offerings (IPOs) using data from NASDAQ Main Market and First North Growth Market in
   Stockholm between 2015 and the first half of 2023. We identify positive relationships between
   both hot and cold IPO market periods and the proportion of institutional cornerstone investors
   in IPOs. The results support theories of institutional informational advantage, quid pro quo
   relationships between underwriters and institutions, and signaling effects. Meanwhile, we
   conclude that the definition of the different states of the IPO market plays a decisive role in
   determining the significance of the relationships.

Keywords:

   Initial Public Offering (IPO), Institutional Cornerstone Investors, Hot IPO Markets, Cold IPO
   Markets, Institutional investors

Authors:

   Johan Björkman (25281)
   Samuel Lindström (25272)

Tutor:

   Maíra Sontag González

Examiner:

   Adrien d´Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Acknowledgements:

   We want to express our gratitude to our tutor, Maíra Sontag González, for their invaluable
   mentoring throughout the project. Furthermore, we would like to thank Seyyed Morteza
   Aghajanzadeh Amirkalaee for their support and advice during the data analysis process. Finally,
   we are highly appreciative of employees at Carnegie Investment Bank and Handelsbanken
   Capital Markets for valuable insights into initial public offerings from a practitioner’s
   perspective and initial guidance on information collection.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Johan Björkman and Samuel Lindström, 2023
                           Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings 3

2021 was a year with a record number of initial public offerings (IPOs), resulting in a record
amount of capital raised (Mackintosh (2022), Driebusch and Santilli (2021)). Since then, the
number of listings has decreased drastically. There were 153 listings on NASDAQ Main List and
First North Growth Market in Stockholm during 2021. From the beginning of 2022 to the middle
of 2023, the number of listings were down to 62 (Nasdaq (n.d.)). Meanwhile, so-called
“cornerstone investors” have been depicted as a potential tool to address challenges in raising
equity capital in fragile markets. Some industry professionals predict cornerstone investors to have
a growing role in IPOs, as they could potentially reduce uncertainty in terms of transaction risk
and provide a signaling effect (for example, see Chen, Hughes, and Megaw (2023), Lipschultz
(2023), Espinasse (2018), Cole, McNaughton and Gossen (2015)). There is no globally established
definition of a cornerstone investor. However, cornerstone investors are commonly described as
large investors who undertake to invest in an IPO before the bookbuilding process for a guaranteed
allocation of shares, which is later disclosed in the prospectus (for instance, see Finansinspektionen
(2016), Espinasse (2014), Cole, McNaughton and Gossen (2015)). The purpose of cornerstone
investors is, meanwhile, a debated topic. One potential concern regarding cornerstones is that their
superior information and influence might lead to the marginalization of retail investors in high-
demand IPOs (Rock (1986), McGuinness (2014), Jakobsson (2015), Finansinspektionen (2016)).
Other potential issues relate to liquidity and pressure on share prices. As cornerstone investors can
be faced with lock-up periods, a large allocation to cornerstone investors could have a negative
impact on the liquidity of the share in the after-market. Moreover, the undertaking of cornerstone
investors could contribute to price pressure as markets anticipate cornerstone investors to sell their
shares at the expiry of lock-up periods (Tan and Ong (2013), Espinasse (2018)).
       While the role of cornerstone investors is a debated topic, the available empirical evidence
regarding benefits and disadvantages of cornerstone investors is limited, much due to cornerstone
investors being a comparatively new concept in many capital markets. That is, the primary obstacle
to empirical research has so far been the availability of data. In the U.S. for example, the presence
of cornerstone investors has started to increase after the U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission’s easing of regulation in 2019 (Chen, Hughes, and Megaw (2023)). In Sweden, the
term “cornerstone investor” was first used in an IPO in 2014 as Lifco went public (Höiseth (2017),
Lifco (2014)). Since then, cornerstone investors have frequently occurred in the prospectuses of
Swedish companies offering shares in the public markets (Falkner and Roth (2015)).
4 Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings

McGuinness (2012) study the relationship between cornerstone investors and IPO underpricing
and find that the percentage of cornerstone investors in IPOs positively and significantly correlates
with “money left on the table”. Meanwhile, empirical data on the role of cornerstone investors and
the motivations behind the allocation of shares to cornerstone investors remains uncharted territory
in research. Cornerstone investors are often considered to be large, institutional investors
(Finansinspektionen (2016), Bader, Friedman, Kim, Kengelbach, and Rice (2021)). Several studies
cover institutional ownership, including Aggarwal, Prabhala, and Puri (2002), in which private
information, size, demand, and underwriter reputation are significant in determining institutional
allocation in IPOs. Moreover, Benveniste and Wilhelm (1990) discover that institutional investors
gain a competitive advantage in participating in highly demanded issues by agreeing to partake in
less attractive offerings as well, supporting the strategic role of underwriters in allocating
ownership. Whereas private information, strategic underwriters, size, pre-market demand, and
underwriter reputation have been shown to impact institutional allocation, the influence of the state
of the IPO market on the proportion of institutional investors, and more specifically cornerstone
investors, offers a relevant addition to the existing research. Helwege and Liang (2004) study the
difference between firms carrying out their IPO in hot versus cold markets. They observe that IPOs
conducted in hot IPO markets have a higher proportion of institutional ownership than IPOs in
cold markets, measured at the end of the quarter of the public issuance. Meanwhile, the allocation
of shares to institutions in earlier stages of the IPO process – in the case of cornerstone investors,
before the book-building process – deserves additional attention, given argued trade-offs between
signaling effects, reduced transaction risk, after-market liquidity concerns, price pressure, and
satisfactory levels of allocation to retail investors.
       Our paper aims to provide relevant contributions to existing research by examining the
effect of the state of the IPO market on the participation of institutional cornerstone investors in
IPOs and thereby further analyze the role of cornerstone investors in the IPO process. The recent
years’ IPO market in Sweden, with record low and high periods, combined with a relatively long
presence of cornerstone investors, provide us with sufficient data and allow for empirical analysis
to be conducted. We thus contribute to the relevant research on the topic by using a unique data
set of Swedish IPOs. We use information on the percentage of the issue subscribed to by
institutional cornerstone investors to investigate the impact of the state of the IPO market.
                           Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings 5

       The first part of our analysis consists of simple linear univariate regressions on the
dependent variable of the normalized rank-transform of the percentage of institutional cornerstone
investors in an IPO against each independent dummy variable representing the different states of
the IPO market the month prior to the listing, considering the timing of the final decision to get
cornerstone investors on board. The relationship between hot IPO markets and the proportion of
institutional cornerstone investors in IPOs is insignificant in the univariate regressions. Moreover,
classifying cold markets as the bottom third of months in terms of IPO activity provides a positive
yet insignificant relationship between cold markets and cornerstone investor ownership. The
explanatory value is low, with an R-squared value below 0.1% for the model. In addition, taking
the characteristics of the sample into account and broadening the classification of cold markets
leads to a positive but still insignificant relation between cold IPO markets and the degree of
institutional cornerstone participation.
        Next, controlling for underwriter reputation, pre-market demand, different proxies for the
size of the IPO, and industry belonging, we find a positive yet insignificant relationship for both
cold and hot IPO markets, at the ten percent level, using the narrower definition of cold markets.
We suggest that strategic allocation practices by underwriters (Benveniste and Wilhelm (1990))
can help explain participation of cornerstone investors regardless of market conditions.
Meanwhile, using a broader classification of cold IPO markets to take our sample into
consideration, we obtain a positive and significant result, which applies to both cold and hot IPO
markets. Broadening the classification of cold markets may illuminate the differences between hot,
neutral, and cold markets, leading to a significant outcome. As for the positive and significant
influence of the variable for hot markets, Rock (1986) claims that institutions can effectively
identify “lemons” in the market, either through informational advantage or preferential treatment.
As Choe, Masulis, and Nanda (1993) claim that higher costs of information asymmetry discourage
high quality firms from going public in times of bad market conditions, the results in addition to
theory suggest that hot markets foster greater institutional participation in IPOs. The result of an
increased participation of institutional cornerstone investors in cold IPO markets aligns with
argued benefits of reduced transaction risks and signaling effects to ensure listing success in
market downturns (Chen, Hughes, and Megaw (2023), McGuinness (2012)). Moreover, in
uncertain market conditions, institutional cornerstone investors can support underwriter in price
setting activities (Lowry and Schwert (2010)). Finally, the suggested quid pro quo relationship
6 Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings

between underwriters and institutions may lead to institutional cornerstone investors obtaining a
larger share of significantly underpriced stocks in hot markets (Lee, Taylor, and Walter (1999))
while committing to issues in colder markets.
        As it relates to the validity and accuracy of the results, using a narrower definition of cold
IPO markets and following the classification of Helwege and Liang (2004) offers an insignificant
relationship between the proportion of institutional cornerstone investors and hot and cold IPO
markets. If increasing the percentile for the classification of cold markets accurately captures cold
market periods, it could enhance the distinction between hot, neutral, and cold markets, explaining
the increased significance for hot and cold periods. However, this may lead to ambiguities in the
definition of the different states of the IPO market. The varying results between the two
multivariate models suggest that while conservatively defined cold markets imply no significance
for neither hot nor cold markets, a broader definition highlighting periods of below-median IPO
activity as cold reveals a higher proportion of cornerstones in both hot and cold market conditions.
Thus, it is important to exercise caution when interpreting the differing results depending on
market classification.
       The contribution of the paper is relevant for academics and practitioners in the field.
Studying the influence of market conditions on the proportion of institutional cornerstone investors
in IPOs through the lens of available theory offers a greater understanding of the role of
cornerstone investors and the motivations behind their activity. The results are important for
underwriters and issuers when seeking to go public in different states of the market. However, it
is further critical for institutional and retail investors to have a thorough grasp of the mechanics
behind pre-bookbuilding processes.
        The paper proceeds as follows. Section I provides data definitions, sources, and descriptive
statistics of our sample. Section II examines the relationship between the proportion of institutional
cornerstone investors in IPOs and the state of the IPO market. Moreover, we analyze whether there
is any difference depending on prevailing market conditions. Finally, section III provides a
summary of the results and draws conclusions from our investigation.

   I. Data Set
       The data set consists of IPOs offered at NASDAQ Main List or First North Growth Market
in Stockholm from 1 January 2015 to 30 June 2023. Whereas the number of listings on these two
                           Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings 7

markets is a total of 615 over the period, several exclusions have been made. In line with previous
research, we have excluded IPOs by real estate investment trusts (REITs) using industry
classification from S&P Capital IQ, IPOs where no proceeds are raised such as direct listings, spin-
offs, and reverse takeovers, IPOs with unit offerings and four instances with insufficient
information provided (see Aggarwal, Prabhala and Puri (2002)). After these exclusions, the sample
consists of 235 IPOs for the period. The exclusions are detailed in Table I below.

                                         Table I
                               Sample Size
 The table reports the total number of listings on NASDAQ Main Market and First North Growth Market
 in Stockholm from 1 January 2015 to 30 June 2023 in row 2. In row 3, the number of listings consisting
 of listing transfers, direct listings, and similar non-issuance transactions are reported. Row 4 reports the
 number of REITs excluded beyond those already omitted in row 3, row 5 reports the number of unit
 offerings, and row 6 reports the number of observations subtracted from the sample due to lack of
 information available. Finally, row 7 reports the final sample used for the purposes of this paper.

    Item #

 Total listings on NASDAQ Main List and First North Growth Market in Stockholm 615
 Listing transfers, direct listings, and similar non-issuance listings 304
 REITs 14
 Unit offerings 58
 Insufficient information 4
 Final sample 235

       Section I will proceed as follows. In subsection I.A the dependent variable of our analysis
is defined and presented – the transformed percentage of institutional cornerstone investors in
IPOs. The definition of hot and cold IPO markets, the independent variables of focus in this paper,
are presented and defined in subsection I.B. Finally, the control variables used in our analysis are
presented in subsection I.C, along with descriptive statistics of the IPOs in our sample.

A. Institutional Cornerstone Investors
       The term “cornerstone investor” appeared for the first time in Sweden during the second
half of 2014 as Lifco went public (Höiseth (2017)). On page 5 of Lifco’s prospectus (2014), the
term was presented as follows:
8 Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings

       Didner & Gerge Fonder AB and Fjärde AP-Fonden (“Cornerstone Investors”)
       have individually undertaken to acquire 6,813,200 series B shares in the Offer.
        Cornerstone Investors will thus, after the implementation of the Offer, individually
       hold approximately 7.5 percent of the number of shares and approximately 4.7
        percent of the number of votes in the Company. [translated from Swedish]

       There has, however, not existed a globally established definition of cornerstone investors
throughout the period of our sample (Finansinspektionen (2016)). Tan and Ong (2013) analyze
cornerstone investors in Asian IPOs and define cornerstone investors as the “class of investors
who commit in advance to invest a fixed amount of money, or for a fixed number of shares, in an
IPO”. Furthermore, they state that the allotment of shares to these investors is guaranteed through
formal agreements. Cornerstone investors should, according to Tan and Ong, also be distinguished
from “anchor investors”, whose orders are not guaranteed and are placed during the bookbuilding
process. Anchor investors are, in contrast to cornerstone investors, also typically not disclosed in
the prospectus and not subject to lock-up periods according to Tan and Ong. This may be
contrasted with the disclosure of the anchor investors in Cedergrenska’s prospectus (2021) for its
public listing on First North in 2021, where the anchor investors in the IPO were described on page
31 in the prospectus as follows:

       Enter Fonder, FE Fonder and Prior & Nilsson Fonder (”Anchor Investors”) have
       undertaken to, under certain conditions, and at the same price as other
       investments, subscribe for a total of 1,600,000 shares corresponding to an amount
        of approximately SEK 80 million and approximately 61 percent […]. [translated
       from Swedish]

       In European IPOs, Cole, McNaughton and Gossen (2015) note that the definition of
cornerstone investors is based on the definition established in Hong Kong, but subject to several
deviations. For example, whereas lock-up periods are mandatory in Hong Kong, this is not the
case in Europe (see also Espinasse (2014)). Given this discrepancy in the definition of cornerstone
investors, we have decided to follow the definition of cornerstone investors used by the Swedish
Financial Supervisory Authority (Finansinspektionen (2016)), as our data consist of Swedish IPOs:
                           Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings 9

        A relatively new phenomenon on the stock market in Sweden is the presence of so-
       called anchor investors (cornerstone investors) in connection with IPOs. Anchor
        investors are the larger investors who, prior to an IPO, commit to subscribing to a
        certain number of shares in exchange for a guaranteed allocation. [translated from
       Swedish]

       That is, in Sweden, several terms can be used to describe the group of investors in question.
We have consequently defined cornerstone investors as investors who (i) publicly in the prospectus
(ii) undertake to invest in a certain number of shares in exchange for (iii) a guaranteed allocation.
This definition thus includes any term used for an investment undertaking disclosed publicly in
the prospectus, such as investment undertakings and anchor investments, if the investors are
guaranteed allocation in the offering. Our definition of institutional cornerstone investors is based
on our definition of cornerstone investors in combination with a definition of institutional investors
widely used in the literature (for instance, see Lewellen and Lewellen (2022), Ferreira and Matos
(2008), McCahery, Sautner and Starks (2016)). Institutional cornerstone investors have
consequently been defined as (i) banks, insurance companies, investment companies, investment
advisors or similar professional money managers with discretionary control over assets who (ii)
publicly in the prospectus (iii) undertake to invest in a certain number of shares in exchange for
(iv) a guaranteed allocation.
       For the 235 IPOs in our sample, we know the percentage of institutional cornerstone
investors of the issue in each IPO. The percentages have been calculated based on the cornerstone
investors’ undertakings as a share of the primary and potentially secondary offering, excluding
potential overallotment options provided in the published prospectus of each company, as the
information on potential exercise of overallotment options is less available and reliable, and
depending on later occurring events. The prospectuses have primarily been collected from the
Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority’s prospectus register, nyemissioner.se, and in some
instances the investor relations webpage of certain companies in our sample. The classification
into institutional and non-institutional cornerstone investors has been based on the respective
investors’ description of themselves as well as other publicly available information. For example,
in Checkin.com Group’s (2021) prospectus published in 2021, four parties described as
cornerstone investors jointly represented 60% of the offer: TIN Fonder (38.9%), Knutsson
Holdings (10.0%), Norron Select (5.6%) and ES Aktiehandel AB (5.6%). TIN Fonder and Norron
10 Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings

Select are both defined as institutional cornerstone investors as Norron Select is a Nordic
investment manager and TIN Fonder is a fund manager (for instance, see TIN Fonder (n.d.),
Norron (n.d.)). ES Aktiehandel AB and Knutsson Holding are, however, not considered as
institutional cornerstone investors. ES Aktiehandel AB is a company managed and owned by the
private individual Erik Selin, and Knutsson Holding is a family-owned holding company (for
example, see Affärsvärlden (2023), Knutsson Holdings (n.d.)). Thus, institutional cornerstone
investors represented 44.5% of the IPO in Checkin.com Group’s IPO given our definition.
        Finally, to deal with the bounded nature of the variable, having a value between 0 and 1,
and to account for potential non-normal distribution, the variable is rank-transformed and
normalized (to have zero mean and unit standard deviation) in line with Antón and Polk (2014).

B. State of the IPO Market at the Time of Cornerstone Investor Commitment
       In the financial press, the state of the IPO market is often described using the volume of
offerings and degree of oversubscription. Hot IPO markets are characterized by a high volume of
offerings and frequent oversubscription of offerings while cold IPO markets are defined by low
volumes of issuance (for example, see Asgari (2021), Izzi (2021), Demos (2016)). The
commitment by cornerstone investors to invest in an IPO is undertaken before the prospectus is
published and thus before the offer date. Unfortunately, we are unable to gather information on
exactly when the potential commitments of cornerstone investors have taken place for each IPO
in our sample as it is not information available in the prospectuses nor in other public documents.
In the European market, however, cornerstone investors generally commit to invest in IPOs around
one month before the offer date (Cole, McNaughton and Gossen (2015)).
       Considering the European IPO process, the issuer and underwriter typically desire some
form of commitment from cornerstone investors at the end of the preparatory stage so that the
potential commitments can be included when the intention to float announcement (ITF) is
published. This is ideally in the form of a formal commitment. However, as cornerstone investors
typically want to compare their view of the company valuation of the issuer to others’ opinions on
the matter, the formal commitment might occur later. After the ITF is published, a pre-deal investor
education stage begins which typically lasts for two weeks. At the latest, the potential cornerstone
commitment will occur at the end of the pre-deal investor education stage, just before the
prospectus is published and the bookbuilding period commences. The bookbuilding period does
                           Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings 11

in turn generally start two weeks before the offer date (Cole, McNaughton and Gossen (2015)).
We therefore approximate the commitments from cornerstone investors to occur during the month
prior to the day of the IPO. That is, the independent variable is the state of the IPO market the
month before the IPO.
        In existing research and literature, the state of the IPO market tends to be defined based on
volume. Helwege and Liang (2004) define hot and cold periods of IPO markets by using three-
month centered moving averages of the number of IPOs scaled by the number of new business
formations for each month. With this approach, Helwege and Liang reduce the risk of classifying
seasonally low months as periods of cold IPO markets when they in fact were neutral. They use a
larger sample of IPOs than their main sample, including unit offerings and firms with insufficient
data. The top quarter of the data is classified as hot markets for IPOs and the bottom third of months
as periods of cold IPO markets. Helwege and Liang classify the bottom third of the data rather
than the bottom quarter as cold IPO market periods due to the risk of otherwise ending up with an
excessively small sample as the bottom quartile includes a number of months with no IPOs.
       We do, in line with Helwege and Liang (2004), use the three-month centered moving
average scaled by business formations and classify the top quarter of the months throughout the
sample period as hot IPO market periods. Moreover, we use a larger sample of 310 IPOs including
unit offerings in the classification of the state of the market of each month. However, one
adjustment to Helwege and Liang’s classification is made. Whereas Helwege and Liang’s sample
consists of 6,419 observations over 312 months (approximately 21 IPOs per month on average),
our sample consists of 310 observations over 102 months (approximately 3 IPOs per month on
average). This suggests our sample should have proportionally more months with no IPOs, in turn
suggesting an excessively small sample even when using the bottom third of the sample to classify
cold markets. Taking this into consideration, we provide regressions using both the same threshold
percentile as Helwege and Liang, and a slightly adjusted threshold taking the characteristics of our
sample into consideration. In the adjusted classification, the cold IPO market is defined as the

             th
bottom 38  percentile rather than the bottom third. Data on business formations used in the
definition have been gathered from the Swedish Companies Registration Office, and the offer dates
have been collected from NASDAQ’s website.
       The classification of the months in the sample period into the different states as well as the
resulting distribution of IPOs depending on the state of the market the month prior the IPOs is
12 Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings

presented in Table II for both classifications. Since the sample covers the period from 1 January
2015 to 30 June 2023, there are 102 months in total over the period. Out of these 102 months, 32
had no IPOs. Following the classification used by Helwege and Liang (2004), 35 months are

                                                                                       th
classified as cold, 41 as neutral and 26 as hot. When instead using the 38  percentile of months,
40 months are classified as cold, 36 as neutral, and 26 as hot. With the classification used by
Helwege and Liang, 17 IPOs out of 235 were conducted following a month classified as a cold

                                      th
IPO market period. Using the 38  percentile, the corresponding number of IPOs is 24.

                                         Table II
                 Hot and Cold IPO Market Definition
 The table reports information on the classification of the months throughout the sample period into
 different states of the IPO market as well as the resulting distribution of IPOs depending on the state of
 the IPO market the month prior to the IPOs. In row 2, the total number of months covered by our sample
 is presented. Row 3 reports the number of months in our sample which had no IPOs. In row 4 to 6, the
 table reports the distribution of the sample’s months into the different states of the IPO market. Row 7
 reports the total number of IPOs in our main sample used in the regressions while row 8 to 10 present
 the distribution of IPO depending on the state of the month prior to the month of each IPO. Bottom third
 denotes the distribution when classifying the months of the sample using the classification used by
                                        th
 Helwege and Liang (2004). 38  Percentile represents the distribution when using the adjusted
 classification taking our sample into consideration, classifying cold IPO markets using the 38th percentile
 rather than the bottom third.

                                                                                                    th
    Item Bottom third 38  Percentile

 Total months 102 102
 Months with no IPO 32 32
 Months classified as cold 35 40
 Months classified as neutral 41 36
 Months classified as hot 26 26
 Total number of IPOs in main sample 235 235
 IPOs following a month classified as cold 17 24
 IPOs following a month classified as neutral 91 84
 IPOs following a month classified as hot 127 127

C. Control Variables
       Aggarwal, Prabhala and Puri (2002) consider several variables in their paper analyzing the
percentage of institutional allocation in IPOs. These include the reputation of the underwriter in
each IPO, three different proxies for size of the IPOs, industry belonging, days spent in the
registration process, and the percentage difference between the midpoint of the filing range and
                           Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings 13

the final offer price. Following Aggarwal, Prabhala and Puri, the basis for assigning the reputation
of the underwriter is based on the underwriters’ respective market shares. The market share is in
turn defined as the SEK proceeds among the IPOs issued between January 2015 and June 2023,
and has been gathered from Dealogic. The variable is then constructed as a dummy variable,
equaling one for IPOs with lead managers ranked among the top 10 in terms of market share, and
zero otherwise. In our sample of 235 IPOs, 92 IPOs (that is, approximately 39%), were managed
by at least one underwriter ranked among the top 10 during the period.
       Control variables taking the size of the IPO into consideration are included in our
regressions, following the findings of Aggarwal, Prabhala and Puri (2002). Aggarwal, Prabhala
and Puri evaluate three different proxies for size: Total assets of the issuer prior to the offer, the
number of shares offered in the IPO, and the issue proceeds excluding any green shoe amount
(additional proceeds from exercising overallotment options). As the three give similar results, they
decide to only report the size estimate based on the number of shares offered. As illustrated in
Table IV, the three variables have a skewed distribution in our sample. We consequently use the
natural logarithm of these three variables in our regressions, in line with the approach of Aggarwal,
Prabhala and Puri.
       The industry belonging of each IPO was included in Aggarwal, Prabhala and Puri’s (2002)
paper as control variables in the form of dummies based on the companies’ one-digit U.S. Standard
Industrial Classification (SIC) codes. As our sample consists of mostly Swedish companies, we
have used industry definition provided by S&P Capital IQ. The dummy variables equal one when
the industry represented by the dummy and the industry of a company match, and zero otherwise.
The industry distribution of our sample is presented in Table III.
       Aggarwal, Prabhala and Puri (2002) find a significant relationship between institutional
allocation and pre-market demand. Their proxy for pre-market demand is the percentage difference
between the midpoint of the filing range disclosed in the prospectus and the final offer price. In
our sample, however, there are only a few instances where there is a published filing range in the
prospectuses. The remaining IPOs only have a fixed offer price in their prospectuses.
Consequently, we cannot use the variable used by Aggarwal, Prabhala and Puri as a proxy for pre-
market demand. Pre-market demand tends to be stronger for IPOs where the offer price is at the
upper end of the filing range. Moreover, the IPOs with high pre-market demand have predictably
14 Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings

higher underpricing in comparison with IPOs with an offer price at the lower end of the filing
range with lower pre-market demand (Aggarwal, Prabhala and Puri (2002)). That is, according to

                                           Table III
                        Industry Definition Distribution
 The table reports the industry distribution of our sample of 235 IPOs offered at NASDAQ Main List or
 First North Growth Market in Stockholm between January 1, 2015, and June 30, 2023. The companies
 in the sample were classified using the industry definition provided by S&P Capital IQ.

    Industry #

 Information Technology 54
 Industrials 46
 Materials 7
 Consumer Discretionary 35
 Consumer Staples 5
 Health Care 55
 Energy 2
 Financials 12
 Communication Services 19

Aggarwal, Prabhala and Puri, a well-established “partial adjustment” phenomenon (see also Ritter
and Zhang (2007), Hanley (1993)). Moreover, it is argued that there are issues with simultaneity
bias in the relationship between cornerstone investments and underpricing. That is, not only might
cornerstone investor participation affect the degree of underpricing, but the cornerstone investors
might also be able to pick the IPOs with more underpricing (McGuinness (2012)). Given this, we
use underpricing as a proxy for pre-market demand. There might, however, be several other factors
contributing to the underpricing of IPOs. For example, Helwege and Liang (2004) find that IPOs
with high underpricing tend to consist of companies that are younger, raise more funds, and have
higher capital spending. To compute the underpricing for each IPO in our sample, the first day
closing prices were gathered from S&P Capital IQ. The offer prices were found in the prospectuses
for each IPO, and in some instances press releases. Following Aggarwal, Prabhala and Puri (2002),
we calculate underpricing using the following widely accepted formula.

                                         𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡 𝑑𝑎𝑦 𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 − 𝑂𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒
                𝑈𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑔 =
                                                                   𝑂𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒
                           Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings 15

       The days spent in the registration process is also a variable included in Aggarwal, Prabhala
and Puri (2002). However, the variable does not show any significant effect in their regression.
Moreover, it was complicated for us to collect as the information was limited for our sample, which
is why we will not include it.
       Table IV provide descriptive statistics for our sample. Our sample of IPOs has a mean
(median) of 15.8 million (5.2 million) shares offered with a standard deviation of 38.2 million. The
mean (median) total assets before the IPO of our sample are SEK 2,212.7 million (SEK 87.7
million) with a standard deviation of SEK 16,763.9 million. The mean (median) proceeds from the
IPOs in our sample is SEK 472.4 million (SEK 100.0 million) with a standard deviation of SEK
1,659.5 million. That is, all three proxies of size of the IPOs have a skewed distribution. The mean
(median) underpricing is 14.0% (6.6%) with a standard deviation of 33.7%. The average
percentage of institutional cornerstone investors in an IPO in our sample is 23.4% (median of
17.6%), with a standard deviation of 23.2%. Considering all cornerstone investors, the mean
(median) is 36.3% (41.4%) with a standard deviation of 27.7%. In terms of reputable underwriters,
39.1% of the IPOs in our sample have had at least one lead manager ranked among the top 10 in
terms of proceeds over the period. Looking at institutional cornerstone investors in IPOs following
a month classified as cold using Helwege and Liang (2004), their percentage of the IPOs is on
average 27.6% (14.9%) with a standard deviation of 29.4%. When adjusting the classification, the
average increases to 30.3% (while the median increases to 37.5%) and the standard deviation
decreases to 27.3%. For IPOs following a month classified as neutral using Helwege and Liang’s
definition, the average percentage of institutional investors as cornerstone investors is 22.2%
(17.9%) with a standard deviation of 21.9%. When adjusting the definition, the average decreases
to 21.0% (while the median decreases to 16.2%) and the standard deviation decreases to 21.6%.
In terms of IPOs following a month classified as hot, the average percentage of institutional
cornerstone investors is 23.7% (17.6%) with a standard deviation of 23.4%.

   II. Does the State of the IPO Market Affect the Proportion of
         Institutional Cornerstone Investors in IPOs?
       In this section, we present and analyze our empirical results on whether the state of the IPO
market has an impact on the proportion of institutional cornerstone investors in IPOs. The section
will proceed as follows. In subsection II.A the empirical results of our univariate and multivariate
16 Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings

                                    Table IV
                        Descriptive Statistics of Sample
 The table reports the mean, median and standard deviation of characteristics in IPOs offered at
 NASDAQ Main List or First North Growth Market in Stockholm from January 1, 2015, to June
 30, 2023, relevant to this paper. Shares offered represents the million number of shares from the
 primary and potentially secondary offering of each IPO; Total assets denotes the total assets of
 each issuer before the offer in SEK million; Proceeds denotes the amount raised in each IPO in
 SEK million; Underpricing denotes the underpricing of each IPO (that is, the percentage
 difference between the first day closing price and the offer price); Inst. cornerstone investors
 represents the percentage of institutional cornerstone investors in each IPO; Inst. cornerstone
 investors in cold represents the percentage of institutional cornerstone investors in IPOs taking
 place following a month classified as cold using Helwege and Liang’s definition (2004); Inst.
 cornerstone investors in adj. cold represents the percentage of institutional cornerstone investors
 in IPOs taking place following a month classified as cold using the adjusted definition; Inst.
 cornerstone investors in cold represents the percentage of institutional cornerstone investors in
 IPOs taking place following a month classified as neutral using Helwege and Liang’s definition;
 Inst. cornerstone investors in adj. neutral represents the percentage of institutional cornerstone
 investors in IPOs taking place following a month classified as neutral using the adjusted
 definition; Inst. cornerstone investors in hot represents the percentage of institutional
 cornerstone investors in IPOs taking place following a month classified as hot; Cornerstone
 investors denotes the percentage of all types of cornerstone investors in each IPO; and
 Reputation represents the percentage of IPOs offered by one or more lead managers ranked
 among the top 10 depending on market share in terms of proceeds throughout the sample period.

                                                     Sample (N = 235)

    Characteristic Mean Median St. Dev.

 Shares offered 15.8 m 5.2 m 38.2 m
 Total assets SEK 2,212.7 m SEK 87.7 m SEK 16,763.9 m
 Proceeds SEK 472.4 m SEK 100.0 m SEK 1,659.5 m
 Underpricing 14.0% 6.6% 33.7%
 Inst. cornerstone investors 23.4% 17.6% 23.2%
 Inst. cornerstone investors in cold 27.6% 14.9% 29.4%
 Inst. cornerstone investors in adj. cold 30.3% 37.5% 27.3%
 Inst. cornerstone investors in neutral 22.2% 17.9% 21.9%
 Inst. cornerstone investors in adj. neutral 21.0% 16.2% 21.6%
 Inst. cornerstone investors in hot 23.7% 17.6% 23.4%
 Cornerstone investors 36.3% 41.4% 27.7%
 Reputation 39.1% – –
                           Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings 17

regressions are presented. A discussion of the results and the relation to existing literature and
theory is presented in subsection II.B. Finally, subsection II.C offers suggestions on additional
research to complement and expand on the findings of this paper.

A. Empirical Results
       From previous research, several variables have been shown to influence institutional
allocation in IPOs. When investigating the potential impact of the market state condition on
institutional cornerstone investors participation in IPOs, these predictors are included to control
the result. In total, nine regressions are run to examine a potential relationship, including univariate
and multivariate ordinary least squared regression with different proxies for size and percentile-
based classifications of the state of the IPO market.
       Table V reports the result from our univariate regressions. LR1A regresses the dependent
variable (normalized rank-transform of the percentage of institutional cornerstone investors in an
IPO) on the independent dummy variable HOT. HOT is equal to one when an IPO is conducted in
a month following a month classified as a hot IPO market period, and zero otherwise. LR1B
regresses the dependent variable on the independent dummy variable COLD1. COLD1 equals one
when an IPO takes place in a month following a month classified as a cold IPO market period
strictly following Helwege and Liang’s (2004) classification of cold IPO markets. Finally, LR2B
regresses the dependent variable on the independent dummy variable COLD2. COLD2 follows the
same structure as COLD1, however, deviating in terms of adjusting the classification by including

        th
the 38  percentile of months as cold rather than the bottom third used by Helwege and Liang to
account for the characteristics of our sample.
      In the univariate regressions LR1A and LR1B, both HOT and COLD1 are positive, yet
insignificant at the ten percent level. The two univariate models’ explanatory values are low, with
an R-squared of circa 0.1% for both LR1A and LR2A. In the final univariate regression, LR2B,
the predictor COLD2 is also insignificant and positive at the ten percent level. Consequently,
disregarding control variables, the models show no significant relationships between the state of
the IPO market the month before the IPO and institutional cornerstone investments.
       The main multivariate regressions of our paper, MLR1A and MLR2A, are presented in
Table VI. Both models regress the normalized rank-transform of the percentage of institutional
18 Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings

                                    Table V
                          Univariate Regressions
 The table reports the results from the univariate regressions for the sample spanning from January 1,
 2015, to June 30, 2023. The dependent variable constitutes the normalized rank-transform of the
 percentage of institutional cornerstone investors in an IPO. In LR1A, the independent variable is HOT,
 a dummy variable equal to one when an IPO is offered in a month following a month classified as a hot
 IPO market period. In LR1B, COLD1 is a dummy variable equal to one when an IPO is offered in a
 month following a month classified as a cold IPO market period following Helwege and Liang’s (2004)
 classification of cold IPO markets (that is, the bottom third of months in terms of the three-month
 centered moving average number of IPOs scaled by business formations). The independent variable in
 LR2B, COLD2, follows the same structure as COLD1, however, deviating in terms of classifying the
    th
 38  percentile rather than the bottom third as cold. In line with Aggarwal, Prabhala and Puri (2002), t-
 statistics based on the paper of White (1980) are used, with robust standard errors reported in the
 parentheses.

                                          Dependent Variable:
                       Normalized Rank-Transform of % of Institutional Cornerstone Investors in IPO

                         LR1A LR1B LR2B
 Intercept -0.04 -0.01 -0.03
                                 (0.10) (0.07) (0.07)
 HOT 0.07
                                 (0.13)
 COLD1 0.10
                                                             (0.29)
 COLD2 0.26
                                                                                            (0.24)
 R-squared 0.1% 0.1% 0.6%

 ** Significant at the five percent level using two-tailed test.
 * Significant at the ten percent level using two-tailed test.

cornerstone investors in an IPO on the independent dummy variable for a hot IPO market in the
month preceding the IPO (HOT), a dummy variable for underwriter reputation (Reputation),
underpricing (Underpricing), industry dummy variables, and the natural logarithm of total assets
before the IPO (Total_Assets). However, the two regressions use different dummy variables for
cold IPO markets. While MLR1A uses COLD1, MLR2A uses COLD2. In addition to MLR1A and
MLR2A, Appendix A reports the results when alternative variables for size are used. MLR1B and
MLR1C use shares offered and total proceeds, respectively, instead of total assets. The same logic
applies to MLR2B and MLR2C.
                          Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings 19

                                       Table VI
                           Multivariate Regressions I
The table presents the results from multivariate regressions for the sample, spanning from January 1,
2015, to June 30, 2023. The dependent variable constitutes the normalized rank-transform of the
percentage of institutional cornerstone investors in an IPO. Shared control variables for MLR1A and
MLR2A are HOT, a dummy variable equal to one when an IPO is offered in a month following a month
classified as a hot IPO market period; Reputation, a dummy variable equal to one if one or several lead
managers of an IPO are ranked among the top 10; Underpricing representing the underpricing of an IPO
(that is, the percentage difference between the first day closing price and the offer price); and
Total_Assets denoting the natural logarithm of the total assets before the IPO in SEK million. MLR1A
does in addition to these variables include COLD1 whereas MLR2A includes COLD2. COLD1 is a
dummy variable equal to one when an IPO is offered in a month following a month classified as a cold
IPO market period following Helwege and Liang’s (2004) classification of cold IPO markets (that is, the
bottom third of months in terms of the three-month centered moving average number of IPOs scaled by
business formations). COLD2 follows the same structure as COLD1, however, deviating in terms of
                    th
classifying the 38  percentile rather than the bottom third as cold. Industry dummy variables are used in
both regressions as control variables but are, however, not included in the table. In line with Aggarwal,
Prabhala and Puri (2002), t-statistics based on the paper of White (1980) are used, with robust standard
errors reported in the parentheses.

                                         Dependent Variable:
                     Normalized Rank-Transform of % of Institutional Cornerstone Investors in IPO

                            MLR1A MLR2A

Intercept -0.74** -0.81**
                                         (0.27) (0.27)
HOT 0.18 0.25*
                                         (0.13) (0.13)
COLD1 0.24
                                           (0.27)
COLD2 0.45**
                                                                                     (0.23)
Reputation 0.82** 0.84**
                                         (0.16) (0.16)
Underpricing 0.40** 0.42**
                                         (0.16) (0.16)
Total_Assets 0.03 0.02
                                         (0.09) (0.09)
Adjusted R-squared 14.6% 16.0%

** Significant at the five percent level using two-tailed test.
* Significant at the ten percent level using two-tailed test.
20 Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings

       Firstly, MLR1A has an improved adjusted R-squared value in comparison to previously
presented univariate regressions, with the model explaining 14.6% of the variance in institutional
cornerstone investor participation in IPOs. In the multivariate regression, HOT and COLD1 are
positive but insignificant at the ten percent level. This result is supported by MLR1B and MLR1C
as shown in Appendix A. This suggests that, given that the classification of the state of the IPO
market is accurate, there is no significant relationship between the state of the IPO market during
the month before the IPO and the proportion of institutional cornerstone investors in an IPO.
       Moreover, lead manager reputation is positive and significant, contrary to the findings of
Aggarwal, Prabhala and Puri (2002). Meanwhile, underpricing, used as a proxy for pre-market
demand, is significant and positive at the five percent level, similar to the results of Aggarwal,
Prabhala and Puri. Thus, the inclusion of reputable co-lead managers is positively related to higher
institutional cornerstone ownership, which similarly applies to public issues with high pre-market
interest. Finally, the size variable in MLR1A, Total_Assets, is positive but insignificant. This result
is shared with MLR1B. However, in MLR1C, the variable for proceeds from the IPO, Proceeds,
is significant and positive, implying that listings with large proceeds gather high institutional
cornerstone ownership. Meanwhile, we note that Habib and Ljungqvist (1998) identify a
mechanical relationship between underpricing and proceeds, which may lead to issues with the
accuracy of the predictor coefficients. However, after checking for multicollinearity, we find no
problems with the inclusion of both variables as independent predictors.
       In MLR2A, HOT and COLD2 are both positive and significant at the ten percent and five
percent level, respectively, suggesting both hot and cold IPO markets lead to a higher proportion
of institutional cornerstone investors in IPOs. As in MLR1A, we find a positive and significant
effect of underpricing as well as for lead manager reputation, contrary to Aggarwal, Prabhala and
Puri (2002). Similar to MLR1A, the result thus suggests a positive relationship between pre-market
demand and the proportion of institutional cornerstone investments in IPOs. The result is supported
by regressions run on alternative size variables, as shown in MLR2B and MLR2C, presented in
Appendix A. Like MLR2B, MLR2A has an insignificant proxy for size, which differs from the
result of Aggarwal, Prabhala and Puri, where the size variables are positive and significant,
meaning larger issues attracts a higher proportion of institutional investors. We find no such
relationship for the size variables representing total assets pre-IPO or total shares offered.
Meanwhile, the variable for proceeds in MLR2C is positive and significant. In terms of
                           Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings 21

explanatory value, MLR2A has an adjusted R-squared of 16.0%. Finally, outliers were identified
using Cook’s distance and the rule of >4/n. These influential data points were further analyzed to
ensure no errors were made in the data gathering process. Alternative regressions were run without
outliers and the key results remained unchanged.

B. Discussion on the Empirical Results
       In our analysis of the results, we begin with the control variables. In the six multivariate
OLS regressions, the dummy variable representing a reputable lead manager is significant and
positive, which contradicts the findings of Aggarwal, Prabhala and Puri (2002). A possible
explanation of the result is found in Booth and Smith (1986), where the underwriter’s role as a
signaling tool is highlighted. Hence, a prestigious manager of an IPO may attract a higher
percentage of institutional owners. Moreover, in the correlation matrices to be found in Appendix
B, we identify a strong and positive relationship between the variable Reputation and our proxies
for size of the IPO, arguably due to the placement of larger issues in the hands of reputable firms.
The correlation matrices would also suggest a potential positive relationship between size and
institutional cornerstone investor participation in an IPO. This is contrary to the initial theories of
Aggarwal, Prabhala and Puri (2002), in which the authors argue that institutional investors may be
unable to absorb a significant portion of shares in larger IPOs or that the demand from retail
investors may be more significant due to the reduction of information asymmetry and moral hazard
problems. Meanwhile, we find no significance in the effect of either total assets prior to the IPO
or the primary and potentially secondary shares offered in the listing. However, the variable of
proceeds from the IPO has a positive and significant influence on institutional cornerstone investor
commitment as share of the IPOs, which aligns with the results of Aggarwal, Prabhala and Puri.
This contradicts the original theories of Aggarwal, Prabhala and Puri and suggests that larger issues
attract more institutional investors. Moving on to Underpricing, our proxy for pre-market demand
is significant and positive, suggesting public issues with notable pre-market interest engage a
larger share of institutional cornerstone investors. Meanwhile, we view the variable Underpricing
with some cautiousness, as there are unavoidable issues with endogeneity stemming from
simultaneity bias, considering that multiple studies research the effect of institutional owners on
underpricing (see McGuinness (2012)). We are therefore hesitant to draw any definitive
conclusions on the effect of underpricing on the share of institutional cornerstone investors.
22 Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings

       Proceeding to the impact of the state of the IPO market the month prior to an IPO, MLR1A
suggests that there is no significant relationship. There are papers suggesting buy-side clients are
given preferential treatment in the allocation of underpriced issues (Ritter and Welch (2002)) while
others use strong underpricing as a way of defining hot IPO markets (for instance, see Helwege
and Liang (2004) and Ritter (1984)). This would suggest a positive relationship between
institutional cornerstone commitments and hot IPO market periods, which contradicts our findings
in MLR1A. One possible explanation to the insignificant result in MLR1A could be counteracting
forces, as some theories suggest lower institutional ownership in hot IPO markets as companies
seek to “reduce excess monitoring” and “acquire a higher retail investor base” (see Helwege and
Liang (2004)). Moreover, Lee, Taylor, and Walter (1999) claim that while institutional investors
tend to subscribe more to underpriced issues than overpriced ones, they receive the same allocation
in either issue. Consequently, a quid pro quo relationship seems to exist, where institutional
investors participate in unattractive issues with an expectation of favorable allocations in IPOs
with strong demand. In this way, underwriters act strategically in the allocation of shares (see
Benveniste and Wilhelm (1990)). One potential consequence of this behavior could be the
participation of institutional investors across varying states of the market, as underwriters utilize
their relationships with institutional clients to ensure IPO success.
        Alternatively, due to the characteristics of our sample, the definition of cold IPO markets
is excessively narrow when using the definition by Helwege and Liang (2004). In case cold IPO
market conditions contribute to higher institutional cornerstone investments in IPOs, classifying
too few months as cold due to several months with no IPOs may lead to an increase in the level of
institutional cornerstone investments in neutral markets, reducing the differences between hot,
cold, and neutral IPO markets. Table IV presents the averages of institutional cornerstone investors
depending on classification used. We note that the percentage of institutional cornerstones is
higher in the broader definition of cold markets (30.3% compared to 27.6%), while the mean value
of institutional cornerstone commitment in the adjusted neutral is lower than the neutral
classification following Helwege and Liang. Moreover, the proposition is supported by the second
multivariate regression (MLR2A), where the definition of cold IPO market periods is five
percentage points broader relative to MLR1A. The variable for hot IPO markets is still positive
but now also significant. Moreover, MLR2A also suggests a positive relationship between cold
IPO markets and participation of institutional cornerstone investors in IPOs.
                           Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings 23

       There are several theoretical frameworks on institutional ownership that can assist us in
explaining higher institutional cornerstone investor participation in hot IPO markets. According to
Rock (1986), institutional investors possess an informational advantage over retail investors in that
they can identify the “lemons” in the market, resulting in retail investors receiving a proportion of
good IPOs but the entirety or majority of bad IPOs, which in turn explains the existence of
underpricing. The argued reason behind this “winner’s curse” phenomenon is either superior
information possessed by institutional investors or underwriter’s tendency to engage in favorable
allocation in relation to buy-side clients (Aggarwal, Prabhala, and Puri (2002)). According to
Choe, Masulis, and Nanda (1993), the cost of information asymmetry is greater in cold markets,
discouraging high quality firms from going public. This supports the findings of Allen and
Faulhaber (1989), Grinblatt and Hwang (1989), and Welch (1989). Consequently, institutional
investors with superior information or preferential status may receive a higher proportion of shares
in hot IPO markets. Additionally, the demand for secured pre-allocation is argued to be higher for
hotter issues, potentially increasing the share of cornerstone investors in hot markets (Espinasse
(2018)). Meanwhile, Loughran and Ritter (1995), Lerner (1994), and Field (1997) argue that bull
markets are characterized by irrational investors, providing managers with a unique exit or
fundraising opportunity, leading to lower quality firms conducting IPOs in hot markets. If
Loughran and Ritter, Lerner, and Field’s claims about the lower quality of firms entering the
market during periods of high IPO frequency are true and institutional investors with superior
information can differentiate between good and bad offerings, we would instead expect a lower
proportion of institutional cornerstone investors in IPOs taking place after a month classified as
hot. Meanwhile, note that this argument contradicts the theories of high institutional ownership in
hot markets as a result of higher quality firms going public.
       Moreover, the possible desire of companies seeking to decrease excess monitoring and
obtain a higher share of retail investors would rather imply a negative or insignificant relationship
between institutional cornerstone investor participation in IPOs and hot IPO market periods (see
Helwege and Liang (2002)). However, MLR2A, like Helwege and Liang, find results that
contradicts this hypothesis, with higher institutional equity shareholding in hot markets. Instead,
Helwege and Liang argue that Benveniste, Busaba, and Wilhelm’s (2002) theory on IPO bundling
could explain the result, where strong institutional demand is utilized by investment banks to
24 Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings

ensure a successful market listing by increasing the proportion of committed subscriptions at an
earlier stage of the IPO process and thus reduce risk.
        Additionally, the role of institutional cornerstone investors as signals of high quality, acting
as certifiers of IPOs, is highly relevant to the discussion. According to Bader, Friedman, Kim,
Kengelbach and Rice (2021), cornerstone investors can be used in bull markets to gather a
competitive edge in fundraising. Thus, we would expect higher institutional ownership in hot
markets, which is suggested by the result of our regressions using the broader definition of cold
IPO markets. Moreover, these forces could potentially also explain the result of MLR2A
suggesting a higher proportion of institutional cornerstone investors in IPOs taking place in a
month following a month classified as cold. Although Helwege and Liang (2004) observe no
significant differences between firms going public in hot versus cold markets, investors may still
perceive “lemon” offerings as more prevalent during bad market conditions. This perception may
arise from the notion that stable and sustainable firms have the flexibility to delay their IPOs until
more favorable market conditions emerge. In this case, institutional cornerstone investors could
potentially be used as a signal of quality and reduce transaction risk in line with the arguments of
Chen, Hughes, and Megaw (2023) and McGuinness (2012), playing a similar role to that shown
of venture capital firms (Megginson and Weiss (1991)).
       Moreover, Ritter and Welch (2002) discuss the dynamic created by the allocation of shares
to institutional investors — for the purposes of this paper institutional cornerstone investors —
and the remaining shares for retail investors. Depending on the extent of pre-allocation and
institutional and retail demand, underwriter decisions can significantly impact the demand in the
secondary market. For instance, Aggarwal (2000) and Zhang (2004) describe a common
underwriting practice of over-allocation of cold IPOs to boost demand in the aftermarket. Hence,
investment banks may strategically utilize cornerstone investors to create “crowding out effects”
(McGuiness (2012)), potentially in cases of bad market conditions as prices are naturally
suppressed in cold markets (Derrien and Womack (2003)).
       Meanwhile, cold IPO markets often occur simultaneously with economic downturns with
unattractive capital markets. One of the key characteristics of cold IPO markets is the lack of
liquidity (Duguid, Platt, and Rennison (2022)). Booth and Chua (1996) claim that allocation of
shares to a larger base of investors increases liquidity. Thus, in the case of illiquid markets,
underwriters may be inclined to spread ownership among a larger number of investors, rather than
                           Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings 25

a few key institutional cornerstone investors, implying lower institutional cornerstone investor
ownership in cold markets. However, another argument would be along the lines of Ritter and
Welch (2002), where pre-market allocations are high to ensure significant trading in the
aftermarkets, resulting in increased liquidity. Furthermore, as lock-up periods are not a mandatory
part of cornerstone investments in Europe (Cole, McNaughton and Gossen (2015)), the claims of
Booth and Chua are less relevant to this set of institutional investors. Nevertheless, one should
consider the potential incentive of cornerstone investors in complying with underwriter desires
arising from potential underwriter-investor relationships in the IPO process (for example, see
Binay, Gatchev, and Pirinsky (2007), Benveniste and Wilhelm (1990)). That is, cornerstone
investors might have an incentive to hold onto the shares in an IPO despite no mandatory lock-up
periods to increase probabilities of receiving desired allocations in other attractive IPOs managed
by the underwriter.
        Furthermore, according to previous studies, institutional investors serve a monitoring role,
reducing agency problems between ownership and management, improving performance and
increasing shareholder value. Hartzell and Starks (2003) observe a positive relationship between
institutional ownership and the degree to which management compensation is tied to company
performance. Moreover, evidence suggests institutions play a role in monitoring R&D and capital
expenditure (Bushee (1998), Wahal and McConnell (2000)). Finally, Parrino, Sias, and Starks
(2002) touch on the monitoring role of institutions related to CEO turnover. Consequently,
institutional investors can potentially ensure alignment of objectives, increase performance levels,
and boost shareholder value. This could be especially beneficial for companies looking to go public
during tough market conditions, as the cost of asymmetric information is higher (Helwege and
Liang (2004)). If these forces are in play, we would expect a higher proportion of institutional
cornerstone investors during uncertain market environments. This could, however, at least partly
depend on the degree of engagement from the institutional investors as argued by Denes, Karpoff
and McWilliams (2017). Moreover, Bebchuk, Cohen, and Hirst (2017) acknowledge the passive
nature of institutional ownership, potentially reducing the impact of the monitoring role of
institutional investors (see also Lewellen and Lewellen (2022)).
       The quid pro quo relationship argued to exist between underwriters and institutional
investors could potentially explain a higher proportion of institutional cornerstone investors in
IPOs offered in months following a cold market period (see Lee, Taylor, and Walter (1999)). As
26 Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings

the transaction risk is arguably greater in cold IPO markets, investment banks may utilize their
relationship with institutional investors to increase the degree of subscription before the
bookbuilding process commences, thus suggesting higher proportion of institutional cornerstone
commitment in IPOs following cold market periods. This would also suggest a higher proportion
of institutional cornerstone investors in hot IPO market periods, as the investment banks return
favors and allow institutional cornerstone investors to achieve greater guaranteed allocations in
significantly underpriced issues during hot IPO market periods in line with findings of retail
investors being crowded out in significantly underpriced issues (Lee, Taylor, and Walter (1999))
and analysis on hot IPO market definitions by Helwege and Liang (2004). In addition, as per Lowry
and Schwert (2010), institutional investors can assist in the price setting activities of companies
going public. This is particularly important during uncertain market conditions. Thus, institutional
cornerstone investors can play an important role in supporting underwriters ahead of the
bookbuilding process, which could be particularly useful in cold IPO markets. We would thus
expect higher institutional cornerstone investments in IPOs occurring in months after periods of
cold IPO markets, as supported by the results of the second multivariate regression.
       Finally, we touch upon the design of the models. Using the lower third of months to define
the cold variable strictly follows the methodology of Helwege and Liang (2004). In doing this, we
get an insignificant result for HOT and COLD1 in the multivariate regression, MLR1A. However,
this approach may be too narrow considering the sample size, and increasing the percentile could
offer a more accurate description of the different states of the IPO market, and thus improve the
accuracy of both hot and cold market variables. Meanwhile, adjusting the percentile to include
more months as a base for the cold IPO market variable could potentially lead to problems with
clarity in terms of market definitions. In expanding the classification criteria for cold markets,
there may arise ambiguities about what cold markets entail. Moreover, the interpretation changes.
Hence, the difference in result between MLR1 and MLR2 could imply that although a conservative
definition of cold markets shows no significant relationship to institutional cornerstone
participation in IPOs, a broader definition of cold markets as periods with below median IPO
activity exhibits a higher proportion of institutional cornerstone investors. This distinction
becomes important when interpreting the outcome of the models, as the definition of cold markets
becomes increasingly wide.
                           Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings 27

C. Encouragement of Further Research
       Although the models provide an interesting set of results, there are further additions to the
research to consider. We identify four main considerations. Firstly, as the model is linear, it seeks
to optimize the fit to the underlying sample and estimate the normalized values of the percentage
of institutional cornerstone investors. Another research paper can address the probability of the
existence of institutional ownership, for instance through a logit model. This would offer an
interesting expansion of the current knowledge of institutional allocation.
       Secondly, due to limits in the access to data, the model omits some important factors
present primarily in the bookbuilding process, including private information according to
Aggarwal, Prabhala and Puri (2002). Moreover, one should also consider the existing relationship
between underwriters and institutions, as for instance Cornelli and Goldreich (2001) argue that
underwriters favor frequent investors. Thus, there are omitted variables that deserve additional
attention. Thirdly, due to limited information, we estimated that the cornerstone investment
commitments occurred in the month prior to the IPO. With additional information on when the
actual decisions were made, the precision of the regression could be further improved.
       Finally, this paper focuses on institutional cornerstone investors, utilizing theories on
institutional allocation. Meanwhile, studying the broader phenomenon of cornerstone investors
offers an interesting addition. Cornerstones covers a range of investor classes, including
institutions like pension funds, strategic investors (Bader et al. (2021)), family offices, and high
net worth individuals (McGuinness (2012)). Thus, it would be apt to further consider studying
cornerstones as a set of investors in addition to examining each type of cornerstone investor
individually. For instance, do certain high net worth individuals act as certifiers and do financial
phenomena like “skin in the game” matter when insiders publicly commit to being early investors?

   III. Summary and Conclusion
       Cornerstone investors participate in IPOs by undertaking to invest in an issue before the
bookbuilding process. Their commitment is disclosed in the company’s prospectus, and in return
the investor receives a guaranteed allocation. This class of investors constitutes a new
phenomenon, with cornerstone investors’ first appearance in Swedish IPOs in 2014. Thus, research
covering their role in IPOs is scarce. Studies have previously discussed the relationship between
cornerstone investor participation and underpricing, finding a positive relationship. However,
28 Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings

there is an evident research gap on further analysis of the motivation of cornerstone investors and
their express role in IPos. Moreover, several papers have examined institutional investors,
however, a particular focus on the role of market conditions is noticeably absent. Hence, in this
paper, we study the relationship between the state of the IPO market and the allocation of shares
to institutional cornerstone investors, using theories on institutional ownership. More specifically,
we consider the prevailing market conditions when the agreement of participation is made.
       Initially, we define cold markets as the bottom third of months based on IPO activity in
line with previous research on the state of the IPO market. Controlling for several factors shown
to influence institutional allocation, we document a positive but insignificant relationship between
flourishing IPO markets and institutional cornerstone investments. The same applies for the cold
market dummy variable. We argue that the strategic role of underwriters can help explain the
result, as institutional investors participate in IPOs irrespective of prevailing market conditions.
To guarantee issuance success, underwriters utilize their relationships with institutional clients.
       However, using a broader classification of cold markets, taking the characteristics of our
sample into consideration, suggests a positive and significant relationship between cold markets
prior to an IPO and institutional cornerstone investor participation. Moreover, the previously stated
positive but insignificant relation between hot markets and institutional cornerstone commitments
is now also significant. The result lends support to predictions of high-quality firms entering
markets with good conditions and theories of institutional information advantage and preferential
treatment. Moreover, the result also supports the suggestion of investment banks acting
strategically, utilizing a quid pro quo relationship with institutional investors to secure IPO success
in cold IPO market periods in exchange for granting institutional cornerstone investors a larger
share of desired IPOs in hot IPO market periods. For example, involving investors early on could
assist in reducing uncertainties concerning price setting, arguably being particularly present in
uncertain, cold IPO markets. Furthermore, the findings support the argued role of cornerstone
investors as means of reducing transaction risk and as signaling devices, gaining a competitive
advantage in times of markets associated with investor enthusiasm, or ensuring IPO success during
fragile market conditions.
        Meanwhile, it is important to carefully interpret the findings, as the narrow definition of
cold markets offers an insignificant result for hot and cold IPO markets. Although the broadening
of the classification can contribute to clearer differences between the market conditions due to the
                           Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings 29

relative size of the sample, the result of the first multivariate regression indicates the need for
caution in interpreting the outcome and suggests that the results seem to depend on how the
different states of the market are classified.
        This paper’s contribution to existing research is two-fold. Firstly, we study the impact of
market conditions on institutional cornerstone commitment and discover signs suggesting that,
depending on the definition of IPO market states, hot and cold markets have a higher institutional
engagement. Secondly, we analyze the motivations and role of institutions in IPOs, specifically
focusing on institutional cornerstone investors. Using a broader definition of cold markets, we find
support for theories relating to underwriter-institutional relationships, informational advantage,
and signaling. These findings are relevant for issuers and investors alike. Finally, we encourage
further research on the topic, particularly including additional key determinants of allocation, like
private information and issuer-institutional relationship, improving the accuracy of the model with
detailed information on timing of decision-making, and investigating the role different sets of
cornerstone investors play in the IPO process.

                    REFERENCES
Affärsvärlden, 2023, Erik Selin blir delägare i BPC Instruments, June 30. Available at:
        https://www.affarsvarlden.se/artikel/erik-selin-blir-delagare-i-bpc-instruments Access
       Date: November 12, 2023.
Aggarwal, Reena, 2000, Stabilization activities by underwriters after initial public offerings,
       Journal of Finance 55 (3), 1075–1103.
Aggarwal, Reena, Nagpurnanand R. Prabhala, and Manju Puri, 2002, Institutional Allocation in
       Initial Public Offerings: Empirical Evidence, Journal of Finance 57 (3), 1421–1442.
Allen, Franklin, and Gerald R. Faulhaber, 1989, Signaling by underpricing in the IPO market,
       Journal of Financial Economics 23 (2), 303–323.
Antón, Miguel, and Christopher Polk, 2014, Connected Stocks, Journal of Finance 69 (3), 1099–
       1127.
Asgari, Nikou, 2021, European IPOs mark best start to year since 2015 with €8bn haul,
       Financial Times, February 12. Available at: https://www.ft.com/content/171ea5f4-b3f4-
       4e76-bb13-2480879d1bd0, Access Date: October 27, 2023.
Bader, Maximilian, Daniel Friedman, Daniel Kim, Jens Kengelbach, and Gregory Rice, 2021,
       Does Your IPO Need an Anchor or Cornerstone Investor? Boston Consulting Group, June
        29. Available at: https://www.bcg.com/publications/2021/does-ipo-need-cornerstone-
       or-anchor-investor Access Date: October 29, 2023.
Bebchuk, Lucian A., Alma Cohen, and Scott Hirst, 2017, The Agency Problems of Institutional
       Investors, Journal of Economic Perspectives 31(3), 89–112.
30 Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings

Benveniste, Lawrence, Walid Busaba, and William J. Wilhelm, (2002), Information Externalities
       and the Role of Underwriters in Primary Equity Markets, Journal of Financial
       Intermediation 11 (1), 61–86.
Benveniste, Lawrence, William J. Wilhelm, 1990, A comparative analysis of IPO proceeds under
       alternative regulatory environments, Journal of Financial Economics 28 (1), 173–207.
Binay, Murat M., Vladimir A. Gatchev, and Christo A. Pirinsky, 2007, The Role of Underwriter-
       Investor Relationships in the IPO Process, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
       42 (3), 785–809.
Booth, James, and Lena Chua, 1996, Ownership dispersion, costly information, and IPO
       underpricing, Journal of Financial Economics 41 (2), 291–310.
Booth, James R., and Richard L. Smith II, 2002, Capital raising, under writing and the certification
       hypothesis, Journal of Financial Economics 15 (1–2), 261–281.
Bushee, Brian, 1998, The influence of institutional investors on myopic R&D investment
       behavior, The Accounting Review 73 (3), 305–333.
Cedergrenska, 2021, Inbjudan till förvärv av aktier i Cedergrenska AB (publ), May 10. Available
       at: https://www.nyemissioner.se/files/rights-issues/5096/prospekt.pdf Access Date:
       October 2, 2023.
Checkin.com Group, 2021, Inbjudan till teckning av aktier i Checkin.com Group AB i samband
       med listning på Nasdaq First North Growth Market. Available at: https://www.ny
        emissioner.se/files/rights-issues/5081/prospekt.pdf Access Date: October 2, 2023.
Chen, Silin, Jennifer Hughes, and Nicholas Megaw, 2023, ‘Cornerstone’ investors prop up US
       IPOs in shaky market, Financial Times, September 12. Available at: https://www.ft.co
       m/content/29138009-8c4b-45af-965e-ade4129f7b9b Access Date: October 27, 2023.
Choe, Hyuk, Ronald W. Masulis, and Vikram Nanda, 1993, Common Stock Offerings across the
       Business Cycle, Journal of Empirical Finance 1 (1), 3–31.
Cole, James, Ross McNaughton, and David Gossen, 2015, Cornerstone Investments in IPOs: The
       New Normal for European Markets? Paul Hastings, Available at:
       https://webstorage.paulhastings.com/Documents/PDFs/plc-magazine---september-2015---
        cornerstone-investments-in-ipos-article.pdf Access Date: October 14, 2023.
Cornelli, Francesca, and David Goldreich, 2001, Bookbuilding and strategic allocation, Journal of
       Finance 56 (6), 2337-2369.
Demos, Telis, 2016, IPO Market Is Ice Cold to Start 2016, The Wall Street Journal, January 15,
       2016. Available at: https://www.wsj.com/articles/BL-MBB-45269 Access Date: October
       16, 2023.
Denes, Matthew R., Jonathan M. Karpoff, and Victoria B. McWilliams, 2017, Thirty years of
       shareholder activism: A survey of empirical research, Journal of Corporate Finance 44,
      405–424.
Derrien, François, and Kent L. Womack, 2003, Auctions vs. Bookbuilding and the Control of
       Underpricing in Hot IPO Markets, The Review of Financial Studies 16 (1), 31–61.
                           Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings 31

Driebusch, Corrie, and Peter Santilli, 2021, IPOs Has a Record 2021. Now They Are Selling Off
       Like Crazy., The Wall Street Journal, December 29, 2021. Available at: IPOs Had a Record
       2021. Now They Are Selling Off Like Crazy. – WSJ Access Date: September 27, 2023.
Duguid, Kate, Eric Platt, and Joe Rennison, 2022, ‘Liquidity is terrible’: poor trading conditions
       fuel Wall Street tumult, Financial Times, June 7. Available at: https://www.f
       t.com/content/cbc47bbf-f158-4330-9e29-5b0b71935140 Access date: October 30, 2023.
Espinasse, Philippe, 2018, Cornerstone Investors: A Practice Guide for Asian IPOs, Hong Kong
       University Press, 32–35, 115–116. Available at: https://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt22p7jbp
       Access Date: October 26, 2023.
Espinasse, Philippe, 2014, IPO: A Global Guide, Expanded Second Edition, Hong Kong University
       Press, 10, 81, 131–136, 215–216. Available at: https://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt13x0m7w
       Access Date: October 26, 2023.
Falkner, Joakim, and Henric Roth, 2015, Cornerstone investors are becoming increasingly
       common in Swedish IPOs, Lexology. Available at: https://www.lexology.com/lib
       rary/detail.aspx?g=1cdc507d-6b75-401e-aa1d-05c8284b60c0 Access Date: October 12,
       2023.
Ferreira, Miguel A., and Pedro Matos, 2008, The colors of investors’ money: The role of
       institutional investors around the world, Journal of Financial Economics 88 (3), 499–
       533.
Field, Laura C., 1997, Is the Institutional Ownership of Initial Public Offerings Related to the
       Long-Run Performance of These Firms? Anderson Graduate School of Management,
       UCLA. Available at: https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1136n8ps Access Date: October 22,
       2023.
Finansinspektionen, 2016, Tillsynen över den svenska värdepappersmarknaden, March 10.
       Available at: https://www.fi.se/contentassets/a35360e6c270482dbb48e3b5c8ba5811/
       marknadrapp_2016ny4.pdf Access Date: October 11, 2023.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Chuan Yang Hwang, 1989, Signalling and the Pricing of New Issues, Journal
       of Finance 44 (2), 393–420.
Habib, Michel A., and Alexander P. Ljungqvist, 1998, Underpricing and IPO proceeds: A Note,
       Economics Letters 61, 381–383.
Hanley, Kathleen Weiss, 1993, The underpricing of initial public offerings and the partial
       adjustment phenomenon, Journal of Financial Economics 34 (2), 231–250.
Hartzell, Jay C., and Laura T. Starks, 2003, Institutional Investors and Executive Compensation,
       Journal of Finance 58 (6), 2351–2374.
Helwege, Jean, and Nellie Liang, 2004, Initial Public Offerings in Hot and Cold Markets,
       Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 39 (3), 541–569.
Höiseth, Patrik, 2017, Noteringsvågen göder korparna – håvar in miljardvinst, Dagens industri,
        May 11. Available at: https://www.di.se/nyheter/noteringsvagen-goder-korparna-havar-
       in-miljardvinst/ Access Date: October 30, 2023.
32 Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings

Izzi, Rosie, 2021, Global IPO market has record-breaking 2021, prepare for headwinds in 2022,
       Ernst & Young, December 16, 2021. Available at: https://www.ey.com
        /en_gl/news/2021/12/global-ipo-market-has-record-breaking-2021-prepare-for-headwind
        s-in-2022 Access Date: October 16, 2023.
Jakobsson, Josefin, 2015, Småsparare förlorar på ankarinvesterare, Dagens Industri, January 26,
        2015. Available at: https://www.di.se/artiklar/2015/1/26/smasparare-forlorar-pa-a
       nkarinvesterare/ Access Date: October 27, 2023.
Knutsson Holdings, n.d., About us, Knutsson Holdings AB. Available at: https://www.kn
       utsson.se/en/about-us/ Access Date: November 12, 2023.
Lee, Philip J., Stephen L. Taylor, and Terry S. Walter, 1999, IPO Underpricing Explanations
       from Investor Application and Allocation Schedules, Journal of Financial and
       Quantitative Analysis 34 (4), 425–444.
Lerner, Joshua, 1994, Venture Capitalists and the decision to go public, Journal of Financial
       Economics 35 (3), 293–316.
Lewellen, Jonathan, and Katharina Lewellen, 2022, Institutional Investors and Corporate
       Governance: The Incentive to be Engaged, Journal of Finance 77 (1), 216–264.
Lifco, 2014, Inbjudan till förvärv av aktier I Lifco AB (publ), November 7. Available at:
       https://www.avanza.se/avanzabank/kampanjer/cf/2014/lifco/2014-11-07%20 %20Prospe
       kt%20Lifco.pdf Access Date: October 2, 2023.
Lipschultz, Bailey, 2023, So-Called Cornerstone Investors Provide a Boost to This Year’s Top
       IPOs, BNN Bloomberg, July 26, 2023. Available at: https://www.bnnbloomberg.ca/so-
        called-cornerstone-investors-provide-a-boost-to-this-year-s-top-ipos-1.1950961 Access
       Date: October 12, 2023.
Loughran, Tim, and Jay R. Ritter, 1995, The New Issues Puzzles, Journal of Finance 50 (1), 23–
       51.
Lowry, Michelle, and G. William Schwert, 2004, Is the IPO pricing process efficient? Journal of
       Financial Economics 71 (1), 3–26.
Mackintosh, Phil, 2022, A Record Year for IPOs in 2021, NASDAQ, January 13, 2022. Available
        at: https://www.nasdaq.com/articles/a-record-year-for-ipos-in-2021 Access Date
       September 27, 2023.
Megginson, William L., and Kathleen A. Weiss, 1991, Venture Capitalist Certification in Initial
       Public Offerings, Journal of Finance 46 (3), 879–903.
McCahery, Joseph A., Zacharias Sautner, and Laura T. Starks, 2016, Behind the Scenes: The
       Corporate Governance Preferences of Institutional Investors, Journal of Finance 71 (6),
      2905–2932.
McConnell, John J., and Sunil Wahal, 2000, Do institutional investors exacerbate managerial
       myopia? Journal of Corporate Finance 6 (3), 307–329.
McGuinness, Paul B, 2012, The role of ´cornerstone´ investors and the Chinese state in the
       relative underpricing of state- and privately controlled IPO firms, Applied Financial
       Economics 22 (18), 1529–1551.
                           Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings 33

McGuinness, Paul B., 2014, IPO firm value and its connection with cornerstone and wider
        signaling effects, Pacific-Basin Finance Journal 27, 138-162.
Nasdaq, n.d., Listings. Available at: https://www.nasdaqomxnordic.com/news/listings Access
       Date: September 27, 2023.
Norron, n.d., Experienced Nordic Asset Manager. Available at: https://norron.com/en/about-us/
       Access Date: November 12, 2023.
Parrino, Robert, Richard W. Sias, and Laura T. Starks, 2002, Voting with their feet: Institutional
       ownership changes around forced CEO turnover, Journal of Financial Economics 68 (1),
       3–46.
Ritter, Jay R., and Donghang Zhang, 2007, Affiliated mutual funds and the allocation of initial
       public offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 86 (2), 337–368.
Ritter, Jay R., and Ivo Welch, 2002, A Review of IPO Activity, Pricing, and Allocations. Journal
       of Finance 57 (4), 1795–1828.
Ritter, Jay R., 1984, The “Hot Issue” Market of 1980, Journal of Business 57, 215–240.
Rock, Kevin, 1986, Why new issues are underpriced, Journal of Financial Economics 15 (1),
      187–212.
Tan, Tze-Gay, and Jeanne Ong, 2013, Cornerstone investors in IPOs – an Asian perspective,
       Capital Markets Law Journal 8 (4), 427–449.
TIN Fonder, n.d., Legal Information. Available at: https://tinfonder.se/legal-information?
     Utm_source=google&utm_medium=cpc&utm_campaign=15386318795&utm_content=1
      44458207404&utm_term=fonder&gclid=CjwKCAiA9ourBhAVEiwA3L5RFthkgSZD2P
      swRlGofa_KJEgZJCPqPvSDgYpOgVossbDINXkk0rFDihoCwdUQAvD_BwE Access
       Date: November 12, 2023.
Welch, Ivo, 1989, Seasoned offerings, imitation costs and the underpricing of initial public
       offerings, Journal of Finance 44 (2), 421–449.
White, Halbert, 1980, A heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance matrix estimator and a direct test
       for heteroskedasticity, Econometrica 48, 817-838.
Zhang, Donghang, 2004, Why Do IPO Underwriters Allocate Extra Shares When They Expect to
       Buy Them Back? Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 39 (3), 571–594.
34 Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings

                        APPENDIX A

                                          Table A.1
                         Multivariate Regressions II
 The table presents the results from multivariate regressions for the sample, spanning from January 1,
 2015, to June 30, 2023. The dependent variable is the normalized rank-transform of the percentage of
 institutional cornerstone investors in an IPO. Shared control variables for MLR1B and MLR2B are HOT,
 a dummy variable equal to one when an IPO is offered in a month after a month classified as a hot IPO
 market; Reputation, a dummy variable equal to one if one or several lead managers of an IPO are ranked
 among the top 10; Underpricing representing the underpricing of an IPO; and Shares_Offered
 representing the natural logarithm of the million number of shares from the primary and secondary
 offering. MLR1B does in addition to these variables include COLD1 whereas MLR2B includes COLD2.
 COLD1 is a dummy variable equal to one when an IPO is offered in a month after a month classified as
 a cold IPO market period following Helwege and Liang’s (2004) classification of cold IPO markets.
                                                                                                                                                                         th
 COLD2 follows the same structure as COLD1, however, deviating in terms of classifying the 38
 percentile rather than the bottom third as cold. Industry dummy variables are used in both regressions as
 control variables, however, not included in the table. In line with Aggarwal, Prabhala and Puri (2002), t-
 statistics based on the paper of White (1980) are used, with robust standard errors reported in the
 parentheses.

                                          Dependent Variable:
                       Normalized Rank-Transform of % of Institutional Cornerstone Investors in IPO

                             MLR1B MLR2B

 Intercept -0.74** -0.81**
                                           (0.25) (0.23)

 HOT 0.17 0.24*
                                           (0.13) (0.13)

 COLD1 0.21
                                           (0.27)

 COLD2 0.44*
                                                                                       (0.23)

 Reputation 0.77** 0.79**
                                           (0.16) (0.16)

 Underpricing 0.40** 0.42**
                                           (0.16) (0.16)

 Shares_Offered 0.10 0.09
                                           (0.14) (0.14)

 Adjusted R-squared 14.8% 16.1%

 ** Significant at the five percent level using two-tailed test.
 * Significant at the ten percent level using two-tailed test.
                          Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings 35

                                         Table A.2
                        Multivariate Regressions III
The table presents the results from multivariate regressions for the sample, spanning from January 1,
2015, to June 30, 2023. The dependent variable constitutes the normalized rank-transform of the
percentage of institutional cornerstone investors in an IPO. Shared control variables for MLR1C and
MLR2C are HOT, a dummy variable equal to one when an IPO is offered in a month following a month
classified as a hot IPO market period; Reputation, a dummy variable equal to one if one or several lead
managers of an IPO are ranked among the top 10; Underpricing representing the underpricing of an IPO;
and Proceeds representing the natural logarithm of the amount raised in an IPO in SEK million. MLR1C
does in addition to these variables include COLD1 whereas MLR2C includes COLD2. COLD1 is a
dummy variable equal to one when an IPO is offered in a month following a month classified as a cold
IPO market period following Helwege and Liang’s (2004) classification of cold IPO markets. COLD2
                                                                                                  th
follows the same structure as COLD1, however, deviating in terms of classifying the 38  percentile rather
than the bottom third as cold. Industry dummy variables are used in both regressions as control variables,
however, not included in the table. In line with Aggarwal, Prabhala and Puri (2002), t-statistics based on
the paper of White (1980) are used, with robust standard errors reported in the parentheses.

                                                Dependent Variable:
                    Normalized Rank-Transform of % of Institutional Cornerstone Investors in IPO

                            MLR1C MLR2C

Intercept -1.33** -1.39**
                                           (0.35) (0.34)

HOT 0.16 0.23*
                                          (0.12) (0.13)

COLD1 0.17
                                          (0.26)

COLD2 0.41*
                                                                                     (0.23)

Reputation 0.45** 0.47**
                                          (0.21) (0.21)

Underpricing 0.41** 0.43**
                                          (0.16) (0.16)

Proceeds 0.39** 0.38**
                                          (0.17) (0.17)

Adjusted R-squared 17.3% 18.5%

** Significant at the five percent level using two-tailed test.
* Significant at the ten percent level using two-tailed text.
36 Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings

                      APPENDIX B
                                          Figure B.1
                               Correlation Matrix I
The figure reports the correlation between the variables relevant to our multivariate regressions using the
same definition of cold markets as by Helwege and Liang (2004) over the sample period of 1 January 2015
to 30 June 2023. HOT is a dummy variable, being equal to one when an IPO is offered in a month after a
month classified as a hot IPO market period; COLD1 is a dummy variable, being equal to one when an IPO
is offered in a month following a month classified as a cold IPO market period following Helwege and
Liang’s classification; NEU1 is a dummy variable, being equal to one when an IPO is neither offered in a
month following a month classified as a cold not hot IPO market period following Helwege and Liang’s
definition; Reputation is a dummy variable equal to one if one or several lead managers of an IPO are
ranked among the top 10 depending on market share in terms of proceeds over the sample period;
Underpricing represents the underpricing of each IPO (that is, the percentage difference between the first
day closing price and the offer price); Total_Assets represents the natural logarithm of the total assets of
each issuer before the IPO in SEK million; Shares_Offered represents the natural logarithm of the million
number of shares from the primary and potentially secondary offering of each IPO; Proceeds represents the
natural logarithm of the amount raised in each IPO in SEK million; and Inst_Corner represents the
normalized rank-transform of the percentage of institutional cornerstone investors in each IPO.

       Reputation

        HOT

       NEU1

      COLD1

    Underpricing

  Shares_Offered

     Total_Assets

        Proceeds

      Inst_Corner

                  HOT
                         NEU1
                                  COLD1                 Proceeds
                      Reputation                                               Inst_Corner
                                                  Underpricing  Total_Assets
                                                        Shares_Offered
                           Showing Off in Initial Public Offerings 37

                                     Figure B.2
                              Correlation Matrix II
The figure reports the correlation between the variables relevant to our multivariate regressions using the
adjusted definition of cold markets as by Helwege and Liang (2004) over the sample period of 1 January
2015 to 30 June 2023. HOT is a dummy variable, being equal to one when an IPO is offered in a month
after a month classified as a hot IPO market period; COLD2 is a dummy variable, being equal to one when
an IPO is offered in a month following a month classified as a cold IPO market period following the adjusted
version of Helwege and Liang’s classification; NEU2 is a dummy variable, being equal to one when an IPO
is neither offered in a month following a month classified as a cold not hot IPO market period using the
adjusted definition of Helwege and Liang’s definition; Reputation is a dummy variable equal to one if one
or several lead managers of an IPO are ranked among the top 10 depending on market share in terms of
proceeds over the sample period; Underpricing represents the underpricing of each IPO (that is, the
percentage difference between the first day closing price and the offer price); Total_Assets represents the
natural logarithm of the total assets of each issuer before the IPO in SEK million; Shares_Offered represents
the natural logarithm of the million number of shares from the primary and potentially secondary offering
of each IPO; Proceeds represents the natural logarithm of the amount raised in each IPO in SEK million;
and Inst_Corner represents the normalized rank-transform of the percentage of institutional cornerstone
investors in each IPO.

      Reputation

       HOT

       NEU2

      COLD2

   Underpricing

 Shares_Offered

    Total_Assets

       Proceeds

     Inst_Corner

                  HOT
                        NEU2
                                 COLD2                 Proceeds
                     Reputation                                               Inst_Corner
                                                 Underpricing  Total_Assets
                                                       Shares_Offered