IN THE LINE OF FIRE
____________________________

A STUDY OF MARKET EFFICIENCY IN THE CONTEXT
OF WILDFIRES AND STOCK MARKET REACTIONS

ISAK KRISTOFFERSSON
MARKUS LIND

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2023
In the Line of Fire: A Study of Market Efficiency in the Context of Wildfires and Stock
Market Reactions

Abstract:

   Climate research finds that climate change and raising global temperatures increase the
   risk and severity of wildfires. However, the impact varies substantially based on
   geographical location and causes a dispersion in wildfire trends. Utilizing data from 14
   countries, we investigate if wildfire severity trends have a material impact on the
   profitability of the forestry and paper & pulp (P&P) industries and whether the stock
   market is efficiently pricing these trends. We find that a poor wildfire trend ranking for a
   country forecasts lower profitability growth and that the market responds efficiently in
   terms of correctly pricing this climate change-related risk.

Keywords:

   Climate Disaster Events, Wildfires, Fire Weather Index, Fire Severity Rating, Efficient
   Market Hypothesis

Authors:

   Isak Kristoffersson (25459)
   Markus Lind (25443)

Tutor:

   Marieke Bos, Researcher and Deputy Director, Swedish House of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d'Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Acknowledgments:

   We would like to express our most sincere gratitude to our supervisor Marieke Bos for
   invaluable guidance during our writing process, our seminar teacher Morteza
   Aghajanzadeh for helpful econometric lectures and consultations, our thesis discussants
   for insightful feedback, and lastly the data sources mentioned below that enabled us to
   conduct our research.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Isak Kristoffersson and Markus Lind, 2023

                                    1
1. Introduction

In 2022 alone, economic damages related to weather and climate disaster events in the EU
amounted to more than €50 billion, with a majority of the economic losses attributable to
heatwaves, cold waves, droughts, and wildfires (European Environment Agency, 2023).
Climate disaster events such as wildfires are due to rising temperatures, increasing
occurrence of droughts, and agricultural practices becoming increasingly frequent and severe
(Center for Climate and Energy Solutions, 2018; The European Commission, 2023). In
addition to the tragic loss of lives and devastating impact on societies and local populations,
wildfires have a substantial negative impact on assets such as housing, forestry, and
infrastructure (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2019). Consequently, this
constitutes an interesting and important area of research. In this study, we examine the
occurrence and development of wildfire severity in a selection of countries in Europe and
measure if, and to what extent, this proxy for climate change has a material impact on
companies within the forestry and paper and pulp (P&P) industries. Thereafter, we
investigate the extent and magnitude of the stock market’s responses to these events in the
context of the Efficient Market Hypothesis (EMH). We use the methodology put forward by
Hong, Wekai Li and Xu in the article Climate risks and market efficiency (2018).

Our sample starts from 2003, the year from which the European Forest Fire Information
System (EFFIS), a European Commission established system aimed at supporting services in
charge of the protection of forest fires in the EU and neighboring countries, first provides
data on wildfires for European countries. EFFIS is based on the European Fire Database and
comprises more than 2 million data records relating to forest fires provided by 22 European
countries from 2003 until today, and utilizes satellite Earth observations as well as in-situ
data for its data collection (EFFIS, 2023). During the period 2003 to 2022, the aggregated
average number of yearly wildfires for the 14 countries we have selected for our research

                                    2
amounted to approximately 994 and the average burnt area equaled 349,314 hectares. The
distribution among the analyzed companies is dispersed, where Switzerland exhibited the
fewest average wildfires per year of mere 0.2 while Italy experienced the highest number of
an astounding 276 yearly wildfires on average. Some countries and years stand out as
particularly intensive, such as 2018 when Italy suffered a devastating wildfire season with
more than 780 wildfires alone, while other years exhibited significantly less wildfire severity,
such as the following year of 2019 with less than 500 wildfires for all countries combined
(EFFIS, 2023). Explanatory factors to the large dispersion include geographical settings,
weather variations, as well as discrepancies in global fire fighting capabilities (International
Association of Wildland Fire, 2020; National Park Service, 2017).
       As forest wildfires likely have a material impact on companies operating within the
forestry and P&P industries and are of growing interest in terms of climate change (Wang and
Lewis, 2023), we find this an interesting research area to study in more detail. As such, in this
paper we study the material impact of wildfires on within-industry companies across
countries and the stock market’s response to these climate events in the context of current
finance theory and research. More specifically, our paper aims to answer the following
research questions:

   i. Does the trend in wildfire severity have a significant material impact on companies
          in terms of net income?

   ii. In the aftermath of wildfire severity trends having a significant material impact on
          companies’ net income, does the market efficiently respond to this publicly
          available information in accordance with the Efficient Market Hypothesis?

Prior studies relating to climate disaster events have mainly been divided in three distinct
areas of research, namely climate disaster events and the effects on asset prices, wildfires and
the effects on asset prices, and climate disaster events and market response. Notable studies
include the impact of natural disasters on stocks within the financial sector, the effects of
wildfires on the housing market, as well as event studies measuring stock market reactions to
climate disaster events. Our research builds upon and extends these studies by measuring
climate disaster events’ material impact on asset prices in the light of wildfire severity and
the subsequent stock market reactions to these events. As such, this research advances
previous findings of climate disaster events and stock market efficiency on a new strand of
assets by a different proxy for climate change, opening up a new and salient area of finance
and climate research.
       We study the effects of wildfire severity’s material impact on forestry and P&P
companies and the stock market’s reactions to this information during the time period 2013 to
2022, the total time period of EFFIS’ publicly available wildfire severity data. Since wildfire
severity is constructed through a multitude of factors such as temperature, relative humidity
and weather precipitation (Natural Resources Canada, 2023), and therefore is less affected by
confounding factors such as societal improvements of firefighting or general actions
undertaken to mitigate the occurrence of wildfires, we find this measure to be a better proxy
for changes in climate change compared to, for instance, the number of wildfires or areas
burnt. As forestry and P&P companies by their inherent nature are more affected by wildfires
and the related disruption in firm operations (Bousfield et al., 2023), we expect to see a
higher material impact and subsequent trading activity for these companies. Furthermore, as
we want to study the effects of wildfire severity on forestry and P&P companies in terms of
material impact and stock market returns spanning over a longer period of time, we conduct a
longitudinal study on the total time period containing publicly available data, 2003 to 2022.

                                    3
Utilizing wildfire data by EFFIS, we rank countries based on their wildfire severity indices
and test for trends having a significant material impact on firms within the forestry and P&P
industries. Thereafter, we use intraday trading data covering the largest stock exchanges for a
set of 14 countries in order to assess stock market returns in the context of market efficiency.
        Our results show that countries are experiencing significantly different trends in terms
of wildfire severity, where a few countries exhibit a positive trend and others strong negative
trends. There is a significant forecastability of changes in forestry and P&P industry
profitability based on the trends in wildfire severity. Countries with positive time trends in
wildfire severity experience lower growth in profits than countries with less positive time
trends. This publicly available information should in an efficient market, even though they
predict future profitability within the industries, not be able to forecast future stock returns. In
line with this, our results show that these rankings cannot forecast future stock returns and
that the market does efficiently price in climate risk as measured by wildfire severity.

2. Theoretical Framework and Related Literature

In order to study the effects of wildfires in the context of market efficiency, we have drawn
upon a number of studies and areas of research. Firstly, our study utilizes research covering
climate disaster events and the effects on asset prices. Moreover, studies of climate disaster
events and market response have been of large interest for our theoretical framework and
results. Lastly, one area of research that our study naturally is closely related to includes prior
studies of wildfires and the effects on asset prices. The research focusing on climate disaster
events and its impact on economies and financial markets have during recent years seen an
increased interest. As the climate crisis is growing ever more salient and climate disaster
events are becoming more frequent, further research and studies on the topic are expected to
be undertaken in the near future.

2.1 Climate Disaster Events and the Effects on Asset Prices

Climate disaster events have, not surprisingly, large impacts on asset prices and global capital
markets. As firms are affected by climate disaster events in terms of supply chain and
production disruptions, physical damage to tangible assets, and other operating performance,
market participants react differently to these news.
       Our study uses the methodology put forward by Hong, Wekai Li and Xu (2018), who
study the impact of droughts on companies within the food industry. The authors use the
Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI) as a proxy for climate change and models
country-specific trends in droughts for 31 countries across America, Europe and Oceania. As
food industries in countries suffering adverse effects of droughts (due to the reliability of
water supplies) exhibit lower financial performance in terms of net income, the authors
measure how food companies’ cash flows are affected by these trends and whether the stock
markets are efficiently pricing the risks associated with climate change. They found that there
is a strong forecastability of changes in food industry profitability and stock returns,
suggesting that the market is not efficient in terms of correctly pricing these climate risks.
       Furthermore, Bebhe and Ndlovu (2020) study the impact of natural disasters and
climate change risk on the performance of stocks within the financial sector. The authors use
a Seemingly Unrelated Regression (SUR) in conjunction with an ARCH/GARCH model to
predict index volatility and isolate abnormal returns for stocks listed on the Johannesburg
Stock Exchange (JSE). The index used is the JSE all-share index and the period studied is
1995 to 2021. The authors find results suggesting that the occurrence of natural disasters have
a negative impact on the index and, conditional on the observed above-market performance,

                                    4
that stocks within the financial sector experience a negative impact from the occurrence of
natural disasters. Our paper builds upon partial similarities in terms of measuring the effect of
natural disaster events’ impact on stock indices. However, our methodology differs from the
work of Bebhe and Ndlovu (2020) by instead of measuring the across-industry effects of
natural disaster, we delineate our analysis to examine the impact of a specific natural disaster
category on listed stocks within a certain industry and as such study the explicit impact of
wildfire severity on stocks within the forestry and P&P industries.

2.2 Wildfires and the Effects on Asset Prices

As the negative impact following wildfires has been estimated to amount to several billions
of dollars by affecting countries and economies in terms of labor market disruptions, damages
to assets and infrastructure, as well as production losses (Meier et al., 2023), this is not
surprisingly of large interest when studying wildfires and the effects on asset prices. Adachi
and Li (2023), who study the effects of wildfire risk on property prices in South Australia,
find that houses that are located in areas more prone to wildfires experience a 4.96% price
discount compared to houses not located in these areas after a wildfire has occurred. The
authors show that this effect is withstanding six months after a wildfire and persists up to two
years after the wildfire occurrence, suggesting that wildfire risk perception is evident
following a wildfire event and that wildfires have a direct effect on asset prices. This is
important for our study as we examine the effect of wildfire severity on forestry and P&P
company profitability, rendering the same conclusion that wildfires have a material impact on
asset prices.
       In a study by Wang and Lewis (2023), the authors examine the effect of wildfires and
droughts on the economic value of forests and biological assets by employing parcel-data
over a 17-year period in three Pacific states in the US. In addition, the authors study changes
in risk perception by examining woodland prices of forests in close proximity to areas that
have suffered from wildfires. While the authors’ results indicate a substantial effect on asset
prices, estimated by more than $6 billion in economic damages attributed from climate
change, the authors suggest that most of the damages arise from changes in investors’ risk
perception rather than the actual economic damages per se. The finding that wildfires are
suggested to have a substantial material impact on asset prices is important for our research
question and framework, as we motivate the forestry and P&P industries as being the most
affected industries by wildfires and wildfire severity. Furthermore, in addition to our results
being much in line with those of Wang and Lewis (2023), our study partly builds upon their
research and findings by proxying the impact of wildfires by wildfire severity and extends the
research of wildfire severity’s impact on woodland asset prices in European countries through
a different set of firm fundamentals, namely forestry and P&P companies’ net income.

2.3 Climate Disaster Events and Market Response

In their study, Pagnottoni et al. (2022) analyze the effects of natural disasters on 27 global
stock market indices and find heterogeneous stock market reactions, with the most extreme
reactions caused by climatological and biological disasters. Among the indices analyzed, the
authors find that European indices are the ones most responsive to climate disaster events.
This is of importance for our study since we mainly examine European countries and the
stock market reactions relating to forestry and P&P companies within these countries. As
such, the results of Pagnottoni et al. (2022) suggest that the countries examined in our study
should be prone to swiftly respond to market events and in particular differences in wildfire
severity.

                                    5
This conclusion is further strengthened in a study conducted by McCoy and Walsh (2018),
who research changes in location-specific risk perceptions to housing markets following
wildfire risk. More specifically, the authors empirically model the link between wildfire
occurrence and housing market dynamics by developing a framework that measures the
relative price and quantity dynamics in the context of salience shocks in communities facing
a high and low risk of wildfires, respectively. In that way, the study measures climate-driven
increases in the risk of wildfires as well as social dynamics that capture the market’s response
to climate disaster events in the form of wildfires. Here, the authors find evidence for
immediate short-term price shocks in the year following a wildfire to housing situated in the
high risk areas, which is not evident for housing situated in low risk areas. Importantly, the
results show that the immediate shocks are only temporary during the initial two to three
years following a wildfire, illustrating the large effects of market response and changes in risk
perception in addition to measurable economic damages following wildfires. This is closely
related to our study as we examine market efficiency in the context of wildfire severity
affecting companies’ financial fundamentals, which by its nature to a large extent is driven by
saliency and investor emotions.

2.4 Contribution

To our present knowledge, no paper aimed at quantifying the material impact of wildfires on
listed companies within the forestry and P&P industries and subsequently testing the market’s
response to those events have yet been published. Therefore, this study contributes to the
existing literature in several ways. Utilizing the framework of Hong, Wekai Li and Xu
(2018), we measure the trend of climate events across a number of selected countries. In
contrast to Hong, Wekai Li and Xu (2018), however, we study the trends of climate disaster
events in the form of wildfire severity and its effects on the forestry and P&P industries.
Thus, our study extends the existing research of market efficiency related to climate disaster
events into wildfires and the forestry and P&P industries. Moreover, in much the same way as
Bebhe and Ndlovu (2020) measure across-industry effects of natural disasters, our study
contributes to this by delineating the analysis to specific natural disaster events in the form of
wildfire severity on listed stocks within the forestry and P&P industries rather than indices.
Lastly, our research contributes to the existing literature on market response to information
surrounding wildfires, such as the study by McCoy and Walsh (2018), by examining
short-term stock market responses to wildfire severity trends for publicly traded forestry and
P&P companies. Through our contributions, we hope to elucidate a new area of research for
future scholars to build upon.
3. Hypotheses

   i. We expect that negative trends in wildfire severity will have a negative material
          impact on the forestry and P&P industries in terms of net income.

Hong, Wekai Li and Xu (2018) show that a climate related drought index has a significantly
negative impact on food industry profitability, where food companies situated in countries
with a negative trend in drought experience a significantly negative effect in terms of net
revenue. We expect to see a similar result in our study, where forestry and P&P companies
experience a significant negative material impact following a higher wildfire severity trend as
seen by the wildfire severity rating.

                                    6
   ii. We hypothesize that the market is efficiently pricing the risks associated with
          wildfire severity on companies’ cash flows within the forestry and P&P industries.

In Hong, Wekai Li and Xu’s (2018) study, the authors find that the market does not efficiently
price in risks associated with droughts for companies within the food industry even after a
forecastability has been established between the drought index and the food industry
profitability, providing evidence for the occurrence of inefficiencies within the stock market.
However, the authors thereafter make the same analysis and controls for additional sectors
beyond the food industry, such as utilities and basic resources, but conclude that no such
findings can be seen. Since our research setting does not differ substantially in terms of
dependent (the change in forestry and P&P industry profitability) and independent (wildfire
severity trend) variables, we hypothesize that the market is efficiently pricing the risks
associated with wildfire trends on companies’ cash flows within the forestry and P&P
industries.

4. Data

4.1 Wildfire Trend Measures

In order to measure trends in wildfires, we have used data from the European Forest Fire
Information System, EFFIS. EFFIS is a European Commission established system aimed at
supporting services in charge of the protection of forests against wildfires in the EU and
neighboring countries and provides a number of statistics related to wildfires such as the
number of wildfires, the areas burnt in hectares (ha), emissions following wildfires, thermal
anomalies, as well as a wildfire severity rating. The majority of the data published is in a
weekly format, making each measurement variable contain 52 observations per year in total.

                                    7
We follow the methodology of Hong, Wekai Li and Xu (2018) in their article Market
Efficiency and Climate Risks, although while they study the impact of droughts on stocks
within the food industry by utilizing a drought severity index, our study investigates the
impact of wildfire severity through a weekly wildfire severity rating. The wildfire severity
rating is part of the Canadian Forest Fire Weather Index (FWI) System, which incorporates
weather data in order to provide a numerical rating of the risk of wildland fires and consists
of six components, namely Fine Fuel Moisture Code (FFMC), Duff Moisture Code (DMC),
Drought Code (DC), Initial Spread Index (ISI), Buildup Index (BUI), and lastly Fire Weather
Index (FWI). An additional component of the FWI system, the Daily Severity Rating (DSR),
is based on the FWI system but more accurately takes into account the efforts associated with
fire suppression. Since our research question aims to explore the risk of wildfires having a
material impact on forestry and P&P companies, and not the actual number of wildfires or the
amount of areas burnt per se, we are using the wildfire severity rating DSR as a better proxy
for the risk of wildfires. By utilizing wildfire severity rating as a proxy for climate change,
our variable is not impacted by confounding factors such as overall societal improvements in
firefighting capabilities or general actions undertaken to mitigate the occurrence of wildfires,
which would have been the case if the actual number of wildfires or amount of areas burnt
would have been used as proxies for climate change.
       As such, we have used the EFFIS Weekly Severity Rating (which is an average of the
DSR) as a proxy for wildfire severity over time across the analyzed countries. In total, the
EFFIS Weekly Severity Rating consists of 31 countries across Europe, America, and Oceania.
After filtering out the countries that we could not obtain annual market return for as well as
companies that at present only had one or no listed companies within the forestry and P&P
industries, we are left with 14 countries in our dataset (a full list of all countries included is
available in Table 15 in the Appendix). This filtering, which limits us to less than half the
amount of countries used by Hong, Wekai Li and Xu (2018), makes each country have a
larger impact on the data and could lead to a reduced generalizability. There is also a risk of
selection bias as our market returns were only available for European countries and Turkey,
which again might reduce the external validity. As we are interested in the wildfire severity
over the years 2003 to 2022, we constructed a web-extracting script in Java using the EFFIS
API in order to download all weekly data from EFFIS’ website, making our final wildfire
trend data consisting of approximately 25,000 data points in total. In an ideal setting, our
wildfire trend measures would be based on a dataset spanning more than 20 years, which is
the total wildfire severity data publicly available at EFFIS as of now, as this short time period
could make our current trends less robust and be more prone to short-term fluctuations. This
would enable us to assess the effects of trends over a longer period of time, which likely is of
importance since climate change progressively affects the wildfire severity rating, and would
create more robust trends that measure long-term movements in wildfire severity rating rather
than potential short-term fluctuations.

                                    8
4.2 Forestry and P&P Companies

Since our study investigates the material impact of wildfire severity on companies in terms of
net income, we have chosen the forestry and P&P industries as suitable sectors to measure
within-industry firm material impact since these industries have been shown to be the most
affected in terms of financials following wildfires (Wang and Lewis, 2023). Moreover, as
Hong, Wekai Li and Xu (2018) find that the next most affected industry following climate
disaster events as measured by droughts is utilities, we believe that the forestry and P&P
industries are closely linked in terms of fundamentals and similarities in firm assets.
Therefore, we also include placebo tests for the utilities and healthcare industries.
       In order to assess the material impact of wildfire severity trends on companies within
the forestry and P&P industries, we have used financial data provided by Compustat for all
forestry and P&P companies listed within the countries in our dataset. The data is based on
yearly financial statements published by the companies spanning from 2013 to 2022, and is
retrieved from the Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS, 2023). To measure stock returns
for forestry and P&P companies within the analyzed countries, we have used monthly stock
return data for the period 2013 to 2022 from Compustat (WRDS, 2023). By using the North
American Industry Classification System (NAICS) coding structure, which is a six-digit
hierarchical classification method used to classify companies within different industries based
on their operations (United States Census Bureau, 2023), we have filtered out companies
belonging to the groups 321 (forestry) and 322 (P&P). Since some companies are listed at
multiple exchanges we then need to filter out any duplicates, which we do by using their IID,
calculating the average trading volume of each stock’s separate IID, and lastly keeping those
with the highest trading volume due to the notion that a higher liquidity better represents the
market’s valuation of the stock. The location of each company’s headquarters determines
which country a stock belongs to.
       After having selected all listed forestry and P&P companies within the relevant
countries, we are left with a total of 114 companies. The dataset includes both live and dead

                                    9
stock, making our data free of any survivorship bias. Lastly, we have utilized data from the
Kenneth French website in order to calculate the CAPM and Fama-French three-factor
models. We chose to use the European Markets Factors and Returns 3 Factors, which contain
the size factor (Small Minus Big), the value factor (High Minus Low), and the market return
factor (Market Return Minus Risk-Free Rate), as that best represents the countries in our data.
The Small Minus Big (SML) factor accounts for historical tendencies of large-cap stocks
outperforming small-cap stocks in terms of absolute returns, the High Minus Low (HML)
factor captures historical outperformance of high book-to-market stocks compared to low
book-to-market stocks, and the Market (Mkt-Rf) factor takes into account the excess return of
the market index minus the risk-free rate (French, 2023). The Mkt-Rf factor contains all
stocks for which Fama-French has market equity data (a full list of the included countries is
available in the Appendix). In the ideal scenario we would have a higher total number of
countries and especially more firms per country. Unfortunately, we cannot control the number
of firms per country, making the available data limiting us to these countries which will partly
weaken our results. However, the relative homogeneity of countries could also be a strength.

4.3 Variables

4.3.1 Dependent Variables

4.3.1.1 Future Forestry and P&P Return

Following the construction of variables as posited by Hong, Wekai Li and Xu (2018), we are
analyzing the 12-month future forestry and P&P industry return, 𝐹𝑃𝑃𝑅𝐸𝑇12 in time 𝑡 + 1,
as one of our dependent variables. The variable is calculated as the absolute value-weighted
return 𝑅 divided by the market cap for all companies within each country 𝑖 during each future
12-month period 𝑡 + 1, where the market cap is calculated by taking the closing share price

                                    10
𝐶𝑆𝑃 each month, denoted 1, 2 and so forth until month 12, multiplied by the number of
shares outstanding 𝑆𝑂 in the same year for each firm 𝑓. Since the shares outstanding are
based on each firm’s year-end financial report, the value does not differ between the months
and is therefore constant during each year. The market cap is then multiplied by the monthly
return, 𝑅, again denoted 1, 2 and so on until month 12, each month to create a value-weighted
return. We then sum the value-weighted returns and market caps of all firms per country and
take the sum of weighted return divided by the sum of market cap to get the monthly
value-weighted return per country. Lastly, we use the formula for compounding returns to
achieve the annual compounded return and lag the value 12 months in order to arrive at our
𝐹𝑃𝑃𝑅𝐸𝑇12 variable:

                                                                                    Eq. 1

4.3.1.2 Change in Forestry and P&P Industry Profitability

Our next dependent variable, the change in forestry and P&P industry profitability, 𝐶𝑃, is
calculated as the percentage change in forestry and P&P industry profitability from year 𝑡 to
𝑡 + 1, where  𝑁𝐼 is the forestry and P&P industry-level net income and 𝐴 is the forestry and
P&P industry-level book assets based on each company’s end-year financial report. The net
income and total assets at the industry level for the forestry and P&P sectors are calculated by
summing up the individual net income and book assets of the firms operating within these
industries:

                                                                                    Eq. 2

4.3.2 Independent Variables

4.3.2.1 Lagged Forestry and P&P Return and Market Return

Consistent with the article by Hong, Wekai Li and Xu (2018), we perform a regression
analysis using the lagged forestry and P&P return and the lagged market return as two of our
independent variables. The lagged market return, 𝑀𝑅𝐸𝑇12 in time 𝑡 − 1, is simply the
lagged market return in percentage per year for each country. The lagged forestry and P&P
return, 𝐹𝑃𝑃𝑅𝐸𝑇12 in time 𝑡 − 1 , is calculated as the absolute value-weighted return 𝑅 and
market cap for all companies within each country during each lagged 12-month period 𝑡 − 1,
where the market cap is calculated by multiplying all companys’ year-end closing stock price
𝐶𝑆𝑃 with their amount of shares outstanding 𝑆𝑂 in time 𝑡 − 1. Thereafter, we have
compounded the monthly returns to yearly returns by using the formula for compounding
returns:

                                       11
                                                                                    Eq. 3

4.3.2.2 Forestry and P&P Industry Price-to-Book

Similar to Hong, Wekai Li and Xu (2018), we calculate the forestry and P&P industry
price-to-book ratio, 𝐹𝑃𝑃𝑃𝐵, in time  𝑡 by dividing the market cap with the book value of
equity for all forestry and P&P companies within each country, where the market cap is
calculated by multiplying each company’s year-end closing stock price 𝐶𝑆𝑃 with the amount
of shares outstanding 𝑆𝑂 in time 𝑡, and the book value of equity is calculated by subtracting
total assets 𝑇𝐴 with total liabilities 𝑇𝐿 in time 𝑡. We have thereafter taken the logarithm of
this ratio:

                                                                                    Eq. 4

4.3.2.3 Trend Quintile 5 and Trend Quintile 5 (2012)

The next independent variables we construct are the yearly trends for Quintile 5,
𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5, and the trend for Quintile 5 from the beginning of the year 2012,
𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5_2012.  𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5  is dummy variables taking the value 1 for
countries belonging to Quintile 5 (the countries suffering the highest wildfire severity rating)
at the end of December each year, and the value 0 otherwise. Similarly,
𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5_2012 is a dummy variable taking the value 1 for countries belonging to
Quintile 5 at the end of December 2012, and the value 0 otherwise.

4.3.2.4 Inflation Rate and Dividend/Price Ratio

In much the same way as Hong, Wekai Li and Xu (2018), we construct the inflation rate as
well as the dividend/price ratio for each country during the data period. Inflation rate, 𝐼𝑁𝐹12,
is the lagged country-specific inflation rate per year, as published by the World Bank
year-end (World Bank, 2023). The dividend/price ratio, 𝐷𝑃, is the defined as the market
return including dividend, 𝑀𝑅𝐸𝑇𝐼𝐷, minus the market return excluding dividend,  𝑀𝑅𝐸𝑇𝐸𝐷,
expressed as a fraction. The dividend/price ratio and the market return is based on data from
WRDS (WRDS, 2023).

                                    12
As can be seen in the correlation matrix, our independent variables exhibit low correlations
with each other and thus suggest no concerns related to multicollinearity. The lack of
correlation improves the interpretability and fortifies the precision of our statistical model by
using unbiased parameter estimations. In that way, each variable contributes uniquely to our
model without being confounded by collinearity and allows us to better employ the variables
across our different regressions.

                                    13
5. Methodology

5.1 Longitudinal Study

In order to answer our research questions, we follow the methodology outlined by Hong,
Wekai Li and Xu in the article Climate risks and market efficiency (2018). As such, our study
is a longitudinal study that aims to explore market efficiency in the context of wildfire
severity having a material impact on companies within the forestry and P&P industries. A
longitudinal study is a research method that measures repeated observations over a longer
period of time, so-called longitudinal or panel data, and has been used for research purposes
for hundreds of years. Therefore, it is an appropriate method to measure cause-and-effect
relationships across time and is particularly suitable for our research question as we aim to
explore the effects of wildfire severity on companies’ profitability in terms of net income,
which by its nature have a time-dependent effect by gradually, over a longer period of time,
affecting companies and their operations (Giang et al., 2021).

5.2 OLS-Regression

Utilizing Hong, Wekai Li and Xu’s (2018) methodology, we measure trends in wildfires by
using the EFFIS Weekly Severity Rating in order to measure whether or not investors are
correctly pricing these risks. To start with, we use their method of sorting out suspicious
returns by setting returns to missing for stocks that have risen 300% or more within a month
and then declining by 50% or more the following month. Further, we treat returns above
1000% as missing. We also winsorize returns at the 1st and 99th percentile to reduce the
impact of outliers on our results (McLean et al., 2009). While Hong, Wekai Li and Xu (2018)
perform an autoregressive (AR) model for drought augmented with a deterministic time trend
𝑡, the authors also tested several different models which gave approximately the same results.
Therefore, we initially use an ordinary least square (OLS) model that regress the fire risk,
𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑒 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘 , on time, 𝑡 , up until the end of 2012, where β is the trend in wildfire severity, α is
the intercept, ε denotes the error term, and i denotes the country:

                                    14
                                                                                Reg. 1

Thereafter, we created a more advanced, iterative version that calculates monthly trend values
for each month from January 2013 until December 2022 by utilizing the same regression as
outline by Equation 5, where the trend is based on all data up until month 𝑡. The reason for
running this OLS-regression in conjunction with the iterative model is to observe whether the
trends are stable over time and not just displaying temporary variation. Based on our
OLS-regression results, we segmented the data into quintile groups based on their trend
values. Quintile 1 is composed of countries with the least deterioration in wildfire severity
conditions over the study period. Conversely, Quintile 5 consists of countries that experience
the most severe worsening in wildfire severity.

5.3 Statistical T-Tests

Like Hong, Wekai Li and Xu (2018), we utilize Welch’s two sample t-test for unequal
variances, which is used to test whether or not two populations have equal mean. In our
study, we test if there is a statistically significant difference in wildfire severity trends
between countries with the most severe worsening of wildfire severity conditions and those
with the least deterioration, as well as if there is a difference between the change in
profitability for forestry and P&P companies in Quintile 5 and Quintile 1, respectively. We
test this by calculating the test statistic and analyzing the corresponding p-values as given by
the calculations outlined by Newbold et al. (2022), where x̄ and ȳ are the sample means, 𝑠 is
the sample variance, and 𝑛 is the sample size:

                                                                                    Eq. 6

Firstly, we test the hypothesis that the mean wildfire severity trend in Quintile 1 is
significantly less than in Quintile 5, implying a lesser deterioration in wildfire severity
conditions in Quintile 1 compared to Quintile 5. This hypothesis aligns with our research
objective to understand the disparities in wildfire severity progression across different global
regions. We perform the test as a one-sided t-test with the following null and alternative
hypothesis for average wildfire severity trend:

                                  𝐻0 : 𝑄1 − 𝑄5 ≥ 0
                                  𝐻1 : 𝑄1 − 𝑄5 < 0

Next, we perform a two-sided t-test to test the hypothesis that there is a significant difference
between the change in profitability for forestry and P&P companies in Quintile 5 and Quintile
1 for year 𝑡 to 𝑡 + 1 , 𝑡 to 𝑡 + 2 , and lastly 𝑡 to 𝑡 + 3, rendering three hypothesis and
alternative hypothesis for each period:

                                    15
                                  𝐻0 : 𝑄1 − 𝑄5 = 0
                                  𝐻1 : 𝑄1 − 𝑄5 ≠ 0

5.4 Portfolio Sorts

Consistent with Hong Wekai Li and Xu (2018), we follow Fama and French (2000) in order
to measure the change in forestry and P&P profitability by comparing the profitability of
portfolios and then sorting the quintile portfolios based on the trends in wildfire severity. As
such, at the end of each year 𝑡, we sort countries into quintile portfolios based on their
wildfire severity trends using data up to year 𝑡 and hold the portfolios for one, two and three
years, respectively. Thereafter, we report the changes in percentage. Quintile 5 contains firms
in countries with the worst wildfire severity trend and Quintile 1 contains firms in countries
with the best wildfire severity trend. The sample period used is 2013 until 2022. To calculate
the change in profitability for the quintile portfolios for two and three years, we use Equation
2.
       We are interested in examining if markets are efficiently responding to information
regarding long-term trends in wildfire severity. Our previously calculated monthly
value-weighted portfolio returns are used in combination with the Fama-French factors from
Kenneth-French to calculate CAPM alphas and Fama-French three-factor model alphas on
overlapping portfolios that we construct following Jegadeesh and Titman (1993). This is done
to investigate whether these quintile portfolios have significantly different returns as well as
smoothing out short-term stock volatility and potential noise. At the end of month 𝑡, we sort
the forestry and P&P-industry portfolios across all countries into quintiles based on their
wildfire severity trends up to month 𝑡. Returns for each quintile portfolio is the
equal-weighted average returns of all countries within each portfolio. Each portfolio is held
for 12, 24, and 36 months, respectively. For each quintile portfolio at month 𝑡, we have 12
(24, 36) portfolios formed. Returns for the 12 (24, 36) portfolios are then equally-weighted in
order to receive the average return for each quintile portfolio for month 𝑡. The oldest portfolio
is removed and replaced with a new portfolio every month. Because of the method of
portfolio creation the portfolio returns for 12-month holdings have data for 2014 to 2022,
24-month holdings 2015 to 2022 and lastly the 36-month holdings 2016 to 2022. We
construct four different portfolios, namely one for Quintile 1, one for Quintile 2-4, one for
Quintile 5, and lastly one for Quintile 1 minus Quintile 5, which is a long-minus-short
portfolio. Consequently, our study employs linear regression models to analyze the returns of
the portfolios categorized by wildfire severity.
      More specifically, we conduct three separate regressions for each quintile with
portfolio holdings of 12, 24, and 36 months, respectively. Firstly, we regress the excess return
mode, which is a basic model considering only the intercept and represents the excess returns
of the portfolios. Secondly, we regress the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), which
includes the market return to account for market-related variances in portfolio returns. Lastly,
we regress on an extension of the CAPM, the Fama-French three-factor model, which
incorporates the three factors market return 𝑀𝐾𝑇𝑅𝐹, size  𝑆𝑀𝐵, and value  𝐻𝑀𝐿, providing a
more comprehensive view of the returns influenced by different market dynamics. We also
report the t-values for our long/short portfolio, consisting of Quintile 1 minus Quintile 5,
which is our primary portfolio of interest. The value we are interested in is the alpha
(intercept) for all portfolios, which is the only value we report from each regression where 𝑖
denotes the quintile portfolios:

                                    16
                                                                                Reg. 2

                                                                                Reg. 3

                                                                                Reg. 4

5.5 Cross-Country Regression

Following the methodology of Hong, Wekai Li and Xu (2018), we run cross-country
regressions in order to check whether or not a company belonging to the worst countries in
terms of wildfire trend has a material impact on firm profitability. Based on our regression
results of trends, Regression 1, we create a dummy variable called 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5 taking
the value 1 for countries with the worst wildfire severity trend and 0 otherwise. A similar
dummy variable, 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5_2012, is created with the same sorting although only
based on the trend up until the end of 2012. Thereafter, we run our regression on the
dependent variable, the change in forestry and P&P industry profitability, denoted 𝐶𝑃. As
outlined in the data section, we conduct regressions with the following independent variables:

𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5               = Dummy variable taking the value 1 for the countries with the
                                worst wildfire severity trend and 0 otherwise
𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5_2012       = Dummy variable taking the value 1 for countries with the
                               worst wildfire severity trend at the end of 2012 and 0
                              otherwise
𝐹𝑃𝑃𝑃𝐵                         = Logarithm of the Price-to-Book ratio for the forestry and
                             P&P Industries
𝐹𝑃𝑃𝑅𝐸𝑇12                   = 12-month lagged forestry and P&P return
𝐷𝑃                            = Dividend yield
𝑀𝑅𝐸𝑇12                    = 12-month lagged market return
𝐼𝑁𝐹12                        = 12-month lagged inflation rate

The cross-sectional regression of our dependent variable 𝐶𝑃 is performed as a Fama-Macbeth
(1973) regression that controls for country and industry characteristics in order to check for
robustness. Each year 𝑡, we run a cross-sectional regression with the one-year future change
in profitability as our dependent variable. Our first regression uses only 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5 as
the independent variable to check if there is a correlation with the future industry
profitability. Secondly, we add two control variables, 𝐹𝑃𝑃𝑃𝐵 and 𝐹𝑃𝑃𝑅𝐸𝑇12, to check if the
potential correlation can be explained by these variables. Lastly, we add an additional three
control variables, 𝐷𝑃 , 𝑀𝑅𝐸𝑇12 , and 𝐼𝑁𝐹12, to check whether our potential correlation is
robust to the inclusion of our control variables. To control for potential autocorrelation and
heteroskedasticity, our standard errors are Newey-West (1987) adjusted with a lag of six
periods. Thereafter, the regressions are repeated using 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5_2012 as our primary
independent variable to investigate if our trend rankings are long-term trends and not
temporary fluctuations:

                                    17
                                                                                Reg. 5

                                                                                Reg. 6

                                                                                Reg. 7

                                                                                Reg. 8

                                                                                Reg. 9

                                                                              Reg. 10

Next, in order to examine if there is a correlation between 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5 and future stock
returns, we change our dependent variable to the 12-month future forestry and P&P industry
returns, 𝐹𝑃𝑃𝑅𝐸𝑇12, for country  𝑖 in time 𝑡 + 1. The first regression has no control
variables. The second regression controls for two variables, 𝐹𝑃𝑃𝑃𝐵 and 𝐹𝑃𝑃𝑅𝐸𝑇12. The
third regression checks whether our results are robust for the inclusion of three additional
control variables, 𝐷𝑃 , 𝑀𝑅𝐸𝑇12 , and 𝐼𝑁𝐹12.

                                                                               Reg. 11

                                                                              Reg. 12

                                                                              Reg. 13

                                                                              Reg. 14

                                    18
                                                                              Reg. 15

                                                                              Reg. 16

5.6 Placebo Tests and Correlation Matrix

Additionally, we conduct a robustness check by undertaking a permutation test where we
randomize our 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5 variable and reiterate our regressions 500 times. Thereafter,
we plot the distribution of the estimate of our main outcome variable Quintile 5 and compare
this to our baseline regression in order to examine if our coefficients fall in the middle or in
the tails of the random distribution. As such, we test if our findings are a result of random
noise or actual effect. Moreover, we conduct a placebo test that uses non-forestry or P&P
industries and calculates excess return, CAPM alpha and Fama-French three-factor alphas for
returns to portfolios sorted on wildfire severity trends. We re-do the same analysis as
previously done in our portfolio sorts but instead filter for companies belonging to NAICS
code 22 and 62, which represent healthcare and utilities, respectively. The results of these
tests can be found in the Appendix. Finally, in order to control for potential multicollinearity
issues and identify potential dependencies between our independent variables, we construct a
correlation matrix to examine the correlation between the independent variables.
6. Empirical Results

                                    19
Table 5 reports the summary statistics for our iterative regressions for the estimation of
wildfire trend values per country. For each country, the constants, trend estimates, and
t-statistics shown are the averages of the estimates and t-statistics over all months from the
rolling regressions.

In Table 6, we report the t-test results of whether or not there is a statistically significant
difference in wildfire severity trends between countries with the most severe worsening of
wildfire severity conditions and those with the least deterioration. The test produced a t-value
of approximately -31, indicating a highly significant difference between the two groups and
that the mean trend in Quintile 1 indeed is lower than in Quintile 5. In that way, the results of
the t-test decisively indicate a statistically significant difference in wildfire severity trends
between the two groups. Countries in Quintile 1 are experiencing a trend towards less severe
wildfire severity, in contrast to those in Quintile 5, who are seeing a trend towards worsening
wildfire severity. This finding is critical for understanding the geographical disparities in the
impact of climate change.

Table 7 displays the change in industry profitability for our five quintiles. Countries
belonging to Quintile 1 have an average increase of 1.69%, 2.78%, and 2.17% when looking
1, 2, and 3 years ahead, respectively. For Quintile 2 to 4 the change in profitability is 0.91%,

                                    20
0.88%, and 1.56%. For Quintile 5 the increase is 1.52%, 2.37%, and 2.08%. Lastly, the
difference between the countries experiencing the less severe wildfire severity trend, Quintile
1, compared to those experiencing the most severe wildfire severity trend, Quintile 5, is
0.17%, 0.42%, and 0.09%, respectively. However, since the t-statistic is 0.09, 0.16, and 0.03
for the three periods, the difference in change in forestry and P&P industry profitability
between Quintile 1 and Quintile 5 is not significantly different from 0 for any time period.

In Table 8, Panel A, we report the results of our regression of change in forestry and P&P
industry profitability based on rankings of trends in fire risk at the end of each year. *, **,
and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively, with our t-statistic
for each variable reported in the parenthesis. As seen in the first regression in column one, the
variable 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5 is positive although not significant. While this could indicate
belonging to 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5 is positively correlated with our dependent variable, the
change in profitability 𝐶𝑃, this relationship is not statistically significant and therefore
suggests that the independent variable in isolation does not have a discernible impact on the
dependent variable. For our second regression in column 2, the variable 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5 is
negative but not significant, indicating that the variable does not serve as a strong predictor
for changes in our dependent variable. Out control variable 𝐹𝑃𝑃𝑅𝐸𝑇12 is negative and
significant, indicating that an increase in the lagged industry return has a negative impact on
the future change in profitability. In our third regression with all control variables included,
presented in column 3, 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5 is negative and significant at the 10% level. This
indicates that belonging to the 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5 Quintile has a negative effect on future
change in profitability. Our control variables 𝐹𝑃𝑃𝑅𝐸𝑇12 is negative and significant at the
1% level, while 𝐷𝑃 and 𝑀𝑅𝐸𝑇12 are positive and significant at the 5% level. This suggests
that the 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5 variable and the lagged forestry and P&P industry profitability are
inversely related to the dependent variable while the lagged market return and
dividend-to-price ratio are positively related to the dependent variable, making the variables
all relevant factors in this model.

                                    21
In Table 9, Panel B, we report the results for our regressions on change in forestry and P&P
industry profitability based on rankings of trends in wildfire severity at the end of 2012. In
our first regression, column 1, 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5_2012 is negative but not significant. As
such, controlling for ranking based on estimated fire risk at the end of 2012 does not indicate
that 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5_2012 has an impact on the dependent variable. For our second
regression in column 2, 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5_2012  is again negative but not significant.
Similarly to Panel A our lagged industry return is negative and significant while
price-to-book is not significant. In our third regression in column 3, 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5_2012
remains negative and insignificant when taking into account all control variables. In much the
same way as Panel A, however, our control variable 𝐹𝑃𝑃𝑅𝐸𝑇12 is negative and significant at
the 1% level while 𝑀𝑅𝐸𝑇12 is still positive but now significant at the 1% level. 𝐷𝑃 is
positive but not significant. This points towards the lagged forestry and P&P industry
profitability being inversely related to the dependent variable while an increase of the
12-month lagged market return also increases our dependent variable based on our ranking of
wildfire severity trend on estimated wildfire severity at the end of 2012, similar to Panel A.

                                    22
In Table 10, Table 11, and Table 12, we can see the Excess Return, CAPM alpha, and the
Fama-French three-factor alpha for portfolios belonging to Quintile 5, Quintile 2 to 4,
Quintile 1, and Quintile 1-5, with the corresponding t-statistic. Panel A represents a one-year
holding, Panel B a two-year holding and Panel C a three-year holding period. Noteworthy is
that all quintiles have a positive alpha for all our asset pricing models, meaning that our
industries have overperformed overall. Looking at the one-year holdings, the Fama-French
three-factor model, which is our most stringent asset pricing model, has a negative return of
-0.60 for our long/short (1-5) portfolio with t-statistic of -4.13, indicating a high statistical
significance. In Panel B, with a two-year holding period, the long/short portfolio has a
negative return of -0.58 with a t-statistic of -4.25, again indicating a high statistical
significance. Similarly for the three-year holdings the long/short portfolio has a return of

                                    23
-0.27 with a t-statistic of -3.21, again with a high statistical significance. These results
indicate that creating a self-financed portfolio by investing in a portfolio consisting of all the
firms in Quintile 5 while going short all the companies in Quintile 1 would have a positive
return for all holding periods.

Table 13, Panel A, presents the results of our Fama-Macbeth regressions of the future
12-month non-overlapping forestry and P&P returns on wildfire severity time trend and the
end of each year. In our first regression, column 1, we observe a positive and significant
result of our variable 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5 at the 5% significance level, indicating a strong and
positive correlation between belonging to 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5 and future 12-month returns. For
our second regression in column 2, where we have added the two control variables 𝑃𝐵 and
𝐹𝑃𝑃𝑅𝐸𝑇12, our independent variable  𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5 is still positive, nevertheless with no
significance. This suggests that adding these two control variables moderates the effect of
𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5 which no longer remains a significant predictor for the future returns. As
can be seen in our third regression in column 3, where all our control variables are added, the
𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5 variable is positive but still insignificant. However, our control variable 𝐷𝑃
is positive and significant at the 5% significance level. This progression, where our
independent variable as a result of including additional control variables moves from being
notably positive and strongly significant in the first regression to being negligible positive
and insignificant indicates that the combined effect of the included control variables mask the
effect of our independent variable, suggesting that the initial impact of 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5 in
our model is attributable to factors represented in the control variables.

                                    24
In Table 14, Panel B, we have a positive and insignificant result of our independent variable
𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5_2012 in our first regression. As can be seen in our second regression in
column 2, 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5_2012 is still positive and insignificant when including the
control variable 𝑃𝐵 and 𝐹𝑃𝑃𝑅𝐸𝑇12. However, when including all control variables in our
third regression in column 3, 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5_2012 is still positive but now significant at
the 5% significance level. This suggests that belonging to the 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5_2012
countries, where the dummy variable takes the value 1, has a positive effect on future
profitability. Our control variable 𝐷𝑃 is significant at the 5% significance level. This
illustrates the substantial influence of the included control variables and suggests that the
effect of 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5_2012 is conditional upon the presence of other variables that
might be overshadowed in the model.

7. Discussion

7.1 Analysis

Our results from Regression 1 shows a significant heterogeneity in wildfire severity trends
between different countries, consistent with climate studies showing that there are
geographical winners and losers regarding the effects of climate change (Adachi and Li,
2023; Wang and Lewis, 2023). Having sorted the countries into quintiles, our results show
that there is a significant difference between the trend of the Quintile 1 and Quintile 5
countries, meaning that there is a meaningful differentiation between the groups. To
investigate our first hypothesis, we then examined if any difference in forestry and P&P
profitability growth for these different quintiles could be discerned. In Table 7, we noticed a
marginally better future profitability for the countries with the best trend compared to those

                                    25
with the worst trend for one-, two-, and three-year holding horizons, respectively. However, it
is important to note that the t-statistic for all of these comparisons was low, indicating that we
cannot discern any difference between the quintiles. This stands in contrast to the results of
Hong, Wekai Li and Xu (2018) that showed a significant outperformance for their quintile
with the best (decreasing) drought trend compared to their quintile with the worst (increasing)
drought trend. However, there is a large difference in total number of countries, number of
countries per quintile, the total number of firms per country, and the length of the studied
time period for the drought as well as the firm data. All of these differences affect the
robustness of the results as well as the likelihood of showing significant results.
       In addition to the portfolio sorts, we also ran regressions where we added control
variables to check the robustness of our portfolio sort results. Having added all of our control
variables, we found a significant effect of our primary variable of interest, 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5,
meaning that belonging to countries sorted in the worst quintile predicted a negative future
profitability in comparison to the countries sorted on other quintiles, which was in line with
our first hypothesis. Nevertheless, this predictive variable should not affect the future returns
of stocks in this quintile according to the Efficient Market Hypothesis, as all publicly
available information should be reflected in the price of an asset. This means that our publicly
available wildfire data and the trends we find should already be priced in for all publicly
traded stock companies. To assess whether our second hypothesis was supported, we wanted
to assess if the market is efficiently accounting for these trends in wildfire severity between
countries. Looking at Table 10, 11, and 12, we surprisingly see that for all holding periods
Quintile 5 outperforms Quintile 1 with a high statistical significance. The results of Panel A,
Panel B and Panel C stand in contrast to the Efficient Market Hypothesis as this would mean
that publicly available information has a predictive power on future returns. A self-financed
portfolio going long Quintile 5 and short Quintile 1 would achieve a positive return which, in
theory, would imply an arbitrage opportunity. This result is partly in line with Hong, Wekai
Li and Xu (2018) that also found that the returns violated the Efficient Market Hypothesis.
However, our results suggest the opposite of theirs, namely that the market overreacts to
climate risks as proxied by our wildfire severity trends. Our placebo analysis, which used
non-forestry and P&P industries, did not display any significant differences between the
quintiles, which demonstrates that we are identifying climate change risks related to wildfire
severity and that our main results are not driven by unobserved differences in
country-specific characteristics. Another interesting finding is that all quintiles achieve a
positive alpha, both according to the CAPM and Fama-French three-factor models, regardless
of the holding horizon. As such, this provides evidence, and can act as a rationale, for
investing in these particular industries. Although this is not our primary research objective it
is a noteworthy finding.
       We further investigate the predictive power of our wildfire severity trends on future
portfolio returns by our regressions in Table 13. Our first regression without control variables
indicates an overperformance of Quintile 5 compared to all other quintiles. Again, this
indicates that the market is not efficient. In line with our earlier results, Quintile 5 can be
stated to be underpriced as the returns for this quintile is better than the other quintiles. A
possible explanation for this overperformance could be overly risk-avert investors selling and
avoiding these stocks, which is in accordance with theories from behavioral finance. In our
second and third regressions with control variables added, the 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5 variable is
still positive. However, it is no longer significant which means that we cannot state that the
market is inefficient and suggests that our earlier results could be explained by omitted
variable bias. This is in contrast to the findings of Hong, Wekai Li and Xu (2018) that
indicated that the market is indeed inefficient and underestimates the risk of climate change.

                                    26
Possible explanations to this difference in results can be the aforementioned shorter time
period as well as the fewer number of firms and countries of our study compared to theirs.
Additionally, the homogeneity in countries and consequently markets which we study can be
assumed to be more efficient because of better institutions and less uncertainty compared to
the more diverse countries in their study. We believe that this homogeneity in country
characteristics may strengthen our results compared to Hong, Wekai Li and Xu (2018) which
will have more confounding factors through uncontrolled variation in institutional stability.
Our regression results of Table 8, Panel A, and Table 9, Panel B, are in general similar
regarding sign, size of the effect, and significance level with a few exceptions, suggesting
that our wildfire severity trend measures are stable over time and that we are measuring
long-term trends rather than temporary fluctuations in weather conditions. Similarly for Table
13, Panel A, and Table 14, Panel B, we generally see the same results which strengthen these
findings. In our placebo tests where we randomized which countries belong to the
𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5, we can observe that our coefficients fall in the middle of the random
distribution, meaning that it could be due to us observing noise. The aforementioned
differences in time periods, especially for the firm data and stock returns, could be one of the
explanations why these results are not robust.

7.2 Limitations

Our wildfire severity data is built on a time period of 20 years, compared to Hong, Wekai Li
and Xu (2018) which had a time period of more than 100 years. To examine the effects of
climate change, we need a longer time period which means that our dataset is a limitation.
Our trends up until the end of 2012, which we use to control if our trend results seem to be
robust over time and not temporary fluctuation, have an even shorter time period, thereby
being further limited than our main trends. Additionally, the industries we have chosen and
believe are most affected by an increase in wildfires and wildfire severity have somewhat few
firms per country. More specifically, we have filtered out countries with less than two firms,
leaving us with 14 countries compared to 31 of Hong, Wekai Li and Xu’s (2018) study.
However, a majority of our countries still have less than 10 firms, the limit that Hong, Wekai
Li and Xu (2018) used, meaning that firm-specific events that have no relation to wildfires
can have large effects on countries’ change in profitability and future stock returns.
Furthermore, with the decrease in total number of countries compared to Hong, Wekai Li and
Xu (2018), each country has a larger effect on the quintile performance, leading to less robust
results which is an additional limitation. Another limitation is potential omitted variable bias
as there are other variables influencing both the profitability and stock returns that we are not
able to include in our regressions. We are neither controlling for country-specific effects,
although that is in part negated by looking at quintile data instead of country data. However,
this does not fully substitute for controlling for country-specific effects. The underlying
country-specific factors could still disproportionately affect the data in each quintile,
especially as our number of countries per quintile is low.
       Even though the Daily Severity Rating has a component that reflects the expected
efforts required for fire suppressions, an additional limitation could be that the trends that are
based on this index does not necessarily lead to impactful wildfires. More specifically, it is a
proxy for climate change and wildfire impact and may therefore not exactly align with those.
Moreover, a limitation of our study could be a lack of consistency of the wildfire trend over
the analyzed period, where we can see a difference in wildfire trend in 2012 as well as over
the whole sample period. However, while the decision to choose 2012 as a comparative year
is due to our stock return data beginning in the following year, 2013, this only display that
there is a difference between the trend in wildfire severity in 2012 compared to the whole

                                    27
period, and does not necessarily show that there is an inconsistency surrounding the other
years. A further limitation is potential endogeneity as the forestry and P&P industries can
both affect as well as be affected by wildfires, creating a bidirectional relationship. For
example, silviculture practices may influence wildfire frequency and severity, while wildfires
can significantly impact the productivity and sustainability of these industries. Lastly, our
stock return sample period includes the Covid-19 period which had a large effect on the stock
market. As our total sample period is only 10 years, this might have an impact on our results
which is not related to our wildfire severity trends.

8. Concluding Remarks

8.1 Conclusion

Wildfires are becoming increasingly potent due to factors such as climate change and
agricultural practices. The negative consequences are not seldom catastrophic for societies
and local populations, resulting in human casualties. In addition to the tragic loss of lives,
wildfires have a substantial negative impact on assets running from real estate, forestry and
infrastructure. Hence, this constitutes a new and unexplored economic area of research that
offers many insightful learnings. In this study, we investigate if wildfire severity has a
material impact on companies within the forestry and P&P industries and whether or not the
stock market correctly prices these risks in accordance with the Efficient Market Hypothesis.
As such, we construct wildfire severity trends on a set of European countries, study the
material impact of these trends on firm-specific net income through a set of regressions on
different portfolio sorts, and measure the stock market’s response to this information. More
specifically, we run cross-country regressions for our dependent variable being the one-year
future change in profitability. Thereafter, we run a set of identical regressions on the
12-month future forestry and P&P industry returns as our dependent variable in order to
examine if there is a correlation between our independent variable and future stock returns.
Additionally, we conduct a placebo test to assess the robustness and validity of our results.
Since few studies have been conducted within our specific research area, we base our study
on research topics ranging from climate disaster events and the effects on asset prices,
wildfires and the effects on asset prices, as well as climate disaster events and market
response.
       We find support for a statistical difference in wildfire trends across the analyzed
countries, where the countries experiencing the least severe trend in terms of wildfire
severity, Quintile 1, is strongly different from the companies belonging to the most severe
trend in wildfire severity, Quintile 5. This is an important initial conclusion as it conveys a
meaningful differentiation between companies belonging to different countries experiencing
different wildfire severity, where they have statistically different means, and provides cues
for the countries’ different geographical settings. While we do not find any statistical
difference of the change in forestry and P&P industry profitability when in isolation
comparing companies situated in countries experiencing the least severe wildfire severity
trend, Quintile 1, compared to those situated in countries experiencing the most severe
wildfire severity trend, Quintile 5, we do find statistical evidence that belonging to Quintile 5
has a significantly negative impact on forestry and P&P industry profitability compared to
belonging to any other quintile when doing a regression together with a set of control
variables. As a control to see if our trends are stable over time and not capturing temporary
climate fluctuations, we also conducted the same profitability regressions although instead
based on the trend up until 2012. Our results of these regressions are generally the same as
for our rolling trends, with the same sign for almost all variables and mostly the same

                                    28
significance levels. However, our primary variable of interest, 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒5_2012, is no
longer significant. This does not invalidate our conclusions that the change in profitability is
negatively correlated with wildfire severity trends but instead indicates that our trends may be
capturing temporary climate changes rather than long-term trends. We control for
multicollinearity and conclude that this is not present for our independent variables.
However, our placebo tests indicate that our regression results might be based on noise rather
than actual effect. When regressing the returns for the quintile portfolios on different holding
horizons, we find evidence that holding a long/short portfolio of Quintile 5 - 1 for one, two,
or three years has a statistically significant positive alpha when using both the CAPM as well
as the Fama-French three-factor model, suggesting that the stock market is not efficiently
pricing these wildfire severity trends. In addition, we observed a positive alpha across all
quintiles, suggesting that the forestry and P&P industries outperform the stock market. When
taking our regression with control variables into account, however, we conclude that this
outperformance does not derive from belonging to Quintile 5 but instead from other factors.
As such, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that belonging to Quintile 5 has no effect on
future stock returns, which would indicate that the market indeed is efficiently pricing climate
change risk as proxied by wildfire severity.
       To conclude, our study finds that trends in wildfires have a material impact on
forestry and P&P industries in terms of future profitability. Furthermore, our results indicate
that the market is indeed efficiently pricing the risks associated with wildfires in terms of
companies’ profitability and thus supports the Efficient Market Hypothesis. As such, we hope
that our study and findings can support future decision makers in making efforts to mitigate
climate change, as well as serve as a foundation for forestry owners and investors when
making investments, either directly or through the stock market, in this form of asset.

8.2 Future Research

The study of market efficiency in the context of climate disaster events and wildfires is an
interesting field of research. With increasing occurrence of wildfires and a surge in public
concern pertaining to climate change, it is of large interest to understand the economic impact
of these climate disaster events and how market actors are responding to wildfire severity in
the light of finance theory. Consequently, we believe that future research could increase the
geographical scope of our study by including a more diverse set of countries and companies,
especially in countries that have undertaken societal actions to decrease wildfire severity in
order to discern the potential effects on climate change. This could furthermore be extended
beyond the forestry and P&P industries in order to examine the broader economic impact of
wildfires and wildfire severity. As mentioned in our earlier discussion, addressing the
limitation of potential issues with the trend in wildfire severity over time could moreover be
an area for future research, where one could study how strong and consistent the trend in
wildfire severity is over time as this can have implications for the stock market’s ability to
correctly anticipate wildfire severity trends and their impacts on firm fundamentals. As such,
this could have an effect on stock market responses to these wildfire severities and be
important factors to take into account when conducting research aimed at establishing causal
inference between these variables, as well as whether or not the stock markets are efficient.
While our study examines a set of countries in an aggregated form, additional research efforts
could be directed towards in-depth analysis on specific countries and the diverse effects of
wildfires on countries and asset prices. Lastly, since our study does not directly measure
behavioral aspects of investors following wildfires or wildfire severity trends, it would be
interesting to conduct an event study aimed at investigating the effects of information
regarding wildfires on investor sentiment and trading behavior. As such, intricacies or novel

                                    29
findings surrounding market efficiency in a research area growing ever-more important could
potentially be found.

                                    30
Bibliography

Adachi, J.K. Li, L. (2023, March 1). The impact of wildfire on property prices: An analysis
       of the 2015 Sampson Flat Bushfire in South Australia. Cities, 136 (2023), 104255.
Bebhe, S. Ndlovu, G. (2023, October 28). Natural disasters, climate change risk and the
       performance of financial stocks: Evidence from the Johannesburg stock exchange.
         Elsevier Reference Module in Social Sciences.
Bousfield, C.G. Lindenmayer, D.B. Edwards, D.P. (2023, November 13). Substantial and
       increasing global losses of timber-producing forest due to wildfires. Nature
       Geoscience (2023).
Center for Climate and Energy Solutions. (2023). Wildfires and Climate Change. Retrieved
       from: https://www.c2es.org/content/wildfires-and-climate-change
Center for Climate and Energy Solutions. (2018, November). Resilience Strategies for
       Wildfires. Retrieved from:
       https://www.c2es.org/document/resilience-strategies-for-wildfire/
European Environment Agency. (2023, October 6). Economic Losses From Weather- and
       Climate-Related Extremes in Europe. Retrieved from:
       https://www.eea.europa.eu/en/analysis/indicators/economic-losses-from-climate-relate
      d
European Commission. (2023, November 22). 2022 Was the Second-Worst Year for Wildfires,
       a Warning From a Changing Climate. Retrieved from:
       https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_23_5951
European Forest Fire Information System EFFIS. (2023). About. Retrieved from:
        https://effis.jrc.ec.europa.eu/about-effis
European Forest Fire Information System EFFIS. (2023). European Fire Database. Retrieved
       from:
        https://effis.jrc.ec.europa.eu/about-effis/technical-background/european-fire-database
Fama, E.F. French, K. R. (2000, April). Forecasting Profitability and Earnings. The Journal
       of Business, Vol. 73, No. 2, pp. 161-175
Fama, E.F. MacBeth, J.D. (1973). Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests. Journal of
       Political Economy, 81 (3), pp. 607–636.
French, K.R. (2023). Current Research Returns. Retrieved from:
       https://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html
French, K.R. (2023). Description of Fama/French 3 Factors for Developed Markets.
       Retrieved from:
       https://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/Data_Library/f-f_3develope
       d.html
Giang, N.T.H. Hanh, T.M. Hien, P.T. Trinh, N.T. Huyen, N.T.K. Trang, V.H. (2021, January).
       The Impacts of Climate Change Risks on Financial Performance: Evidence from
       Listed Manufacturing Firms in Vietnam. Advances in Economics, Business and
       Management Research, 196.
Hong, H. Weikai Li, F. Xu, J. (2018, October 16) Climate risks and market efficiency.
       Journal of Econometrics, 208 (2019), pp. 265–281.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (2018, October). Global Warming of 1.5°C.
       Retrieved from:
       https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/sites/2/2022/06/SR15_Full_Report_HR.pdf
Jegadeesh, N. Titman, S. (1993, March). Returns to buying winners and selling losers:
       Implications for stock market efficiency. Journal of Finance, 48 (1), 65–91.

                                    31
National Park Service. (2017, February 16). Wildland Fire Behavior. Retrieved from:
       https://www.nps.gov/articles/wildland-fire-behavior.htm
Natural Resources Canada. (2023). Background Information: Canadian Forest Fire Weather
       Index (FWI) System. Retrieved from:
       https://cwfis.cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/background/summary/fwi
       International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 17(20), 7504.
Newbold, P. Carlson, W. Thorne, B. (2022, September 8). Statistics for Business and
       Economics, Global Edition, 10th edition. Pearson Education Ltd.
Newey, W.K. West, K.D. (1987, May). A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity
       and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica, 55 (3), pp. 703–708.
McCoy, S.J. Walsh, R.P. (2018, August 13). Wildfire risk, salience & housing demand.
       Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 91 (2018), 203–228.
McLean, R. Pontiff, J. Watanabe, A. (2009. Share issuance and cross-sectional returns:
       International evidence. Journal of Financial Economics, 94 (1), pp. 1–17.
Meier, S. Elliott, J.R.R. Strobl, E. (2023, January 21). The regional economic impact of
       wildfires: Evidence from Southern Europe. Journal of Environmental Economics and
       Management, 118 (2023), 102787.
Pagnotti, P. Spelta, A. Flori, A. Pammolli, F. (2022, May 10). Climate Change and Financial
       Stability: Natural Disaster Impacts on Global Stock Markets. Physica A, 599 (2022),
      127514.
Raine, H. (2020). Governing Wildfire – A Global Inquiry. International Association of
       Wildland Fire. Retrieved from:
       https://www.iawfonline.org/article/governing-wildfire-a-global-inquiry/
United States Census Bureau, North American Industry Classification System. (2023).
       Introduction to NAICS. Retrieved from: https://www.census.gov/naics/
Wharton Research Data Services. (2023). Retrieved from (login required):
       https://wrds-www.wharton.upenn.edu/login/?next=/pages/get-data/compustat-capital-i
       q-standard-poors/compustat/global-daily/fundamentals-annual/
Wharton Research Data Services. (2023). Retrieved from (login required):
       https://wrds-www.wharton.upenn.edu/pages/get-data/compustat-capital-iq-standard-p
       oors/compustat/global-daily/security-monthly/
World Bank. (2023). World Development Indicators. Retrieved from:
       https://databank.worldbank.org/reports.aspx?source=2&series=FP.CPI.TOTL.ZG&co
       untry=
Wharton Research Data Services. (2023). World Indices. Retrieved from (login required):
       https://wrds-www.wharton.upenn.edu/pages/get-data/world-indices-wrds/monthly-wr
       ds-world-indices
Wang, Y. Lewis, D.J. (2023, October 3). Wildfires and Climate Change Have Lowered the
       Economic Value of Western U.S. Forests by Altering Risk Expectations. Journal of
      Environmental Economics and Management.

                                    32
Appendix

                                    33
34