RIDING THE WAVE

IPO  UNDERPRICING ON THE  LONDON  STOCK  EXCHANGE
BETWEEN 2008  AND  2023

JOHANNA LAGERGREN

VICTOR VAHMAN

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2024
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

Riding the Wave: IPO Underpricing on the London Stock Exchange between 2008
and 2023

Abstract:

Initial Public Offering (IPO) underpricing has been observed on the London Stock
Exchange  (LSE)  since 1917. Between 2008 and 2023, an IPO underpricing of 13.21%
was found, disrupting the previous increasing pattern between 1917 and 2007. This
decrease in IPO underpricing can be attributed to enhanced regulatory frameworks,
which increased trust  and reduced information asymmetry. Of the previously
statistically significant factors impacting IPO underpricing on the LSE, only market
capitalisation remains significant. The negative estimate of this factor indicates that
larger firms still experience  less IPO underpricing. Moreover, no trends in IPO
underpricing are identified when comparing the pre-  and post-Brexit periods, signifying
Brexit’s limited  effect  on IPO underpricing.

Keywords:

Initial public offering, IPO underpricing, Brexit,  Market Capitalisation, London Stock
Exchange

Authors:

   Johanna Lagergren  (25481)
   Victor Vahman  (25494)

Tutor:

Emil Bustos, Economist, Research Institute of Industrial Economics

Examiner:

Adrien  d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in  Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
©  Johanna  Lagergren  and  Victor Vahman,  2024

                                   2
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

Introduction

Initial Public Offering (IPO) underpricing is a  phenomenon where the offer price is set
below the firm's market value. Previous research establishes that IPOs, on average are
underpriced, affecting investors, stock liquidity, and volatility (Lowery,  Officer and
Schwert, 2010). In the current changing macroeconomic environment, IPOs have become
a  topic  of discussion. During 2021, the IPO market  experienced  a record number of 123
IPOs on the London Stock Exchange (LSE) Main and AIM markets. However, in the
following year, 2022, the number of IPOs on the LSE Main and AIM markets fell to  a
total of  40 IPOs (LSE, 2024). Similarly, 2023 has been a turbulent year for the IPO
market, and the future is still uncertain.  Nevertheless, David Ludwig, head of Global
Equity Capital Markets at Goldman Sachs,  is hopeful for a recovery in  2024.  Since the
United Kingdom (UK) left the European Union (EU) they received more regulatory
control  of  their  markets. With  this  newfound freedom, there are ongoing discussions of
easing the regulatory requirements to list on the LSE (Szaja, Morrison and Scargill,
2024).

The first study  on  IPO underpricing on the  LSE  was written in 1967 by Merrett,  Howe
and Newbould who found an  IPO underpricing of 17.2% between 1959 and 1963.
Concurrently, the first study on the US market was conducted by Stoll and Curley (1970),
who examined a sample of equity offerings during the years 1957, 1959 and 1963.
Thereafter, multiple studies on IPO underpricing have followed and confirmed consistent
IPO underpricing on stock markets.

Despite extensive research on IPO underpricing during the 20th century and early 21st
century, a lack of research exists on the current market environment. Therefore, this study
aims to address the information gap concerning IPO underpricing, and whether it still
exists, between 2008 and 2023 on the LSE by leveraging the framework  developed by
Chambers and Dimson (2009)  in their  research paper “IPO Underpricing over the Very
Long Run”. Further, this study seeks to investigate which factors influence IPO
underpricing and if the patterns found by Chambers and Dimson (2009) continue to
persist in the period 2008 to 2023. Given the existing information gap in IPO  research
and literature, this study is relevant to  both  professionals and researchers in the field.

Chambers and Dimson (2009) investigate the cause of IPO underpricing between 1917
and 2007 by dividing their period  into  three sub-periods. Between 1917 and 1945 they
found  an average IPO underpricing of 8.04%,  and  in the post-WWII  sub-period  between
1946 and 1986 an increased average underpricing of 12.09% was found. Moreover, in the
sub-period between 1987 and 2007 they found that the average  IPO  underpricing had
increased to 19.00%.  Similarly, Loughran and Ritter (2004) also found that IPO
underpricing on the US market increased over time, from 7% in the 1980s to 15% between
1990 and 1998.

In comparison to previous research (Chambers and Dimson,  2009), we discover an
average IPO underpricing of 13.21% on the LSE, which is a decrease from 19.00% found
between 1987 and 2007 by Chambers and Dimson (2009). Our finding disrupts the
increasing pattern in IPO underpricing found by Chambers and Dimson (2009) on the

                                   3
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

LSE between 1917 and 2007. Adjusting the IPO underpricing model used by Chambers
and Dimson  (2009)  to our current period, and performing an analysis to estimate the
yearly effects, we see no significant secular trends within our period with relatively low
volatility in IPO underpricing when controlling for firm-specific and market environment
factors.

Consistent with the approach of Loughran and Ritter (2004), our analysis focuses on the
technology sector, given the notable rise in technology companies opting for public listing
and LSE emerging as a leading global venue for technology firms (LSE,  2024). As our
period is characterised by significant events such as the Financial Crisis, Covid Crisis and
the war in Ukraine, we examine the potential impact of these events on IPO underpricing.
Despite volatility in the UK stock market followed by the Financial and Covid crises, we
found little to no significant effect on IPO underpricing. We only found the Financial
Crisis variable to be significant on a univariate level, and this significance disappeared
when firm-specific risk and market environments were controlled for in the multivariate
regression.

Market Changes

During our period, 2008 to 2023, there have been several market developments and
changes. To acknowledge these changes and highlight how our sample period differs
from Chambers and Dimson’s (2009) century-long period, we will explore the following:
Book-Building,   International   Financial   Reporting   Standards   (IFRS),   Spinning,
Regulatory Changes, Brexit, and Crises.

Book-Building
Contrary to Chambers and Dimson’s  (2009) period, which primarily operated under a
fixed offer price regime, our period is instead characterised by the use of the book-
building method. In the book-building,  the underwriter controls the IPO process from
determining the price to inviting investors to participate in the IPO (Ljungqvist  and
Wilhelm,  2003). Today, the IPO book-building process consists of the following five
steps, according to the London Stock Exchange, “How to list equity”  (2024): (1) Choose
a market:  the issuing company must decide if they should list their shares on the Main or
AIM market. (2) Choose advisers: the issuing firm  chooses their advisors. This step
usually consists of a “beauty” parade where the advisors compete to advise the issuing
company. (3) Prepare the application:  the issuing company and advisors must prepare the
application to list on the LSE. (4) Market to  investors:  involves a roadshow, where the
underwriters sell and market the opportunity to invest in the issuing company to external
investors. In step (5) Launch and beyond:  the issuing company go through with their IPO
and lists their shares on the market  of their choice. After completing these five steps, the
company has successfully listed its shares on the LSE.

                                   4
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

IFRS
In 2005, many countries, including the UK, adopted the mandatory IFRS rules (EY
McGrath and Gourley 2018). Hong, Hung and Lobo  (2014) found evidence that the IFRS
standards allowed for market comparison, thus decreasing the information asymmetry
during the IPO process. They also found significant results that implementing the IFRS
rules decreased IPO underpricing. Despite leaving the European Union in 2020, the UK
continues to apply the IFRS rules (IFRS, 2021). Since the IFRS rules have been
implemented throughout our whole sample period, we have not included a variable related
to IFRS or investigated its effect on IPO underpricing  further.

Spinning
The  phenomenon  known  as  spinning,  where  managers  of  the  issuing  firm  and
underwriters engage in IPO underpricing to derive personal and firm gains, has long been
a subject of interest in IPO literature. Loughran and Ritter (2004) investigate  spinning.
They found that spinning increased the incentive for managers of the issuing firm to leave
money on the table, as they would derive personal gains from the underpriced IPO. They
also found that this incentive among managers increased during hot markets since analyst
coverage and the hot market would help the stock price. Furthermore, Liu and Ritter
(2010) identified that spinning contributed to an average increase in IPO underpricing of
23%. Spinning was later regulated in the US in 2014 by the Financial Industry Regulatory
Authority (FINRA) rule 5131(FINRA, 2020) and in the UK in 2018 through the Financial
Conduct Authority’s, (FCA) COBS 11A.1.6 rule (FCA Handbook, 2018). Hence,
spinning has most likely constituted a problem and affected IPO underpricing during both
Chambers and Dimson’s (2009) and our sample period. However, due to data availability,
no further exploration of how spinning and the regulation of spinning have affected IPO
underpricing between 2008 and 2023 is conducted. Additionally, the regulation of
spinning is only one aspect of the COBS rule, making it challenging to analyse  spinning
separately.

Regulatory Changes
During Chambers and Dimson’s (2009) century-long period, the market experienced
several changes. Among the most prominent changes was the deregulation of the  LSE  in
1986, which made it easier to trade and enabled electronic trade. Additionally, provincial
and regional exchanges existed until 1973, when they merged into the LSE. As a result,
the period studied by Chambers and Dimson (2009) differs from our period (2008 to
2023). Like Chambers and Dimson’s (2009) period, our period is also characterised by
market changes. More recent market changes that have taken place between 2008 and
2023 are regulatory changes aimed at enabling trading and decreasing information
asymmetry (Szaja et al.,  2024). For example, in 2018, the FCA established changes
regarding the pre-IPO analysis to address the information asymmetry in the first stage and
to  encourage independent analyst research. Furthermore, in 2021, the FCA reduced the
free float requirement from 25% to 10% and increased the minimum initial equity market
capitalisation from £700,000 to £30 million (Szaja et al., 2024). We expect that regulatory

                                   5
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

changes aimed at reducing information asymmetry  will  minimise IPO underpricing,
whilst the change in free float requirement is anticipated to have a minimal impact.

Brexit
The most substantial change to the UK market between 2008 and 2023 is Brexit. The day
                                    rd
Brexit was announced (June 23  2016), the Pound reached a 30-year low and the global
stock market lost $2 trillion in market value  (Quaye, Mu, Abudu and Agyare,  2016).  The
                                              st
UK officially  left the EU,  on the 31  of  January 2020,  a move that has brought several
regulatory changes to the LSE.

Changes made close before and after Brexit were mainly due to the UK’s new position as
a non-EU  member. Some of these changes were  the  Financial  Services  Regulations in
2020, the Official Listing of Securities Regulations in 2019 and the prospectus regulation.
The prospectus regulation builds upon the EU’s prospectus regulation but reflects the
UK’s new position as a non-EU  member  (Corner,  2021). For example, the prospectus
regulation  meant  the discontinuation of the “passported” prospectus within the European
Economic Area (EEA). Now instead, the UK Treasury and the Financial Conduct
Authority (FCA) overseas what the European Security and Market Authority (ESMA) do
in the EEA. The UK Treasury has established that a prospectus, in accordance with EEA,
will now be approved by the FCA as if it were prepared under UK law (Szaja et al., 2024).

Leaving the EU, the UK is taking advantage of the newfound freedom to regulate its
market. Hence, more  changes are currently being discussed and pursued on the LSE, the
most prominent being the prospectus regime stemming from the Lord Hill’s Listing
Review recommendation and the listing regime proposed by the FCA in December 2023
(LSE, 2024).  The prospectus regime aims to make the prospectus regulations more agile,
enhancing the quality of the information in the prospectus, increasing participation and
reducing unnecessary replications. The new prospectus regime is predicted to become
effective in 2025 (Browne, Corner, Graves, Summerfield, Tompkins and Ward,  2021 &
Smith, Phillips, Tobin, Shah and Bateman,  2024). If the listing regime is changed as
proposed by the FCA, it will be the largest re-writing of rules since 1980 (LSE, 2024).
Most regulatory changes following Brexit stem from the UK’s new position as a non-EU
member.

What we would consider the most prominent changes, the prospectus and listings regime,
has not yet become effective. Thus  we have not hypothesised and tested for  their impact
on IPO underpricing.  However, the announcement of Brexit resulted in a large market
reaction  (Quaye et al., 2016), and therefore may have affected companies’  and investors’
behavior  towards issuing and investing in IPOs on the LSE. Thus, we have divided our
period into two sub-periods: 2008 to 2015 and 2017 to 2023, from now on referred to as
pre-  and post-Brexit.  The division investigates whether any significant differences in
secular trends exist between the two periods. However, no significant change in secular
trends between the two sub-periods is seen. Despite the concerns raised by Brexit, the
LSE has maintained its status as a premier destination for companies seeking to list their
shares (Szaja et al.,  2024).

                                   6
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

Crises
The UK experienced the three following events which we describe as crises: the
Financial Crisis between 2008 and 2009, the Covid Crisis between 2020 and 2021, and
the Ukraine war which broke out in  early  2022 and  is still ongoing.  Despite substantial
research and literature on IPO underpricing, the impact of these crises over the past two
decades on IPO underpricing is relatively unexplored.

According to the UKCES (2014) report “The Labour Market Story: The UK Following
Recession” the UK’s economy was strongly impacted by the Financial Crisis in 2008,
and a slow recovery followed.  A decade later,  in 2020, the Covid Crisis breakout resulted
in  uncertainty and volatile markets.  During the Covid Crisis, the Gross Domestic Product
(GDP)  in the UK fell by 19.4% (Office for National Statistics, 2024) leading the
government to provide loans and financial aid to stabilise the economy (Hickman, Morris
and McDonald,  2022). Following the reopening of the economy, the GDP increased by
17.6%, and markets became more stable (Office for National Statistics, 2024).  2021 was
characterised by a more stable macroeconomic environment (PwC, 2022).  However, due
to the outbreak of the Ukraine war in early 2022,  markets were  once again  destabilised
with increased inflation and volatile energy markets  (Adolfsen, Kuik, Lis and Schuler,
2022). Given the substantial impacts of  these  crises, causing volatile markets and
uncertain macroeconomic environments, we hypothesise that these three crises have
significantly   affected   IPO   underpricing.   Nonetheless,   it   remains   challenging   to
hypothesise whether the crises have had an increasing or decreasing effect on IPO
underpricing, considering the overall volatile market environment the crises have caused.

                                   7
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

Literature Review

When exploring the phenomenon of IPO underpricing, existing research highlights that
several factors affect IPO underpricing. Here, we review the most  relevant research and
relate the findings to our research.

Loughran and Ritter (2004) investigated IPO underpricing  on  the US market between
1980 and 2000, specifically focusing on underpricing during the Internet Bubble (1999
to 2000). Loughran and Ritter (2004) found that a large amount of the change in
underpricing could be attributed to the changing issuer objective function hypothesis
(spinning). This phenomenon can be explained by an increased willingness to leave
money on the table for personal gains and increased research coverage. Loughran and
Ritter (2004) contribute a challenging view and explanation for  IPO  underpricing and
highlight the complex relationship between underwriters, managers, and the issuing firm.
Due to Loughran and Ritter’s  (2004)  findings, this thesis investigates the relationship
between underwriters, managers and the issuing firm between 2008 and 2023 by
acknowledging spinning and trust between the parties in the IPO process. We find that
regulatory changes during the period may have made it harder for the involved parties to
exploit underpricing for their own gains.

Chambers and Dimson (2009) contribute a nearly century-long view of IPO underpricing
on the LSE by exploring IPO underpricing from 1917 to 2007 and highlighting regulatory
changes and patterns in underpricing over time. Through their research, they have
identified a consistent increase in IPO underpricing overtime on the LSE, and their
findings provide a deepened understanding of the evolution of IPO underpricing.
Therefore, we build upon the foundational work of Chambers and Dimson (2009) to fill
the existing information gap and to position our findings in relation to a broader historical
context of  IPO  underpricing on the LSE.

Lowery et al. (2010) explore IPO underpricing from 1965 to 2005. Lowery et al. (2010)
echo previous findings found by Loughran and Ritter (2004) and Chambers and Dimson
(2009) that IPO underpricing consistently exists on the market. Considering these
findings, we expect to see IPO underpricing in  the  modern period. However, Lowery et
al. (2010) provides new insights into IPO underpricing by exploring the volatility of initial
returns on IPOs. They find a positive correlation between the dispersion of IPO returns
and average initial returns on a monthly basis. Moreover, they concluded that despite their
expertise, underwriters experienced difficulty in valuation. They found that valuation was
extra challenging for underwriters during hot markets and when the  information
asymmetry was more prominent. Continuing, Sherman (2005) looks into the IPO process
of book-building and sale-bid auctions. Sherman (2005) finds that a more controlled
process, provided by book-building, lowers risk and thus limits IPO underpricing or after-
market volatility. Sherman (2005) also acknowledges the trade-off between the reduced
risk of having underwriters control the process and the conflict between underwriters and
issuers. Moreover, Sherman (2005) highlights that IPO underpricing  compensates
investors for the information asymmetry in individual IPOs.

                                   8
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

Both Lowery et al. (2010) and Sherman (2005) highlight essential factors contributing to
IPO underpricing. Lowery et al. (2010) research further demonstrates the importance of
investigating a longer return period, leading us to include the  1-Month  Return in our
robustness check. Moreover, Sherman's (2005) findings prompt us to explore book-
building, the most common IPO process in our period, and how regulatory changes in the
IPO process may have affected IPO  underpricing.

The previous research above has provided insights into factors affecting IPO underpricing
in previous market environments. Therefore, we have chosen to investigate and build
upon those factors in our study and  to see  whether they persist in our period. However,
questions  of how Brexit and other market regulations have affected  IPO  underpricing on
the LSE remain due to the lack of relevant research on the current market environment.
Our thesis touches to some extent  on how Brexit has affected  IPO  underpricing, and we
find no significant secular trends when comparing pre-  and post-Brexit IPO underpricing
on the LSE. Despite our research, a detailed exploration of how Brexit and regulatory
changes have affected IPO underpricing on the LSE remains.

                                   9
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

Contribution and Limitations

Chambers and Dimson (2009) investigate trends in IPO underpricing and further explore
the factors impacting IPO underpricing over a century-long period. This study aims to
provide an extension to Chambers and Dimson's (2009) paper by investigating a new time
period on the LSE, which lacks coverage in current IPO literature.

Using the methodology of Chambers and Dimson  (2009), we will investigate which
factors influence IPO underpricing and if secular trends found by Chambers and Dimson
(2009) persist. By  building upon the foundational research of Chambers and Dimson
(2009), our study also provides a novel methodological framework adopted to the present
market environment. Thus, our study improves the academic understanding of IPO
underpricing in the present time, as it accounts for regulatory changes and crises in the
market between 2008 and 2023.  Thereby,  filling the information gap in IPO underpricing
research.  Our  contribution  holds  significant  interest  for  issuers,  underwriters  and
investors  as well as  researchers  who wish to deepen their understanding of IPO
underpricing in the current setting.

Adjustments have been made to the foundational model established by Chambers and
Dimson (2009) to enhance alignment with the current market environment. These
adjustments, while necessary for adopting Chambers and Dimson’s  (2009) model to the
current   financial   market,   constrain   the   comparability   of   factors   impacting   IPO
underpricing. The adjustments included both integration and omission of various factors,
with  exclusions driven by regulatory changes and data limitations. This means that we
include the following variables in the model: HOT, COLD, COUNTRY, MARKET,
FINANCIAL CRISIS, and UKRAINE WAR, and exclude the following variables:
LNBVP,  TRACK,  AUDIT,  PROPSOLD,  UW,  PRESTIGE,  RD,  PLACING,  and
RESTRUCTURE. Additionally, due to data availability, factors relating to Brexit and
regulatory changes have not been investigated. Furthermore, due to the model adjustment
and restricted data availability, we cannot comprehensively answer whether all the
patterns and findings in IPO underpricing found by Chambers and Dimson  (2009)  persist
in the current market environment.

                                  10
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

An Empirical Model of IPO Underpricing

Dependent Variable
Existing research in IPO  underpricing (Chambers and Dimson,  2009) defines  IPO
underpricing as the discrepancy between the offer price and the closing price at the end
of the first trading day. For any given firm (i), the underpricing (RETi1) is calculated by
comparing the initial  offer price (Pi0) with the closing price of the stock on the first
trading day (Pi1).
                                          𝑃!"
                     𝑅𝐸𝑇!"  =  %   ' − 1
                                          𝑃!#
                                                                                      Model (1)

Model for IPO Underpricing
The model is based on the premise that issuers wish to maximise gross proceeds of the
IPO, both in terms of gross proceeds to the firm and to existing shareholders, subject to
meeting  the  LSE  requirements. For the issuing firm, a lower  IPO  underpricing is  better
as the firm and existing owners leave less money on the table than if the underpricing is
higher (Chambers and Dimson,  2009).

To ensure comparability to Chambers and Dimson (2009), we build on the linear model
with RET as the dependent variable laid down by the authors. The linear model is adjusted
to reflect the market environment between 2008 and 2023. The adjusted model for IPO
underpricing can be seen below  in Model (2), along with explanations of why certain
variables are included and excluded  compared to the one used by Chambers and Dimson
(2009).

  𝑅𝐸𝑇  =  𝑏!  ∗ 𝐿𝑁(𝑀𝐶𝐴𝑃) +  𝑏"  ∗ 𝐿𝑁(1 + 𝐴𝐺𝐸) +  𝑏#  ∗ 𝐼𝑃𝑂  𝐻𝑂𝑇  +  𝑏$  ∗ 𝐼𝑃𝑂  𝐶𝑂𝐿𝐷
                +  𝑏%  ∗ 𝐶𝑂𝑈𝑁𝑇𝑅𝑌  +  𝑏&  ∗ 𝑀𝐴𝑅𝐾𝐸𝑇  +  𝑏'  ∗ 𝐶𝑂𝑉𝐼𝐷  𝐶𝑅𝐼𝑆𝐼𝑆  +  𝑏(
                ∗ 𝐹𝐼𝑁𝐴𝑁𝐶𝐼𝐴𝐿  𝐶𝑅𝐼𝑆𝐼𝑆  +  𝑏)  ∗ 𝑈𝐾𝑅𝐴𝐼𝑁𝐸  𝑊𝐴𝑅  +  𝑏!*
               ∗ 𝐼𝑁𝐷𝑈𝑆𝑇𝑅𝑌+,--./0  + 𝑏!!  ∗ 𝑀𝑅𝐸𝑇  +  𝜀
                                                                                      Model (2)

Independent Variables
Loughran and Ritter (2004) mention that firm-specific risk factors can partially explain
IPO underpricing. Adopting Chambers and Dimson's (2009) approach, we employ firm
age   and   market   capitalisation   as   proxy   variables   for   firm   risk.   Logarithmic
transformations of  the  market capitalisation and age  variables  are applied to ensure
comparability with Chambers and Dimson (2009).

Previous IPO literature, such as those by Helweg and Liang (2004) and Sherman (2005),
explores IPO underpricing in hot and cold markets.  Hence,  hot and cold variables are
included to investigate the significance of hot and cold IPO markets. Following the

                                  11
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

methodology outlined by Helwege and Liang (2004), a three-month moving average
categorises our period into hot and cold. The IPOs issued in months classified as  hot had
a three-month moving average between 13 and 18 IPO listings, and IPOs issued in months
classified as  cold had a three-month moving average of five IPO listings or less.

In line with the common practice in IPO underpricing research, demonstrated by
Chambers and Dimson (2009) and Filatotchev and Bishop (2002), we incorporate an
industry vector dummy utilising the  Financial Times Stock Exchange  (FTSE)  industry
classification to evaluate industry effects. Consistent with the approach of Loughran and
Ritter (2004), our analysis focuses on the technology sector, given the notable rise in
technology companies opting for public listings and LSE’s emergence as a leading global
venue for technology firms (LSE,  2024).

As observed by Quaye et al. (2016) during the announcement of Brexit, Loughran &
Ritter (2004), and Chambers & Dimson (2009) during the dot-com bubble, the market
tends to react strongly to unpredicted events. To explore whether unpredicted crises have
affected IPO underpricing  from  2008 to 2023, the variables FINANCIAL CRISIS,
COVID, and UKRAINE are included in the linear model.

Chambers and Dimson (2009) include a dummy variable, USM, Unlisted Securities
Market, which captures the weaker listing requirements of the USM. Following this
methodology, we have adopted a  dummy variable, MARKET, to capture the weaker
listing requirements on the AIM compared to the LSE Main Market. Furthermore,
following the approach of Chambers and Dimson (2009), we also incorporate a vector of
dummy variables for each calendar year, representing the initial trading year of the issue
(YEAR). The vector of year dummies is observed in the year coefficient plot figures
(Model 3).

Additionally, the phenomenon of home bias, where UK investors disproportionately
favour domestic stocks,  allocating about 25% to UK equities despite them representing
only 4% of the global index,  underscores the relevance of incorporating the  COUNTRY
variable (Joshi,  2023). This inclusion aims to explore the impact of a firm's country of
origin on its IPO underpricing on the LSE.

Control Variable
Ritter and Welch (2002) have highlighted the impact of equity market conditions on IPO
underpricing.  Moreover,  in accordance with Chambers and Dimson (2009) and Lowery
et al. (2010), a lagged market return from the previous month (MRET) before the first
trading day is used as a proxy to control for market conditions.

Excluded Variables
Underwriter (UW) and prestige of the underwriter (PRESTIGE) are excluded from our
analysis due to the comprehensive advisory support needed throughout the IPO process
in the modern market. Firms aiming to list on the Main Market require a Sponsor (a type

                                  12
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

of underwriter), whilst firms aiming to list on the AIM require a Nominated Advisor
(Nomad), as stipulated by the  LSE (2024).

AUDIT was excluded from our analysis due to  the  legislative evolution intensifying the
auditing regulations between 2008 and 2023.  The mandatory nature of auditing,
established in 1900, was reinforced by the Audit Directive in 2006, with the goal of
harmonising the statutory audit requirement through the Companies Act 2006 in the UK
(Competition Commissions Audit Market Investigation, 2024)

Chambers and Dimson (2009) categorise IPOs into placing or public offers. This
categorisation is not made in our dataset as the distinction has lost its significance,
according to Chambers and Dimson  (2009), following the Big Bang period (1986 to
2007). Additionally, PROPSOLD (Proportion of post-issue voting equity sold at IPO) and
TRACK (Length of profit record) have been excluded from our analysis due to data
availability.  Similarly, LNBVP (natural logarithm of book value ratio), RD (undertaking
of  research and development) and RESTRUCTURE (restructuring of voting shares) are
excluded due to lack of available data.

Hypothesis

We hypothesise  that IPO underpricing exists within our period. However, we expect a
slight decrease in IPO underpricing due to market changes fostering a more transparent
IPO process. Therefore, we expect the continuous growth in IPO underpricing found by
Chambers and Dimson  (2009)  to be disrupted. Given the regulatory changes related to
Brexit and the market reaction, we expect to see a secular trend in IPO underpricing
within our period.

                                  13
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

                                  14
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

Data

The primary data source used was the “New Issues and IPOs” data file provided by the
LSE (2024), which provides all New Issues and IPOs on the LSE from 1995 to 2023.
After excluding observations classified as “Not IPO” and data points prior to 2008, the
dataset consisted of 1221 observations. Unlike Chambers and Dimson (2009), we
excluded ‘money raised’ from our dataset as it was only available from June 2016 and
onwards. Country of origin was specified as a country in the LSE dataset but is simplified
to a  dummy variable, ‘1’, meaning that the country of origin is outside the  UK. FTSE
sectors were provided from the LSE database, and through an FTSE sector tree, the
sectors are aggregated into industry level. Firms without an industry definition were
complemented manually through the Financial Times database  (2024).

S&P Capital IQ, a comprehensive database covering financial data of world markets, was
used to complement the existing data gathered from LSE. In the screening tool for initial
public offers, we screened for the following: LSE or AIM exchange, IPO date between
2008  and  2023 and security  was  type set to common stock. From the S&P Capital IQ’s
filtered dataset of 877 IPOs, the first day and  1-month initial return was extracted. Each
IPO's age  was calculated using the ‘Year Founded’ formula in the S&P Capital IQ Excel
plug-in and then subtracting the year founded from the public offer date. In the data points
where ‘Year Founded’ was missing, it was complemented by manually extracting the
registration date of the company on the governmental website of the UK (Gov.UK, 2024).
The market capitalisation at the offer price for each IPO was retrieved from the S&P
Capital IQ charting tool in the local currency Pounds. Similar to Chambers and Dimson
(2009), who measured  market  capitalisation at the offer price at the end of 2007 prices,
we inflation-adjusted the market capitalisation of our data points to the end of 2023 prices
using the Bank of England Inflation  Calculator  (2024)  for the Pound.

When merging the data from the LSE and S&P Capital IQ, we were left with 645 IPOs.
All IPOs that were exclusively on S&P Capital IQ were excluded. This exclusion is done
as we assume that the LSE has more reliable information in regard to their own market
listings than S&P Capital IQ. Like Chambers and Dimson (2009), closed-end funds,
known as investment trusts in the UK, and firms with a smaller capitalisation than one
million pounds have been removed. We also excluded Special Purpose Acquisition
Companies (SPACs) following their emergence in recent years. Their unique structure of
acquiring a business after its listing could skew the results. After the exclusions above,
we were left with 604 IPOs in the dataset.

The MRET variable (1-month return pre-IPO) for the Main and AIM market (FTSE All
Shares index and FTSE AIM All Shares index) was extracted from MarketWatch  (2024).
The definition of the financial crisis period was found in the ‘Financial Crisis Timeline’
report published on the parliament website  (Edmonds, 2010). The Covid crisis period
classification was taken from the Institute for Government Analysis (2024) of the Covid
restrictions.

When categorising the IPOs into hot and cold, we use the original dataset, “New Issues
and IPOs”, from LSE, consisting of 1221 observations. The data distribution from the

                                  15
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

moving averages (based on Helweg and Liang’s 2004 method) was subsequently divided
into quartiles denoted based on the market activity of IPO issuance. IPOs originating in
periods belonging to the fourth quartile were classified as  hot. Contrarily, IPOs from
periods in the first quartile were classified as cold, indicating low issuance of IPOs during
the corresponding periods. The remaining second and third quartiles were classified as
neutral. The monthly number of IPOs and the three-month moving average across the
period can be seen in Figure I.

Looking at the three-month moving average in Figure 1, we see large volatility in IPO
issuance throughout the period. We notice that the crisis  periods had reduced IPO
issuance, potentially underscoring the potential effect of these crises.

                                  16
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

Table II gives an overview of the data and potential outliers which could impact the
analysis.

The dependent  variable, RET has an average IPO underpricing of 13%, with a maximum
IPO underpricing of 350% and a minimum of  -89%. This wide variation in results
indicates that the range in IPO  underpricing is substantial. Similarly, the market
capitalisation and firm age variables exhibit a wide range and high variability, shown by
the large standard deviations. A logarithmic transformation is conducted to control for
the high variability in these variables. This adjustment was made to increase the normality
of the data  and  to facilitate the analysis process.

                                  17
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

Figure II  shows  the industry distribution of firms choosing to list on the LSE from 2008
to 2023. There is a large discrepancy among firms from different industries deciding to
partake in an IPO on the LSE. In our dataset, companies from the Financials and
Consumer Discretionary industries are the most commonly listed on the LSE. In contrast,
those in the Insurance and Telecommunication industries have launched fewer IPOs. The
discrepancy of industries in our data set contributes to an overrepresentation of certain
industry-specific characteristics, and this influence is mitigated by including an  industry
vector dummy.

                                  18
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

In Figure III,  we see firm characteristics regarding  firm  age and market capitalisation.
The  average  firm  age  ranges  between  6  and  26  years,  and  the  average  market
capitalisation varies from 100 million to 700 million pounds. In the last two years, there
has been a notable drop in average firm age and market capitalisation.

                                  19
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

Results

Table III summarises the annual volume and first-day return of IPOs. The lowest IPO
volumes in our period are observed in 2008 and 2009, the financial crisis years.
Conversely, the highest IPO volume was seen in 2021 during the Covid crisis, with 94
IPOs. However, after 2021, a notable decline in IPO volume is observed, with 28 IPOs in
2022 and 15 IPOs in 2023.

                                  20
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

2008 to 2023 is characterised by an average underpricing of 13.21%, based on the equally
weighted mean return of 604 IPOs. This represents a decrease in IPO underpricing
compared to the 19.00% in IPO underpricing found by Chambers and Dimson (2009)
between 1987 and 2007. Thus, the increasing trend seen in IPO underpricing over time
does not persist in the current period. The highest IPO underpricing was observed in 2019,
with a relatively low IPO volume compared to other years. Additionally, despite the
announcement of Brexit,  2016  was  not characterised by any extreme IPO underpricing,
considering the IPO underpricing of 13.75%,  which  is relatively close to the period's
average of 13.21%. The lowest IPO underpricing was recorded between 2008 and 2010,
ranging from 7.02% to 9.81%.

The  average capitalisation-weighted mean return was 5.52%, compared to the equally
weighted mean return of 13.21%, hence  a 7.69% difference in IPO underpricing  can be
seen. This difference suggests that the market capitalisation of the firm going public has
a  decreasing effect on IPO underpricing. This is later confirmed in our univariate and
multivariate regressions in Tables IV and V.

Univariate and Multivariate regressions

An  Ordinary Least Squares (OLS)  regression, both on the univariate and multivariate
level, is conducted using Model (2) to identify which factors affect IPO underpricing. The
univariate and multivariate regression results can be seen in Table IV and Table V. In the
univariate regression, each variable, including the industries, is examined in isolation in
regards   to   the   dependent   variable   (RET)   representing   the   first-day   return.   The
multivariate regression investigates the combined effect of the variables outlined in
Model (2) on the dependent variable RET.

                                  21
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

                                  22
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

                                  23
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

Chambers and Dimson (2009) noted that more mature and larger firms experience less
IPO underpricing. The univariate regression in Table IV shows that both LNMCAP and
LN(1+AGE) are significant at the 0.1% and 5% levels, respectively, with negative
estimates  on the aggregated and Main  Market. However, looking at the multivariate
regression, only LNMCAP is significant at the 1% and 5% levels on the aggregated and
Main Markets. Our finding that LN(1+AGE) is insignificant on a multivariate level
deviates from Chambers and Dimson’s (2009) results, who found that age was significant
at the 10% level on the multivariate aggregated market. Therefore, our results partially
align with the findings of Chambers and Dimson  (2009), and we, to some extent, find
support for  our hypothesis that LNMCAP and LN(1+AGE) decrease IPO underpricing
and that larger and more mature firms are less underpriced.

Opposite to the initial hypothesis, the Technology sector is insignificant for both the
univariate and multivariate regressions.  Further, previous research has been interested in
hot and  cold IPO markets (Helwege and Liang 2004), and contrary to our hypothesis, we
find that both  hot and  cold markets decrease  IPO  underpricing. However, only  cold
markets significantly affect  IPO  underpricing across the univariate and multivariate
regressions. Specifically, in the multivariate regression,  cold markets are significant in
both the aggregated and AIM markets. In contrast,  hot markets only significantly affect
IPO  underpricing in the multivariate regression for the AIM market.

Contrary to our beliefs, the dummy variable COUNTRY has a negative  effect  on IPO
underpricing. However, the impact of COUNTRY on IPO underpricing is insignificant in
the univariate and multivariate regression. This  demonstrates that the issuing firm's home
country did not significantly affect IPO underpricing during our period. MARKET has a
negative effect on IPO underpricing but is only significant at the 10% level in the
multivariate regression, which indicates less underpricing on the AIM. This also holds
when the average equally weighted mean return on the AIM and Main Markets are
investigated, where AIM experiences a lower average equally weighted mean return of
11.62% than the Main Market, which had an average equally weighted mean return of
15.61%.

Unique to our period are the three crises, FINANCIAL CRISIS, COVID and UKRAINE.
Looking at the multivariate regression, none of the crises yielded a significant result.
Hence, contrary to our hypothesis, the  crises have not affected IPO underpricing.
However, looking at the univariate regression, both the FINANCIAL CRISIS and
UKRAINE variables are significant and shown to have a negative effect on IPO
underpricing.

Furthermore, results from the multivariate regression show that the industry classification
of the issuing firm has no significant impact on IPO underpricing. Only FINANCIALS
and HEALTHCARE are significant at the 5% and 10% level, respectively. However,
looking   at   the   univariate   regression,   Table   IV,   CONSUMER   STAPLES,
INDUSTRIALS, INSURANCE, and REAL ESTATE industries all statistically  affect
IPO underpricing. Moreover, the above industries have a negative  effect  on IPO
underpricing, indicating that firms in those sectors are less underpriced.

                                  24
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

Comparison of Pre-  and Post-Brexit Referendum (2016)

We  estimate  the  YEAR  dummy  coefficients  while  controlling  for  changing  risk
composition, equity market conditions and industry risk using Model (3) for the 604 IPOs
to see how IPO underpricing has varied over time.

 𝑅𝐸𝑇  =  𝑏!  ∗ 𝐿𝑁(𝑀𝐶𝐴𝑃) +  𝑏"  ∗ 𝐿𝑁(1 + 𝐴𝐺𝐸) +  𝑏#  ∗ 𝐼𝑃𝑂  𝐻𝑂𝑇  +  𝑏$  ∗ 𝐼𝑃𝑂  𝐶𝑂𝐿𝐷
               +  𝑏%  ∗ 𝐶𝑂𝑈𝑁𝑇𝑅𝑌  +  𝑏&  ∗ 𝑀𝐴𝑅𝐾𝐸𝑇  +  𝑏'  ∗ 𝐼𝑁𝐷𝑈𝑆𝑇𝑅𝑌+,--./0  + 𝑏(
               ∗ 𝑌𝐸𝐴𝑅+,--./0  +  𝑏)  ∗ 𝑀𝑅𝐸𝑇  +  𝜀
                                                                                      Model (3)

To help the interpretation of the  Year dummy coefficients, all explanatory variables,
except the year dummies, in  Model (3) are demeaned. Hence, with firm characteristics
that display the average characteristics of the sample, the Year dummy coefficients
represent the level of IPO underpricing for each year. Below in Figure IV,  these Year
dummy coefficients are plotted along with average values of these coefficients for each
respective period, along with a 95% confidence interval. Regressing these Year dummy
coefficients on a  constant with a dummy variable for IPOs that are post-Brexit, we
observed no statistical difference of the +2.97% increase in the mean values of the year
coefficients from the pre-Brexit period (+2.80%) and that for the post-Brexit period
(+5.77%) with a p-value of 0.310.
When these coefficients are weighted by the number of IPOs each year, the weighted
averages for the same two intervals display an increase of 2.45%.

                                  25
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

To further examine this potential increase in IPO  underpricing, we modified our
regression by substituting the Year dummies with one period-specific dummy (BEFORE)
between 2008 and 2015 and one dummy (AFTER) between 2017 and 2023. Similarly, all
explanatory variables are demeaned to assist the interpretation of the period-specific
dummies. The regression shows an increase of 2.41% in IPO underpricing when
comparing the BEFORE (1.41%) and AFTER (3.82%) estimated effects. Like Chambers
and Dimson (2009), we conduct a standard Wald test of the null hypothesis  by
constraining these two coefficients to equality. The results show a p-value of 0.341,
meaning that the null hypothesis cannot be rejected. This indicates that IPO underpricing
does not significantly differ between the pre-  and post-Brexit periods.

Through these two statistical tests (linear regression and standard Wald test), we find no
statistical difference, meaning that no long-term trend can be identified within our period.
Furthermore, IPO underpricing is relatively stable throughout the period, except for 2019,
when the estimated yearly effect increased drastically to about 20%. The wide 95%
confidence interval, shown by the blue lines in Figure IV, makes it challenging to
determine exact trends and volatility pre-  and post-Brexit periods.

Model simplification
We simplify the method above by regressing the dependent variable, RET, with only the
Year dummy variables. Regressing these Year dummy coefficients on a constant plus and
a dummy variable for IPOs that are post-2016, we observe a statistically significant
difference of  +5.07% increase in the mean values of the year coefficients from the 2008
to 2015 period (-3.28%) and that for 2017 to 2023 period (+1.79%) with a p-value of
0.035. When these coefficients are weighted by the number of  IPOs each year, the
weighted averages for the same two intervals display an increase of 4.03%.

                                  26
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

Moreover, examining this potential increase in IPO underpricing, we modified our
regression by substituting the Year dummies with one period-specific dummy (BEFORE)
between 2008 and 2015 and one dummy (AFTER) between 2017 and 2023. The
regression shows an increase of 4.03% in IPO underpricing when comparing the
BEFORE (-2.67%) and AFTER (1.36%) estimated effects. Like Chambers and Dimson
(2009), we conduct a standard Wald test of the null hypothesis by constraining these two
coefficients to equality. The results show a p-value of 0.104, meaning that the null
hypothesis cannot be rejected.

By simplifying Model (3) we find support that IPO underpricing differs between the two
sub-periods. However, as this model doesn’t control for changing firm composition and
environmental conditions, these results need to be taken with a grain of salt. Below, we
plot the yearly coefficients of a regression where the dependent variable, RET, is
regressed against Yearly dummies, LNMCAP and LN(1+Age).

                                  27
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

Further, when conducting identical tests to the ones above (including the LNMCAP and
LN(1+AGE) variables in the linear OLS regression model), we see an increase in IPO
underpricing   between   the   periods.   However,   this   increase   is   without   statistical
significance. As indicated by the regressions first done in Figure IV, secular trends are
diminished as more explanatory variables are added to enhance the model, controlling for
firm and environmental factors.

                                  28
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

Robustness

To ensure the reliability of our results and regression outcomes from Model (2) and Model
(3), robustness tests were conducted by altering the dependent variable RET, first-day
return,   to   LN(1+RET),   LOG(1+RET),   and   1-Month   return.   The   logarithmic
transformation and extended return period aim to control for variance, achieve more
normally distributed data, and ensure comparability to the results of Chambers and
Dimson (2009).

Analysing   the   robustness   tests   with   the   dependent   variables   LN(1+RET)   and
LOG(1+RET), the factors affecting IPO underpricing are similar. The most relevant
difference in relation to our hypothesis is that LN(1+AGE) loses its significance for the
univariate regressions on LN(1+RET) and LOG(1+RET). Moreover, the  FINANCIAL
CRISIS  dummy loses significance on the aggregated level in the univariate regressions
on LN(1+RET) and LOG(1+RET). Except for these changes in the univariate regression,
the robustness check with the dependent variables LN(1+RET) and LOG(1+RET) yielded
more or less the same results as the RET univariate regression  (see appendix  Table VI,
VII, X and XI). On the multivariate level MARKET loses significance in both robustness
checks. Moreover, FINANCIAL CRISIS gains significance at the 10% level but only in
the Main Market on the multivariate level. No variables other than the ones mentioned
above gain or lose significance in the robustness checks,  they only fluctuate between
significance levels.

Investigating the robustness check with the dependent variable 1-Month return,  in the
univariate regression, contrary to LN(1+RET) and LOG(1+RET), the LN(1+AGE) stays
significant at the 5% level for the aggregated and Main Market. Additionally, HOT gains
significance  at  the  10%  level  for  the  aggregated  and  Main  Markets.  However,
CONSUMER DISCRETIONARY, which has been significant for the dependent variable
RET and the other robustness checks, loses its significance in the univariate regression
on the Main Market in the 1-Month return robustness check. On the contrary, the
UTILITIES industry gains significance in the aggregated and Main Markets. Through all
robustness checks, LNMCAP has been significant in the aggregated market both in the
univariate and multivariate regressions with negative estimates. Hence our robustness
tests  confirm  our  initial  findings  that  LNMCAP  contributes  to  decreased  IPO
underpricing on the LSE during the period.

Investigating the secular trends and the average IPO underpricing seen in the pre-  and
post-Brexit periods, our original results persist (IPO underpricing is higher in the post-
Brexit period, 2017 to 2023, but without  a  statistically significant difference). However,
only the robustness check of the 1-Month return yields a significant result where the
underpricing in the pre-Brexit period is 6.47%. In  comparison, the underpricing in the
post-Brexit period is 28.71% (see appendix  Figure X). This yields a difference between
the both periods of 22.24%. Nonetheless, the difference between the pre-  and post-Brexit
periods in the other robustness checks, LN(1+RET) and LOG(1+RET) are small  without
signifiance. In summary, our robustness tests strengthen the initial results, indicating that
no significant secular trends exist between the pre-  and post-Brexit periods.

                                  29
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

Discussion

Research  by  Chambers  and  Dimson  (2009)  finds  a  progressive  increase  in  IPO
underpricing from 1917 to 2007, culminating in a peak of 19% between 1987 and 2007.
This increase in IPO underpricing was found despite benefits from regulatory changes in
disclosure, which led them to conclude that market developments eroded trust between
investors and issuers, causing the increase in IPO underpricing. The  century-long trend
of increasing IPO underpricing has been disrupted, as IPO underpricing between 2008
and 2023  decreased to 13.21%. Several market changes have occurred before and during
our period compared to Chambers and Dimson’s (2009), which we believe have
decreased   information   asymmetry   and   increased   trust   between   investors   and
underwriters. One such factor  is the mandatory adoption of IFRS in 2005 (McGrath and
Gourley, 2018), which Hong et al.,  (2014) found to negatively impact IPO underpricing
due to decreased information asymmetry. Hence, the implementation of IFRS reporting
may explain the decrease in IPO  underpricing in our period compared to Chambers and
Dimson’s  (2009).

Another regulatory change that can explain the decreased IPO underpricing in our period
is the implementation of the COBS 11A.1.6 rule, which outlawed spinning (FCA
Handbook,  2024). This regulation aimed to prohibit the unethical practices of spinning,
creating a more level playing field between the issuing firm, underwriters, and investors.
Despite the inability to further investigate the direct effects of the COBS 11A.1.6 rule,
we believe that the prohibition of spinning has two primary effects in decreasing  IPO
underpricing for our period. Firstly, by fostering an IPO environment with increased trust,
and secondly, Liu and Ritter (2010) found spinning to increase IPO underpricing by 23%
on average. Hence, a prohibition of spinning has most likely led to decreased  IPO
underpricing from previous elevated levels.

The period 2008 to 2023 predominantly operated under a book-building regime in
contrast to the 20th century, which mainly utilised a fixed price regime. Sherman (2005)
highlighted that the book-building method lowers risk  or  after-market volatility. Hence,
we would expect that the book-building method would decrease IPO underpricing.
However, we have no evidence to support this.  The fixed price regime period (1946 to
1986) analysed by Chambers and Dimson (2009) displayed an IPO underpricing of
12.09%, slightly lower than 13.21% between 2008 and 2023.

We found little to no significant results for factors (in  Model 2) specifically  impacting
IPO underpricing. However, throughout  our results and robustness  checks, market
capitalisation was continuously significant, and LN(1+AGE) was also significant but only
in the univariate regressions. We anticipated both market capitalisation and  age of firms
undergoing an IPO to affect  IPO  underpricing, a hypothesis based on the findings of
Chambers and Dimson (2009), who found significance in both variables. Hence, it was
unsurprising that significance in market capitalisation was found in both  the univariate
and multivariate analyses. However, we were surprised that firm age did not have any
statistical significance in the multivariate regression since Chambers and Dimson (2009)
found  firm  age  to be  statistically significant at the 10% level. One potential reason  firm
age has lost its significance in the modern market compared to Chambers and Dimson’s

                                  30
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

(2009) period could be attributed to the trend of younger firms deciding to go public on
the LSE, hence making firm age lose its risk proxy  function previously held.

Moreover, we found no statistical significance in any of the three crises during the period,
except for the financial crisis, which was significant in the univariate regression at the 5%
significance level, with a negative impact on IPO underpricing. Considering the market
volatility caused by these crises, we hypothesised that the crises would yield some type
of statistical significance, either positively or negatively affecting IPO underpricing.
Possibly, hypothesising an increasing effect of the crises on IPO underpricing would have
been more natural considering the volatile IPO volumes seen from 2008 to 2023.
Especially,  since the crises created an unstable, unpredictable and risk-averse market
environment. The average IPO volume during the entire period was 38, and looking
further into the financial crisis between 2008 and 2009, only 16 respectively 7 IPOs were
made. That lower IPO volumes characterise the financial crisis is not surprising
considering the relatively slow macroeconomic environment in the UK during this period.
Further, the lower IPO volumes continued up until 2013. This could be a reflection that
the UK experienced a slower recovery from the financial crisis compared to other
countries (UKCES, 2014).

The Covid crisis dummy variable has a positive but non-significant impact on IPO
underpricing. As with the Financial crisis, we expected to find some significance as
markets were volatile with increased uncertainty. During 2020, the IPO volume of 30 was
below the  period average, following the characteristic seen in the financial crisis.
However, in 2021, the IPO volume peaked at 94 IPOs. Thus, the pattern seen in the latter
part of the Covid crisis is the opposite of what we saw during the financial crisis, where
it took the market up until 2013 to pick up (UKCES, 2014). This boom in IPO volume
was relatively short-lived because, in 2022, during the outbreak of the Ukraine war, the
IPO volume drastically decreased. The Ukraine war period, which is still ongoing,
follows the findings seen in the financial crisis with low IPO volumes and a weaker
macroeconomic environment (UKCES, 2014) and (Adolfsen et al., 2022). Despite the
non-significance of the crisis variables regarding its impact on IPO underpricing, we find
that the IPO volume in these crisis periods deviates substantially from the average. We
also find that, through the Year Coefficients graph (Figure IV) and Table III, the volatility
in IPO underpricing is relatively low, with one exception, 2019, which is not characterised
by a crisis.

The LSE has become a hub for tech companies. Further, Loughran and Ritter (2004)
found that tech companies had a higher one-day return than non-tech companies. Contrary
to our initial hypothesis, no statistical significance exists despite  TECHNOLOGY  being
the fourth-largest industry.  TECHNOLOGY, though statistically insignificant, has a
positive effect on IPO underpricing both in the univariate and multivariate regression on
an aggregate and Main Market level whilst displaying a  negative impact on IPO
underpricing in the AIM market.

Regarding hot and cold IPO markets, we find  that  the  COLD  variable  is  statistically
significant and decreases  IPO underpricing in the univariate and multivariate regression.
Similarly, we find the variable HOT to also decrease IPO underpricing and be significant
in the multivariate regression. Our findings that cold markets decrease IPO underpricing

                                  31
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

go against our initial hypothesis that  cold markets would increase IPO underpricing. Our
initial hypothesis is based on our belief that colder  IPO  periods are characterised by a
worsened macroeconomic  environment, where investors demand higher risk premiums
to participate in IPOs. We believe that one potential explanation for this deviation is that
only stable firms, usually larger firms, go public during cold markets.

During our period, the UK left the EU, a substantial change for the UK and the  LSE  as
several regulatory changes followed  (Szaja  et al. 2024). The announcement of Brexit on
the 23rd of June 2016 caused significant market volatility  (Quaye et al.,  2016). Due to
this market reaction, issuing firms may hesitate to list their stock on the LSE, reducing
the IPO volume. Similarly, investors may defer from investing in the LSE due to
increased uncertainty regarding the aftermath of Brexit. Consequently, it may have had
an impact on IPO underpricing. Therefore, we hypothesised that secular trends would be
seen between the pre-  and post-Brexit periods. However, we do not find any support for
our hypothesis, as no secular trends exist between the two periods. Furthermore, the
relatively  low volatility in the Year Dummy coefficients, except for 2019, indicates that
IPO underpricing has been relatively stable over time (when controlling for firm-specific
and market environment factors). Examining the average IPO volume in pre-  and post-
Brexit periods, the first period has an average IPO volume of 34 IPOs, whilst the latter
averaged 41 IPOs per year. Hence, we see no indication that companies or investors have
been discouraged from listing and investing on the LSE.

Conclusion

This  thesis provides an extension to Chambers and Dimson’s  (2009)  study by examining
IPO underpricing on the London Stock  Exchange from 2008 to 2023. Addressing the
central question and filling the existing information gap, this study examines the existence
of IPO underpricing and whether the findings of Chambers and Dimson  (2009)  persist.
Our study found a lower average IPO  underpricing of 13.21%, disrupting the increasing
pattern identified by Chambers and Dimson  (2009). We find that the regulation of
spinning through the  COBS 11A.1.6  rule  and the mandatory adoption of the IFRS have
increased trust between underwriters, issuers, and investors in the IPO process. Firm
market capitalisation is significant in determining IPO underpricing, whilst other factors
investigated, such as crises and technology, show no statistical significance. Investigating
Yearly coefficients reveals  no significant secular trends between the pre-  and post-Brexit
periods, indicating Brexit’s insignificant  effect  on IPO underpricing. With the above
findings, we help deepen the understanding of IPO underpricing in the current market
environment on the London Stock Exchange.

                                  32
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

Further research

To explore IPO underpricing and the contributing factors from 2008 to 2023, we have
based our research on the model that Chambers and Dimson (2009) developed and
adjusted it to our period. However, several variables were excluded and not investigated
due to data limitations. This limits our ability to conclude if all patterns found by
Chambers and Dimson (2009) persist in the current period or if they have been replaced
with new patterns. To build upon this and thoroughly explore the IPO underpricing, an
indication  for  future  research  would  be  to  examine  the  variables  PROPSOLD,
PRESTIGE, TRACK, LNBVP, RD and RESTRUCTURE which we excluded due to data
availability. Furthermore, future research could look into the effect of spinning becoming
regulated on the London Stock Exchange.

The ongoing regulatory discussions regarding the prospectus and listing regime on the
London Stock Exchange also present a valuable research opportunity on how regulatory
changes, if done, affect IPO underpricing. With the UK’s exit  from the EU, future
research  can  benchmark  how  and  if  the  regulatory  changes  have  affected  IPO
underpricing on the LSE with EU member state exchanges. This offers a research
opportunity to deepen and enhance the understanding of regulatory changes’ impact  on
IPO underpricing.

                                  33
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

References

Papers published in periodicals:
Chambers, D., and Dimson, E., 2009, IPO Underpricing over the Very Long Run,
Journal of Finance, 64(3), 1407-1443.

Filatotchev, I., and Bishop, K.,2002, Board  Composition, Share Ownership and
‘Underpricing’ of U.K. IPO Firms, Strategic Management Journal, 23(10), 941-955.

Helwege, J., and Liang, N., 2004, Initial Public Offerings in Hot and Cold Markets,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 39(3),  541-569.

Hong, H. A., Hung, M., and Lobo, G. J., ., 2014, The Impact of Mandatory IFRS
Adoption on IPOs in Global Capital Markets, Accounting Review, 89(4), 1365-1397.

Liu, X., and Ritter, J.,2010, The Economic Consequences of IPO Spinning, Review of
Financial Studies, 23 (5), 2024-2059.

Ljungqvist, A., and Wilhelm, JR, W. R., 2003, IPO Pricing in the Dot-com Bubble,
Journal of Finance, 58(2), 723-752.

Loughran, T., and Ritter, J., 2004, Why has IPO underpricing Changed over Time?,
Financial Management, 33(3), 5-37.

Lowery, M., Officer, M. S., and Schwert, W. G., 2010, The Variability of IPO Initial
Returns, Journal of Finance, 65(2), 425-465.

Merrett, A. J.,  Howe, M., and Newbould, G. D.,1967, Equity Issues and the London
Capital Market (Longmans, London).

Quaye, I., Mu, Y., Abudu, B., and Agyare, R., 2016, Review of Stock Markets’
Reaction to New Events: Evidence from Brexit, Journal of Financial Risk Management,
5, 281-314.

Ritter, J., and Welch, I., 2002, A Review of IPO Activity,  Pricing, and Allocation,
Journal of Finance, 57(4), 1795-1828.

Sherman, A. E., 2005, Global trends in IPO methods: Book building versus auctions
with endogenous entry, Journal of Financial Economics, 78, 615-649.

Stoll, H. R.,  and  Curley, A. J.,1970, Small business and the new issues market for
equities, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 5(3), 309-322.

                                  34
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

Electronic Sources:

Adolfsen, J. F., Kuik, F., Lis, E. M., and Schuler, T., 2022, The impact of the war in
Ukraine on euro area energy markets, The European Central Bank (ECB), URL:
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/economic-
bulletin/focus/2022/html/ecb.ebbox202204_01~68ef3c3dc6.en.html

Bank of England, 2024, Inflation calculator, URL:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetary-policy/inflation/inflation-calculator

Browne, P., Corner, J., Graves, P., Summerfield, P., Tompkins, A., and Ward, O., 2021,
UK prospectus regime  -  HMT publishes its consultation paper, simmons+simmons,
URL:  https://www.simmons-
simmons.com/en/publications/ckrvzyekw1a1q0a80c0d96g8r/uk-prospectus-regime-
review-reimagining-the-uk-s-prospectus-regime

Competition Commission, 2024, Audit Market Investigation Development of the
statutory financial audit, URL:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5329db4140f0b60a76000016/developme
nt_of_the_statutory_financial_audit.pdf

Corner, J., 2021, Prospectus regime after Brexit, simmons+simmons, URL:
https://www.simmons-
simmons.com/en/publications/ck3symdmpkatg0b48635yzv0b/prospectus-regime-after-
brexit

Edmonds, T., 2010, Financial Crisis Timeline, House of Commons Library, 04991,
URL: https://researchbriefings.files.parliament.uk/documents/SN04991/SN04991.pdf

Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) Handbook, 2018, COBS 11A.1 Underwriting and
Placing, URL:
https://www.handbook.fca.org.uk/handbook/COBS/11A/1.html?date=2018-10-01

Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA), 2020, 5131. New Issue Allocations
and Distributions, URL:  https://www.finra.org/rules-guidance/rulebooks/finra-
rules/5131

Financial Times, 2024, Stock Screener, URL:
https://markets.ft.com/data/equities?expandedScreener=true

GOV.UK,  2024,  search the register, URL:  https://find-and-update.company-
information.service.gov.uk/

Hickman, J., Morris, P., and McDonald, R., 2022, COVID-19: Government support for
individuals and businesses, BDO, URL:  https://www.bdo.co.uk/en-
gb/insights/tax/corporate-tax/covid-19-government-support-for-individuals-and-
business

                                  35
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

IFRS, 2021, United Kingdom, URL:  https://www.ifrs.org/use-around-the-world/use-of-
ifrs-standards-by-jurisdiction/view-jurisdiction/united-kingdom/

Institute for Government analysis, 2024, Timeline of UK government coronavirus
lockdowns and measures, March 2020 to December 2021, URL:
https://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/sites/default/files/2022-12/timeline-
coronavirus-lockdown-december-2021.pdf

Joshi, A., 2023, Overcoming home bias when investing, Barclays, URL:
https://privatebank.barclays.com/insights/2023/april/market-perspectives-april-
2023/overcoming-home-bias-when-investing-/#ref1

MarketWatch, 2024, URL:
https://www.marketwatch.com/investing/index/asx?countrycode=xx&mod=search_sym
bol

McGrath, E., and Gourley, L. M., 2018, The impact of  Brexit on the application of IFRS
in the UK, Ernest & Young, URL:  https://assets.ey.com/content/dam/ey-sites/ey-
com/en_uk/topics/brexit/compliance-and-regulation/ey-policy-pulse-june-2018-impact-
of-brexit.pdf

Office for National Statistics, 2021, GDP and events in history: how the COVID-19
pandemic shocked the UK economy, URL:
https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/grossdomesticproductgdp/articles/gdpandeventsinhist
oryhowthecovid19pandemicshockedtheukeconomy/2022-05-24

PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC), 2021, Global IPO Watch 2021, URL:
https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/audit-services/ipo-centre/assets/pwc-global-ipo-watch-
2021.pdf

Saito, Y., 2023 December 27, Goldman Sachs' IPO backlog 'as high as it has ever been':
IPO chief, Nikkei Asia, URL:  https://asia.nikkei.com/Editor-s-
Picks/Interview/Goldman-Sachs-IPO-backlog-as-high-as-it-has-ever-been-IPO-chief

S&P Capital IQ, 2024, URL:  https://www.capitaliq.com/CIQDotNet/Login-okta.aspx

Smith, R., Phillips, C., Tobin, M., Shah, M., and Bateman, P., 2024, UK Prospectus
Regime Reforms Approach Next Milestone, Slaughter and May, URL:
https://my.slaughterandmay.com/insights/client-publications/uk-prospectus-regime-
reforms-approach-next-milestone

Szaja, P. J., Morrison, M., and Scargill, M., 2024, Initial Public Offerings Laws and
Regulations 2023, Global Legal Insights, URL:
https://www.globallegalinsights.com/practice-areas/initial-public-offerings-laws-and-
regulations/united-kingdom/

                                  36
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

The London Stock Exchange, 2023  -  A Year of Progress And Laying The Groundwork
For the Future, URL:  https://www.londonstockexchange.com/discover/news-and-
insights/2023-market-insights

The London Stock Exchange, 2024, AIM, URL:
https://www.londonstockexchange.com/raise-finance/equity/aim

The London Stock Exchange, 2024, How To List Equity, URL:
https://www.londonstockexchange.com/raise-finance/equity/how-list-equity-listing-
journey

The London Stock Exchange, 2024, ICB structure & definitions, URL:
https://www.lseg.com/en/ftse-russell/industry-classification-benchmark-icb

The London Stock Exchange, 2024, New Issues and IPOs, URL:
https://www.londonstockexchange.com/search?searchtype=all&q=New%20Issues%20a
nd%20IPOs

The London Stock Exchange, 2024, Role Of Advisers on AIM, URL:
https://www.londonstockexchange.com/raise-finance/equity/how-list-equity-listing-
journey/role-of-advisers-on-aim

The London Stock Exchange, 2024, Role Of Advisers on Main Market, URL:
https://www.londonstockexchange.com/raise-finance/equity/how-list-equity-listing-
journey/role-of-advisers-on-main-market?accordionId=0-c3302158-ff1e-4610-86a2-
9a95eb25af18

The London Stock Exchange, 2024, URL:  https://www.londonstockexchange.com/

UK Commission for Employment and Skills (UKCES), 2014, The Labour Market
Story: The UK Following Recession, URL:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5a7de9beed915d74e6222e0b/The_Labou
r_Market_Story-_The_UK_Following_Recession.pdf

                                  37
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

Appendix

Robustness: LN(1+RET)

                                  38
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

                                  39
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

Year dummy coefficients are plotted along with average values of these coefficients for
each respective period, along with a 95% confidence interval. Regressing these Year
dummy coefficients on a constant with a dummy variable for IPOs that are post-Brexit,
we observed no statistical difference of the 0.58% increase in the mean values of the year
coefficients from the pre-Brexit period (+0.59%) and that for post-Brexit period (+1.10%)
with a p-value of 0.750 . When these coefficients are weighted by the number of IPOs
each year, the weighted averages for the same two intervals display an increase of 0.81%.

To further examine this potential increase in IPO underpricing we modified our regression
by substituting the Year dummies with one period-specific dummy  (BEFORE) between
2008-2015 and one dummy (AFTER) between 2017-2023. Similarly, all explanatory
variables are demeaned to assist the interpretation of the period period-specific dummies.
The regression shows an increase of 0.98% in IPO underpricing when comparing the
BEFORE (0.18%) and AFTER (1.16%) estimated effects. Like Chambers and Dimson
(2009), we conduct out a standard Wald test of the null hypothesis, by constraining these
two coefficients to equality. The results show a p-value of 0.562, meaning that the null
hypothesis cannot be rejected, which shows that IPO underpricing does not significantly
differ between the two pre-  and post-Brexit periods.

                                  40
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

We simplify the method above by regressing the dependent variable, RET, with the Year
dummy  variables. We then extract these year dummy coefficients and plot these in the
graph below. Regressing these Year dummy coefficients on a constant plus and a dummy
variable for IPOs that are post-2016, we observe no statistical significant difference of
+2.04% increase in the mean values of the year coefficients from the pre-Brexit period (-
2.79%) and that for the post-Brexit period (-0.75%) with a p-value of 0.155 When these
coefficients are weighted by the number of IPOs each year, the weighted averages for the
same two intervals display an increase of 1.91%.

Moreover, examining this potential increase in IPO underpricing we modified our
regression by substituting the Year dummies with one period-specific dummy (BEFORE)
between 2008-2015 and one dummy (AFTER) between 2017-2023. The regression show
an increase of 1.91% in IPO underpricing when comparing the BEFORE (-2.50%) and
AFTER (-0.59%) estimated effects. Like Chambers and Dimson (2009), we conduct out
a standard Wald test of the null hypothesis, by constraining these two coefficients to
equality. The results show a p-value of 0.249, meaning that the null hypothesis cannot be
rejected.

                                  41
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

We simplify the method above by regressing the dependent variable, RET, with the Year
dummy variables, LNMCAP and  LN(1+Age). We then extract these year dummy
coefficients and plot these in the graph below. Regressing these Year dummy coefficients
on a constant plus and a dummy variable for IPOs that are post-2016, we observe no
statistical significant difference of  +1.27% increase in the mean values of the year
coefficients from the pre-Brexitt period (-2.33%) and that for the post-Brexit period (-
1.06%) with a p-value of 0.421 When these coefficients are weighted by the number of
IPOs each year, the weighted averages  for the same two intervals display an increase of
1.36%

Moreover, examining this potential increase in IPO underpricing we modified our
regression by substituting the Year dummies with one period-specific dummy (BEFORE)
between 2008-2015 and one dummy (AFTER) between 2017-2023. The regression show
an increase of 1.40% in IPO underpricing when comparing the BEFORE (-1.79%) and
AFTER (-0.39%) estimated effects. Like Chambers and Dimson (2009), we conduct out
a standard Wald test of the null hypothesis, by constraining these two coefficients to
equality. The results show a p-value of 0.393, meaning that the null hypothesis cannot be
rejected.

                                  42
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

Robustness:  1-Month Return

                                  43
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

                                  44
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

Year dummy coefficients are plotted along with average values of these coefficients for
each respective period, along with a 95% confidence interval. Regressing these Year
dummy coefficients on a constant with a dummy variable for IPOs that are post-Brexit,
we observed no statistical difference of the 22.24% increase in the mean values of the
year coefficients from the pre-Brexit period (+6.47%) and that for post-Brexit period
(+28.71%) with a p-value of 0.115 . When these coefficients are weighted by the number
of IPOs each year, the weighted averages for the same two intervals display an increase
of 16.44%.

To further examine this potential increase in IPO underpricing we modified our regression
by substituting the Year dummies with one period-specific dummy (BEFORE) between
2008-2015 and one dummy (AFTER) between 2017-2023. Similarly, all explanatory
variables are demeaned to assist the interpretation of the period period-specific dummies.
The regression shows an increase of 13.95% in IPO underpricing when comparing the
BEFORE (0.58%) and AFTER (14.53%) estimated effects. Like Chambers and Dimson
(2009), we conduct out a standard Wald test of the null hypothesis, by constraining these
two coefficients to equality. The results show a p-value of 0.087 meaning that the null
hypothesis  can  be  rejected,  which  shows  that  IPO  underpricing  does  somewhat
significantly differ between the two pre-  and  post-Brexit periods.

                                  45
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

We simplify the method above by regressing the dependent variable, RET, with the Year
dummy variables. We then extract these year dummy coefficients and plot these in the
graph below. Regressing these Year dummy coefficients on a constant plus and a dummy
variable for IPOs that are post-2016, we observe a statistical significant difference of
+22.39% increase in the mean values of the year coefficients from the pre-Brexit period
(-10.39%) and that for the post-Brexit period (12.00%) with a p-value of 0.036 When
these coefficients are weighted by the number of IPOs each year, the weighted averages
for the same two intervals display an increase of 17.35%.

Moreover, examining this potential increase in IPO underpricing we modified our
regression by substituting the Year dummies with one period-specific dummy (BEFORE)
between 2008-2015 and one dummy (AFTER) between 2017-2023. The regression show
an increase of 17.35% in IPO underpricing when comparing the BEFORE (-9.81%) and
AFTER (7.54%) estimated effects. Like Chambers and Dimson (2009), we conduct out a
standard Wald test of the null hypothesis, by constraining these two coefficients to
equality. The results show a p-value of 0.029, meaning that the null hypothesis can be
rejected.

                                  46
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

We simplify the method above by regressing the dependent variable, RET, with the Year
dummy variables,  LNMCAP and LN(1+Age). We then extract these year dummy
coefficients and plot these in the graph below. Regressing these Year dummy coefficients
on a constant plus and a dummy variable for IPOs that are post-2016, we observe no
statistical significant difference of   19.07% increase in the mean values of the year
coefficients from the pre-Brexit period (-8.59%) and that for the post-Brexit period
(10.48%) with a p-value of 0.100 When these coefficients are weighted by the number of
IPOs each year, the weighted averages for the same two intervals display an increase of
14.95%

Moreover, examining this potential increase in IPO underpricing we modified our
regression by substituting the Year dummies with one period-specific dummy (BEFORE)
between 2008-2015 and one dummy (AFTER) between 2017-2023. The regression show
an increase of 0.47% in IPO underpricing when comparing the BEFORE (-7.09%) and
AFTER (+8.07%) estimated effects. Like Chambers and Dimson (2009), we conduct out
a standard Wald test of the null hypothesis, by constraining these two coefficients to
equality. The results show a p-value of 0.054, meaning that the null hypothesis  can  be
rejected.

                                  47
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

Robustness: LOG(1+RET)

                                  48
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

                                  49
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

Year dummy coefficients are plotted along with average values of these coefficients for
each respective period, along with a 95% confidence interval. Regressing these Year
dummy coefficients on a constant with a dummy variable for IPOs that are post-Brexit,
we observed no statistical difference of the +0.23% increase in the mean values of the
year coefficients from the pre-Brexit period (+0.25%) and that for post-Brexit period
(+0.48%) with a p-value of 0.750 . When these coefficients are weighted by the number
of IPOs each year, the weighted averages for the same two intervals display an increase
of 0.35%.

To further examine this potential increase in IPO underpricing we modified our regression
by substituting the Year dummies with one  period-specific dummy (BEFORE) between
2008-2015 and one dummy (AFTER) between 2017-2023. Similarly, all explanatory
variables are demeaned to assist the interpretation of the period period-specific dummies.
The regression shows an increase of 0.47% in IPO  underpricing when comparing the
BEFORE (0.07%) and AFTER (0.54%) estimated effects. Like Chambers and Dimson
(2009), we conduct out a standard Wald test of the null hypothesis, by constraining these
two coefficients to equality. The results show a p-value  of 0.562, meaning that the null
hypothesis cannot be rejected, which shows that IPO underpricing does not significantly
differ between the two pre-  and post-Brexit periods.

                                  50
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

We simplify the method above by regressing the dependent variable, RET, with  the Year
dummy variables. We then extract these year dummy coefficients and plot these in the
graph below. Regressing these Year dummy coefficients on a constant plus and a dummy
variable for IPOs that are post-2016, we observe no statistical significant  difference of
+0.88% increase in the mean values of the year coefficients from the pre-Brexit period (-
1.21%) and that for the post-Brexit period (-0.33%) with a p-value of 0.155 When these
coefficients are weighted by the number of IPOs each year, the weighted averages for the
same two intervals display an increase of 0.83%.

Moreover, examining this potential increase in IPO underpricing we modified our
regression by substituting the Year dummies with one period-specific dummy (BEFORE)
between 2008-2015  and one dummy (AFTER) between 2017-2023. The regression show
an increase of 0.85% in IPO underpricing when comparing the BEFORE (-1.1%) and
AFTER (-0.25%) estimated effects. Like Chambers and Dimson (2009), we conduct out
a standard Wald test of the null hypothesis, by constraining these two coefficients to
equality. The results show a p-value of 0.249, meaning that the null hypothesis cannot be
rejected.

                                  51
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

We simplify the method above by regressing the dependent variable, RET, with the Year
dummy variables, LNMCAP and LN(1+Age). We then extract these year dummy
coefficients and plot these in the graph below. Regressing these Year dummy coefficients
on a constant plus and a dummy variable for IPOs that are post-2016, we observe no
statistical significant difference of   +0.54% increase in the mean values of the year
coefficients from the pre-Brexit period (-1.0%) and that for the post-Brexit period (-
0.46%) with a p-value of 0.421 When these coefficients are weighted by the number of
IPOs each year, the  weighted averages for the same two intervals display an increase of
0.59%

Moreover, examining this potential increase in IPO underpricing we modified our
regression by substituting the Year dummies with one period-specific dummy (BEFORE)
between 2008-2015  and one dummy (AFTER) between 2017-2023. The regression show
an increase of 0.61% in IPO underpricing when comparing the BEFORE (-0.78%) and
AFTER (-0.17%) estimated effects. Like Chambers and Dimson (2009), we conduct out
a standard Wald test of the null  hypothesis, by constraining these two coefficients to
equality. The results show a p-value of 0.393, meaning that the null hypothesis cannot be
rejected.

                                  52
Riding the Wave                                        Lagergren and Vahman

AI Disclosure:
Grammarly and ChatGPT 4 has been used as an advanced grammar and spelling check to
enhance the quality  of  the text. Additionally, ChatGPT 4 has also been used to assist with
the coding process, outlining a framework for the R code.

                                  53