
The Effect of Insider Transactions on Stock Prices: An event study on how insider
transaction announcements affect stock prices and how retail investors can earn
abnormal returns from it

Abstract:

   The paper examines how FSA announcements regarding insider transactions affect
   stock prices and if abnormal returns can be earned from mimicking the transactions
   of insiders. 50 stocks from the Swedish market are used as a sample and only
   acquisitions and disposals of shares are investigated. Two sub-samples are analyzed,
   the first one being how the magnitude of the transaction affects stock prices and the
   second one being how different managerial positions have different effects on stock
   prices. An event study is conducted to investigate any abnormal returns. The results
   show that the semi-strong and strong form of the efficient market hypothesis does not
   hold and that abnormal returns can be earned.

Keywords:

   Signaling, Public information, Insider transactions, Efficient market hypothesis,
   Abnormal returns

Authors:

   Robin Jörgensen (25391)
   Edward Saldh (25247)

Tutors:

   Chin-Te Alvin Chen, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien D'Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor's Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Robin Jörgensen and Edward Saldh, 2024

                                   1
1. INTRODUCTION

Prior studies such as Seyhun (1986) and Lakonishok and Lee (2001) show that
uninformed investors can earn abnormal returns by mimicking the transactions of
informed insiders (excluding transaction costs). Uninformed retail investors can earn
abnormal returns by, for example, purchasing a stock when it is announced that a board
member has purchased the stock. Seyhun’s study shows that insiders purchase stocks
before an abnormal increase in price and sell stocks before an abnormal decline. On the
other hand, Seyhun’s study was made almost 40 years ago when the internet was very
new and most people did not have access to it (Science+ Media Museum, 2020).
Therefore, the delay of information was significantly larger in 1986 compared to today.
There have also been new regulations such as “Market Abuse Regulation (EU)
596/2014” which entered into force on 3 July 2016 and could have a significant impact
on the Swedish market. The Swedish market is particularly of interest because this topic
has been less extensively studied than in the US. Sweden is also a great country for this
research because of the government-owned agencies that document all transactions
which could enhance market fairness. With new information technology and
regulations, this paper is set to investigate this topic once again in a Swedish setting.

The strategy to buy shares after insider transactions is currently used by several
financial corporations and some of them have this as their main trading strategy, such as
The Insiders Fund. Their strategy is to invest in companies at or near prices that
management has been willing to invest significant amounts of their wealth in. Their
argument for this strategy is “After all, who knows a business better than the people
running it?” (The Insider Fund, 2024). This is also a finding that is known in previous
research. It is found that managers have a competitive advantage compared to the public
in predicting future firm-specific events, and they are also the ones with the most
information about the company (Dierkens, 1991) (Lakinshok & Lee, 2001).

Fund managers and investors are constantly being evaluated upon whether they can beat
the market, or in other words, obtain abnormal returns or positive alphas (Jensen, 1968).
However, the conclusion that abnormal returns can be earned by trading on publicly
available information denies the semi-strong Efficient Market Hypothesis (EMH). The
semi-strong EMH states that all public information is already priced into the stock and
that it is impossible to earn positive alphas in the long run with information that is
available for everyone (abnormal returns) (Fama, 1970). This study investigates if
abnormal returns can be achieved by mimicking the transactions of insiders by
examining the percentage change in stock price before and after the Swedish Financial
                                                                                           1
Supervisory Authority (FSA) has announced the transaction . Since the FSA
information is publicly available, the initial hypothesis is in line with the semi-strong
EMH, and that it should hold. Hence, the hypothesis is also that uninformed investors
can not earn abnormal returns by mimicking the transactions of insiders.

Seyhun refers to Banz (1981) and Reinganum (1981) in his study, discussing the
potential biases of using the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) when measuring
expected returns to securities. The biases arise because there is a negative correlation

1
 The Swedish FSA is the equivalent of the American SEC and is called “Finansinspektionen” in Swedish

                                   2
between CAPM and the size of the company, therefore, he used a market model which
did not take the size of the company into account. To evaluate and benchmark the
results in this study, the OMX30 index is utilized as a control portfolio. This allows for
the comparison of expected versus actual returns, helping to identify any abnormal
returns across individual stocks. Thereby, potential biases can be avoided compared to
using CAPM as an estimation model.

This study looks at the stock returns before and after the FSA has announced an insider
transaction. The actual transaction date is often a couple of days before the publication
at FSA but sometimes it is multiple weeks or months before. Therefore, this study also
investigates if there are abnormal returns before and after the actual transaction date.
However, if the hypothesis about the semi-strong EMH holds, the transaction date
should not make a difference in the impact of the publication. Even if the transaction is
made four days or four weeks before the publication, the stock should react to the FSA
publication in the same manner since that is when the information becomes public. This
study also tests the strong form of EMH by analyzing if insiders make abnormal returns
after the transaction date. A sample of the 50 most traded companies at the Swedish
trading platform Avanza is used and the study is based on 4584 insider transactions
between 04-01-2021 and 31-01-2024. The data is split into buy and sell transactions to
analyze any differences between them. Lastly, the study investigates two sub-samples to
analyze how the magnitude of the transaction and the position of the acquiring PDMR
potentially affect stock prices differently.

This study identifies potential robustness tests that could be further investigated.
However, due to time constraints, these tests were not conducted. Instead, assumptions
based on previous research were made, which are further discussed in the analysis.

2. DATA AND METHODOLOGY

2.1 Data

The data consists of the 50 most owned stocks at Avanza by 31-01-2024 which can be
found on their webpage (Avanza, 2024). Avanza is one of the most popular trading
platforms for retail investors in Sweden. The initial research question was “Can retail
investors earn abnormal returns between FSA announcements and Avanza
announcements?”. Thus, these companies were chosen because Avanza more often
publishes news regarding PDMR-transactions (Persons Discharging Managerial
Responsibilities) which is of interest to their customers. However, after consultation
with Avanza, it was evident that they did not have this data at hand and the research
question was therefore modified. The right method for the sample would be to, for
example, obtain 30 randomly selected small-cap stocks, and 30 randomly selected
large-cap stocks.

All insider transactions performed in these 50 firms are gathered from the
PDMR-transactions page on the FSA’s website (Finansinspektionen, 2024). The
transactions span from 04-01-2021 to 31-01-2024. Dates before this time horizon were
disregarded because of the volatility in the stock market in 2020 due to COVID-19,

                                   3
thus, the outcome could have been skewed. Therefore, the years after 2020 were chosen
to still keep the study as new and truthful as possible.

To benchmark the stock returns, OMX30 has been utilized as a control portfolio. If a
market model such as the CAPM were used, it would result in very low expected
returns on such a short time horizon used in this paper. For example, if CAPM would
give an 8% yearly expected return for a stock and divide that by 252 trading days times
the horizon of interest, it would yield a very low percentage. In reality, markets are more
volatile and can move multiple percent per day. Another popular benchmark is to
calculate the expected return based on an estimation window with a non-overlapping
period before the event (MacKinlay, 1997). Due to market volatility during 2020, the
usual benchmarking approach has been avoided. Consequently, it is believed that using
a control portfolio such as OMX30 will yield more realistic returns and serve as a more
effective benchmark for identifying abnormal returns. The daily stock prices for each
firm and the daily price of OMX30 were gathered from Yahoo Finance (Yahoo Finance,
2024).

All the data has been gathered manually from different sources. Later, code was written
manually to match the different transactions, companies, dates, and stock prices. Thus,
there is a risk that the analysis contains flaws because of human errors.

2.2 Sample Selection

To structure and optimize the data, the analysis was limited exclusively to transactions
involving acquisitions and disposals (buy/sell), disregarding all other types of
transactions. Other types of transactions exist, however, the focus was narrowed to
make it easier for the uninformed investors to mimic this potential strategy and earn
abnormal returns. This is because acquisitions and disposals of shares are made based
on the investors' own will compared to, for example, option programs where it is a sort
of compensation. Therefore, acquisitions and disposals should contain more information
about the company and have a signaling effect.

In many cases, there were several transactions published for a company on the same
day. Thus, in the main sample, only one acquisition or disposal per day was analyzed.
Otherwise, the effect on that stock would have a higher weight compared to the ones
where it only was one transaction. For the first sub-sample which focuses on the
magnitude of the transaction, the transactions for the same company were grouped
based on the publication date. Lastly, for the sub-sample categorized by position, they
were grouped by company per date and position. There could be that there were two
different transactions published on the same date where the PDMRs have different
positions in the firm. It is acknowledged that it could lead to one position getting the
effect of another position's signal.

All different trading venues are included in the data. Initially, the intention was to
disregard “outside of the trading venue” which means that the transaction was not made
on a stock exchange. However, these were ultimately included because such
transactions often involved larger volumes compared to those executed on the stock

                                   4
exchange (see Appendix A). Hence, these types of transactions could potentially have a
more significant effect on our tests.

Regarding the position the buyer or seller holds in each specific firm, all positions are
included, such as CXOs, Chairman of the board of directors, Deputy member of the
board of directors, Members of the board of directors, and Other members of the
company's administrative, management or supervisory body (see Appendix B). These
are classified by the FSA as persons discharging managerial responsibilities within
companies and therefore it was decided not to exclude any position from the analysis.
However, it is acknowledged that some positions should hold more information about
the company than others. Therefore, the analysis will compare the impact on stock
prices based on the position of the PDMR in the transaction within the sub-sample.

2.3 FSA Data Description

FSA data is public information and can be obtained by anyone. It is the first official
source that publishes information regarding PDMR-transactions in Sweden.
Transactions back to 3 July 2016 are searchable on FSA’s website while earlier
transactions are stored at FSA.

To conduct and understand this study, it is important to understand how the FSA data
works but it is also important for a retail investor to understand this to create a potential
trading strategy based on the results.

Every PDMR within an issuer is obliged to report the transactions they have made in
securities that are linked or issued by this issuer. Even people who are closely associated
with such a person are obliged to report their transactions. The threshold for being
obliged to report is 5000 euros in total transaction amount during a calendar year, which
is in accordance with Article 19(8) of the Market Abuse Regulation (MAR, 2016). All
transactions linked to an issuer's shares, derivatives, debt instruments, or other financial
instruments should be reported. However, this study only focuses on acquisitions and
disposals of shares for the simplicity of retail investors. A notification to the FSA
should be reported no later than three business days after the transaction took place
(PDMR Transaction register, 2020).

For each transaction, information is obtained regarding aspects such as publication date,
issuer, notifier, PDMR, position, nature of the transaction, instrument name, instrument
type, transaction date, volume, and price.

However, the information from the FSA is not necessarily correct at all times. There is a
human part of the data input which could have been handled incorrectly. This potential
flaw in the data is acknowledged, however, for the purposes of this study, it is assumed
that the data is accurate and that the observations provided to the FSA are truthful.

                                   5
3. EMPIRICAL METHOD

3.1 Event study and two-sided t-tests

This study is made using an event study methodology where the transaction date and
publication date of each insider transaction are investigated. For each transaction, the
intervals 10, 5, 3, and 1 day(s) preceding and following the transaction and publication
date are used. During each interval, the stock price is analyzed to identify any
significant cumulative abnormal returns (CAR). If this study finds significant CAR after
the publication date, that means the semi-strong EMH does not hold since you could
earn abnormal returns by trading on public information. An uninformed investor could
then potentially create a trading strategy where they mimic the transactions of informed
investors to earn abnormal returns. Furthermore, if significant CAR is found after the
transaction date, that would indicate that the strong form of EMH does not hold since
insiders could then earn abnormal returns based on their private information.

In order to test this hypothesis, two-sided t-tests are conducted. In this scenario, these
tests are preferred since they effectively assess the differences in values between two
distinct time points. Since the main purpose is to find if the sample mean is significantly
greater or significantly less than the population mean, a two-sided t-test is more suitable
than a one-sided t-test. To conduct t-tests, you have to make assumptions regarding
normal distribution, no significant outliers, and independent variables (Datanovia,
2024). Firstly, the data consists of >2000 observations and it can therefore be assumed
that the Central Limit Theorem (CLT) holds. CLT says that you can assume normality if
observations are greater than 30 (n>30) (Gyu Kwak and Hae Kim, 2017). Secondly, a
potential downside in this study could be that the variables might not be regarded as
independent. This is because OMX30 is used as the benchmark and many of the chosen
stocks are included in OMX30. Hence, when comparing the stock returns to OMX30,
they are somewhat affected by each other. The appropriate method for conducting this
test involves removing the influence of the stock undergoing a transaction from the
return of OMX30 when comparing them. This is achieved by first determining the
stock’s weight within OMX30 and then adjusting for its impact by subtracting the
product of the stock’s return and its weight. Due to time constraints and the added
complexity, this adjustment was not made, although it is recognized that this could limit
the results of the study. Thirdly, significant outliers in the data are removed (see section
3.2).

3.2 Method

As outlined in section 2.2, the focus is strictly on acquisitions and disposals of shares,
with other types of transactions being disregarded. Initially, the study tests how insider
transactions and their publication affect the stock prices on an aggregate level. The
following formula is used to calculate percentage changes in prices (PCP) before the
transaction/publication date by utilizing the intervals described in 3.1 (P = stock price):

 (𝑃                       − 𝑃          ) ÷ 𝑃           * 100 = 𝑃𝐶𝑃
      𝑎𝑡 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛/𝑝𝑢𝑏𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒        𝑛 𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠 𝑏𝑒𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑒          𝑛 𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠 𝑏𝑒𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑒                         𝑏𝑒𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑒

                                   6
Then the following formula to calculate PCP after the transaction/publication date is
applied:

(𝑃         − 𝑃                      ) ÷ 𝑃                       * 100 = 𝑃𝐶𝑃
    𝑛 𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠 𝑎𝑓𝑡𝑒𝑟        𝑎𝑡 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛/𝑝𝑢𝑏𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒          𝑎𝑡 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛/𝑝𝑢𝑏𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒                         𝑎𝑓𝑡𝑒𝑟

Regarding OMX30, the percentage change is calculated in the same manner as for the
stocks, both before and after each transaction/publication. The difference in percentage
changes between each stock and OMX30 is then determined using the following
formula:

                                     𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘 𝑥          𝑂𝑀𝑋30
                      𝑃𝐶𝑃       − 𝑃𝐶𝑃       = 𝐶𝐴𝑅
                                                                        𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑎𝑙 𝑛                     𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑎𝑙 𝑛

Since the intervals 10, 5, 3, and 1 day(s) before and after each date are investigated, the
returns are accumulated and therefore the CAR for each stock is obtained. Regarding
prices, the actual stock price is used to measure CAR at the publication date but for the
transaction date, the price paid for the stock by the PDMR is used. Many transaction
prices were extreme outliers but those transactions with prices below or over 50% of the
actual stock price were removed to control for this.

After conducting the tests on acquisitions and disposals of shares, two sub-samples were
created to examine whether the position of the acquirer and the magnitude of the
transaction influenced stock prices. The sample of transactions was split into four
quartiles depending on the size of the transaction and the same t-tests as before were
conducted. The total value was calculated accordingly:

                    𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑝𝑒𝑟 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒 ∗ 𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒 = 𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒

The optimal way to test this would be to check how large the transaction amount was in
comparison to the acquirer's wealth. A person buying shares for 10 million SEK with a
wealth of 100 million SEK should theoretically have a stronger signaling effect than if
the person had 500 million SEK in wealth. This limitation is recognized as a potential
downside of this study but due to the difficulty of finding each person's wealth and time
constraints, this was disregarded. Also, the aim is to simplify the study to enable retail
investors to create a trading strategy. Hence, since personal wealth is not public
information, it is reasonable to disregard this. Regarding the second sub-sample,
positions with more than 30 observations have been included in the analysis and t-tests
have been conducted to determine if any particular position significantly affects stock
prices. Only positions with more than 30 observations are included because it is then
possible to assume normality according to CLT (Gyu Kwak and Hae Kim, 2017).

As noted earlier, previous studies have assumed a maximum interval between the
transaction date and the publication date. These assumptions were made over 40 years
ago which makes them somewhat outdated because of the progression of information
technology. The approach is designed to minimize assumptions and maximize practical
application. Therefore, the exact transaction dates have been used for the analysis.
Furthermore, previous research papers such as Jaffe (1974) and Seyhun (1986) have
included transaction costs when conducting similar studies. The methods prior studies

                                   7
have used to calculate these transaction costs have varied and have been conducted with
different levels of complexity. Seyhun took the bid-ask spread into account, while Jaffe
just assumed a 2% transaction cost. Those costs have been disregarded in this study and
it is acknowledged that potential abnormal returns that are found could be negative after
transaction costs (negative alpha). However, transaction costs are included when
constructing a theoretical trading strategy.

4. EMPIRICAL RESULTS

4.1 Acquisitions & Disposals of Shares

The first analysis investigates the effect of insider transactions on stock prices. In this
part, both acquisition and disposal are taken into account. Both the transaction date and
publication date are analyzed. In case there was a significant effect after the transaction
date and before the publication date, investors would either speculate that there has been
an insider transaction or that rumors have spread which means that all investors do not
have access to the same information (information asymmetry). It can also be that
insiders are very good at timing the market. As can be seen in Table 1, there are
different degrees of freedom for each interval which is because some intervals are
outside the time horizon and because some stocks were not listed during the whole
duration of the time horizon.

The average time difference between the transaction date and publication date for
acquisitions is 2.66 days and for disposal 3.86 days. There were some extreme outliers
in the data where the differences were 448, 353, 265, 259, and 202 days between
transaction date and publication date (see Appendix C). An investigation into the large
discrepancies between transaction and publication dates was conducted, but no
definitive explanation was found. One possible explanation could be that MAR requires
PDMRs to report their transactions once they have made total investments of 5000
euros during a calendar year. Thus, a PDMR does not report their transactions until they
have hit that threshold and therefore these discrepancies between transaction date and
publication date can occur.

4.1.1 Acquisitions effect on stock prices
Significant results for acquisitions both regarding the publication date and transaction
date were found. The mean difference in the t-tests is the difference between the change
in stock price and the change in OMX30 price. This statistic is presented as the average
cumulative abnormal return (ACAR)

Firstly, significant negative ACAR 10, 5, and 3 days before the publication of an
acquisition was found. 10 days before the publication the ACAR is approximately
-1.99%, 5 days before it is -1.09%, and 3 days before it is -0.77% (see Table 1). Based
on the sample and the significant values, it is reasonable to conclude that stocks go
down before the publication of an insider transaction when the person acquires shares.
After the publication, significant positive ACAR 5 and 10 days after was found. 5 days
after the publication the ACAR is approximately 0.64% and 10 days after it is 1.25%.

                                   8
Since investors can earn abnormal returns from public information it indicates that the
semi-strong form of EMH does not hold.

Secondly, a significant negative ACAR 10 days before the transaction date was found
and it is approximately -0.82%. However, 3 and 1 day(s) before the transaction, the
ACAR is significantly positive. 3 days before the ACAR was approximately 0.59%
while it was 1.37% 1 day before. Significant negative values for 1 day and 3 days after
the transaction were found. 1 day after the ACAR is approximately -0.96% and 3 days
after it is -0.60% (see Table 2). The increase in price before the transaction could
indicate information leakage and that some investors know that the PDMR will make
the transaction. Also, the decrease after the transaction suggests that PDMRs are
especially bad at timing the market. Hence, the PDMR can not generally make
abnormal returns on their private information (within the intervals used), indicating that
part of the strong form of EMH holds. The strong form does not fully hold since
abnormal returns can be earned from public information and the semi-strong form does
not hold.

A reason for the difference in results between the publication date and transaction date
can be explained by the prices that have been used. At the publication date, the actual
closing stock price for that day was used while with the transaction date, the stock price
that the acquirer paid for the stock was used. Since the acquirer in several cases paid a
lower stock price than the actual, there will be differences between findings for
publication and transaction dates. The reason why the acquirer paid a lower price could
be explained by the fact that some transactions happened outside of a trading venue and
the price could have been negotiated between the parties.

The average time difference between the transaction date and the publication date for
acquisitions is approximately 2.66 days, the results for publication date overlap the
transaction date. The negative values before the publication date can therefore be
affected by the negative values after the transaction date.

Seyhun (1986) had similar results for acquisitions related before and after the
publication even though the methodology in this paper is different in many aspects
regarding assumptions, time horizon, etc. However, regarding the transaction date, he
found that the insider would buy stocks before an abnormal increase in stock prices,
which is not found in this study.

                                   9
                                    Table 1

Table 1: T-test results for Average Cumulative Abnormal Returns (ACAR) from acquisitions of shares 10, 5, 3, and 1
day(s) preceding and after the publication date from the FSA.
                                    Table 2

Table 2: T-test results forAverage Cumulative Abnormal Returns (ACAR) from acquisitions of shares 10, 5, 3, and 1
day(s) preceding and after the transaction date.

4.1.2 Disposals effect on stock prices
The study then examined how disposals of shares affect stock prices, yielding
significant findings related to both the transaction date and the publication date.

Firstly, there are no significant results for the publication date except 1 day before when
the ACAR is approximately -0.53% (see Table 3). This could indicate information
leakage and that some investors know that the announcement of disposal will be

                                  10
published. On the other hand, there are no significant results after the announcement
which indicates that the market does not react negatively or positively to disposals of
shares. One could believe that investors should perceive disposals of shares as a
negative signal. However, there could be many reasons for a PDMR to sell their shares,
such as liquidity reasons or portfolio management. Therefore, disposals of shares may
not necessarily indicate any information regarding the future of the company (Kallunki
Nilsson and Hellström, 2009) (Lakonishok and Lee, 2001).

Secondly, there are significant results for all intervals around the transaction date.
Before the transaction date, the ACAR is approximately between 1.7-3.1%, and the
days after it is approximately between -1.58% and -2.49% (see Table 4). One reason for
these significant results could be that a PDMR often sells its shares after an abnormal
increase in stock price, hence the increase before the transaction date. The abnormal
negative returns could be explained by the market reaction to a large disposal of shares
without knowing the reason for it. However, as explained earlier, the price used for the
transaction date is not the real market price and the significant results that were found
here could be caused by this difference in price.

With these results at hand and the fact that there could be many reasons for a PDMR to
sell their shares, the decision was made to focus on acquisitions in the sub-samples. The
only reason a PDMR would purchase shares in their company is if they believe that the
stock is undervalued and will increase in price. Hence, the acquisitions contain
information regarding the company in almost all cases. However, previous studies have
shown that managers might acquire shares without having any information leading to
uninformed investors reacting to the signal and bidding up the stock price (Jaffe, 1974).

In the paper by Seyhun (1986), he found that there are significant values both before
and after the publication. In this paper, there was only one significant value which was
one day before. This contradicts Seyhun but other articles have similar results as in this
paper, one example is Lakonishok and Lee (2001), and Jeng, Metrich, and Zeckhauser
(2003), who found that insider selling appears to have no predictive ability. Another
interesting finding from other previous research is Kallunki et al. (2009) who found that
insiders with a large proportion of insider stock tend to sell more before bad earnings
announcements.

                                    11
                                    Table 3

Table 3: T-test results for Average Cumulative Abnormal Returns (ACAR) from disposals of shares 10, 5, 3, and 1
day(s) preceding and after the publication date from the FSA.

                                    Table 4

Table 4: T-test results for Average Cumulative Abnormal Returns (ACAR) from disposals of shares 10, 5, 3, and 1
day(s) preceding and after the transaction date.

4.2 Magnitude of Transaction

In the first sub-sample, this paper investigates how the difference in magnitude (size) of
the transaction might have an impact on the stock price. As described in 4.1.2, disposals

                                  12
are disregarded in this section. Because of the focus on signaling effects and the
semi-strong EMH, only the publication date of these transactions is studied further. For
the average size of each quartile see Appendix D.

In the first quartile, significant values both before and after the publication date were
found. 10, 5, and 3 days before the publication the ACAR is significantly negative and
ranges between -0.68% and -2.50%. 10 and 5 days after the publication, significant
positive values were found and the ACAR ranges between 1.13% and 2.50%. For the
second quartile, significant results 10, 5, and 3 days before the publication and 5 days
after were found. Before the publication, the ACAR is negative and approximately
between -1.65% and -3.21%. 5 days after, the ACAR is 1.04%. In the third quartile,
there are significant values both before and after the publication date. 10, 5, and 3 days
before the publication the ACAR is significantly negative and ranges approximately
between -1,13% and -3.21%. 10 and 5 days after the publication the ACAR is
significantly positive and ranges between 1.22% and 1.33%. Lastly, for the fourth
quartile, significant negative results 10 days before the publication were found and the
ACAR is approximately -1.82% (see Table 5).

Based on these results, the ACAR is negative before the publication of an acquisition in
all quartiles. These results were found when looking at acquisitions in 4.1.1 as well. An
explanation for this could be that the average time difference between transaction dates
and publication dates regarding acquisitions is 2.66 days, as mentioned in 4.1.1.
Therefore these results can be affected by the negative values found after the transaction
dates.

For the first, second, and third quartile, the ACAR is also significantly positive after the
publication, indicating that the transaction signal was perceived as positive by investors.
However, for the fourth quartile, there are no significant values after the publication.
One possible explanation could be that these transactions are very large (see Appendix
D) and it is often companies investing in other companies but, for example, the CEO is
the PDMR. From the sample, it was discovered that from the fourth quartile, 46.1% of
the time the notifier and the PDMR were not the same entity. Meanwhile, for the first to
the third quartile, it only happened 4.0-7.0% of the time (see Appendix E). It is possible
for companies that are shareholders to other corporations to have board representatives
since it is the shareholders that elect the board members (Bolagsverket, 2020). For
example, the Swedish company Industrivärden has invested in AB Volvo with large
amounts of money. Because Industrivärden owned 9.1% and had a 27.9% voting right
over AB Volvo (AB Volvo Annual Report, 2023), the CEO Helena Stjernholm was
assigned the role of “Member of the Board of Directors”. Thus, she is assigned the title
PDMR on the transactions according to the FSA, even though it is Industrivärden that
invested their capital. Since these transactions do not reflect personal wealth being
invested, investors may not view them as significantly meaningful or informative.

These findings suggest that the semi-strong EMH does not hold since investors can earn
abnormal returns from public information. However, with the largest transactions, this is
not possible and the semi-strong EMH holds for these transactions.

                                  13
                                    Table 5

Table 5: T-test results for Average Cumulative Abnormal Returns (ACAR) from acquisitions of shares 10, 5, 3, and 1
day(s) preceding and after the publication date from the FSA, divided into four quartiles based on the total value of
the transaction.

4.3 Position of the person acquiring

In the final sub-sample, this study investigates how different positions of a PDMR
might have different impacts on the stock price. Those positions with a sample size of
less than 30 observations are disregarded since normality can not be assumed according

                                  14
to CLT (see Appendix B). Also, positions with very small significance or positions
lower down in the managerial hierarchy are not analyzed further but they can be found
in Appendix F-H.

Firstly, significant results are found for “Members of the Board of Directors” both
before and after the publication of an insider transaction. 10, 5, and 3 days before the
publication significant negative ACARs are found and they range between -1.32% and
-3.73%. 10, 5, and 3 days after the publication significant positive ACARs are found
and they range between 0.75% and 2.69%. Secondly, for the positions “CEO/Managing
Directory” and “CFO”, there are only significant negative results 10, 5, and 3 days
before the publication. The ACARs for “CEO/Managing Directory” range between
-1.31% and -2.91%. The ACARs for “CFO” range between -1.51% and -2.07%. This
might come as a surprise since the CEO should be the one possessing the most
information since he/she is the highest operative employee. Lastly, the position
“Chairman of the Board of Directors'' is investigated but significant results are only
found for 10 days before and after the publication. 10 days before the publication the
ACAR is -1.52% and 10 days after it is 1.65% (see Table 6).

As mentioned before, the significant results 3+ days before the publication can be
caused by the overlap with the transaction date since the average time difference
between the transaction date and publication date for acquisitions is 2.66 days.
Significant results after the publication are only found for “Member of the Board of
Directors” and ”Chairman of the Board of Directors”. The results are significantly
positive and it can be concluded that these positions affect the stock prices more than
the other positions. Members of the Board of Directors have the most impact on the
stock price. 10 and 5 days after the publication of an acquisition from this position the
ACARs are very significant. The position “Deputy CEO/Deputy Managing Director”
had no significance on the stock price when conducting insider transactions (see
Appendix H).

These findings are slightly different from Seyhun´s results. He found that there is an
information hierarchy where top executives' trades contain the most information and
directors contain the least. However, in the article by Jeng et al. (2003), they tested
which hierarchy levels Seyhun defined would give the most abnormal return. The
definitions are slightly different from Seyhun but overall, they found that top executives'
portfolios earn significant abnormal returns. However, despite these results, they
conclude that there was no evidence that top executives outperform directors (excluding
top executives who are part of the board) and other officers. This study finds that there
is an information hierarchy where lower hierarchical positions have lower significance
which can be seen in Appendix F-H.
The main difference is that this study finds that directors outperform top executives
such as the CEO and CFO. One reason why the CEO might not achieve as significant
results as anticipated is due to the heightened scrutiny from both shareholders and
regulators. This oversight could make the CEO more cautious about capitalizing on
their informational advantage (Jeng et al., 2003). Also, it is important to note that, for
example, the CEO may in many cases be a board member (Mckinsey & Company,
2023). Hence, they can state themselves as a board member instead of CEO when

                                  15
reporting to FSA. This argument is strengthened by the fact that according to the same
article, the CFO can sometimes also be a part of the board of directors, and there were
no significant results post announcements for that position either. Nevertheless, in this
study, it is more relevant to examine the disclosures on the PDMR-transaction page, as
these are the details upon which uninformed investors might potentially base their
trading decisions.

                                  16
                                    Table 6

Table 6: T-test results for Average Cumulative Abnormal Returns (ACAR) from disposals of shares 10, 5, 3, and 1
day(s) preceding and after the publication date from the FSA. Focusing on four different positions of interest.

                                  17
4.4 Theoretical trading strategy

Based on these findings, it would be possible for a retail investor to earn abnormal
returns by mimicking insiders when they acquire shares. The investor would purchase
the stock the day the announcement is published. Since the highest ACAR for
acquisitions is 10 days after the announcement in this study, the investor would hold the
stock for 10 days before selling it. The expected return will not theoretically change
because the investor buys every acquisition, however, it potentially reduces the
volatility through diversification. The total number of trading days can be divided by 10
to obtain a total amount of 10-day intervals during the period. Also, FSA does not
publish announcements regarding acquisitions every day and therefore there is only a
certain percentage of possible 10-day intervals. The following formula can be used in
any time period to calculate the abnormal returns an investor would earn:

                                                                                                                          𝑇𝐷    𝑃𝐷
                                                           10 ∗ 𝑇𝐷
                 (1 + (𝐴𝐶𝐴𝑅 − 𝑇𝐶 * 2))       − 1 = 𝐴𝑅

ACAR: Average Cumulative Abnormal Return
TC: Transaction Costs
TD: Number of trading days
PD: Number of publication days from the FSA
AR: Abnormal returns

Applying the findings from this study, an investor could acquire one stock of each
publication and earn approximately 1.25% every 10 days (see section 4.1.1). During the
time horizon used, there were 959 acquisitions reported that fit with the analysis of this
paper and there were in total 778 trading days. However, there were only 500 distinct
days where announcements regarding acquisitions were published. That would mean
that there would be 77.8 10-day intervals where there only occurred publications of
acquisitions approximately 64% of the days. Transaction costs are assumed to be 0,2%
based on the average fees from Avanza Small and Mini fees, which are the two highest
possible fees in percent (Avanza, 2024). Thus in this scenario, the AR for these 778
days would be:

                                                                       778  500
                                                         10 * 778
            (1 + (0, 0125 − 0, 002 * 2))       − 1 ≈ 52, 68%

However, one could choose to only invest in stocks where the PDMR was a member of
the board of directors or invest in smaller transactions which on average yield a higher
abnormal return. The downfall with this strategy would be that even though the ACAR
would be higher, there would be fewer transactions, thus, the PD would decrease
significantly which ultimately would mean less of a compounding effect.

These results are different from what Seyhun (1986) and Jaffe (1974) found. Their
papers did not obtain abnormal returns when transaction costs were included. However,
those studies were conducted decades ago when transaction costs were higher compared
to today. For example, the transaction cost used in this study is 0.2% while the study by
Jaffe used a 2% transaction cost and Sehyun included the bid-ask spread which

                                  18
according to the Swedish House of Finance can more than double the commission fee
(Swedish House of Finance, 2023).

Important to note is that these results were based on the 50 most owned stocks on
Avanza which could be the most owned because they have yielded the highest return
during the period investigated. Additionally, it is important to note that this function
provides an estimate and does not reflect the actual returns. The exact point in time that
the transaction got published is not taken into account, thus, the timing of the
compounding effect will vary, but it can be seen as a more theoretical formula for how
this strategy can be evaluated.

5. DISCUSSION

5.1 External validity

This study highlights market inefficiencies, demonstrating that the semi-strong form of
the EMH does not apply in Sweden, and possibly in similar markets. Many countries
have similar authorities as the Swedish FSA, for example, the SEC in America. The
                                                                                           2
PDMR-transactions page at FSA is similar to the Official Summary at SEC.  Since
information about insider transactions is announced in similar ways in other countries, it
is reasonable to assume that the results from this study could also apply internationally.
Therefore, retail investors in these countries could potentially trade based on the
findings in this study. This is confirmed by comparing our results to Seyhun’s (1986)
results which also find abnormal returns from insider transactions by analyzing the
Official Summary published by the SEC. However, it is imperative to consider
transaction costs and variances in information management between countries. For
example, longer delays between transactions and announcements can affect the results.
This is seen when comparing transaction costs used in this study to the ones used in
previous papers (see section 4.4).

On the other hand, countries with fewer regulations and without authorities like the
FSA, might not see the same results and the findings here can not be applicable to those
countries. The MAR is an EU regulation, hence, this study might only be applicable in
countries within the EU or countries with similar regulations. The main reason is that
information regarding insider transactions might not become public at the same time for
the whole market which creates information asymmetry.

Also, this study was conducted in a period of increased interest rates which could affect
the study (Swedish Central Bank, 2024). Therefore, the evidence found here might not
be applicable in other time horizons with different interest rates.

2
 Jaffe (1974) and Seyhun(1986) refers to the Official Summary published by the SEC. It is called
EDGAR since 1992.

                                  19
5.2 Limitations

The limitations of this study are acknowledged. Large quantities of data from various
sources have been consolidated in this study. Given that the data handling was
performed by humans, there is a possibility of errors due to human factors. Additionally,
mistakes may occur in the reporting of transactions to the FSA by notifiers due to
similar human errors.

Assumptions regarding normality have been made according to the CLT but the data
might not be normally distributed which can affect the final results. The data is not
independent since OMX30 was used as the benchmark and many of the stocks are
included in that index. See 5.3.2 for how to solve this.

Another limitation of this research is that each PDMR’s wealth is not accounted for
when analyzing how the size of the transaction affects the stock price. The optimal way
to conduct these tests would be to weigh the transaction size against the PDMR’s
wealth. See section 3.2 for more details on how to account for this.
One aspect of this study that might skew the results is that it is only possible to obtain
the stock price data on a daily basis from Yahoo Finance. Thus, the FSA might publish
the transaction in the morning but in this study, the closing stock price is used for that
day. There is a probability that the stock already increased a lot in price between those
time points because of the delay.
Furthermore, since the analysis of positions is grouped by date and position, there is a
risk that there were two different transactions published on the same date where the
PDMRs have different positions in the firm. Therefore, the effect of one position could
potentially affect the results of the other position.
Lastly, the 50 most owned stocks at Avanza were used as a sample to estimate the
Swedish market. However, the results that were found might deviate from other types of
companies or industries that are not included in the sample. Also, these stocks were
chosen due to a pivot from the original research question but a more appropriate sample
selection would be randomly selected and include both smaller and larger stocks.

5.3 Extensions

5.3.1 Time difference between FSA and Avanza
This study investigates FSA publications on insider transactions and the effect they have
on the stock price. However, many retail investors do not keep track of the FSA
announcements but rather look at the news Avanza publishes for each stock. For
example, when an insider transaction takes place, Avanza has a “News” page available
for each stock, and the transactions are often announced there. When conducting this
study, it was noticed that there is a slight time difference between the FSA
announcement and Avanza’s news announcement regarding the same transactions. A
possible extension to this paper could be to investigate whether there are abnormal
returns between these announcements or after the Avanza announcement. Since many
retail investors only look at the news on Avanza, the signaling effect could have a larger
effect when Avanza announces the transaction compared to when the FSA does it. On

                                  20
the other hand, large funds presumably keep track of FSA announcements and the price
may adjust to the news immediately when FSA announces them.

5.3.2 Conducting robustness tests
This study has made multiple assumptions due to time constraints but could be
improved by conducting robustness tests. Firstly, normality was assumed according to
CLT but this could be tested for. Secondly, OMX30 was used as the benchmark when
investigating abnormal returns. Since many of the stocks in this paper are included in
OMX30, it would be better to remove each stock’s return when calculating abnormal
returns (see section 3.1). Lastly, when investigating how the transaction size might have
a different impact on the stock price, it would be optimal to account for the investor's
personal wealth (see section 3.2). This could be done by sorting the transaction sizes
depending on the percentage of personal wealth the acquirer bought the stock for.

5.3.3 Increase sample size
Lastly, this study could be improved by increasing the sample size and looking at a
broader set of companies. The sample used in this research only contains the 50 most
owned stocks at Avanza. One solution would be to either take +50 random listed
companies in Sweden and do the same analysis to see the effect on a more aggregate
level. Another solution would be to analyze both small-cap and large-cap stocks.

6. CONCLUSION

The results found in this study indicate that retail investors can earn abnormal returns by
mimicking the transactions of insiders. Previous studies have analyzed insider
transactions in similar settings and have found that insider transactions have a
significant impact on stock prices, but investors can not earn abnormal returns by
mimicking them because of the high transaction costs. It is perceived that insiders hold
valuable information regarding companies’ future and outsiders could benefit from
knowing when insiders buy or sell shares. An acquisition of shares should give a
positive signal about the company’s future while disposals of shares should be the
opposite.

This study shows that acquisitions have a positive signal and give positive abnormal
returns after the announcements. However, there is no significance found regarding
disposals of shares, probably because there are many reasons for a PDMR to sell shares
which would not necessarily indicate a negative signal. Furthermore, when analyzing
transaction dates, the study finds that insiders are poor at predicting future stock
increases but good at predicting future stock decreases. The evidence also suggests,
similar to other articles in the field, that higher positions hold more valuable
information and give more significant signals. Unexpectedly, CEOs and very large
transactions did not have any significant results on the stock price.

This study proves that the semi-strong EMH does not hold and that there are
inefficiencies in the Swedish stock market. However, insiders were not able to earn
abnormal returns after their transactions in the short run, and, in fact, it was significantly
negative right after the transactions. That would indicate that the strong form of EMH

                                  21
holds but, since the semi-strong does not hold, it is denied. Since plenty of countries
have similar institutions as the FSA and also similar stock markets, the results from this
study could potentially be applied in those countries as well. Even though information
technology has significantly improved since Seyhun’s study in 1986, evidence from this
study shows that market inefficiencies still exist and that abnormal returns can still be
earned from insider transactions. In addition, this study differs from previous research
by showing that abnormal returns can be earned even after transaction costs due to the
lowered trading fees today. On the other hand, there are multiple limitations to this
study, and extensions or robustness tests could be made in this paper to improve the
empirical results.

By utilizing the results found in this study, retail investors can earn abnormal returns by
mimicking insider transactions but inherent risks and transaction costs still need to be
taken into account. The theoretical trading model in this study suggests that abnormal
returns can be earned by uninformed investors if they mimic the transactions of insiders
when they acquire shares. During the time horizon used in this study, abnormal returns
of approximately 53% could be achieved according to the model.

                                  22
REFERENCES

AB Volvo Annual Report, 2023. Available at:
https://www.volvogroup.com/content/dam/volvo-group/markets/master/events/2024/feb/annual-report-20
23/AB-Volvo-Annual-Report-2023.pdf

Avanza, 2024, Vad kostar det att spara? Available at:
https://www.avanza.se/konton-lan-prislista/prislista/courtageklasser.html

Avanza, 2024, List of stocks. Available at:
https://www.avanza.se/aktier/lista.html

Bolagsverket, 2020, Board of directors and managing director. Available at:
https://bolagsverket.se/en/foretag/aktiebolag/startaaktiebolag/styrelseochverkstallandedirektoriaktiebolag.
505.html

Datanovia, 2024, T-TEST ESSENTIALS: DEFINITION, FORMULA AND CALCULATION. Available
at:
https://www.datanovia.com/en/lessons/t-test-assumptions/independent-t-test-assumptions/

Dierkens, 1991, Information Asymmetry and Equity issues, The Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 26, 181-199. Available at:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/2331264.pdf?casa_token=4NujfySWb6oAAAAA:JTTX-rFz4r5AeKUjy-
osW30rjx5Xphb9Y7TQNuoqeJSA94KUyriRri5iFnRqqDI-XKsGA-h7he1EbEZaf8e9Cd_iPUs2pKy_vC
BzcDRsjXdPrZzW9A

Fama, 1970, Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical work, The Journal of Finance
25, 383-417. Available at:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/2325486

Finansinpektionen, 2020, PDMR transaction. Available at:
https://www.fi.se/en/markets/investors/pdmr-transactions/

Finansinspektionen, 2024, PDMR Transactions register. Available at:
https://marknadssok.fi.se/Publiceringsklient/en-GB/Search/Start/Insyn

Gyu Kwak and Hae Kim, 2017, Central limit theorem: the cornerstone of modern statistics, Korean
Journal of Anesthesiology 70, 144-156. Available at:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5370305/

Jaffe, 1974, Special Information and Insider Trading, The Journal of Business 47, 410-428. Available at:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/2352458?casa_token=ZieEPRMdBnUAAAAA%3AKLAHMq8fhcMgU01C
mF_pti8Fb_M2SC3LFQn9Iqgh45uQ0lRBart3WAi8S3iVysYI7S4Aw2o0NhV1GDC0JY3ImnjOOZq0bihI
VbiejhyYjznCILS0Nw&seq=12

Jeng, Metrich and, Zeckhauser,2003, The Review of Economics and Statistics 85, 453-471. Available at:
https://www-jstor-org.ez.hhs.se/stable/pdf/3211592

Jensen, 1968, The performance of mutual funds in the period 1945-1964, The Journal of Finance 23,
389-416. Available at:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/2325404.pdf?casa_token=d2mVP9wnm-wAAAAA:AwfUAeraRF5K8C6
G1p05WCGixe9go45zORwgEIJzdOt8UuFL01WmaM1iVsnFAtEbLnzktd0-5BzyBjvCnUVkZzBiDlvlDJ
359pUuiyCXoolKp4fvBA

                                  23
Kallunki, J.-P., Nilsson, H., & Hellström, J, 2009, Why Do Insiders Trade? Evidence Based on Unique
Data on Swedish Insiders, Journal of Accounting and Economics 48, 37-53. Available at:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0165410109000329?casa_token=VRPjE-DGMm0AA
AAA:UJTITU-yqs_EIRUdN0tidA-6X83wvoZQLoPICdOH0lXQzJVIHzPHUaxLo9tqF7rxYmq7XPXK

Lakonishok, and Lee, 2001, Are Insider Trades Informative? The Review of Financial Studies 14, 79-111.
Available at:
https://www-jstor-org.ez.hhs.se/stable/pdf/2696757

MacKinley, 1997, Event Studies in Economics and Finance, Journal of Economic Literature 35, 13-29.
Available at:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/2729691?seq=8

Mckinsey & Company, 2023, What is a board of directors? Available at:
https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/mckinsey-explainers/what-is-a-board-of-directors

Regulation (EU) No 596/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on market
abuse. Article:19/(8) https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A32014R0596

Science+ Media Museum, 2020, A Short History of the Internet. Available at:
https://www.scienceandmediamuseum.org.uk/objects-and-stories/short-history-internet

Seyhun, 1986, Insiders’ profits, costs of trading, and market efficiency, Journal of Financial Economics
16, 189-212. Available at: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/0304405X86900607

Swedish Central Bank, 2024, “Policy rate, deposit and lending rate”. Available at:
https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/statistics/interest-rates-and-exchange-rates/policy-rate-deposit-and-lending
-rate/

Swedish House of Finance, 2023, The Retail Investment Boom and the Cost of Trading Small Stocks.
Available at:
https://www.hhs.se/sv/houseoffinance/outreach/news--press/news/2023/the-retail-investment-boom-and-t
he-cost-of-trading-small-stocks/

The Insider fund, 2024, Homepage. Available at:
https://www.theinsidersfund.com/

Yahoo Finance, 2024, Stock prices and OMX 30 values. Available at:
https://finance.yahoo.com/?guccounter=1&guce_referrer=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8&gu
ce_referrer_sig=AQAAAFgFG4ExeZmVTFG_Rpen9U4Qhw4ikUHkFKxsHrhobRmtDNTSvjE31VeBeT
yUo5euJS0kGIBSCI3bZt5htVWS1GvkcWVQcPFoDkvFSCQYCG23_iij5ErMqn6QOK-NvDUtgied7Ma
txhl80twkz36h2ZvDrg6KYJRLE0SZG608YTAT

                                  24
APPENDIX
Appendix A

                                  25
Appendix A: Number of transactions and average transaction size (SEK) per trading venue.
Appendix B

Appendix B: Number of transactions per position of the PDMR
Appendix C

Appendix C: Visualizing the spread of days between publication date and transaction date for acquisitions and
disposals.

                                  26
Appendix D

Appendix D: Average transaction size per quartile.

Appendix E

Appendix E: The percentage where the notifier and the PDMR were not the same entity per quartile.

Appendix F

                                  27
Appendix F: T-test results for Average Cumulative Abnormal Returns (ACAR) from acquisitions of shares by the
position “Employee Representative of the Board of Directors or deputy Employee Representative of the Board of
directors“10, 5, 3, and 1 day(s) preceding and after the publication date from the FSA.

Appendix G

Appendix G: T-test results for Average Cumulative Abnormal Returns (ACAR) from acquisitions of shares by the
position “Other member of the companies administrative, management or supervisory body“10, 5, 3, and 1 day(s)
preceding and after the publication date from the FSA.

                                  28
Appendix H

Appendix H: T-test results for Average Cumulative Abnormal Returns (ACAR) from acquisitions of shares by the
position “Deputy CEO/Deputy Managing Director“10, 5, 3, and 1 day(s) preceding and after the publication date
from the FSA.

Appendix I
ChatGPT-4 made by OpenAI has been used to help write the R-code used in the analysis
and to improve the writing quality of the paper. It is acknowledged that ChatGPT-4 may
provide incorrect outputs. Therefore, the output has been reviewed by the authors of this
paper to ensure quality.

                                  29