PLAYING THE NUMBERS GAME

EXAMINING STRATEGIC ROUNDING OF EPS DATA IN
SWEDEN

GUSTAV KJELLGREN

ERIK MALMSTEN

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2024
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in
Sweden

Abstract:

   This thesis explores  strategic rounding in earnings per share (EPS) in Sweden  from
   2003  to  2023  by analyzing the  frequency of  the  third  decimal  digit  in EPS data,  with
   an  in-depth  focus on  the  digit  4.  Contrary to previous US data  research, we find no
   proof that  a rounding bias  exists in the third decimal place.  We test our findings over
   time, by firms,  and  for  firm  factors,  being  size, EPS magnitude, and growth-value
   dynamics, where none show signs that rounding occurs. We consider whether currency
   affects rounding  incentives by applying a comparative approach with other Nordic
   countries but fail to find support.  Examining  the second decimal place indicates  that
   rounding might  occur as zeroes are overrepresented and nines are underrepresented,
   which  could be analyzed  further in future research.  Our  findings contribute to  the
   research  field  by  showcasing  different  results  in  another  geographical  market
   compared to  previous literature, as well as  examining the potential effect  currencies
    have on rounding incentives.

Keywords:

   Earnings per share,  Rounding, Earnings Management,  Financial  Manipulation

Authors:

   Gustav Kjellgren  (25274)
   Erik Malmsten  (25351)

Tutors:

   Emil Bustos,  Tenure-Track Researcher  in Economics, Research Institute of  Industrial
  Economics

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in  Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Gustav Kjellgren and Erik Malmsten, 2024

                                   1
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

                  I. Introduction

Within financial reports, earnings per share (generally denoted as EPS) is a mandatory
measure  that enables external parties to efficiently compare  the  firm's performance
internally throughout periods and externally between peers in the  same  industry.  Basic
EPS is,  according to IFRS,  defined  as  the following:
Basic earnings per share shall be calculated by dividing profit or loss attributable to
ordinary equity holders of the parent entity (the numerator) by the weighted average
number of ordinary shares outstanding (the denominator) during the period.
EPS, commonly rounded to two decimals, is  essential  for investors when  deciding  which
investment projects  to  allocate  capital  to.  Driven by incentives such as meeting analysts'
expectations and being more attractive to new investors  and  financial enterprises,
managers  might  be tempted  to  manipulate  a firm’s reported net  earnings  or  number  of
shares  to push the calculations so that the reported EPS becomes rounded one  additional
cent higher than  its actual value.  Although rounding of EPS  does not necessarily  infer
that  an accounting policy has been  violated,  as it can occur naturally,  finding  consistent
non-random  trends  in  underlying rounding behavior  could  help identify firms with  an
aggressive accounting culture.  Such firms  are more likely to engage in  potentially risky
or problematic accounting practices  that  can lead  to enforcement proceedings  and
litigation  in the future.
This has been covered in past research.  Most recently, a research paper  by Malenko,
Grundfest, and Shen (2023) named “Quadrophobia: Strategic Rounding of EPS Data” has
gained quick breakthroughs  within the practical field.  They  analyze  the  frequency of the
number  4  in  the third decimal place, as this digit requires the least effort to round up to
receive  one additional cent in the reported EPS. They show  that  persistent avoidance of
reporting  a  4  holds  predictive  power  on  companies  found  guilty  of  accounting
misconduct.  Building on their research,  the  SEC  (United States  Securities and Exchange
Commission)  has  introduced  departments  to control  for  similar  signs of accounting
malpractice. Litigation  action against some companies has taken place  as a direct result
of  its implementation, proving  the method’s  practical usefulness.
Expanding  on the methodology established by Malenko et al. (2023), our paper explores
the presence of rounding-up bias in the Swedish enterprise environment  by looking at the
distribution of the  third decimal digits  from  2003  to  2023. We pay  additional  attention to
the presence of the number 4 as the  third decimal digit  due to its ease of rounding up EPS
by an extra  second decimal digit.  By running our experiment  using  Swedish data, we
expand  the research field  to  new  geographics  as all previous  research has been done on
US data.  We  calculate  EPS  manually  by dividing net income  by  the weighted  average
number of  shares outstanding and extracting  the  third decimal digit. The  frequency  of
each  digit  is  calculated  for  diluted EPS, where the  total  occurrences of each digit are
divided by the total sample size.  The results show no signs of a rounding bias.  We
compare the results with other variables by performing the same methodology for revenue
per share,  gross profit per share, and operating income per share.  These  confirm  that  our
null hypothesis,  that each digit should occur with  a  10% chance,  is  reasonable.

                                   2
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

We run a robustness test on our findings for firm-specific rounding by following the novel
method  proposed by Malenko et al. (2023) regarding  the variable  Quadrophobia-score
(Q-score),  where the digit  4 is in focus. The  binary variable takes on the value of 0 if  the
firm  has  a  third decimal digit  being 4 in any  previous  quarters and 1 if  there are zero
occurrences of the  digit  4.  The exclusion of the digit 4  indicates non-randomness  in
reporting numbers,  potentially due to  strategic  and  persistent  rounding  of  EPS.  We
calculate  the difference in frequency of  reporting  the digit  4  between  the firms  with a Q-
score of 0 and those with 1 and examine the results for different periods. The results show
that  historical  reporting patterns  cannot  prove  that potential rounding of the  third decimal
digit  occurs within specific firms.
Next, time-specific rounding is analyzed to see whether there  have been periods where
potential rounding occurred more often than other periods. We plot the frequency  of  digit
4 in the  third decimal place  on an annual basis and find no empirical evidence that some
periods had more potential rounding than others.
Continuing our analysis, we test the importance of specific firm factors deemed important
in prior literature concerning rounding incentive structures. These are limited to firm size,
EPS magnitude,  and  price-to-book  ratio. The data is sorted based on each factor and split
into 10 groups, from which we calculate the frequency of reporting the  digit  4  and
implement a low-minus-high strategy between group 1 and group 10. We also run a probit
regression to see if the factors can predict when digit 4 occurs or, in our case, when it fails
to occur.  Our analysis shows that none of the firm factors examined  are related to a
rounding bias in EPS.
In our analysis, we use the Swedish currency krona (SEK), and its counterpart to the cent,
                                                                 th
öre. For reference, SEK is valued at approximately 1/10  of a US dollar. This discrepancy
results in a difference between the intrinsic value of the third decimal place between the
two currencies, implying that  the  incentive gains of manipulating financial data in
Sweden could differ from those in the US. To examine whether currency affects rounding
incentives,  we run similar tests as before on the  third  decimal place  on datasets from
Finland,  Denmark,  and Norway.  The benefit  of  this is  that  we can fix  effects related to
culture and geography while changing the currency between Norway’s NOK, Denmark’s
DKK,  and Finland’s EUR.  We don’t find proof that different currencies  impose different
distributions in the  third decimal digits. Moreover, we examine whether  potential
rounding exists in the second decimal place  as  a lower-valued  currency  could increase
interest  to round a  higher-valued decimal position.  We find that rounding in the second
decimal place is potentially  occurring,  but  no  proof  that  currency  is  the sole explanation.
We compare our findings to past literature to understand why our results differ. We argue
that diverging  incentive  packages  or  cultural  differences are the most probable  causes of
the  contradicting  results, but  these have not been tested quantitatively.  In conclusion,  we
cannot  establish any empirical evidence that  rounding in  the  third decimal digit  in EPS
took  place in Sweden  in any way  between the years 2003  to  2023.

                                   3
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

                  II.  Background
Accounting  Standards in Sweden
Contrary to the  United States,  which  accepts GAAP as  its  national  accounting standard,
Sweden,  per  its  membership in the EU,  is  required  to  use  IFRS as  its  national accounting
standard  for public companies  since  IFRS was  adopted  into  European law  in 2005.  IFRS
is the most common  accounting standard in the world,  having been  adopted by  168
different jurisdictions. GAAP and IFRS share many similarities, but the major differences
lie in the reporting on  inventory,  intangibles,  and recognition of revenue.
Earnings per  share  was  introduced in the  International Accounting Standards Committee
in 1997 before being  adopted  by the International Accounting Standards Board in 2001
as  part of the IFRS  foundation.  Comparing the  distinction of EPS  between  IFRS and
GAAP, there are no significant differences in  how the  ratio  is  reported  relevant to  the
research performed in this  paper.  However,  Reported EPS  (or  GAAP EPS)  is  a  specific
reporting instrument related to the SEC in the US, which has been used  in the research by
Malenko et al.  (2023) to measure  which EPS ratio is of more interest to analysts between
diluted and basic EPS by comparing it to the reported EPS. GAAP EPS is a measurement
that we are,  to the best of our knowledge,  unable to gather  based  on  Swedish data, which
has a slight negative effect  on the  reliability of our data  in questions relating to which of
the stated EPS figures  are  more  in focus in Sweden.
Role  of EPS  in Sweden
The strategy of using fundamental valuation is  well-established in the financial sector.
EPS is a key ratio  analysts  use  to determine whether companies are  performing  well  or
poorly, an intuition that translates into demand for investing in the company or  avoiding
it.  Given  that  EPS is used by analysts  globally, there should be no difference in the usage
of EPS in Sweden versus the US. The main difference between the usage of EPS between
the two countries is  again  that of GAAP EPS in the US.  However,  as  Govindarajan,
Srivastava,  and  Zhao  (2021),  mention in their Harvard Business Review article,  there is
an increasing trend for companies to report a “Non-GAAP” EPS,  where 95% of the S&P
500 companies reported a non-GAAP EPS to enhance transparency and comparability by
removing costs that  are non-recurring or translate some intangible expenses into
investments.  This  trend  is also analyzed by Malenko et al. (2023),  who  compare cases
where GAAP EPS is equal to Pro-Forma EPS  (Non-GAAP EPS) and when it is not.
Although there is a potential  difference in where analysts pay their attention between the
countries, this recent trend of implementing  non-GAAP EPS points  to  increased  demand
for comparability.  Conclusively, there shouldn’t be any difference in the usage of EPS
between countries or  accounting standards.
Accounting Malpractice
The meaning behind accounting malpractice is broad.  Tutino and  Merlo  (2019)  write “It
consists of  intentional manipulation of financial statements, which are done  to create an
illusion about a company’s wealth”.  Malenko et al. (2023)  state  that the production of
financial   information   is   influenced   by   managerial   judgments   and   subjective
determinations, which can potentially lead to various distortions in financial reports.

                                   4
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

Amar, Chen, Gavious,  and Weihs (2022)  further describe  how managers  who  engage in
earnings management  can use various techniques to affect the company’s financial
statements  to better coincide with their self-interest.  They describe how  misconduct can
undermine trust between  companies, regulators,  and market  participants,  potentially
resulting in  reduced stock prices,  increased cost of capital,  and reduced future earnings.
In this  paper, we will  investigate if  public firms in Sweden systematically use earnings
management to round the  third decimal digit  in  EPS.  Rounding of EPS  is not an  illegal
practice per se and does not necessarily infer that an accounting policy has been violated.
However, the methods  used to round and the persistence of rounding EPS in a firm can
indicate  an aggressive accounting  culture.  Those companies, as described by Malenko et
al. (2023),  are more likely to  use risky accounting practices that result in litigation.
Economic Significance of Rounding
From an economic perspective, rounding by a single cent in EPS can appear insignificant.
However,  Das and Zhang  (2003) argue that an additional cent can sometimes  have
significant  valuation implications. For example, Skinner and Sloan (1999)  show that  the
stock prices of high-growth firms suffer  substantial  downward adjustments on negative
earnings announcements,  potentially increasing incentives  for  managers in  high-growth
firms  to perform rounding activities.  Further investigation into the effect  of  earnings
management on security pricing through accruals  was conducted  by Defond and Park
(2001). Their research shows  that  abnormal accruals, often used to manipulate earnings
to increase EPS, play a vital role in shaping the market´s responses to earnings surprises.
They highlight the connection between earnings management, abnormal accruals, and
investors’ reactions to the stock market.
An example that underscores the importance of rounding up with something as small as
a cent is illustrated by McGough (2000) through discount retailer Dollar General. On May
  th
9 , 2000, Dollar General reported earnings of 17 cents a share for its fiscal quarter.
Precisely what security analysts had forecasted, resulting in investors bidding the stock
up 50 cents on the day of the report. However, the company earned only 16.575 cents a
share,  which was  below analysts’ projections. Because of the possibilities resulting from
rounding, Dollar General was able to round up to 17 cents and satisfy investors’
expectations. McGough (2000) argues that due to the financial world's obsession with
hitting earnings targets, even  minor  differences in earnings can give stocks a valuable
boost.
Literature Review
The search for anomalies within financial statements has been a research topic for several
years.  Carslaw (1988)  investigated  how income numbers might mirror a pricing strategy
often seen in retail, where prices just below a round figure (like $1.99 instead of $2.00)
appear  much cheaper. He suggested that companies might avoid reporting earnings that
are just below such rounded figures, as they  would appear much lower than they are,
which might result in lower demand from investors. His theory suggests that in income
figures, you  can  see a lot more zeros and fewer nines in the  second-leftmost  digit. After
studying data from  New Zealand, he found evidence supporting  his theory.

                                   5
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

Thomas (1989)  built on  Carslaw’s paper  to broaden the field of research to US datasets
and  ran a similar  analysis  using, among others,  EPS data. Thomas’  research  showed  that
a similar smoothing effect is also in place for EPS data, where multiples of  5 cents  occur
at a higher frequency than expected  when looking at the second decimal value.

Das and Zhang (2003)  expanded on  the results from Thomas  (1989)  by looking at the
distribution of the  third decimal digit  in EPS, as the  ability to round up should be  less
transparent. They  conclude that digits between 5-9 occur  more often  than  digits between
0-4, indicating that rounding of the last reported  decimal  number is likely.  Additionally,
they broaden the field by trying to understand the different incentives for why institutions
and managers  would manipulate their financial reports  in such a fashion.  They  present
evidence that  firms are more likely to round  up when  they anticipate  it  will  contribute to
meeting  analysts’  forecasts,  reporting positive  profits,  or sustaining recent performance.
Further evidence is provided that firms are likely to use working capital accruals to round
up  earnings  to meet  analysts’  benchmarks and thresholds.  This combination  of evidence
and reasoning presented by Das and Zhang (2003) paved the way for further research into
how firms manipulate their  financial data, especially  regarding  analysts’  forecasts.

A recent article within the same field was  published by Malenko et  al.  (2023),  in which
the prevalence of the number 4 in the third decimal place was examined. The results were
that  digit  4 was significantly underrepresented in the sample of US firms  between 1980
and  2021, indicating that rounding-up bias likely takes place at a systematic level.  The
authors introduce a “Q-score,” measuring  how  firms fail to report a 4  continuously over
different periods,  and  they  show how  the  method  has predictive power on  accounting
malpractice.  Similar to the  reasoning  presented by Das and Zhang (2003),  Malenko et al.
(2023) show  how  firms with larger incentives related to size, meeting projections,  and
internal  compensation  packages  have  a  higher  likelihood  of  pursuing  accounting
misconduct.  The findings in their research  have motivated  SEC’s  “EPS  Initiative
Program” and have garnered significant interest from practitioners and regulators. Several
settlements arose  from this initiative, underscoring  the  practical usefulness  of  this  field
research  and  the need for  continued  investigation.

Based on previous research,  rounding has been proven likely to exist  in the US market,
and  rounding behavior  has practical importance as it  could help predict aggressive
accounting practices.  With an exception for Carslaw (1988), the research field has
exclusively focused on the American  financial landscape.  Although  the benefits of
reliable  and extensive  datasets  based in the US are large, this  results in a gap in the
research field  as we are  currently  unaware of the extent to which  rounding  could be an
issue in other  economies.  We are also unaware  of whether  the currency used  affects
rounding, as all previous research has strictly used USD as the currency in focus. Sweden
houses a stable economy with advanced regulatory institutions, as well as being part of
the EU while maintaining its local currency.  Hence, expanding the field into the Nordic
markets allows us to  examine these factors  while maintaining  robust results.

                                   6
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

Research  Questions

In this paper, we  focus our analysis on the following questions:

    Q1.  Are there signs of a systematic  rounding bias in reported EPS in Swedish firms
       when looking at the distribution of the  third decimal digit?
    Q2.  Are such rounding activities  in the  third decimal place  in EPS  consistent
        through time, firms,  or firm  factors?
   Q3.  Does  the reported  currency affect incentives to partake in  such  rounding
        activities?
Malenko et al. (2023)  have  shown that systematic rounding bias indicates an aggressive
accounting culture in firms, sometimes resulting in severe  accounting and security law
violations. Q1 helps us extend this reasoning by broadening the research field to a new
geographical market. If signs of EPS rounding exist, this  opens  up  new regulatory
implications that could be applied in Sweden in the same way that the SEC has taken after
Malenko’s research in the US. Q2  improves the  robustness  of  our assessment  and
discerning  whether the results occur by chance or if  the  anomalies  are consistent  among
certain firms, periods,  or  firm  factors.  Q3 allows us to  cover a new  aspect  within this
research field,  namely  a  currency  effect.  Since  we choose to focus on  a Nordic country,
we can consider different currencies in nearby countries of similar economic size while
keeping other factors,  such as culture,  fixed.  To  our knowledge,  the  currency has  never
been  analyzed  in this field of research  before.

                         III.  Data

Data
Our  main dataset is obtained through  the  Refinitiv Eikon database.  Using  the  Refinitiv
Eikon database  as  the  exclusive data source  ensures minimal discrepancies  and helps
enhance  data  accuracy.  We  gather  quarterly financial  fundamentals from publicly listed
companies in Sweden between  the years 2003 to 2023. From this output, we remove firm
observations  that lack  all values  or where the currency is  not  denoted  in SEK.  According
to  the  Swedish Companies Registration Office,  Swedish companies  can  report their
earnings in SEK or  EUR. Since we wish to compare  the  currency  effect,  we ensured
consistency  in currency  by manually looking  into each company’s latest financial report
to see which currency is being used.  In  total, 61 firms  (and  about 2000 firm observations)
were omitted  due to  not  reporting in  SEK, which  is  about 5% of the original data and,
therefore, should not affect our data too negatively in terms of reliability. Our final sample
contains  about  37000  quarterly observations from  824  firms.  As we only looked at the
currency that was most recently used in the companies’ financial reports,  we assume  that
all  firms have been consistent in the currency used when reporting  their finances over the
entire period in focus.  Some companies may  have changed the currency used  throughout
this time,  but the probability is low and  should  create  a limited  amount of noise if that is
the case.

                                   7
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

Our  primary  interest  is  in  the variables  Net Income Basic  including  extraordinary  items,
Shares used to calculate Basic EPS,  and  Shares used to calculate  Diluted  EPS.  Other
relevant variables for our analysis  are  Market  Capitalization, Revenue,  Gross Profit,
Operating Income,  Total Assets,  and  Price-to-Book  Value Per Share.  Revenue, Gross
Profit,  and Operating  Income  are  important variables for  us when testing assumptions
regarding  the  distribution  of digits  for different  financial  metrics.  Additionally, we use
Total Assets and Price-to-Book Value Per Share as estimates when investigating if certain
firm  factors  affect  the likelihood of rounding  practices.  The data  is skewed  somewhat in
terms of having more firm observations for more recent quarters, as shown in Figure A1
in the  Appendix.
Furthermore, we  extract similar datasets for Finland, Norway,  and Denmark to measure
the  currency effect later in our analysis. These  variables  are also obtained from Refinitiv
Eikon, using the same fundamentals and period. We  extract  the fundamentals using each
country’s currency.  If we were to  use a common currency for all countries, this would
change the net income and,  by doing so, also the EPS and the  third decimal digit.  If there
is a systematic rounding strategy in those countries, the evidence of this would be omitted
when changing the currency. Hence, we don’t compare the samples relative to each other
in any other way  except for  their distribution of reported decimals.  Finland  was the latest
country to  change the national currency  out of the Nordic countries,  changing to  the  euro
in 1999 after joining the EU in 1995,  which falls outside the scope of this paper and is a
factor we,  therefore,  do  not need to consider.
Difference  in Basic EPS  vs Diluted EPS
When examining rounding within EPS, we need to differentiate between Basic EPS and
Diluted EPS.  Companies and analysts tend to focus more on one of these key ratios,
posing a greater risk of manipulation  since  a larger volume of  analyst coverage  increases
managerial  pressure  to meet  investor expectations, as proven  by Yu (2008).  Given the
limited data on analyst coverage of the companies in our dataset, we choose to follow the
results presented in previous research from Malenko et al.  (2023), in which diluted EPS
showed a closer resemblance to the expected reported EPS from analysts after the year
1997, indicating that the ratio was more interesting for analysts, and hence, for companies
to manipulate. As our dataset starts in 2003, and no other materially significant accounting
standard related to the reporting of EPS has taken place since 2001 in IAS 33, we assume
diluted EPS is under  more pressure  of  manipulation  than basic EPS. As discussed
previously, there shouldn’t be any differences in the accounting standards used for this
reasoning not to hold.

           Table 1: Summary Statistics  of EPS data

                                   8
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

We also see in our summary statistics reported in Table 1 that the differences between
using diluted or basic EPS  are minimal  for our dataset  and shouldn’t provide different
results in general.  Consequently, in our research method and the in-depth experiments
tested, diluted EPS will be  the  focus,  often referred to  solely  as EPS.
Brief Overview of the Dataset
Before  analyzing  economic rounding,  we want to highlight that  the absolute amounts
related to rounding are generally small.  Looking  solely at 2021, the mean  (median)
amount required to  increase the third decimal digit by one unit  was  204,220  SEK
(49,189), and relative to the net earnings, about 4.1% (0.11%). Comparing these numbers
to those presented in Malenko et al. (2023)  for the same year,  the mean (median) was
$335,000 ($58,000) or 0.13% (0.22%) of the firms’ earnings for that quarter. The Swedish
data contains a higher fraction of smaller firms,  as the  mean rounding required is
substantially larger in the US than in Sweden. It is also worth noting that the mean fraction
of rounding  compared to net earnings  in Sweden  is  substantial,  at 4.1% compared to  the
US’  0.13%.  The reason behind this is that there are many firms with extreme outliers,
which we can see from the median  being lower than the median in the US dataset.
We summarize  the  firm size  in Figure 1 below.  Market Cap is used to divide  the firm
observations into Large Cap, Mid Cap, and Small Cap.  On the Swedish stock market,
companies are sorted into Large Cap if the market value is above 1 billion EUR, Mid Cap
between 1 billion  EUR and 150 million EUR, and Small Cap below 150 million EUR.
Since our  financial data is in SEK, we assume  1 EUR is about 10 SEK  and  define
observations as Large Cap if  the Market Cap exceeds  10 billion SEK, Mid Cap between
10 billion SEK  and 1.5 billion SEK, and Small Cap below 1.5 billion SEK.  We
acknowledge that  this is not a perfect substitute, as the exchange rate has varied  over the
period, and this  rule  isn’t sensitive to inflation.  Although  this may result in  a downward
bias, where  more of our past  observations  are  placed in a lower group than they  were  in,
this is  merely a summary statistic and does  not affect our results in any way.

                                   9
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

                 Figure  1:  Firm Size Overview

Our analysis  of the sample structure  based on  Market  Cap  indicates  that the  main  group
of firms examined is the Small Cap segment, as there are more Small Cap firms compared
to  Large Cap firms.  Nonetheless, firm size has been argued by Das and Zhang (2003) to
be  an ambiguous firm characteristic  in terms of  affecting rounding  incentives and  should,
therefore,  not  bias our findings.  Firm size  will be analyzed later in our paper  when we
examine the importance of firm characteristics,  using total assets as an estimate instead
of  Market  Cap  to omit noise from differences in valuation.  Lastly, we also  examine our
data based on industry  classification  reported in the  Appendix as  Figure A2.

                 IV.  Methodology
Identification  of  Rounding  in EPS
We begin by trying to see whether signs of rounding up can be identified in our data. The
intuition behind identifying rounding is whether an abnormal distribution of third decimal
digits   can   be   identified,   where   numbers   5-9   are   overrepresented   and   0-4   are
underrepresented.  Malenko et al. (2023) pay additional attention to  the occurrence of  the
digit  4, as this digit requires the least amount of manipulation  to  result in a rounded-up
digit  in the second decimal place.  Moving on to our experiment, we divide net income by
the  weighted average  number of  shares outstanding for each specific firm for every
quarter and  extract the third  decimal digit. We divide our dataset into  two  groups:  firms
with positive net income and firms with negative net income.  We made  this  decision

                                  10
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

because  if there is a rounding bias, firms with negative EPS would  be incentivized to
round down their decimals  to  reduce their losses, compared to those with positive EPS
who would like to round up to  increase their gains.  We follow Malenko et al.  (2023)  as
well as  Das and Zhang (2003)  by stating that  the null hypothesis can be assumed to take
                                                                          1
on a  uniform distribution  based  on the reasoning from  Benford’s law where each  of the
potential 10  decimal  numbers  is expected to  occur  in  10% of all observations  each.  To
test whether this null hypothesis is  relevant to our test, we  run  the same experiment using
other key  values from the income statement  that  intuitively shouldn’t  be  under  pressure
of manipulation.  The key instruments analyzed are revenues, gross profit, and operating
income, all divided by the weighted average number of diluted shares outstanding to get
similar ratios such as EPS. According to Malenko et al. (2023), these accounting measures
should not be under as much market attention,  and therefore,  the incentive to manipulate
these numbers  is  lower.  Following in the footsteps of previous research, the null
hypothesis is tested using a normal distribution, where the reported frequency will differ
                                               !"!!
from the null, being 0.1 (10%). The  statistic  𝑧  =         is used for the calculation of the
                                                           "($%")
                                      #
                                                    '
Z-score, where p is the frequency of the digit in question, p0 is the frequency of 0.1 which
was the assumed null hypothesis, and  n is the sample size.

                  Table  2:  Revenue  per Share

1                                                                                     ()*
 Benford’s law explains how the frequency of numbers often follow the function 𝐹(  =  log &   ' for
                                                                                (
numbers in the first position of a number. However, as the position of the number increases, the predicted
                                                                  rd
frequency will approach 𝐹+  =  0.1. Given that we focus on the 3  decimal value, we hypothesize that the
frequency should move closer to 0.1 according to Benford’s law.

                                  11
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

                Table 3:  Gross Profit  per Share

             Table 4:  Operating Income  per Share

The results in Tables  2,  3,  and  4  indicate  that the null hypothesis is reasonable and holds
for the given instruments, as there is no visible pattern  that  lower  digits  occur  less
frequently than higher digits. Although some frequencies deviate significantly from 10%,
all  have  an  opposite effect from that expected from  the  manipulation of rounding.  As the
null hypothesis has been examined and deemed appropriate, we continue with the same
reasoning, now running the analysis on basic EPS and diluted EPS, both filtered on firms
with positive net income.  The distribution is also plotted in Figure 2, where only diluted
positive EPS is displayed. Basic EPS and Diluted negative EPS  are  displayed in  the
Appendix, in Figure A3  and Figure  A4, respectively.

                                  12
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

                      V.  Results
   Figure  2: Distribution  of Third Decimal  Digits  in Diluted
                       Positive EPS

   Table  5:  Prevalence  of Rounding  in  Diluted  Positive  EPS

Based on our initial test  results in Table  5,  the results differ  from those presented  by
Malenko et  al.  (2023).  First,  no significant evidence of  rounding in the Swedish stock
market can be  found.  Malenko’s method of  explicitly  paying attention to the  frequency
of the number 4 cannot show enough evidence to reject the null hypothesis. Second, there
is  a  significant overrepresentation of the numbers 0 and 9.  Both decimals are well above
the  expected frequency,  but none of  them  should  affect  the  manipulation of EPS  as

                                  13
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

rounding up from the digit 0 requires  a lot of manipulation  and should,  to a larger extent,
be avoided, whereas 9 will result in rounding by itself, and should  not be the resulting
digit of the prior manipulation as this requires excessive rounding. The overrepresentation
of  the digit 0  as  the  third decimal digit  could be intuitively explained by the fact that if
the number of shares  is  set to an even number (say 5 million), this would always result in
a third decimal of 0 if the net income is also somewhat rounded, which is  a  common
practice among larger firms that  report in million SEK.  However, the  high occurrence of
digit  9  cannot be as easily explained, as well as  why  similar results  do  not  appear  in
previous literature  with similar methodologies.  Lastly, no decimal  above 5, except  9, has
a frequency above  the expected 0.1, further arguing against  a prevalence of  systematic
manipulation of the Swedish market.  For robustness reasons, we  also test whether  the
prevalence of rounding can be shown by  comparing the summed frequency  of digits 0-4
against digits 5-9, a method implemented by Das and Zhang (2003). We find that  digits
5-9 have a summed frequency of  0.4938,  which  shows  no evidence that rounding exists
as it does not significantly exceed the frequency of lower digits with a summed frequency
of 0.5062.
Firm-specific  Rounding  of  EPS
While previous tests have shown no evidence of  systematic rounding in the market, there
remains a possibility that certain firms are engaging in such activities  and are  being
hidden in the data  of innocent firms.  To test this, we  adopt  the  methodology  of  Malenko
et al.  (2023)  who  introduce  a new variable  in  their  research  paper  called  “Q-Score,”  short
for “Quadrophobia Score”:

                                 (
                     ⎧
                                 0, 𝑖𝑓  - 1 +,,.,-  >  0
                     ⎪
                                 (()        .,/
                                       𝒬$,&             (
                     ⎨
                               ⎪1, 𝑖𝑓  - 1 +,,.,-  =  0
                             ⎩     .,/

Where  j will span N quarters back  in time  to check if the third decimal  digit  was a 4 in
any of the quarters, taking on the value of 0 if  a 4  is reported, and 1 if  it  does not occur
over the period.  The variable presented is based on the reasoning that firms that, over
different periods, fail to report a 4 as their third decimal are more likely to perform
manipulation in their EPS results than those firms that  are not afraid to report a 4.  Based
on the outcome of the Q-score dummy variable,  the data will be subset into  two
subgroups,  one containing the firms that returned a 0 for their Q-score and  another  that
returned a 1.

Quadrophobia is an advantageous method when researching managerial incentives and
earnings management. A strong benefit of quadrophobia is its transparency and ease of
use. The underrepresentation of the number 4 directly measures a firm propensity to use
aggressive financial reporting techniques. The measure captures the combined use of
several techniques used to adjust earnings,  which is useful when  identifying  firms with
aggressive accounting cultures.  It helps to identify likely violations but cannot show with
absolute certainty that earnings management has occurred. Nevertheless, due to the

                                  14
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

predictive power of their measure, practitioners and regulators have gained interest in the
method. One example is SEC’s EPS initiative,  which  was  partly inspired by the Q-score.
As reported Maurer (2021) in the Wall Street Journal, this initiative was built on academic
research investigating the unusually high absence of the number 4 in the third decimal in
EPS in quarterly financial reports. Michaels (2018)  writes that “The paper was widely
read within the SEC,” referring to Malenko et al. (2023).  Furthermore, in September
2020, the SEC announced enforcement actions against two public companies based on
potential accounting violations, including earnings management and improper rounding
of reported quarterly EPS figures, highlighting the method’s usefulness.

We calculate the frequency of reporting a 4 for each group and quarter and run Z-statistics
on the difference in frequency between the subgroups over different values of N. We filter
our data on EPS values above 0.001 SEK to omit firms with negative EPS and firms that
have EPS between 0  and  0.001,  as these  will always result in a 0  as the third decimal
digit.

 Table  6: Firm-specific  Rounding  Analysis  using  the Q-score

The results from the implementation of the Q-score show that,  overall,  there are no
significant  signs of  firm-specific rounding in our sample. The  differences  in frequency
between the two groups  are minimal, spanning  from  -0.4  percentage points for  N=1  to  0
percentage points for N = 20.  For no N is the  quadrophobia group less frequent at
reporting a 4,  results that differ significantly from those presented by Malenko et al.
(2023). When  Q = 1 for N = 20, this means that firms  have  failed to result in a third
decimal equal to 4 for  five  consecutive years. This may seem  suspicious, however  in
                                                                              2
theory this should naturally  occur in  about  12.2%  of all cases .  The limitation  of  this
method  is that as  N  increases, the sample size for Q=1 decreases. Another factor
mentioned by Malenko et al. (2023) is that management and regulatory systems are likely
to change over longer periods, creating  more  noise for higher numbers of N. Unlike
Malenko et al. (2023),  who  used N =  40  as the highest  period,  we chose to use N =  20 to
combat both the  noise  and  the fact that  our dataset spans fewer quarters.

2
 If the null hypothesis that the probability of the digit 4 to occur is 0.1, the probability  that a 4 does  not
                                               /0       /0
occur for 20 consecutive quarters would be (1 − 0.1)  =  0.9  =  0.1216.

                                  15
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

Time-Specific  Rounding  of EPS
We run a second robustness test related to time, as there could have been different periods
where rounding occurred more often than other periods.  Incentives to  manipulate
financial data should increase  if the company in question  is at risk of experiencing losses,
as mentioned by  Das and Zhang  (2003).  Given that our sample includes the financial
crisis  that affected Sweden  from  2007  to  2010, one potential hypothesis is that  rounding
occurred more frequently during this period  than others. Another  consequence of the
financial  crisis  is  the  increased  regulatory  environment  demanded  of  companies,
particularly  banks, to ensure that  market stability  is  prioritized. This  transition  could lead
to increased auditing  and,  hence,  less rounding  happening  in recent years  than  in  earlier
years.  We control for this by calculating the frequency of digit 4 every year, where we
combine our quarterly observations to  get more robust findings every year.  If the test
showcases  a lower frequency of the digit 4 for a specific year, this could indicate  more
potential rounding  is  taking place.

   Figure  3: Frequency of Third Decimal Place Digit 4 Over
                      Time  in Sweden

Figure  3  shows that the digit 4 consistently appears close to the expected frequency of
0.1, with some occasionally lower frequencies. The observed frequencies failed to deviate
more than the 95% confidence level in all years  except for  2011. Therefore,  no specific
period  appears to have  had more potential manipulation than another.  Even though the
frequency of the digit 4  shows a decreasing trend  from 2007  to  2009,  the results aren’t
significant enough to argue that this is solely due to the market  environment and  could

                                  16
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

instead  occur  by chance.  Additionally, we cannot  argue  that early  years had more
manipulation than recent years  based on the provided results.
Factor-Specific Rounding  of EPS
In a third  robustness test,  we  investigate if certain firm  factors  can help predict which
companies will  participate in rounding activities.  Malenko et al. (2023)  and  Das and
Zhang (2003)  show that  strategic rounding  responds to economic incentives  using  basic
firm characteristics.
Skinner and Sloan (1999)  show that  high-growth  firms  are more harshly penalized by
investors  if  unexpected  negative  results are reported.  Consequently, managers in high-
growth firms are more motivated to meet analysts’ expectations, and,  as a result, have  a
higher  incentive to manipulate earnings.  Das and Zhang (2003)  test the association
between growth and the propensity of rounding up using  the  market-to-book value of
equity  ratio  and conclude that high-growth firms are indeed more likely to round up
earnings compared to  low-growth  firms. Based on this, we hypothesize that  managers  in
high-growth  firms should have  greater  incentives to round up earnings.  Another
predictive  factor  for rounding is  a  lower magnitude of EPS, which  implies  that rounding
the second  decimal  one digit  higher  makes  the  percentual gain larger  compared to a
similar change for  a  higher magnitude in EPS.  Financial results  would inflate  more
recognizably  for companies  with small EPS,  enhancing the appeal  to  investors  and,
therefore,  increasing  incentives for managers to round up.  Another discussed firm factor
is firm size, whose  role has previously been argued as ambiguous.  On  the  one hand,
rounding in a larger company would likely result in a more significant absolute gain, both
on  the  firm level  through a higher valuation  and  on a  managerial level  through  their
incentive packages  due to  the increased firm value.  On the other hand,  large firms  are
covered by more analysts and accountants,  which could make  mistakes  more  likely and
costly.  We focus on these three main factors  in our examination of firm characteristics
that could affect rounding. Due to the lack of relevant data regarding analyst coverage
and manager incentive packages  in Sweden compared to  the US, we  avoid these to
maintain  as high of validity in our results as possible.
We  begin our examination  of these three firm  factors  by applying  a  low-minus-high
strategy  to  our data. Depending on which  variable is in focus, we sort  our  sample  on the
variable and divide it into  ten  equally  sized  groups,  where group 1  contains the lowest
values and group 10 the highest.  We extract the third decimal  digit for all firm
observations  and calculate the frequency  for the digit 4  to occur  in  each group. We
compare the frequency  between group 1 and group 10 by using a Z-statistic  as  we have
previously performed in our Q-score  calculations.  To spot evidence of rounding, we
check whether the difference in frequency between group 1 and group 10  is  significant
and in line with  our previous intuitive  reasoning.  We  measure firm size based on total
assets,  EPS magnitude based on our manually calculated diluted EPS, and  high-growth
firms based on  the  price-to-book ratio that  is often used  to  evaluate companies, where
higher price-to-book ratios are correlated with overvaluation and growth firms, and lower
values related to undervalued firms.

                                  17
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

   Table  7: Prevalence  of  Rounding  with  Specific  Factors  in
                     Sweden

The results in Table 7 show  no  significant results  that the firm factors examined  are
related to a rounding bias. Large firms and firms with higher EPS magnitude report lower
frequencies  of digit  4; however,  these are in the opposite direction of what is intuitively
logical.  This result does not argue that manipulation of the third decimal digit exists, but
at the same time, the results contradict previous research  provided by Das and Zhang
(2003).
We continue the analysis by implementing a new variable, which we name “DUMMY4”,
following  a  similar methodology as Malenko et al.  (2023).  The variable is binary and
takes on the value of 0 if the firm-quarter observation does  not  have  a 4 as the third  EPS
decimal and the value of 1 if it does.  We wish to examine whether the previously
mentioned factors could help predict when a 4  will or will not  occur  as  the third  decimal
digit.  If any of the results have a significant effect, this would  indicate that the distribution
of digit 4  may  not  be  random  and that the factors could predict what type of firms are
more likely to  perform rounding.  A negative coefficient  would indicate  that rounding is
more  likely to  occur for  the independent variable in question.  We run  a  regression on the
DUMMY4 variable as the dependent variable,  using the  factor-specific variables as
independent variables, while  filtering  our data on  observations where EPS is bigger than
0.001 SEK. Additionally, we only include the firm observations where all the firm factors
are available.  We  use the logarithm of assets to make the  results  more normalized and
easily interpreted.

                                  18
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

     Table  8:  Regression  of  the  Occurrence  of  the  Digit 4

Our results show  no evidence that these factors can predict  when the digit 4 occurs  and
that the distribution is random  regarding  these factors.  We also  attempted  to add  the  Q-
score  variables  when N = 4  (found in the  Appendix named Figure A5),  but this  had  no
explanatory effect and did not change the estimates of the other variables. When Malenko
et al. (2023) performed the same test,  both with and without the Q-score variable,  they
found strong  significance  for all variables.  The  result  from the regression is in line with
the outcome presented in Table 7, that is, none of the firm factors are related to a rounding
bias.
Currency’s  Effect  on Rounding Incentives
All  our previous results have implied that there is no empirical evidence that  rounding  in
the third decimal place  exists  in Swedish firms. We continue by considering  the  potential
prevalence of a currency effect. The reasoning behind this is that the intrinsic value of the
third decimal position differs depending on the currency used to report the earnings. Even
though a relatively “more valuable” currency should result in lower EPS magnitudes, this
effect  fails to translate when considering a specific decimal  position.  Consider the case
where we have  two  firms with EPS equal to 1.234, denoted in  two  currencies, USD and
SEK, where  1 USD is assumed to be 10 SEK,  and  the  number of shares is 1 million for
both firms.  As only  two  decimals  are  reported, both would, in this case,  report an EPS of
1.23.  If the firms wanted to add one additional unit to the last reported decimal, this would
imply a gain in value of 0.01 * 1 million = 10,000.  As the USD is worth  10x that of SEK,
this would  mean  that the firm with  earnings in USD, denoted in SEK, would  receive an
additional value of 10,000 * 10 = 100,000 SEK, compared to the firm that reports in SEK,
which only added 10,000 SEK.  The above  scenario  proves  that  we  fix  our interest in a
specific  position rather than the economic value of the digit.  It could help explain why
evidence for rounding is found in the US compared to Sweden, as the third  digit  holds a
larger economic value  and,  thus, increases  the benefit of rounding.
However, this argument  works both ways.  Considering the same scenario, for the firms
to round up their second decimal by one unit,  both need to  increase  their third decimal
digit 4 to the digit 5  (that is,  requiring  an increase  in earnings  by 0.001 * 1 million  =
1,000).  We can consider this a  measure  of risk, where the more  earnings  you need to

                                  19
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

“make  up,”  the  higher  the  probability  that  an  external  party  might  find  these
overestimated earnings.  In this scenario, the firm denoting earnings in USD would be
risking 1,000 * 10 = 10,000 in SEK, whereas the Swedish firm only risks 1,000 SEK. For
both firms,  the ratio between costs and gains is the same, being that the cost is one-tenth
of the potential gain in valuation.  So,  could the currency effect be ambiguous?
We  begin  our analysis  of the existence of a currency effect  by focusing on  the  specific
currency used.  We extract  three  additional datasets to analyze, each containing similar
firm-quarter-specific observations as our previous data but now containing Finnish,
Norwegian, and Danish firms. By doing so,  three  additional currencies are introduced:
the  Norwegian kronor (NOK), Danish kronor (DKK),  and Euro  (EUR). All of these are
traded at different exchange rates compared to SEK, where EURSEK is about 1:11
DKKSEK 1:1.5, and NOKSEK 1:1. An alternative data that could be examined would be
the previously omitted dataset  on Swedish firms that report their  earnings in EUR  (or any
other currency). We deem this dataset as inappropriate for analysis as it only consisted of
about 2000 firm observations,  which would not  be sufficient to calculate robust Q-scores,
as well as it is not consistent in  using the same currency, where not only EUR has been
the currency used to  report  financials, but also GBP and USD  in some  instances.
We repeat our initial methodology  by manually calculating EPS for each country’s
dataset, extracting the third  decimal  digit,  and  calculating the frequency  for each digit
while filtering our data  only to  include firm observations containing positive EPS values.
If it is the case that  the  currency effect is positive  (that  is,  more valuable currencies like
USD and EUR have a positive effect on occurrences of earnings management), this would
be shown in our  tables  by  Finland having  lower frequencies of lower digits and higher
occurrences of higher digits, while Denmark and Norway wouldn’t  deviate much  from
the expected frequency of 10%, as we have seen in our Swedish data previously.

  Table  9:  Persistence of Rounding in Diluted EPS in Finland

                                  20
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

 Table 10:  Persistence of Rounding in Diluted EPS in  Norway

     Table 11:  Persistence of Rounding in Diluted EPS in
                   Denmark

Our results  in  Tables  9,  10,  and 11  indicate no significant  strategic  rounding in  either
Finland,  Norway,  or  Denmark.  Regardless  of  comparing  numbers  0-4  to  5-9  or
specifically looking at number 4, no evidence can be found that aligns with what has been
found in previous literature  in the US.  This  result  provides  evidence contradictory to our
hypothesis that  the  value of currency  should  affect  the likelihood of rounding the third
decimal.  The  results  do  once again indicate that  numbers 0 and 9 are overrepresented.  To
maintain robustness, we perform the previous tests  on time-specific, firm-specific,  and
factor-specific rounding for these  countries in the Appendix in Figures A6, A7, and A8.
It is  important to  acknowledge that the sample size  containing the publicly traded firms
is  small in each of the three countries, resulting in  decreasing power to detect the true
effect size in this case.

                                  21
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

Currency’s  Effect  on  the Second Decimal Place
Based on our previous reasoning,  if  incentives to round the third decimal digit are lower
in Sweden, there might be an increased interest in manipulating the second decimal digit
instead. By doing so, the effect  mimics  the pricing strategies used when the currency is
USD or EUR. Assuming 1 USD = 10 SEK,  if  the price of a good in the US  is  $1.99,  it
would be  priced  in Sweden at  19.90 instead of 19.99,  deviating  somewhat  from  pricing a
good just below the reference point (in this case, 20.00).  If this is the case,  those using
SEK should value their first decimal place the same as those using USD value their second
decimal place, and Swedes increasingly ignore the value of the second decimal place.
This  implication  would  allow  for increased manipulation  of  the second decimal  digit.
However,  as  the second decimal place is still reported, potential rounding might still be
perceived as too visible for firms to perform.
To see evidence of rounding in the second decimal place, the digit 9 should be
underrepresented, and the digit 0 should be overrepresented, as firms engaging in earnings
management would like to round up the first decimal. Since the second decimal is
reported,  it is not sufficient to make the decimal place take on a value between 5  and  9
anymore, as this will not change the first decimal place digit. The most efficient way to
round up the first decimal is by rounding up from 9 to 0. This  strategy  is based on the
same reasoning provided by Carslaw (1988) and Thomas (1989).
We  continue  our analysis of the currency effect by  examining whether there is a
prevalence of rounding in the second decimal place. The second decimal digit is extracted
the same way that we  did  with the  third decimal digit. The dataset is filtered  by  only
containing firms with positive EPS and is displayed in Tables  12  to  15.

Table  12:  Frequency of  EPS  Second  Decimal  Place  in Sweden

                                  22
 Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

Table  13: Frequency of  EPS  Second  Decimal  Place  in  Finland

Table  14: Frequency of  EPS  Second  Decimal  Place  in  Norway

    Table  15: Frequency of  EPS  Second  Decimal  Place  in
                   Denmark

                                  23
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

In  Tables  12  to  15,  we  show  that the digit 0 is overrepresented at the 1% significance
level  for  Sweden, Finland, and Denmark. In contrast,  the digit 9 is significantly
underrepresented  in  both Sweden and Finland, which is  in line with the  results  presented
by Thomas (1989), who also showed an increased prevalence of  the  digit 0 and  a
decreased prevalence of  the  digit 9 in the second decimal place  of EPS. One difference is
that  when  Thomas  (1989)  examined  EPS  data,  he  found  that  0  and  5  were
overrepresented, which we fail to see in our dataset. These results are significant, but they
do not necessarily indicate that the reason is due to the currency effect, as both the lowest-
valued currency in SEK and the highest valued in EUR  showed  significant evidence.
Another element is that  the incentives to round the second decimal and the third differ
slightly.  Where the third decimal was strictly based on economic  incentives,  the second
decimal also poses a psychological incentive, where meeting a reference point could yield
additional benefits.  The  different “rules of the game” when comparing  the  second  and
third decimals do  not make this analysis sufficient to single out a currency effect.
This  final test, initially considered to solely act as  a robustness test on currency effect,
has provided us with interesting  evidence  that  could indicate  that  rounding  might  exist in
Sweden.  Although  the currency effect cannot explain this, our previous line of reasoning
that incentives to round the second decimal digit increase in Sweden due to a lower-
valued currency has  not been  wholly  contradicted.  Given that  the scope of this paper
specifically considered the  third decimal place, further analysis of the second decimal
place and its potential evidence of a rounding bias  falls outside of this scope.  Hence, we
will not analyze the second decimal place  further.  Instead, we  decided to  perform all the
relevant robustness tests  covered in this research  (regarding time-specific, firm-specific,
and  factor-specific rounding)  on the second decimal  for  all countries  included in this
paper  and displayed these in the Appendix  in Figures A9, A10, and A11.  These results
can be of interest  to  future research.

                  VI.  Discussion
Rounding  Practices:  Sweden vs  the  US
One possible explanation for  why  our findings  differ  from  previous research  on US data
is  differences  in the possibilities  of  engaging  in earnings management practices.
In this article, we focus strictly on the rounding activities related to EPS while avoiding
diving deeper into what specific part of EPS is being manipulated. The reason behind this
is because many different options exist. Das and Zhang (2003) show findings indicating
that managers use working capital accruals to inflate earnings, thus enabling them to
round up the EPS numbers. They also mention the other possibility  of  manipulating  the
denominator in the EPS calculation  (that is,  reducing the number of shares outstanding,
for instance, through share repurchases). However, their analysis provides no significant
results for this method of rounding shares through manipulation of the number of shares
outstanding. Contrary to what Das and Zhang (2003) find, Robert, Lee, and Lobo (2024)
demonstrate evidence that abnormal stock repurchases are an effective way to manipulate
the number of outstanding  shares  and, therefore,  to round EPS. They argue that working
capital accruals are not an effective tool to round diluted EPS but cannot dismiss the
possibility that accruals can be used for this purpose.

                                  24
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

The  calculation of  EPS  under IFRS and  GAAP  is similar and  should  not  significantly
affect how companies in Sweden and the US report EPS. As Das and Zhang (2003) show,
when manipulation  of EPS  occurs, it is most likely through earnings management using
working capital accruals.  Hypothetically,  if there were large differences between the
calculation of  these instruments,  it could affect  the  possibilities  of engaging  in earnings
management  in Sweden,  thus reducing  companies’  opportunities to round EPS using  this
method.  However, despite  having  small differences in  the  classification of assets,  such as
the treatment of debt as current or noncurrent  in  IAS 1  (IFRS)  and  ASC 470  (GAAP),
there should not be any major  obstacles for firms in  Sweden  to use this method  to round
EPS.  Reducing  the  number of shares outstanding through  a  share repurchase program  is
also  a viable option  for  rounding EPS. However, regardless  of  other possibilities,
rounding EPS should theoretically be equally possible under IFRS and GAAP. Therefore,
differences in accounting regulations  should  not  be  the main factor  for why  rounding of
the  third  decimal  digit  in  EPS  occurs with less frequency in Sweden compared to the US.
Understanding Rounding:  Timing and Motives
As we cannot argue that  differences  in  accounting  standards  allow  the  US,  to  a  greater
extent,  to manipulate their earnings, we revisit the incentive structure that drives
companies to increasingly take part in aggressive accounting practices  to see whether
these could explain  our results.
The intuition between why managers and companies would decide to pursue rounding
activities is,  in theory,  straightforward:  if the benefits outweigh the cost  of getting caught
firms should be more tempted to partake in such rounding practices.  Das and Zhang
(2003) report  that  the benefits of rounding,  such as meeting analysts’ expectations,
reporting profits, and sustaining previous performance levels,  will  likely attract managers
to perform aggressive accounting practices. These findings are supported by evidence
provided by Burgstahler and Dichev (1997), Skinner and Sloan (1999), and Degeorge et
al. (1999). In their paper, Amar et al. (2022) show that, almost 20 years  after  Das and
Zhang (2003), pressure to meet expectations results in managers focusing on short-term
benefits,  which directly influences their decision to engage in earning management
practices, proving its relevance today. Another reason could be in the M&A field, where
Davis and Khadivar (2024) find evidence that earnings management in accruals occurs
before the publication of takeover rumors.
Das and Zhang  (2003)  suggest  that firms are more inclined to manage earnings  when
doing  so  can  help  meet  analysts’  forecasts,  report  profits,  and  sustain  previous
performance.  The incentives for managers to round up are particularly strong  when the
pre-rounded figure is close to its  benchmark, implying  that  strategic rounding occurs
more frequently in firms  with analyst coverage, which  establishes such benchmarks,
compared to those without.  As we find no  evidence for  strategic rounding in Sweden, one
possible explanation for this is that fewer analysts  cover the  Swedish stock market
compared to  the US.  However, Fang Yu (2008)  provides  evidence that contrasts the
findings  of  Das and Zhang (2003). Instead, his findings suggest that firms followed by
more analysts manage their earnings less.  His  findings point towards  the fact  that
experienced  analysts  from  top  brokerage  firms  contribute  to  a  more  transparent
information environment for firms, thus reducing asymmetric information.

                                  25
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

Considering these findings, the difference between the US and Sweden could be
differences in incentive packages.  A  reason for earnings management  is provided by
Burns and Kedia (2006).  They  show  evidence that CEOs  with  option portfolios  sensitive
to stock prices are significantly more likely to use aggressive accounting approaches. The
incentive to misreport is greater with stock options than with other types of compensation
for two main reasons: options limit the risk if the misreporting is discovered  and facilitate
easy exit strategies for CEOs.  Kim,  Lee,  and Lobo (2024)  investigate  the relationship
between  EPS  and managerial insider  selling and  suggest that managerial trading
incentives  may be an explanation for the observed rounding in EPS in earlier literature,
as  insiders who round the EPS have a higher propensity to sell shares after the
announcement of reported earnings.  As most of our data is based on small-cap firms,
incentive packages offered for managers in these roles might not be as  beneficial  as  those
offered in the US  if  previous  datasets examined  contain a  bigger  share  of larger firms. As
we are unable to find trustworthy data on incentive packages for Sweden, this leaves room
for potential extensions  to compare incentive package structures.
The  Impact of  Cultural  Hierarchies on  Accounting  Integrity
One last explanation could be cultural differences. We hypothesize that Sweden generally
has  a less hierarchical organizational culture  than  the US.  The flat structure incentivizes
employees to a  greater  extent to  make  their voices  heard  in decision-making  processes,
making  unethical decisions regarding rounding practices  more difficult to  justify.
Cooper, Dacin,  and Palmer (2013) show in their study that  accountants likely follow the
“tone  at  the top”  and adhere to senior management’s  directives  when engaging in
fraudulent behavior.  This behavior is influenced by their respect  for  hierarchical power
structures,  as highlighted by Wong-on-Wing and Lui (2013).  This  result  aligns with the
findings of  Lord and Dezoort (2001),  who  show that auditors are more likely to approve
an  accounting post that  is  materially  misrepresentative  when  complying  with  pressure
from  authorial superiors  but not  when it comes from pressure to conform to equals.
Pickerd, Summers, and Wood (2014) strengthen the reasoning by providing evidence that
entry-level staff,  especially auditors,  are more influenced by the tone set by their
supervisor compared to their  peers, suggesting that  supervisors strongly impact ethical
choices made by auditors. Moreover, Murphy and Free (2016) underscore that accounting
fraud  often  involves  entire organizations  working in collective action rather than
individual decision-making, further making  the  Q-score a  valuable measure due to its
practical  use  in detecting aggressive accounting cultures in firms.

Murphy and Free (2016) reference a survey of employees and bosses in the US, showing
that 43 percent of employees perceive the working climate within their organization to
follow leadership by coercion. Furthermore, in their Global Competitiveness Report
(2018),  the World Economic Forum ranked Sweden  in  second place in an index
measuring “Willingness to delegate authority.”  However, the US ranked seventh, scoring
78.4 out of 100. Sweden scored 83.8,  making the difference noticeable  but not large. In
an article in Harvard Business Review, Erin Meyer  (2017)  describes  the work culture in
the US as top-down, stating,  “align quickly with the boss and support the decision even
if it conflicts with the opinion, you previously expressed. At this stage, if you show
disagreement—  especially in front of others—you may be viewed as difficult to work
with.” In contrast, she describes leadership in Sweden as consensual, noting,  “Don’t

                                  26
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

expect the boss to jump in and decide for the group. The boss is a facilitator, not the
decider.”

Sweden’s flat  organizational  culture and emphasis on  consensual decision-making can
imply that more people are involved in the process of making decisions, resulting in
“hiding” a misstatement of earnings may be more  a  complex  matter in Sweden than in
the US.  Based on the small contrasts in work and organizational culture between Sweden
and the US, at least part of the differences in our results compared to earlier research in
the US can potentially be explained.
Limitations
There are some limitations regarding using  our  Swedish data. The dataset  is  significantly
smaller than those used on American markets gathered by the likes of  Compustat and
I/B/E/S.  However, given that the dataset used covers 824 public firms for 20 years, it
remains large enough to draw robust conclusions comparable to the results of previous
studies.  Another limitation is that, unlike previous research, there is limited data related
to managerial behavior aspects  and  analytical forecasts on our stocks, which have
previously been used to explain why this rounding bias  could  be present. In our case, we
stick to the original quantitative aspects of previous research and build qualitative
arguments  based  on what has previously been  established  in the research field  where it is
deemed fit.  One final limitation is when comparing Swedish data to data  from  other
Nordic countries.  First,  Finland, Norway,  and Denmark’s datasets are smaller than
Sweden’s, so the validity  of the  results  from each country  should be  considered.  To
measure this, we run  power statistics  where  power  is  80%,  effect size 2%,  and
significance 5%. We find that the necessary sample size is 19622, something we only get
from the Swedish data.  The sample sizes  from positive EPS firms in Finland, Norway,
and Denmark are  5481,  8110,  and  4980,  respectively, resulting in effect sizes of  3.8%,
3.1%, and  4.0%.  Given these power tests,  we should be slightly worried  about  the
robustness of our findings.  Second,  we base our  comparisons on the assumption that the
countries are ideal substitutes for each other, even though this might not be the case.  The
countries  also  differ  in regulations, which perhaps have  not  been  adequately  considered
and could lead to  misleading results.  How  extensively the financial regulation systems
operate  and punish aggressive accounting practices  is subjective to each  country,
affecting  the incentives construction for  the firms for  each  country  differently.  However,
EPS manipulation should still be an issue outside of the US, as the incentive structure for
when it pays off to participate in aggressive accounting practices  should be  the same
regardless of country  and accounting standard.  Hence, it is still relevant for us to  study
other countries  than Sweden.

                                  27
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

               VII. Conclusion

In this paper,  we  analyze  whether  there is evidence in the Swedish market  of  rounding  in
the reported EPS using an approach that looks at the distribution of the third decimal digit.
Our findings indicate that no significant systematic anomalies can be found in the dataset,
which  contradicts  previous  research  evidence  based on US data.
The findings are tested using three robustness tests:  time-specific, firm-specific,  and
factor-specific methodologies.  We fail to find evidence of potential rounding in  all  these
tests  on the  third  decimal  digit.
We  consider that currency could explain why our results differ from previous literature
and expand our experiment to other Nordic countries with different currencies.  We find
mixed results from the other Nordic countries for the distribution of the third decimal
digit but cannot link these specifically to a currency effect.  Additionally, we examine
whether rounding might occur in the second decimal place.  Rounding potentially occurs
for the second decimal place, but  the  currency is not likely  to be the  sole  explanation.
Our results expand previous literature  by  opening  the research field into a new
geographical market, providing  findings  that  contradict  past  research.  Further  research
should be made using more comprehensive datasets  including  incentive structures of
management and analyst coverage to  increase understanding of the psychology of
accounting malpractice  in the Nordics.  Given  the  findings regarding potential rounding
in the second decimal place, additional analysis  of this  area  could  contribute to the
research field.

                                  28
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

                   VIII.  References

Amar, Moty, Chen, Ester, Gavious, Ilanit, & Weihs, Hagit,  2022, Financial reporting
misconduct: Evidence from the field, Finance Research Letters 47(A).
Benford, F., 1938, The Law of Anomalous Numbers, Proceedings of the American
Philosophical Society 78(4), 551–572.
Bolagsverket,  "Redovisningsvaluta.",  Available at:
https://bolagsverket.se/foretag/aktiebolag/drivaaktiebolag/redovisningsvaluta.699.html
Burgstahler,  David  &  Dichev, Ilia, 1997,  Earnings management to avoid earnings
decreases and losses,  Journal of Accounting & Economics  24,  99-126.
Burns, Natasha, & Kedia, Simi, 2006, The impact of performance-based compensation
on misreporting, Journal of Financial Economics 79(1).
By, R. M., 2000, How 'Round-ups' can give stocks a hard ride, Wall Street Journal, July
21.
Carslaw, Charles A. P. N., 1988, Anomalies in Income Numbers: Evidence of Goal
Oriented Behavior, The Accounting Review 63(2), 321–327.
Cooper, D. J., Dacin, T., & Palmer, D., 2013, Fraud in accounting, organizations and
society: extending the boundaries of research, Accounting, Organizations and Society
38(6-7), 440-457.
Corporate Finance Institute, n.d., IFRS vs. US GAAP. Available at:
https://corporatefinanceinstitute.com/resources/accounting/ifrs-vs-us-gaap/.
Das, Somnath, and Zhang, Huai, 2003, Rounding-Up in Reported EPS, Behavioral
Thresholds, and Earnings Management, Journal of Accounting and Economics 35(1),
31-50.
Davis,  Frederick.,  Khadivar, Hamed.,  Accrual and real earnings management by
rumored takeover targets,  International Review of Financial Analysis,  Volume 92,
2024,  103105
DeFond, M. L., & Park, C. W., 2001, The Reversal of Abnormal Accruals and the
Market  Valuation of Earnings Surprises, The Accounting Review 76(3), 375–404.
Degeorge,  F.,  Patel,  J.,  Zeckhauser,  R.,  1999.  Earnings  manipulations  to  exceed
thresholds.  Journal  of  Business  72,  1–33
Deloitte  IAS Plus, n.d., Financial reporting framework in Sweden.  Available at:
https://www.iasplus.com/en/jurisdictions/europe/sweden.
Deloitte  IAS Plus, n.d., IAS 33  -  Earnings Per Share. Available at:
https://www.iasplus.com/en/standards/ias/ias33/.
Govindarajan, Vijay., Srivastava, Anup., Zhao, Rong.,  Mind the GAAP, Harvard
Business Review, Published: May 04,  2021.

                                  29
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

IFRS Foundation, n.d.,  Who uses IFRS Accounting Standards?  Use of IFRS Standards
by Jurisdiction.  Available at:  https://www.ifrs.org/use-around-the-world/use-of-ifrs-
standards-by-jurisdiction/.
Lord, A. T., & DeZoort, F. T., 2001, The impact of commitment and moral reasoning
on auditors’ responses to social influence pressure, Accounting, Organizations and
Society 26(3), 215-235.
Malenko, N., Grundfest, J. A., & Shen, Y., 2023,  Quadrophobia: Strategic Rounding of
EPS Data,  Journal  of  Financial  and  Quantitative  Analysis,  58(8), 3231–3273.
Maurer, Mark, SEC Digs Deeper Into Companies’ EPS Manipulation, Wall Street
Journal, October 10.
McGough,  R.,2000.  How  ‘round-ups’  can  give  stocks  a  hard  ride.Wall  Street  Journal,
July  21.
Meyer, Erin, Being the Boss in Brussels, Boston, and Beijing, Harvard Business
Review, Published: July 2017.
Michaels, D., 2018, SEC probes whether companies rounded up earnings per share;
regulators investigating the case of the missing '4', WSJ Pro.Financial Regulation, June
22.
Murphy, P. R., & Free, C., 2016,  Broadening the fraud triangle: instrumental climate
and fraud, Behavioral Research in Accounting 28(1), 41-56.
Newbold, P., Carlson, W. L., & Thorne, B. M.  (2020).  Statistics for Business and
Economics  (9th ed.).  Pearson Education Limited.
Pickerd, J.  S., Summers, S. L., & Wood, D. A., 2014, An examination of how entry-
level staff auditors respond to tone at the top vis-à-vis tone at the bottom, Behavioral
Research in Accounting 27(1), 79-98.
Robert,  K.,  Lee, Y.G.,  & Lobo, G.J., 2024, Rounding of Earnings Per Share and
Managerial Insider Selling, Asia-Pacific Journal of Accounting & Economics 31(1), 96-
129.
Skinner, D. J., & Sloan, R. G., 1999, Earnings surprises, growth expectations, and stock
returns or don’t let an earnings torpedo sink your portfolio. Working Paper, University
of Michigan.
Stuart, Richard,  2020, U.S. GAAP vs. IFRS: Earnings per Share, National Professional
Standards Group.
Thomas, J. K., 1989, Unusual Patterns in Reported Earnings, The Accounting Review
64(4), 773–787.
Tutino, M., & Merlo, M., 2019, Accounting Fraud: A Literature Review, Risk
Governance & Control: Financial Markets & Institutions 9(1).
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission Release No. 226, 2020.

                                  30
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

Wong-on-Wing, B., & Lui, G., 2013, Beyond cultural values: an  implicit theory
approach to cross-cultural research in accounting ethics, Behavioral Research in
Accounting 25(1), 15-36.
World Economic Forum, 2018, The Global Competitiveness Report  2018.
Yu, Frank, 2008, Analyst Coverage and Earnings  Management, Journal of Financial
Economics 88, 245-271.
AI disclosure:
In this paper,  help  has been  received  from two AI modules; being ChatGPT  (3.5
version)  and Grammarly  (Free version). ChatGPT has been used  solely  to help with
coding  methodology  in R, and Grammarly to  make sure that the language in this paper
is  held  formal and correct. We take full responsibility  for  any potential issues or errors
that have resulted from  the use of  these modules.

                                  31
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

                   IX.  Appendix
          Figure A1: Firm  Observations Over Time
Figure A1 displays the total occurrences of firm observations on an annual basis from our
Swedish dataset.

      Figure A2:  Firm Observations  Sorted  by  Industry
Figure A2 showcases the distribution of the different industries occurring, and how many
firm observations that are linked to each industry. We have a total of 63 industries in our
sample, varying in the number of occurrences. We also have about 1000 firm observations
that can’t be placed in a particular industry. Figure A2 is split into 2 figures, where Figure
A2-a shows the first 30 industries in alphabetical order, and Figure A2-b shows the
remaining industries.

                                  32
Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

            Figure A2-a: Firm Observations by Industries (First 30)

          Figure A2-b: Firm Observations by Industries (Remaining)

                                 33
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

   Figure A3:  Prevalence  of Rounding  in  Basic  Positive  EPS
Figure A3  displays the frequency of the different occurring digits in the third decimal
place after calculating  Net income  divided by  the  Number of  Basic  Shares Outstanding,
denoted in SEK. The Z-score is a double-sided z-statistic calculated with the assumed
population mean of 0.1, following the reasoning  from Benford's law. The Significance
variable plots different signs depending on the confidence levels related to the Z-score
presented. We remove the firm-quarter observations where there are missing third
decimals, which removes all cases where either  net  income data or shares outstanding
data is missing.

  Figure A4:  Distribution of Third Decimal Digit in Diluted
                     Negative EPS
Figure A4 shows the total occurrences of each digit in the  third  decimal place  in  negative
diluted EPS.

                                  34
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

 Figure A5: Probit Regression on the Occurrence of the Digit
                4, including Q-score  when N=4
Figure A5 displays the outcome after running a probit regression on the binary variable
DUMMY4, which takes on the value of 0 if the  third  decimal  digit  in diluted EPS is not
a 4 and the value of 1 if the same digit is a 4.  The independent variables  are the logarithm
of total assets, our manually calculated diluted EPS,  price-to-book ratio,  and the  binary
variable  used for the firm-specific rounding tests when N = 4. It takes on the value of  0  if
the  third decimal digit  for the last 4 quarters  has  been at least one 4, and the value of 1 if
no 4 has appeared.

                                  35
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

       Figure A6:  Third Decimal Place  –  Time  Specific
Figure A6 shows the robustness tests on  our Finnish, Norwegian,  and Danish data
regarding the frequency of digit 4 in the  third  decimal place  over time.  The quarterly
observations have been combined by year to increase robustness for each year. The  data
has been filtered  by only containing observations with diluted EPS  above 0.001. The
black dots  represent  the  observed frequency, the red line the expected frequency of 10%,
and the blue lines represent the confidence intervals for a significance of 95%. The test
the confidence intervals are based on is a double-sided Z-test.
      Figure A6-a:  Frequency of Third Decimal Digit 4 Over Time in  Finland

                                  36
Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

    Figure A6-b:  Frequency of Third Decimal Digit 4 Over Time in Norway

   Figure A6-c:  Frequency of Third Decimal Digit 4 Over Time in Denmark

                                 37
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

       Figure A7: Third Decimal Place  –  Firm  Specific
Figure A7  shows the robustness tests on our Finnish, Norwegian, and Danish data
regarding the frequency of digit 4 in the  third  decimal place  for  firms with historic
avoidance of reporting a 4 compared to those that have reported a 4 in any of the past N
quarters.  The data is sorted into  two  groups based on the Q-score variable, and the
frequency is calculated by dividing the total  occurrences  of digit 4  by  the total firm
observations in the group in question. The difference in frequency is  compared using a Z-
statistic.  The sample is filtered  solely  by  containing diluted EPS values above 0.001.

    Figure A7-a:  Firm-specific Rounding Analysis using the Q-score in Finland

    Figure A7-b:  Firm-specific Rounding Analysis using the Q-score in Norway

   Figure A7-c:  Firm-specific Rounding Analysis using the Q-score in Denmark

                                  38
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

       Figure A8:  Third Decimal Place  –  Factor  Specific
Figure A8  shows the robustness tests on our Finnish, Norwegian, and Danish data
regarding the frequency of digit 4 in the  third  decimal place  while focusing on different
factors,  such as  total assets, EPS magnitude, and  price-to-book ratio.  The data is sorted
on the factor in focus and divided into 10 groups, where we focus on group 1  which
contains the smallest values of the factor, and group 10 with the largest.  From these
groups, the frequency of the digit 4 in the third decimal place is calculated for each group,
where it is compared between groups  1 and 10.  The difference is tested with a Z-statistic.
The sample is filtered on  containing  diluted EPS values above 0.001.

       Figure A8-a:  Prevalence of Rounding with Specific Factors in Finland

       Figure A8-b:  Prevalence of Rounding with Specific Factors in Norway

      Figure A8-c:  Prevalence of Rounding with Specific Factors in Denmark

                                  39
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

       Figure A9: Second Decimal Place  –  Time  Specific
Figure A9 analyzes  the frequency of digits  9 and 0 for the second decimal in diluted
positive EPS  for Sweden, Finland, Norway, and Denmark over time on an annual basis.
The black dots show the observed frequency, the blue lines the confidence intervals for
95% confidence, and the red line the null hypothesis at 10%.
     Figure A9-a:  Frequency of Second Decimal Digit 9 Over Time in Sweden

     Figure A9-b:  Frequency of Second Decimal Digit 0 Over Time in Sweden

                                  40
Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

   Figure A9-c:  Frequency of Second Decimal Digit 9 Over Time in  Finland

   Figure A9-d:  Frequency of Second Decimal Digit 0 Over Time in Finland

                                 41
Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

   Figure A9-e:  Frequency of Second Decimal Digit 9 Over Time in Norway

    Figure A9-f:  Frequency of Second Decimal Digit 0 Over Time in Norway

                                 42
Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

  Figure A9-g:  Frequency of Second Decimal Digit 9 Over Time in Denmark

  Figure A9-h:  Frequency of Second Decimal Digit 0 Over Time in Denmark

                                 43
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

      Figure A10: Second Decimal Place  –  Firm Specific
Figure A10  displays the firm-specific robustness test on the second  decimal place for
Sweden, Finland, Norway,  and Denmark. The method is the same as in our main analysis,
where we divide our sample into  two  groups depending on the binary variable Q-score
for different periods of N. The frequency of digit 9 in the second decimal place is
compared between the  two  groups and the difference is reported by using a Z-statistic.
All datasets  are filtered  for  containing positive diluted EPS.
              Figure A10-a:  Second Decimal Place Q-score in Sweden

              Figure A10-b:  Second Decimal  Place Q-score in Finland

              Figure A10-c:  Second Decimal Place Q-score in Norway

            Figure A10-d:  Second Decimal Place  Q-score  in  Denmark

                                  44
  Playing The Numbers Game: Examining Strategic Rounding of EPS Data in Sweden

     Figure A11: Second Decimal Place  –  Factor Specific
Figure A11 displays the factor-specific robustness test on the second decimal place, where
the factors used are total assets and  price-to-book ratio. The sample is sorted on the factor
in focus and divided into  ten  groups where group 1  contains the lowest values  and  group
10  the highest. The frequency of the digit 9 in the second decimal place  is  calculated for
groups 1 and 10 and compared by using Z-statistics. The sample only contains firm
observations  with positive diluted EPS values.  Note that for this test, sorting on EPS
magnitude  is  not an efficient measure to use,  as several of the  samples’  first 10% of
observations  have values below 0.09, making the frequency of  number  9  in the second
decimal place  0.  Therefore, we do not display  EPS magnitude for this test.
          Figure A11-a:  Second Decimal Place Factor Specific in Sweden

          Figure A11-b:  Second Decimal Place Factor Specific  in Finland

          Figure A11-c:  Second Decimal Place Factor Specific in Norway

         Figure A11-d:  Second Decimal Place Factor Specific in  Denmark

                                  45