UNEXPECTED NATIONAL FOOTBALL
RESULTS’ INFLUENCE ON NATIONAL
STOCK MARKETS

DIFFERENCES IN INTEGRATED AND NON-INTEGRATED MARKET

ANTÓNIO DAVID

LEON JANSSON

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2024
Unexpected National Football Results’ Influence on National Stock
Markets: Differences In Integrated and Non-Integrated Markets

Abstract:

       Using an event study approach with panel data, this paper investigates the
       abnormal stock market returns of national indices following an unexpected
       international football result. We utilise football results as a mood proxy, to
        better examine the effects of cognitive biases and emotional biases on the
       stock market. We report a negative abnormal return of -67.9 basis points
       following a draw for countries with low stock market integration and high
       football popularity. For the difference between the win abnormal return and
       the loss abnormal return, we report a significant positive value of 30.1
       basis points for countries with low stock market integration. Finally, we also
      document these results by accounting for stock market noise where we
       find an abnormal stock return the day after a win of 29.4 basis points for
       countries with low stock market integration.

Keywords:
   Football, securities, returns, mood, market integration, behavioural finance

Authors:
  António David (25519)
   Leon Jansson (25518)

Tutors:
   Mehran Ebrahimian, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:
   Adrien d'Avern, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© António David and Leon Jansson, 2024

                                   1
 1. Introduction
Football, on a global basis, has for a long time been the most viewed sport, as
well as the sport with the most supporters. Not only that, but it is a sport
characterised by its highly passionate supporters who attend matches almost
religiously. These supporters are known for letting a club or national team’s
performance dictate their mood. As a result, extensive research has been
conducted on this subject; Schwarz, N., Strack, F., Kommer, D., & Wagner, D.
(1987) were able to show that outcomes of Germany’s FIFA World Cup matches
were able to significantly alter a subject's well-being and views on national issues.
The research finds “strong mood effects on judgements of satisfaction”, which
confirmed the hypothesis that “affective states serve informative functions” Thus,
football is not simply a sport that is followed on a global scale or used as a source
of entertainment, but it is also a source of intense satisfaction and despair within
certain fan bases which contribute to general changes in decision-making. We,
as football supporters ourselves, feel these intense mood changes following large
football events and know how these impact our day-to-day decisions the following
day. These two characteristics of football, when combined, could have a strong
impact on society. As football is watched by a majority of the population and a
large portion of football supporters’ moods are heavily influenced by football
results, one could speculate that football results could have a quantitatively
measurable societal effect.
       As Malkiel, B. G., & Fama, E. F. (1970) stated in his book “Efficient Capital
Markets: a Review of Theory and Empirical Work,” financial markets are
“informationally efficient” when equity prices incorporate all possible information
that affects future values. Over time, researchers have partially rejected this
hypothesis due to the exclusion of behavioural biases which are likely to affect
equity prices. Within these biases, there is a distinction to be made between
cognitive biases and emotional biases. Cognitive biases involve decision-making
based on a deviation in the process of understanding information or facts. On the
other hand, emotional biases are based on deviations from the norm based on
personal feelings and emotions. The overconfidence bias is an example of an
emotional bias that shows how, when investors feel good (worse) and are
overconfident (underconfident), they become less (more) risk-averse, and vice-
versa. The effect heuristic bias is a cognitive bias that plays a role in decision-
making. In this bias, the investor relies on a heuristic heavily influenced by their
emotions to process a certain situation instead of a more analytical heuristic.
       Furthermore, as globalisation increases, people around the world have
become more connected. Consequently, information asymmetry is decreasing
and access to investments in foreign markets increasing. In these integrated
markets researchers have found a positive effect in decreasing biases associated
with local, individual investors, thus promoting market efficiency. Boubakri, N.,
Cosset, J.-C., Guedhami, O., & Omran, M. (2007) found that socioeconomic
variables such as favourable regulatory frameworks, higher investor protection
and political stability increase overseas investor participation in a given country’s
stock exchange. The Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) works to increase these variables, making OECD countries’ stock
exchanges more integrated than Non-OECD countries.
                                   2
       Football and finance are two environments that are becoming increasingly
powered by digitalization and globalisation. As financial markets have evolved
over time, with the help of globalisation, barriers to the markets have been
loosened and foreign investor participation has increased to a larger extent. We
see similar effects within the sport of football as it is becoming a more and more
globalised sport with foreign ownership structures throughout the highest level of
the sport aided by multinational corporation investments. As foreign investment
participation in markets is increasing, so is information symmetry, thus, investors
are making more rational investment decisions. With the increased adoption of
AI, Machine Learning, robo-advising and AI-assisted investment decisions,
market efficiency and information symmetry have increased. In addition to the
effects of globalisation on financial markets, football as a sport is also subjected
to globalisation where sporting events include countries and participants from all
over the world. As a result, the nature of globalisation and its implications on the
football and finance environment lead us to motivate the test of whether the
prevalence of emotional biases resulting from football results has changed over
time and whether these biases differ through a geographic and globalised
perspective.
       In this paper we aim to identify the two biases mentioned above, using
national football team results as a proxy for national investor mood. If these
football teams' results are a good proxy for investor mood, we theorise national
stock market indices should decrease in value after a national team loses and
increase after a national team wins. We, therefore, aim to answer the question:
“Do unexpected national football team results influence national stock market
indices?” Furthermore, we want to look at how market integration and
globalisation can impact biases and investor irrationality in equity markets. In our
analysis, our mood variable should only affect national investors who are
emotionally attached to football, therefore these biases should be stronger in
more closed stock markets, where foreign investor participation is low and weaker
in integrated stock markets where foreign investment represents a big
percentage of the stock exchange. We present a sub-question in our research:
How does stock market integration moderate the effect of a national team's
results on stock market performance?
       In our paper, we utilise data on match information, historical odds data and
historical market index data comprising a total of 658 unexpected outcome
observations and 382 expected outcome observations. We utilise a sample of 40
countries spanning all 6 habitable continents. Our selection process for country
selection was to utilise countries with more than 10 matches at the World Cup
and countries which had a corresponding TOTMK Datastream index, which was
used to calculate Market Returns.
       We document economically and statistically significant positive abnormal
win effects for non-OECD countries of 29.4 basis points in Table 7. Additionally,
the largest overall effect observed is an economically and statistically significant
negative abnormal draw effect for non-OECD countries where football is popular
at 67.9 basis points, illustrated in Table 6. The only significant effect found when
considering the popularity proxy is a -21.0 basis point draw effect. Although we
can find evidence that the degree of market integration within a country changes
the effects on the stock market resulting from unexpected international football

                                   3
results, we do not find similar evidence when considering the popularity of football
within a given country. When comparing our results for unexpected results with
the results for expected results, we can see that our initial theories regarding
market integration and the popularity of soccer do not hold under the expected
result environment. Within the expected results, we see directly opposite results
compared to our initial theories as we document a statistically significant loss
effect of -32.4 basis points for countries where football is considered to be less
popular.
       This paper's structure is as follows. A thorough literature review in Section
2, followed by a detailed exploration of data sourcing and processing in Section
3. Section 4 outlines the methodology used, while Section 5 presents the
empirical results. The Discussion in Section 6 offers insights and interpretations.
In section 7 we present our Limitations and section 8 provides Concluding
Remarks. Additional information is provided in the References in Section 9 and
the Appendix in Section 10.

 2. Literature Review
Based on previous research by Schwarz et. al (1987), there is psychological
evidence between international football results and psychological mood changes.
In addition to this, Carroll, D., Ebrahim, S., Tilling, K., Macleod, J., & Smith, G. D.
(2002) present that heart attack admissions increased by 25% within the three
days following the day that England lost on penalties to Argentina in the 1998
FIFA World Cup. Thus, football results do not solely impact those involved but
have significant implications for the general population. In a study conducted by
Sheppherd & McNulty (2002), they discuss the decision affect theory (DAT) to
predict that positive (negative) unexpected outcomes will have a larger
psychological effect and thus make the person feel better (worse) compared to
expected outcomes. They are also able to show that, as consistency theories
propose, people feel worse when their expectations are disconfirmed as it gives
the feeling that the person is unable to predict certain outcomes. In order to
observe the existence of behavioural biases in financial markets, Edmans, A.,
García, D., & Norli, Ø. (2007) looked at the market impact of sudden mood
changes, by using football outcomes as a mood variable. Their analysis allowed
them to reject the null hypothesis that the loss effect after football games is driven
by economic factors. However, the paper fails to find evidence of abnormal stock
returns after wins, suggesting that football results may only affect investors’ mood
when the result is negative. In our report, we aim to study the correlation between
a national football team’s unexpected result and a country’s market index excess
return for different periods. Thus, our aim with this contribution is to isolate the
surprise effect caused by unexpected outcomes and test whether this variable
acts as an amplifier to the mood variable. The reference study was conducted
before the financial crisis, therefore it was subjected to a largely different financial
environment than our analysis. Thus, we conducted our analysis in a different
time frame than the previous study and have increased the number of countries
in the sample.
       Empirical studies have indicated that the decision-making process of an
investor can be affected by their emotional state. Therefore, by observing the
securities market together with mood-inducing events, we can study how these
                                   4
events affect an investor’s perceptions and risk tolerance. Previous literature has
found that mood positively influences the stock price, which is supported by
Hirshleifer & Shumway's (2003) study building upon past research by choosing
morning sunshine as a mood-affecting variable. During another study by Schwarz
(1990), evidence was documented showing that individuals in a good mood use
simplifying heuristics to make their investment decisions, whereas those in a bad
mood tend to perform more detailed analysis of securities. Furthermore, they also
consider literature that suggests that individuals in a bad mood usually find
negative information more salient, whilst investors in a good mood find positive
material more available. Supportingly, Goetzmann, W. N., Kim, D., Kumar, A., &
Wang, Q. (2015) found that weather-based indicators of mood in major financial
centres can influence institutional investors assessment, consequently affecting
stock index returns. In another study conducted by García (2013), positive and
negative words in the financial columns of the New York Financial Times were
used to construct a proxy for investor sentiment and found that “one standard
deviation change in our sentiment measure predicts a change in the daily average
of the DJIA of 12 basis points during recession”. This literature supports the idea
that expressions of sentiments and mood-altering information and events tie into
changes in investor sentiment which affects the stock market. Investor mood is
complex and hard to measure and can be estimated using a series of factors.
Previous research quantifies investor mood through the approach of defining a
mood variable which alters investor mood and quantifies its effects observed on
the stock market. Our research study aims to contribute to this approach by
studying a mood variable related to unexpected international football results. We
aim to quantify the effect of this mood variable by observing the stock market
returns on the first trading day following unexpected football results and
comparing our results over different geographies.
      French, K. R., & Poterba, J. M. (1991) was referenced in the study by
Edmans et. al (2007) to show that there exists a “home bias,” where institutional
investors tend to overweight domestic stocks in their portfolios. Thus, cognitive
biases arise, as a result of information asymmetry along with domestic
sentiments, impacting market efficiency. However, in a more modernised time
period, Bastidon, C., Bordo, M., Parent, A., & Weidenmier, M. D. (2023) found
that global stock market integration has been continuously increasing over time.
Thus, we infer that these two bodies of literature can be compared against each
other due to the time horizon aspect. This is because global stock market
integration has increased, strengthening foreign investor participation in equity
markets. Bekaert, G., Ehrmann, M., Fratzscher, M., & Mehl, A. (2012) have been
able to show that over time financial markets have become more globalised and
integrated. The implications of globalisation and market integration discussed are
shown to be different based on geographies as certain countries become more
segmented than others. Meng, Y., Xiong, L., Xiao, L., & Bai, M. (2023) have been
able to show that over time, overseas investors are becoming more prominent in
the Chinese financial markets, with A-shares only becoming open to foreign
investors in 2003. As a result of the Chinese financial markets becoming more
“open,” the paper has been able to show that the market also has been becoming
more efficient. In relation to the findings on direct proportionality between foreign
investor participation and stock market efficiency, Feng, Q., Wang, Y., Sun, X.,

                                   5
Li, J., Guo, K., & Chen, J. (2023) find that in an increasingly globalised world,
spillovers are highest in stocks indicating that stock markets are closely linked
between countries, especially within Europe and developing countries markets
that closely follow other, more developed markets. With increasing market
integration worldwide, countries have become more intertwined and dependent
on each other over time, thus it becomes interesting to analyse stock market
effects resulting from behavioural biases within subsample country groupings of
different levels of market integration in a modernised time. Because we increase
the geographic locations in our study and work with a different timeline, we also
consider differences in market integration between our study and the referenced
literature. As mentioned before, markets have become more integrated over time
due to decreases in information asymmetry and increasing levels of globalisation.
We want to contribute to past literature, by analysing whether there is a difference
in these biases between integrated and non-integrated markets. Furthermore, we
also report statistics for all countries combined as well as expected match results,
to test if the values found by previous literature remain true today in a more
integrated and globalised world. Finally, we further look at whether the popularity
of football in the respective countries of analysis has an impact on the magnitude
of the mood effect. Although popularity is rather subjective, we believe that by
developing a proxy for the “popularity of football” in our analysed countries, we
may observe differing stock market effects attributed to football results in those
countries classified as “Popular.”

 3. Data
     3.1. Data Sourcing
Gathering of results and odds data
We collect international football results spanning from the 25th of January 1931
to the 11th of February 2024. The dataset was downloaded from Kaggle and
provides information for each game on the date, team playing at home, team
playing away, result, location where the game was played, and whether the match
was played at a neutral venue or not. To find which of these football results were
unexpected we used betting odds of football games to calculate the predicted
outcome. We gathered information on the betting odds of the main
intercontinental and intracontinental competitions from the website SofaScore.
This information was then compared to the observed outcome of the game and
the unexpected and expected results were determined.
      To make sure the games have a considerable level of importance, only
games from the biggest tournament were considered and no qualifying matches
were taken into account. In total, we looked at 22 editions from the following
tournaments: AFC Asian Cup, AFCON, Copa America, Euro, Gold Cup, Nations
League, and World Cup. The first tournament edition is in 2015 and the last
tournament edition is in 2024. We gathered a total of 722 game observations
where at least one of the countries we analysed was present. Out of these, 437
represented unexpected game results and 285 represented expected game
results. Note that sometimes, game observations in our dataset are between two
countries that are both part of our sample. Therefore, they count as two return
observations, one for each team, within our sample, leading us to a total number

                                   6
of 658 single unexpected observations and 382 expected outcomes. These
unexpected observations were split into three groups, one group for “Win” with
187 observations, one group for “Draw” with 266 observations and one group for
“Loss” with 205 observations. Although the general expectation would be that the
total number of expected results would outweigh the number of unexpected
results, the truth is that modern football is highly unpredictable, especially national
football games where the team is constantly changing its players and the time
between games can be up to four months. We find evidence of the dynamism in
football by analysing the individual tournaments, for example, we see 83% of
results in the AFCON 2024 edition being unexpected, but only 18% of unexpected
results in the Gold Cup 2019 edition. This displays the unexpected nature of the
sport as well as the geographical differences. In the North American Gold Cup,
matches are less balanced as the top teams, such as the United States and
Mexico significantly outperform weaker and smaller nations, whilst in the African
Cup of Nations, teams are more evenly balanced and have similar resource
levels.
      In our study, we only consider data from 2015 to find the correlation
between unexpected results and the resulting following-trading day market index
returns. As a benchmark for a level of observations, we refer to the reference
paper by Edmans et. al (2007) that makes use of 1162 total observations within
football, while we use a total of 1040. The difference in the number of
observations is quite small and arises from the change in the analysed time series
and the selection of analysed tournaments. The referenced literature conducts
the study over an extended time period with a more limited selection of
tournaments, while we use a shorter total time series of around 9 years, but we
have incorporated a larger amount of tournaments for analysis. Our reasoning for
having a rather recent time series is that we aim to contribute to past research by
changing the time series of the analysis to a more recent time period when the
world has experienced higher levels of globalisation. We also wish to analyse
market integration, thus leading us to focus on a larger geographical reach by
including the main tournaments for each continent.

Market index returns data
We collect the daily total return index values, for each country, from Refinitiv
Eikon Datastream. In contrast to the traditional price return index, the TRI
considers both changes in the price of the stocks, as well as the dividends paid
by them. Therefore, we justify that the TRI provides a more complete picture of
the country's investor’s overall return. The time series for countryi market index
starts two working days before their first recorded match within the dataset. This
is done to ensure we can account for the lagged world market and country index
returns when running regressions. The total return indices used can be found in
Refinitiv Eikon Datastream through the mnemonic “TOTMK”, to ensure
homogeneity in our study we exclude all countries where information on “TOTMK”
is not available, as well as countries where the index regularly has extended
periods of inactivity. The majority of the time series begins somewhere between
2015 and 2016. The earliest time series begins on the 11th of June 2015, and
the latest time series begins on the 1st of June 2022.

                                   7
        Initially, we started our analysis with a larger sample size of countries,
where we analysed all countries with more than 10 World Cup games played as
well as adding certain teams that were used in the study conducted by Edmans
et. al (2007). Following this, we found that certain countries did not have a
corresponding TOTMK dataset, or had a dataset where the data stopped being
measured during the time series or the country did not have more than 3
observations of unexpected results. This led us to exclude certain countries such
as Costa Rica, Iran, Uruguay, Bulgaria, Ecuador and Indonesia. Consequently,
the final countries used in our analysis include 40 different countries from all 6
habitable continents, so that we could observe a holistic view of the correlation
between unexpected football results and following trading-day market returns
through a wide geographical scope.
       The countries included in our analysis include the following; Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Egypt, England, France, Germany, Ghana, Hungary, Italy, Ivory Coast,
Japan, Mexico, Morocco, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Ireland, Romania, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Slovenia, South
Korea, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, Turkiye and the United
States of America.

     3.2. Data Processing
Once we collected the data on football match results, the historical odds and
market returns, we created an integrated Excel sheet to process the data such
that it could be compatible with the programming software R to analyse the data.
To do this, we collected, for each country, the market index daily values starting
from 2 trading days before the earliest match in our dataset was played, so that
we could account for lagged returns. We conducted the same process for the
world market index. Note that we use the trading day following the date of the
match for our analysis because matches often start after markets are closed.
Even though there are rare occurrences when the game occurs during trading
hours, we ensure a homogeneous analysis by using the following trading day to
ensure that each observation is realised after the knowledge of the match result
has been completed. Following this, we used Excel to calculate the log returns
for each trading day and reported the following values (both for country returns
and world market index returns) for each single unexpected and expected
observation:

   ● Lagged Returns: Market returns on the day that the match was played
       since the market closes before the match starts. If the date of the game
       occurred on a weekend or non-weekend holiday, alternatively we use the
       trading bay before the match was played, (0-2 days before the game was
       played.)
   ● Current Returns: Market returns for the first trading day following the date
       that the match was played. If the date of the game occurred on a weekend
       or non-weekend holiday, alternatively we use the next trading day
       following the game (1-3 days following the date when the game was
       played.)

                                   8
   ● Future Returns (only for world market index returns): Market returns for
       the second trading day following the date that the match was played (2-4
       days following the game.)
   ● Day: Day of the week in which the first trading day following the date that
      the match was played occurred
   ● Result: The result of the match in the participating country’s perspective,
       classified as “Win”, “Loss” or “Draw”

Following the organisation and processing of data into different columns
corresponding to each match played, documents were sorted into different
classification measures containing the data for countries within the subsample.
        For all of our 658 single observations, we present the raw results as
percentages grouped by the unexpected match results; win, draw and loss.
These results display the raw return data, thus we are not accounting for the
mean log return in Table 1. We report the minimum, maximum, median, and
mean as well as the 1st and 3rd quartile of our data for each result. We observe
the highest variability within the draw category as the range is 13.06%. Within
the draw section, we also document the largest absolute value of mean at 10.2
basis points, while the win and loss categories present mean values close to
zero. We can also observe the high variability within the 50th percentile of our
data for the loss category as the category reports the lowest (highest) 1st
quartile (3rd quartile) results throughout our dataset.

Table 1: Summary statistics for all unexpected observations

       The table reports values for the stock market daily change of all
       countries for the first trading day following a win, draw or loss.
      Values are in %

    3.3. Classification of Subsample Grouping
Classification of integrated markets
To classify the countries in our sample size into 2 groups with different levels of
integration and participation of foreign investors in the national market, we use
participation in the Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) as a benchmark. Our reasoning stems from a study by Boubakri et. al
(2007) that provides criteria and reasoning for OECD countries being able to
attract more foreign investors. Through the organisation's existence for over 60

                                   9
       1
years , the countries within the OECD have gained a lot of experience with
economic cooperation for the goal of increasing economic and political stability.
Additionally, multiple large and developed economies such as the United
States, France, Germany etc. are present in the OECD. Thus, we believe that
the use of the OECD countries as a classification for integrated markets stems
from the fact that these 38 member countries are able to embody high
economic and political stability and therefore, these countries are able to attract
more overseas investors.
       From our classification measure, the countries that we have classified as
integrated markets include Australia, Austria, Belgium, Chile, Colombia, Czech
Republic, Denmark, England, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Mexico,
the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Ireland, Slovenia, South
Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United States of America.

Classification of popularity
To test the effects of the increased popularity of football within our chosen
countries of analysis, we aimed to develop a popularity index. In order to
develop this popularity index, we decided to look at the current Instagram
followers of each national team’s official account as of April 18th 2024. The
reason for choosing this metric is Instagram is a very large social media
platform with around 2 billion monthly active followers according to Meta’s Q3
                 2
report in 2022 . Additionally, this measure allows us to access a measure of
following in absolute terms for all the selected countries whereas other figures
such as viewership or attendance figures do not contain data for all of our
countries and thus we would have been forced to make assumptions regarding
these figures.
       Following the gathering of data for each country, we decided to account
                                                            3
for the population size (gathered from the World Bank database) of each
country to determine popularity relative to size. Further, we developed a median
of 3.129% (followers per capita) and we had 20 countries where we consider
football to be more popular and 20 countries where it is less popular;
       The 20 countries within the upper boundary (in order of highest to lowest)
are Portugal, Argentina, France, Croatia, England, Morocco, Netherlands, Chile,
Spain, Italy, Belgium, Denmark, Brazil, Colombia, Germany, Norway, Ireland,
Mexico, Sweden, Saudi Arabia.
       The 20 countries within the lower boundary (in order of highest to
lowest): Switzerland, Turkey, Slovenia, Austria, South Korea, Czech Republic,
Hungary, Romania, Australia, Peru, Tunisia, Poland, Ivory Coast, United States,
Japan, Russia, Egypt, Nigeria, Ghana, South Africa.
       Note that although we are classifying countries in terms of popularity, this
may not mean that football is not a popular sport in the latter countries,
however, it is rather a relative measure within our sample countries. We also
acknowledge that this proxy for popularity may not be completely accurate due

1
 “About the OECD - OECD.” OECD, May 2024, www.oecd.org/about/.
2
 “Instagram Statistics 2024: Key Demographic and User Numbers.” Backlinko, 25 Mar. 2024,
backlinko.com/instagram-users.
3
 “World Bank Group - International Development, Poverty, & Sustainability.” World Bank, May 2024,
www.worldbank.org/en/home.
                                  10
to the increasing globalisation of the sport of football as a country such as
Portugal may have a large portion of their followers stemming from other
countries who also display sentiments towards Portugal’s national team.

 4. Methodology
In this paper, we aim to answer the research question: “Do unexpected national
football team results influence national stock market indices?”. Consequently, we
define our Null Hypothesis (H0) as: there is no significant influence of unexpected
national football team results on national stock market indices. We express this
in our analysis as "the mean effect in stock market indices after an unexpected
football team results is equal to zero." Under the null hypothesis, football
outcomes are uncorrelated with asset prices. This hypothesis stems from the
Efficient Market Hypothesis, where securities are priced based on full access and
transparency of information and thus, investors are rational in their decision-
making and behavioural biases do not exist to distort effective security pricing.
      On the other hand, we define our Alternative Hypothesis (H1) as: There is
a significant influence of unexpected national football team results on national
stock market indices. We aim to reject the null hypotheses and find supporting
evidence for the idea that there is a relationship between a national football
team’s unexpected results and investor mood so that an effect is realized in the
national stock market. Based on the previous literature and investor mood
sentiment, we hypothesise that unexpected wins would lead to positive investor
sentiments, therefore creating a positive and significant effect in the stock market
after a win, whereas an unexpected loss would lead to negative and significant
sentiment and a decreasing effect in national indices. With respect to unexpected
draws, we theorise that draws lead to negative abnormal returns in the local stock
market index. In theory, draws would represent a neutral result. However, in the
case of unexpected results, the draw is perceived as a negative result for the
odds-favourite. Whereas, for the team with lower odds, the draw is always a two-
sided result, since it exceeds expectations, but it is not an optimal result, it
represents a small, sometimes unimportant improvement.
       In our approach to this study, we aim to find evidence to reject the null
hypothesis by segmenting our sample size of 40 countries into subsamples and
testing market effects within different groups. Our two groupings as mentioned
previously are based on market integration and the popularity of football within
countries. We aim to test whether the sample grouping approach can provide
more significant evidence to reject the null hypothesis in certain groups compared
to others. As we are segmenting the sample countries into groups, we develop
two further sub-questions with the aim of utilising these sub-questions to answer
our main research question;
        Are there economic indicators, such as market integration, that
         dampen mood effects?
        Does the popularity of football in a given country influence the
          effectiveness of the mood proxy?

Classification of unexpected results
In order to classify an unexpected result for our analysis, we create a benchmark
where the implied probability of a result is less than 50%. In order to calculate the
                                  11
implied probability we use the general formula (not accounting for the
bookmaker's margin):

        1 / (Odds of result) = Implied probability

Thus, for example, in the case of a European Championship group-stage game
between Germany and Portugal (Germany was considered the home team), the
odds for the home win were 3.3, the odds for a draw were 3.4 and the odds for
an away win were 2.2. Therefore, following our formula, we see that the implied
probability of a German win was around 30.3%. Since they won the game by 4-
2, this would be considered an unexpected result. Another example of an
unexpected outcome would be the match between Denmark and Finland in the
2021 edition of the European Championship, where a Denmark and Finland win
corresponded odds of 1.33 and 12.00 respectively. Thus, Denmark was given a
75.18% probability of winning but ended up losing the match and as such, it is
considered an unexpected outcome.
       Note that in our classification of unexpected results, there are cases in
which the odds are even, for example when Turkiye played against Wales in the
2021 edition of the European Championship, the odds for home win, draw and
away win were 2.80, 3.10 & 2.75 respectively. In that case, the implied probability
for each result is less than 50%, thus all outcomes of this match would be
considered unexpected. The reasoning for this is that this match was considered
to be played between two very even teams and there was no general consensus
regarding the expected result. Thus we argue that in these cases, when there is
no general expected result, we classify all results as unexpected results. An
analogy to this methodology would be that of governmental policy where there
must be a majority consensus on the policy of above 50%. We also note that
when we classify an expected outcome, we observe no draws as an expected
outcome. This comes from the fact that in most football matches worldwide, there
is an added incentive for one or both of the two partaking teams to win the match
and thus, there is always one team that is classified as the odds-based favourite.
A draw is often considered a neutral result that is, in most cases, not considered
beneficial to both teams and therefore, the odds-makers never put the draw at
above 50% implied probability.
       Edmans et. al (2007) utilise an ELO-rating system in Section IV of the
literature in order to classify important matches, thus allowing them to conduct
further analysis on their documented loss effect and whether it is stronger in the
cases where a match is considered of high importance. For our analysis, in
contrast to this literature, we utilise historical betting odds priced by Bet365 and
found on SofaScore. This is motivated by the findings presented by Bunker, R.,
Yeung, C., Susnjak, T., Espie, C., & Fujii, K. (2023) as they are able to show that,
in tennis matches, Alternative Decision Tree models and Logistic Regression
models have been historically more accurate at predicting matches compared to
ELO systems. Furthermore, they found that these machine learning models have
been predicting matches with similar accuracy to betting odds and thus, we justify
that betting odds are a more efficient predictor of expected outcomes compared
to the ELO system. Since the betting odds are considered the benchmark for
accuracy predicting, we argue that, although there is a casino margin

                                  12
implemented within implied odds, odds-makers are considered to be the most
accurate predictor of matches.

Theoretical approach
We use a single-event study approach to analyse the effects of unexpected
international football results on the stock market indices of respective countries.
The single-event study approach has disadvantages such as the sample sizing
of data and the possible impact of the often noisy financial markets in the short
term. However, we argue that it is beneficial to use a single-event study approach
in this case because it allows us to isolate an exogenous variable of investor
mood. Due to the short time window regarding the mood impact on individuals
from football results, this approach allows us to capture immediate and short-term
reactions of the stock market to unexpected football results. Large amounts of
previous literature use a single-event study approach. Examples of this include
Ji, X., Bu, N. (Tom), Zheng, C., Xiao, H., Liu, C., Chen, X., & Wang, K. (2024)
studying the announcement of COVID-19 news as a variable impacting the stock
market, Berument, M. H., Dogan, N., & Onar, B. (2010) studying daylight saving
time changes as a variable impacting the stock market and Zawadzki, K. M., &
Potrykus, M. (2023) who study the announcement of hosts of major sporting
events as a variable impacting the stock market. The alternative methodology to
analyse mood effects would be a continuous mood variable. This, however, would
be more applicable to a larger dataset. Although the approach is more efficient at
capturing smaller effects and reducing biases, the continuous variable would not
be applicable due to the short-term nature of our study. Thus we argue that a
single-event study is better suited to capture short-term mood swings caused by
football results.
      Once data was collected, we organised and imported our dataset into R
studio, where each row represented a different single observation and one of the
columns showed the country this observation referred to. There we created a new
column for our panel data where we included the mean effect defined as the
difference between the stock index change the day after and the mean log daily
index change for that country (throughout the whole time series). To divide the
dataset into different groups we simply created copies of our main dataset and
removed the sheets not related to that group’s characteristics. Through
conducting the analysis in RStudio, the software would then extract data from the
sheets we used and create new panel data for that group. For the mean effect of
each country and the different groups, we defined the standard deviation and
standard error as it is commonly defined in econometrics. In our tests for data
significance of the mean effect per subset, we use a two-tailed p-value test. We
aim to test whether we can reject the null hypothesis with significance, therefore
testing for if there is an effect, rather than the direction of this effect. Therefore,
we opt for a two-tailed p-value test rather than a one-tailed test.

Econometric approach
We calculate the win minus loss effect as the difference between the mean win
effects and the mean loss effects. We aim to find a positive win-loss difference
supporting our theory that wins have a positive effect and losses have a negative
effect. We are also interested in the range of this difference as a way to quantify

                                  13
the overall mood effect per group. To calculate the standard error of this win
minus loss effect we use the pooled standard error, which assumes equal
variance for both groups, by taking the average variances of both groups,
weighted by their respective degrees of freedom and then using the square root
operation to convert the pooled variance back to standard error scale.
       To further account for stock market noise in the short term and fully
isolate the specific effect of a national team’s unexpected result on the national
stock market we create a market model regression. In this regression, we define
our dependent variable as the countryi stock market return the day after the
game was played. For the independent variables in this market model we used
the lagged daily stock market return of countryi, the lagged daily world market
return, the day of the game daily world market return and the day after the
game world market return. We define the following variables for our
econometric approach:

    ● Rit-1 : Countryi returns at time t
    ● Rit-1 : Lagged countryi returns
   ● Rmt-1 : Lagged world market returns
   ● Rmt : First trading day following match returns
   ● Rmt+1 : Second trading day following match returns
    ● Ɛit : Residuals for countryi

This approach is based on the econometric approach used by Edmans et. al
(2007), who explains that “if football outcomes are uncorrelated with asset prices.
This in turn implies that the effects of football should be consistently estimated
with any model of stock returns—even one that is completely misspecified. This
follows from the fact that omitted variables do not bias coefficient estimates in a
regression when the omitted variable is independent of other regressors.” We
then collect all of the residuals for each subset we want to study. Consequently,
using Equation 2 we organise them by developing dummy variables for Win, Loss
and Draw. Where the dummy variables take on a value of 1 or 0 for the respective
match result. Through this approach, we find the betas pertaining to the abnormal
returns of that result for each specific subgroup. The two equations mentioned
before are as follows:

                  1)

                             2)

 5. Empirical Results
In Table 2 we report the summary statistics for each of the 40 countries in our
sample. The summary statistics consist of the number of unexpected wins, draws
and losses for each country, the average mean effect for all country's
observations in that subset (win, draw or loss) for each result as well as the
standard error of each result reported. The mean effect is defined as the
subtraction of the stock market return on the following trading day after a match
from the daily mean log return of the country market index. In Table 2 we can
observe that certain countries experience larger stock market effects compared

                                  14
to others following an unexpected football result. Between all countries, we report
a range of average abnormal win returns from -111.5 to 230.4 basis points, a
range for average abnormal draw returns of -160.7 to 78.8 basis points and a
range for average abnormal loss returns of -163.3 to 142.8 basis points. The
range for the average effect of a win, draw or loss range varies significantly
between countries. Argentina represents an example of extreme values, > ± 150
basis points average abnormal effect corresponding to each result. Meanwhile,
other countries such as Ghana report average abnormal returns of less than 20
basis points for each result. When analysing the overall maximum and minimum
mean effect values for each country, we see a preliminary trend regarding the
effects of match results. Losses exhibit the most negative average abnormal
return, wins exhibit the most positive average abnormal return and draws have
the smallest average range.
      One thing to note about the data presented in Table 2 is that certain
countries have one or zero unexpected wins. One of these countries is Brazil who
don’t exhibit any unexpected wins within this time series. The reason that this
occurs is that Brazil and other countries such as Germany are very often odds-
favorites due to their historical success in the sport. As a result, the predicted
outcome of their matches is often in their favour and thus, when they win, it is
considered to be highly expected.

Table 2: Summary statistics for each country

  Country Win   Win   Draw   Draw   Loss   Loss   Country Win   Win   Draw   Draw   Loss   Loss
             Nº    Effect    Nº    Effect    Nº    Effect               Nº    Effect    Nº     Effect     Nº    Effect

 Argentina 2 2.304    10 -1.607    4 -1.633   Morocco 6 0.138     6 -0.247     6 -0.248
                     (0.003)           (0.009)           (0.008)                      (0.001)            (0.002)            (0.003)

  Australia 2 0.275     3 -0.205    4 0.036   Netherla-    7 0.364     6 -1.253     3 -0.146
                    (0.006)           (0.002)           (0.004)      nds            (0.004)            (0.007)           (0.005)

  Austria 4 -0.046    4 0.104     6 0.133    Nigeria 8 0.837     2 0.604     4 -0.572
                     (0.006)           (0.007)           (0.004)                      (0.006)            (0.016)            (0.003)

  Belgium 8 0.717     2 -0.244    10 -0.317   Norway 2 0.064     2 -1.60     3 -0.259
                     (0.003)           (0.012)           (0.002)                      (0.001)           1(0.005)            (0.01)

   Brazil NA      7 -0.528    5 0.23     Peru 7 -0.165    7 0.117     2 -0.073
                      (NA)            (0.004)           (0.007)                     (0.002)            (0.001)           (0.001)

   Chile 2 0.297     6 0.106     4 -0.115    Poland 4 -0.475    9 -0.149     8 0.073
                     (0.003)           (0.004)           (0.004)                       (0.01)             (0.005)            (0.004)

 Colombia 8 -0.107    8 0.282     5 -0.093   Portugal 7 0.019    11 0.784     8 -0.085
                     (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.001)                      (0.005)            (0.003)            (0.003)

  Croatia 12 -0.314    10 -0.028     5 0.195   Republic    2 -0.755     7 -0.488     6 -0.333
                     (0.002)           (0.001)           (0.003)       of              (0.019)            (0.005)            (0.003)
                                                                       Ireland

                                  15
Table 2 (Continuation): Summary statistics for each country

  Czech    7 -0.479    3 0.407    4 0.107    Romania 2 0.148    4 -0.749   3 0.403
  Republic         (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.004)                       (0.002)          (0.008)         (0.002)

 Denmark 8 -0.256    7 0.103    5 0.062     Russia 4 -0.048    6 0.422    6 0.013
                    (0.003)          (0.005)         (0.008)                       (0.002)          (0.005)         (0.005)

   Egypt 3 0.113    9 0.693    4 -0.131     Saudi      2 -0.341    2 -1.106    1 -0.825
                    (0.01)          (0.006)         (0.004)     Arabia           (0.003)          (0.01)           (NA)

  England 3 -0.062   12 -0.142   12 0.482    Slovenia 1 -2.748    3 -1.429    1 0.035
                   (0.004)         (0.002)         (0.003)                       (NA)           (0.004)          (NA)

  France 12 -0.182   10 0.251    6 0.003     South      3 -0.142    4 -0.471    3 -1.117
                    (0.003)          (0.005)         (0.005)      Africa            (0.003)          (0.003)         (0.004)

 Germany 1 0.485    13 -0.405   10 -0.001     South      3 -1.088    4 -0.097    4 0.281
                    (NA)          (0.003)         (0.003)     Korea           (0.002)          (0.003)         (0.006)

  Ghana 3 -0.022    6 -0.004   6 0.198     Spain 5 -0.018   13 0.025    8 0.328
                    (0.001)          (0.001)         (0.006)                       (0.009)          (0.002)         (0.004)

  Hungary 7 0.135    7 -0.287   2 0.207    Sweden 7 -0.155    4 -0.449    5 -0.225
                    (0.004)          (0.005)         (0.002)                       (0.004)          (0.005)          (0.01)

   Italy 8 0.21    10 -0.123    3 1.428   Switzerland 5 -1.115    12 -0.06    5 -0.769
                    (0.006)          (0.006)         (0.009)                       (0.003)          (0.004)         (0.004)

   Ivory     5 0.106    6 -0.262   4 -0.144    Tunisia 3 0.182    7 0.192    8 0.053
   Coast           (0.001)         (0.002)         (0.001)                       (0.003)          (0.001)         (0.002)

  Japan 4 0.014    4 -0.521   5 0.504     Turkey 3 0.136    3 0.788    7 0.098
                    (0.006)          (0.003)         (0.003)                       (0.003)          (0.014)         (0.005)

  Mexico 4 0.076    9 0.09    6 0.447     United     3 -0.382    8 0.024    4 -0.629
                   (0.002)          (0.001)         (0.002)     States           (0.001)          (0.003)          (0.005

      The table reports the number of win, draw and loss observations
       for each country in our dataset, as well as the average effect of
       these observation on the countries stock market. Effect = Stock
      Market Change the Day After the Game – Countryi Mean Log
      Return

In Table 3, we can see our tentative results of the mean effect, as defined in
methodology section, for each of the 658 unexpected observations, split into
three groups for wins, draws and losses. We can see that the effect range
between the 1st and 3rd quartile is larger following an unexpected loss than an
unexpected win or draw. However, when looking at extreme data points, we can
see that the effects following a draw are more extreme when compared to the
outliers for abnormal loss or win returns. These results could be a consequence
of the environment we study our effect in. We choose to study only unexpected
games because past literature has shown that unpredictable events have a
bigger impact on an individual’s mood than predictable events. The highest
                                  16
stock market abnormal return in our dataset is within the draw subset, - 871.0
basis points, as well as the largest positive effect + 435.6 basis points, once
again highlighting the unexpected perception of the draw as a possible
outcome. These tentative results do not provide enough evidence to positively
answer our research question as we see mean abnormal stock market returns
following a win or loss that are statistically not distinguishable from zero. We do
see a 12.8 negative abnormal return following a draw, however, this does not
provide enough evidence to positively conclude that unexpected football results
lead to significant abnormal stock market returns.

Table 3: Summary statistics for all effect observations

       The table reports values for the stock market effect of all countries
       for the first trading day following a win, draw or loss. Effect = Stock
       Market Change the Day After the Game – Countryi Mean Log
       Return. Values are in %

Integrated stock markets
We theorise that the difference between the results found in Edmans et. al (2007)
and our first analysis could be due to the different time frames and methodology
in our analysis. Past literature, as mentioned before, is conducted in a pre-2009
financial crisis, when markets and the world were significantly less integrated and
globalised compared to today. More integrated markets lead to an increase in
efficiency and a decrease in local investor sentiment biases. So, to better answer
our research question, we developed a study sub-question regarding market
integration; “Are there economic indicators, such as market integration, that
dampen mood effects?”
       Table 4 represents the preliminary findings of this paper in relation to
market integration. It looks at the sets of the data, “All Countries”, representing
all countries in our dataset and “OECD” and “Non-OECD” groups, as defined
previously. We observe relatively high standard errors, in comparison to the
magnitude of effects, within our results for all data observations. By looking at the
p-values derived from a two-tailed p-test for “Total Countries”, we cannot observe
statistical significance in any of the values presented apart from the -12.8 basis
point abnormal draw effect with significance at the 0.10 level. Thus, we cannot
provide statistically significant evidence to reject the null hypothesis for win and
loss effects. Concerning draws, we observe an overall economic loss effect, with
statistical significance, following a draw throughout the entire sample size,
showing that unexpected football result draws have a negative impact on investor
                                  17
sentiment. The most significant result that we observe is found in column 10, row
3 of Table 4 and relates to the markets classified as non-integrated. It represents
the difference between the average win effect and the average loss effect. This
win minus loss effect for Non-OECD is 30.1 basis points. We find statistical
significance for the positive non-OECD results at the 0.10 significance level, but
no statistical significance for OECD countries. Thus, we can tentatively report that
the non-OECD countries' win-loss difference presents stronger evidence of
investor sentiment changes between wins and losses. Observing the average
effects by result, we see economically significant win, draw and loss effects for
Non-OECD countries of +12.6, -21.0 and -17.5 basis points respectively.
Regarding OECD countries, the average effects for all wins, draws and losses
are under 10 basis points, therefore showing a weak economic and statistical
effect. Looking at the p-values, we cannot find evidence of our win, loss and draw
effects being statistically significant.
      Comparing our results with the results documented by Edmans et. al
(2007), we see a marginal similarity, in that we document an economically
significant loss effect, however, in our study, it arises within the subset of non-
OECD countries. In contrast to the literature referenced which did not find a win
effect that is distinguishable from zero, we do see an economically significant win
effect of 12.6 basis points, as well as a significant draw effect, for which they do
not analyse, of -21.0. We cannot observe results for OECD countries that are
distinguishable from zero, but we are able to document economically significant
effects for non-OECD countries. As mentioned before, OECD countries portray a
set of socioeconomic variables that attract more foreign investors which can be
justified by Boubakri et. al (2007). By using the OECD classification as a proxy
for stock market integration we can test for the effect of market integration on
behavioural mood biases. Through our results, we can tentatively defend the idea
that increased foreign investor participation dilutes the effects that local investor
sentiment, caused by football results, has on the national stock market. On
average in non-OECD countries, when a country’s national team unexpectedly
wins a football game, the respective market index goes up 12.6 basis points
higher than the mean, potentially representing a cognitive or behavioural bias
related to the mood variable. The same holds true, for draw and loss results,
which we theorise would affect the mood proxy negatively. The effect for a draw
result within OECD countries is also almost double the basis points of the effect
for “Total Countries”.

                                  18
Table 4: Abnormal returns for subgroups “OECD” and “Non OECD”

       The table reports values for the stock market effect the first trading
       day following a win, draw or loss. Effect = Stock Market Change
       the Day After the Game – Countryi Mean Log Return. Values are
      in %

Popularity of football per country
In this section, we aim to answer a second sub-question in relation to our main
research question; “Does the popularity of football in a given country influence
the effectiveness of the mood proxy.”. We theorise that if the effects previously
observed are related to the change in mood of local investors due to national
team football's unexpected results, then this effect would be more prominent in
countries where football as a sport is more popular and affects the individuals’
mood to a larger extent.
       In Table 5, we report findings for the countries which are grouped as
“Popular” and “Non-Popular” based on our proxy for the popularity of national
team football defined in the data section. We once again report values for the
number of observations, the mean effect, the win minus loss effect and the
standard error and p values. In this table, we report a new statistically and
economically significant effect for the subset “Popular”. The mean effect of a draw
for this group is -21.0 basis point, with high statistical significance. Besides the
values for “Total Countries” and the draw effect which we had already discussed,
the only other economically significant value we find is a -11.9 basis point win
effect for “Non-Popular” countries, however, it is not statistically significant with a
p-value of 0.31. Furthermore, for the win minus loss effect, the value is positive
for “Popular” and negative for “Non-Popular”, suggesting that for the first
subgroup, there could be an effect stemming from the football mood proxy since
wins (losses) should affect the stock market positively (negatively), whereas for
the second group, we see the direct opposite so we cannot draw these same
conclusions. However, both of these differences have an effect of under 10 basis
points and high p values. As a result, we cannot conclude that differing levels of
football popularity within countries have a significant influence on the strength of
the investor mood variable.
      The main takeaway, which we discussed, is the highly significant draw
effect for “popular” countries of -21.0 basis points which, once again, shows us
that an unexpected draw is perceived as a negative result. We can argue that the
reasoning for this comes from the fact that countries in which football is more
popular, tend to perform better historically and thus, are more often considered
favourites to win matches. Consequently, if these “Popular” teams do not live up
to the expectation to win, the supporters following the team will perceive a draw

                                  19
as a negative result and we theorise that they exhibit negative sentiments the
following day. In conjunction with the overall sample size draw effect found in
Table 4, we also find evidence to reject the null hypothesis for draw results solely
within the “popular” subsample grouping.
       Comparing the last two tables together we see stronger effects in Table 4
for “Non-OECD” countries compared with the results for “Popular” countries. A
possible reason for this could be that market integration as a statistic is more
objective and justified through previous literature, while, on the other hand,
popularity is a subjective measure. Popularity can be measured in multiple ways
and popularity may also vary over time as different generations of people may
care more about the sport than another generation. Thus, we can conclude that
objective measures regarding the stock market such as the presence of foreign
investors are better proxies to compare how different groups' characteristics
affect the stock market in comparison to subjective measures such as popularity.

Table 5: Abnormal returns for subgroups “Popular” and “Non Popular”

       The table reports values for the stock market effect the first trading
       day following a win, draw or loss. Effect = Stock Market Change
       the Day After the Game – Countryi Mean Log Return. Values are
      in %

Combined grouping characteristics
Previously we looked at popularity and market integration in different subsets to
try to understand if these variables had any impact on the significance of the
effect of the national team’s football results on the stock market. We now conduct
further analysis regarding the intersection between these two grouping metrics.
As we looked at popularity and market integration in two separate groups, an
interesting point of analysis was to isolate the subsets further by grouping them
based on individual characteristics related to both of these proxies. In Table 6,
we report these statistics for each of the results; win, draw, loss, the number of
observations, the mean effect, the win minus loss effect and the standard error
and p values.
       The most significant observation that we find in Table 6 is a -67.9 basis
point effect following an unexpected draw which is highly significant, with a
corresponding p-value of 0.03 for Non-OECD countries where football is popular.
This documented result presents a larger effect than the loss effect of -49.4 basis
points following a loss in World Cup elimination games documented by Edmans
et. al (2007). Even though we use different approaches to our analysis, the
biggest effect found in the previously mentioned literature is lower than the draw
effect from “Non-OECD + Popular” countries. This can be due to a lot of things,
                                  20
one of these reasons could be that our dataset only contains unexpected results,
which, as previously mentioned, tend to have a higher impact on an individual's
moods. Another reason for this can be related to the subset we have created, as
in this subgroup we only consider markets with low stock market integration and
where the popularity of football is high. In our previous findings, we have been
able to report that both of these characteristics have increased our draw effect.
Then it follows that combining these two metrics would, in theory, increase the
significance of the effect even further. We, however, must emphasise that due to
subsampling, this sample only includes 5 countries and 78 total observations.
The only positive win effect that is economically distinguishable from zero is the
one observed for “Non-OECD + Non-Popular” countries of 17.3 basis points. We
also see for “OECD + Non-Popular” a negative result for the win effect of -37.7
basis points. In theory, based on our assumptions, higher levels of market
integration and low popularity of football should correspond with a non-significant
economic stock market effect. However, we report a highly statistically significant
negative win effect for this group. Because football popularity is low and the levels
of market integration are assumed to be high in the country we do not attribute
this win effect to investor sentiment that comes from unexpected football results,
but rather to other economic factors such as short-term market noise.
Furthermore, as we can see in Table 11 in the Appendix, when we observe the
effects of this group, accounting for market noise, we can see that the result
decreases by around 20 basis points to show that at least more than half of this
observed result stems from market noise. Additionally, the number of
observations within this group is quite low with 43 total win observations thus
affecting the reliability of the estimate.
       For Table 6 we focus our analysis on the win minus loss effect for each
category. In the “Non OECD + Popular” category we report an economically
significant win-loss effect of 36.5 basis points. For the opposite category, “OECD
+ Non Popular” we observe a win-loss win minus loss effect of -38.4 basis points
with high statistical significance. When comparing these two groupings, we note
that the “Non-OECD + Popular” category doesn’t report results with statistical
significance in the win minus loss effect, whereas the “OECD + Non-Popular”
group does. The effects presented for these two groups are almost direct
opposites around zero of each other.
       The first group has two characteristics that we predict will increase the
positive impact of wins and the negative impact of draws and losses, whereas the
second group has characteristics that we believe will dampen these effects. Thus
for the first group “Non-OECD + Popular'' even though we fail to statistically reject
our null hypothesis within the subset, we do see strong economic effects that
would support our theory. Whereas for the second group “OECD + Non-Popular”
shows significant evidence that OECD countries where football is a less popular
experience, do not follow our hypothesis. We theorise the reported results may
have been affected by market noise and other biases or events.

                                  21
Table 6: Abnormal returns for subgroups with combined characteristics

       The table reports values for the stock market effect the first trading
       day following a win, draw or loss. Effect = Stock Market Change
       the Day After the Game – Countryi Mean Log Return. Values are
      in %

Controlling for stock market noise
In past literature, Edmans et. al (2007), take a different econometric approach to
the analysis of mood variables, in order to account for the noise of the stock
markets. This approach, which has been previously explained in the Methodology
section, aims to fully isolate the effect of a national team’s result on the national
stock market. In order to holistically compare our results with past literature we
also report T-values for each calculated Beta. Table 7 demonstrates the results
of this analysis. Looking at the entire sample size of unexpected games from the
40 countries in our analysis we can see that although the values are not highly
significant, we do report a positive win effect and loss effect of 5.9 and 2.1 basis
points respectively and a negative draw effect of -5.8 basis points.
       For “Non OECD” countries we see an increase in all effects. The win effect
becomes 29.4 win basis points, with high significance. The draw and loss effect,
although not statistically significant, also increased to -12.1 and -11.9 basis
points, respectively. On the other hand, for the subgroup “OECD” we document
no economically or statistically significant stock market effect corresponding to
any of the results. We conclude that generally, OECD countries experience a
minimal effect if any at all from unexpected football results. Comparingly, “Non-
OECD” countries exhibit evidence to reject, under the assumption that the country
is not a member of the OECD, the null hypothesis which states: “There is no
significant influence of unexpected national football team results on national stock
market indices”. Non-integrated markets report stock market effects that can be
linked to behavioural and cognitive-emotional biases, whilst integrated markets
do not report any of these effects. These indicative results can help us answer
the sub-questions: “Are there economic indicators, such as market integration,
that dampen mood effects?”. Following this, we analyse our second sub-
question, whether the popularity of football within a country could strengthen the
effect of mood variables in the stock market. We report the following values; for
the “Popular” sub-group we see no significant changes, nor economically
significant effects. The win draw and loss effects are 7.5, -6.2 and 2.1 basis
points, respectively. The same trend continues in the sub-group “Non Popular”,
although for this group, the effects are generally smaller. Overall, we do not find
                                  22
any significant effects within either of these subgroups and thus, we are not able
to support the idea that the popularity of football can increase the strength of
mood effects on stock markets following unexpected football games.
      Overall, by factoring in local lagged market returns and world market
returns we can reject the null hypothesis for the subgroup “Non OECD”. Within
this group, we observe an economically and statistically significant win effect,
while the draw and loss effects also contain economic significance. We attribute
our different results compared to Edmans et. al (2007) for three reasons. Firstly,
we only consider unexpected football results. Secondly, we conduct our analysis
in a different time frame and through a slightly wider geographical perspective.
Finally, we also believe these differences arise due to differing time periods of
analysis. Nowadays, markets are becoming consistently more integrated and
emotional biases become harder to quantify. This conclusion is supported by the
fact that we only find a strong effect in the sub-group “Non-OECD”

Table 7: OLS regression of abnormal returns for each subgroup and result

       The table reports the ordinary least square estimates of βW, βD, βL
       from equation 2). Values are in %

Expected results
In our study, we study our hypothesis under the assumption that the game result
of each observation is unexpected. We do this because past literature conducted
by Sheppherd & McNulty (2002) shows that unexpected outcomes tend to have
a larger psychological effect than expected outcomes. As such, we attempt to
isolate the surprise effect caused by unexpected outcomes and test whether this
variable acts as an amplifier to our mood variable. We compare our two datasets
containing unexpected results and the expected results (occurring with >50%
implied probability). We report the same time series, starting from 2015, as we
do in the unexpected results section. As we see from the bookmaker's
classification and within our data processing, games that end in a draw are
always unexpected, therefore draws are excluded from Table 8.
                                  23
      When we compare the unexpected results with the expected results, we
find, within the expected results, a loss effect which is significant at the 0.10
significance level. The effect of each of the expected game results is also stronger
with a -11.3 basis points for the win effect and -24.7 basis points for the loss
effect. Furthermore, the win minus loss effect between the two results, although
statistically not significant, is positive at 13.3 basis points. This loss effect which
we document is interestingly similar to the -21.2 basis points presented by
Edmans et. al (2007). Although the referenced literature uses a different
econometric approach, it is still interesting to note that in both our analysis of
expected games and the referenced study, the loss effect is still prominent almost
2 decades later.
      To further our analysis, we do the same subgrouping as we did for
unexpected for expected results, aiming to understand if the strong results
supporting our hypothesis remain in this different environment. However, we
found opposite results in regard to our expectations, the sub-group “OECD”
showed a stronger negative loss effect of -29.9 basis points compared to the
effect shown by the sub-group “Non-OECD” of -16.3 basis points. We note,
however, that we do not find statistical significance for the first group, whereas
for the latter results are significant at a p-value of 0.07. We continue to not record
any positive or statistically significant values for the win effect for both groups.
       For our other sub-question, we test whether the popularity of football in
different countries has different impacts on stock markets following a football
result. Once again, we look at the sample of expected results to test whether the
prior results still hold. For expected results, we also see the direct opposite of
what we saw for unexpected results. We register the only positive win effect, at
4.8 basis points on our table for the sub-group “Non-Popular”, whereas the
“Popular” group registers a -18.5 basis points win effect with significance at a p-
value of 0.07. Regarding the loss effect, even though we do register two negative
effects after losses, once again the results contradict our expectation that popular
countries would have a bigger effect. For “Non Popular” the effect is -32.4 basis
points with a p-value of 0.02, whereas for “Popular” the effect is only -13.1 basis
points with no statistical significance. Consequently, we find the only statistical
significance for the win minus loss effect within this table for the sub-group “Non
Popular”. The value is 37.2 basis points with a p-value of 0.04.
       In conclusion, we can see that for all expected national results, there is a
strong loss effect in national stock markets with high significance. This reconfirms
the findings by Edmans et. al (2007) but within a different geographical horizon
and time series. However, under the expected results assumptions, neither of our
sub-hypotheses holds true. In fact, instead of finding an increase in the resulting
impact for either “Popular” or “Non-OECD” countries, we find the complete
opposite.

                                  24
Table 8: Abnormal returns for expected results

       The table reports values for the stock market effect the first trading
       day following a win, draw or loss. Effect = Stock Market Change
       the Day After the Game – Countryi Mean Log Return. Values are
      in %

 6. Discussion:
When comparing the total effects seen for the group “Total Countries” we are not
able to find similar effects as the ones found by Edmans et. al (2007). When
accounting for stock market noise we cannot find economic or statistical
significance in any of the results. When we do not account for short-term market
noise in Table 7, we do observe a statistically and economically significant
negative draw effect as documented not only, but also, in table 4. As a result we
do find a significant effect that allows us to reject the null hypothesis for draw
results. We cannot, however, for “Total Countries” find an abnormal economic
effect following a given unexpected win or loss in national football, which can be
attributed to behavioural biases that arise from this result. However, when we
create subsamples within the countries of analysis, we can observe further effects
that can provide evidence to reject the null hypothesis within those specific
subgroups.

Win effect disparities
       What was largely interesting regarding the results in the earlier parts of the
study was that we could never document an economically and statistically
significant positive win effect. These results were consistent with the findings
presented by Edmans et. al (2007) as they could not document any positive
abnormal returns associated with wins. However, when we proceed with the
market model regression defined in Section 4 to account for stock market noise,
we actually document a statistically and economically significant win effect of 29.4
basis points for Non-OECD countries. This poses a further point of discussion.
When we do not factor in lagged and world market returns, our results are
consistent with the findings by Edmans et. al (2007), we do not report any
statistically significant win effect. However, when we utilise a similar econometric
                                  25
approach to the referenced paper, we find contrasting results and document a
win effect. By following the same econometric model under different datasets and
assumptions, contrasting effects on stock market returns can be found. This
shows us the importance of proceeding with caution when drawing conclusions
from a study. Even though our study of the past 10 years has found a positive
win effect, it does not necessarily entail that in the future these results will stay
consistent. The contrasting effects allow us to compare the two different
methodologies that we used and the respective results. Our first methodology
used provides us with findings that are consistent with evidence found in previous
literature by Baker and Wurgler (2006) that illustrates that positive sentiments do
not necessarily lead to any significant positive stock market returns. However,
Sheppherd and McNulty (2002) show that unrelated to the stock market, positive
unexpected outcomes lead to more significant, positive general emotions. When
we change our approach to account for market noise we are able to quantify this
idea with statistical significance.

Data subsets - OECD and Popularity
As justified previously we use OECD and Non-OECD countries as a proxy for the
level of integration in a country's stock market. We want to be able to distinguish
between integrated and non-integrated markets to analyse whether the effects of
globalisation and increased information transparency can be observed in
abnormal market returns. In Table 7 we found economically and statistically
significant positive abnormal returns following an unexpected win for Non-OECD
countries, whereas the effects for OECD countries were almost non-existent.
Moreover, by referencing the figures presented in Table 4 and Table 7, we find
that for both of our approaches, Non-OECD countries exhibit positive abnormal
win returns as well as negative abnormal loss and draw returns. Whereas the
direct reverse effect is exhibited by OECD countries. We, therefore, provide
evidence that non-integrated markets, assumed to be highly composed of local
investors, are more vulnerable to behavioural biases in relation to changes in
mood after unexpected football results. This ties into the literature presented by
Meng et. al (2023) and Boubakri et. al (2007). Regarding our popularity proxy, in
general, we don’t find economically and statistically significant effects in any of
the tables for our subsets “Popular” and “Non Popular”, except for in Table 5,
where we report a -20.9 basis point significant negative abnormal draw effect for
“Popular” countries. We justify the lack of documented effects for our different
subsets with two possible reasons. Firstly, our proxy for football popularity within
a country could be improved. As mentioned before, popularity is a very subjective
measure and quantifying it can be ambiguous. Secondly, if our proxy were to be
an accurate approximation of football popularity, we have failed to reject our null
hypothesis, and consequently, we fail to find evidence that popularity can impact
the strength of mood effect on behavioural biases.

Significance in a global context
The most significant effect that we see throughout our analysis is the -67.9 basis
point effect documented following an unexpected draw for the sub-samples “Non
OECD + Popular”. As discussed, this result is highly statistically significant at both
the 0.10 and 0.05 significance levels. We attribute this result to both lower levels

                                  26
of stock market integration as well as a high level of popularity for football within
these countries. The following countries were part of this subsample; Argentina,
Brazil, Croatia, Morocco and Saudi Arabia. To better understand the magnitude
of this impact we take the Brazilian market as a reference point. The market
                                                                                  4
capitalization of the Brazilian stock exchange for March 2024 was 920.47 billion
USD. Consequently, a -67.9 basis point loss in the Brazilian stock exchange
would represent a loss of around 6.24 billion USD in market capitalization on one
day following an unexpected draw. With statistical significance, these results
show that behavioural biases play an important role in security pricing and can
lead to significant absolute changes.
       Compared with the referenced literature, it is interesting to note that this
draw effect is nearly 20 basis points stronger than the observed loss effect found
in previous literature. We can attribute this largely negative abnormal draw effect
not only to the grouping measures used but also to the unexpected nature of the
draw as a result overall. The draw result presenting the most significant effect
can be a result of its inherent unexpected nature. We can also attribute these
results to supporter mood, as the draw is often an anticlimactic result. As we
conduct the analysis on a different set of observations in comparison with the
referenced literature, it is not surprising that we observe significantly different
results. Thus, we can theorise that when a draw occurs as an unexpected result,
supporters and viewers will be disappointed with the overall match and that it
ended in a neutral result. Therefore, in accordance with this theory, it can be
inferred that the pronounced negative draw effect may not exclusively stem from
pessimistic investor sentiments regarding unfavourable outcomes, it may also be
linked to feelings of disillusionment.

 7. Limitations
Within our empirical results, we struggle with a lack of significance in a majority
of the results we observe. This can be due to two main reasons. Firstly, by using
a single-event study approach, our results could be impacted by short-term
market noise, increasing the difficulty in identifying patterns. In our last
subsection, we aim to control for market noise in our study, but it could stem from
the fact we are not able to capture all market noise in its entirety. Secondly, it
could come from sampling deficiencies and that our dataset is not large enough
to detect meaningful differences. For a large portion of our results, the effects
follow the directions that support our theory, positive for the win effect and
negative for the draw and loss effect. However, most of the time these results
present either low economic significance or low statistical significance. Thus, a
bigger dataset could possibly better represent these differences.
       Another limitation of our study arises from the popularity proxy that we
developed. The popularity of a sport, as mentioned, is a very subjective variable
to measure and it is a challenge to quantify this variable. Because of existing
economic and technological inequalities worldwide, football within certain
countries is less developed, even though supporters' passion can be large.
Therefore, we developed a popularity proxy based on a national team’s social

4
 “Brazil Market Capitalization.” Brazil Market Capitalization, 1995 – 2024 | CEIC Data, May 2024,
www.ceicdata.com/en/indicator/brazil/market-capitalization.
                                  27
media following, which, in principle, should not be affected by socioeconomic
inequalities. There are two main limitations to this proxy. Instagram as a social
media platform, has different adoption levels around the world, so the values to
indicate supporter levels could be underreported for some countries. Secondly,
the national team’s following could be influenced by external supporters. That is
because the quality and the popularity of certain countries’ players, can amass a
higher amount of followers coming from foreign countries, therefore affecting how
well our proxy incorporates the passion for the national team’s results within the
country. For example, Cristiano Ronaldo has an Instagram following of 629
       5
million  and he plays for the Portuguese national team. We saw in our study that
Portugal was classified as the most popular country. Although we cannot deny
the significance of football within Portugal, it is highly possible that Portugal’s
huge national team following may come from international fans of Cristiano
Ronaldo. For the market integration proxy, we also find a possible limitation.
Within our 40 chosen countries of analysis, we find that a majority of these
countries are members of the OECD, thus reducing our subsample of Non-OECD
countries. We therefore have a total of 451 single observations for OECD
countries and 207 single observations for Non OECD countries. This is in part,
due to the higher popularity of football in OECD countries and the lack of stock
market information for most Non-OECD countries. We believe that our study
would benefit from further increasing the amounts of countries analysed. This
would add a further geographical perspective and propose further, additional
perspectives regarding market integration.
      Finally, we also need to consider that our observations are clustered
around the months of January, June and July since most significant international
tournaments in football are either played in this timeframe. However, the mean
log return considered for our analysis incorporates the changes for the whole
year. Although this could present a limitation to our analysis, it cannot be
improved since the majority of significant football matches are expected to
continue being played in this time frame for the foreseeable future.

 8. Concluding Remarks
For future research into this subject, we believe it would be insightful to combine
the time horizon studied by Edmans et. al (2007) with the one analysed in this
study. By conducting this analysis, observing the change of effects over time and
accounting for levels of stock market integration, one could give an improved
image of the effect of globalisation on cognitive biases and emotional biases in
the stock market. Another potential extension to our analysis could be to look at
the results by trimming our datasets and removing the extreme outliers. This
could help us reduce the impact of extreme values and improve the accuracy of
our analysis.
       Another further point of development would be to create sub-samples that
divide our Non-OECD countries into different portfolios with stocks of different
sizes. This stock size segmentation was done by Edmans et. al (2007) since
small-size stocks are predominantly owned by local investors. Therefore, this
segmentation process could further aid in understanding how the level of

5
 Instagram, May 2024, www.instagram.com/.
                                  28
integration of countries’ stock markets can impact the effect of cognitive biases
and emotional biases in the stock market. Finally, one could redefine what an
unexpected result is. To do this, researchers could lower the threshold for
unexpected results. In our study, we classify unexpected results as any results
that had a lower implied probability than 50%. But by lowering the threshold to
less than 25% one could isolate the shock factor even further by only considering
results that were highly unexpected. This would reduce the sample size by a large
margin thus requiring an extension of the time horizon, analysis of more
tournaments or increases in the country sample size. Consequently, a study of
this approach could better test whether the psychological effects presented by
Sheppherd and McNulty (2002) hold in this context when only highly unexpected
outcomes are considered.

                                  29
 9. References

“About the OECD - OECD.” OECD, May 2024, www.oecd.org/about/.

Baker, M., & Wurgler, J. (2006). Investor Sentiment and the Cross-Section of Stock
Returns. The Journal of Finance, 61(4), 1645–1680.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2006.00885.x

Bastidon, C., Bordo, M., Parent, A., & Weidenmier, M. D. (2023). Another history of
global financial markets: Local stock market integration since 1913 from a network
perspective. World Economy, 46(8), 2456–2477. https://doi.org/10.1111/twec.13379

Bekaert, G., Ehrmann, M., Fratzscher, M., & Mehl, A. (2012). Global Crises and Equity
Market Contagion. SSRN Electronic Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2023372

Berument, M. H., Dogan, N., & Onar, B. (2010). Effects of Daylight Savings Time
Changes on Stock Market Volatility. Psychological Reports, 106, 632–640.
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1137082

Boubakri, N., Cosset, J.-C., Guedhami, O., & Omran, M. (2007). FOREIGN
INVESTOR PARTICIPATION IN PRIVATIZATIONS: DOES THE
INSTITUTIONAL ENVIRONMENT MATTER? Journal of Financial Research, 30(1),
129–146. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-6803.2007.00206.x

“Brazil Market Capitalization.” Brazil Market Capitalization, 1995 – 2024 | CEIC
Data, May 2024, www.ceicdata.com/en/indicator/brazil/market-capitalization.

Bunker, R., Yeung, C., Susnjak, T., Espie, C., & Fujii, K. (2023). A comparative
evaluation of Elo ratings- and machine learning-based methods for tennis match result
prediction. Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part P: Journal of
Sports Engineering and Technology. https://doi.org/10.1177/17543371231212235

Carroll, D., Ebrahim, S., Tilling, K., Macleod, J., & Smith, G. D. (2002). Admissions
for myocardial infarction and World Cup football: database survey. BMJ, 325(7378),
1439. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.325.7378.1439

Edmans, A., García, D., & Norli, Ø. (2007). Sports sentiment and stock returns. Journal
of Finance, 62(4), 1967–1998. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2007.01262.x

Feng, Q., Wang, Y., Sun, X., Li, J., Guo, K., & Chen, J. (2023). What drives cross-
border spillovers among sovereign CDS, foreign exchange and stock markets? Global
Finance Journal, 56, 100773. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.GFJ.2022.100773

French, K. R., & Poterba, J. M. (1991). Investor Diversification and International
Equity Markets. The American Economic Review, 81(2), 222–226.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2006858

GARCÍA, D. (2013). Sentiment during Recessions. The Journal of Finance, 68(3),
1267–1300. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12027

                                  30
Goetzmann, W. N., Kim, D., Kumar, A., & Wang, Q. (2015). Weather-Induced Mood,
Institutional Investors, and Stock Returns. The Review of Financial Studies, 28(1), 73–
111. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhu063

Hirshleifer, D., & Shumway, T. (2003). Good Day Sunshine: Stock Returns and the
Weather. The Journal of Finance, 58(3), 1009–1032.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/1540-6261.00556

Instagram, May 2024, www.instagram.com/

“Instagram Statistics 2024: Key Demographic and User Numbers.” Backlinko, 25 Mar.
2024, backlinko.com/instagram-users.

Ji, X., Bu, N. (Tom), Zheng, C., Xiao, H., Liu, C., Chen, X., & Wang, K. (2024). Stock
market reaction to the COVID-19 pandemic: an event study. Portuguese Economic
Journal, 23(1), 167–186. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10258-022-00227

Malkiel, B. G., & Fama, E. F. (1970). EFFICIENT CAPITAL MARKETS: A REVIEW
OF THEORY AND EMPIRICAL WORK*. The Journal of Finance, 25(2), 383–417.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.1970.tb00518.x

Meng, Y., Xiong, L., Xiao, L., & Bai, M. (2023). The effect of overseas investors on
local market efficiency: evidence from the Shanghai/Shenzhen–Hong Kong Stock
Connect. Financial Innovation, 9(1), 42. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40854-022-00429-3

Schwarz, N., Strack, F., Kommer, D., & Wagner, D. (1987). Soccer, rooms, and the
quality of your life: Mood effects on judgments of satisfaction with life in general and
with specific domains. European Journal of Social Psychology, 17(1), 69–79.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/ejsp.2420170107

Schwarz, N. (1990). Feelings as information: Informational and motivational functions
of affective states. In Handbook of motivation and cognition: Foundations of social
behavior, Vol. 2. (pp. 527–561). The Guilford Press.

Shepperd, J. A., & McNulty, J. K. (2002). The Affective Consequences of Expected and
Unexpected Outcomes. Psychological Science. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-
9280.00416

“World Bank Group - International Development, Poverty, & Sustainability.” World
Bank, May 2024, www.worldbank.org/en/home.

Zawadzki, K. M., & Potrykus, M. (2023). Stock Markets’ Reactions to the
Announcement of the Hosts. An Event Study in the Analysis of Large Sporting Events
in the Years 1976–2032. Journal of Sports Economics, 24(6), 759–800.
https://doi.org/10.1177/15270025231156051

                                  31
10. Appendix

Table 9: Tournaments Analysed and Number of Unexpected and Expected Results

                                  32
Table 10: Mean Daily Percent National Index Returns and Number of Wins, Draws
and Losses in International Unexpected Football Matches

                                  33
Table 11: Regression table for 4 groups combined

Figure 1: Boxplot diagram of all stock market effect observations after an unexpected
outcome

                                  34