ETF ARBITRAGE, EXECUTED
BY THE HIDDEN MARKET
PLAYER

A STUDY ON ETF RETURNS IN THE US MARKET, HOW THESE
RETURNS DEVIATE FROM THEIR FUNDAMENTAL VALUE,
AND THE UNDERLYING CAUSES

DAVID ANDERSSON

ERIK LUNDQVIST

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2024
                         Stockholm School of Economics

ETF Arbitrage, Executed by the Hidden Market Player : A Study on ETF Returns
in the US Market, How These Returns Deviate From Their Fundamental Value,
and the Underlying Causes

Abstract:

   By investigating how non-fundamental demand shocks in the primary market affect
   ETF returns in the US, we find that there exists an explanatory power with a positive
   return direction. Specifically, by having Authorized Participants that create and
   redeem ETF shares to correct the law of one price, called ETF Flow, we show that the
   flow explains the ETF- and their underlying assets’ subsequent returns. Moreover, we
   study how fast these non-fundamental returns can recover back to their fundamental
   value by splitting our sample into four subsamples to get a better sense of the
   relationship between the recovery rate and the ETF characteristics. Consequently, the
   price reversal effect and excess volatility work as the main explanations for the
   recovery phenomena.

Keywords:

  ETF Flow, ETF, Creation/Redemption activity, Authorized Participants, NAV,
   Spillover, Law of One Price, Price Reversal

Authors:

   David Andersson (25300)
   Erik Lundqvist (25468)

Tutor:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© David Andersson and Erik Lundqvist, 2024

                                   1
                         Stockholm School of Economics

                         I. Introduction
The broad ETF (Exchange-traded fund) market has seen tremendous growth over the
years, with the first issuance of an ETF in the US in January 1993 (Ben-David, Franzoni
and Moussawi, 2018). The ETF market went from $2.5 trillion in asset under management
                                                                                              1
in 2013 to $6.7 trillion across the US and Europe at the beginning of 2023 . Figure I
displays the growth in the number of new ETFs and Mutual funds across the US from
2016 to 2022 (Kaczmarski, Farrar and Zelter, 2023). Simultaneously, projected annual
growth approximates to 15.5% from 2022 to 2027. Consequently, a thoroughly developed
research base of the asset is crucial (Kaczmarski et al., 2023). Moreover, having a
relatively shallow research base evolving the topic of ETF, this thesis aims to provide
some additional insights and perspectives.

Figure I. Growth in the number of US ETFs in comparison with mutual funds from 2016-2022.
 Notes: Plotted are all new ETFs and Mutual funds in the US from 2016-2022. Starting at 244
new ETFs in 2016, 2022 exhibits 422, which amounts to an increase of 73% more produced ETFs
in 2022.

Source: Oliver Wyman (Kaczmarski, Farrar and Zelter, 2023).

Furthermore, the entire market for ETFs consists of two sub-markets, the primary- and
the secondary market. The secondary market is where private investors buy and sell
shares on the exchange, gaining the value-added through either increases or decreases in
the prices of the ETFs. The primary market is where the ETFs are formed, through
Authorized Participants (APs) who either create or redeem ETF shares. This thesis aims
to investigate and shed light on the creation and redemption activity of the shares in the
primary market, something that is called ETF Flow (Brown, Davies and Ringgenberg,
2021).

To address this, our thesis investigates, from both empirical and theoretical perspectives,
how non-fundamental demand shocks, through ETF Flow, to either the ETF or its
underlying securities in the US market can predict return. According to a model
developed by Brown et al. (2021) (which will later be referred to as “the model”, which
can be found in equation (1) and Appendix A), ETF Flow in the primary market works as
a predictor of non-fundamental demand shocks for different time horizons. Hence, our
research question is:

1
 ETF market research conducted by Oliver Wyman (Kaczmarski, Farrar and Zelter, 2023).

                                   2
                         Stockholm School of Economics

How does ETF Flow serve as a signal for non-fundamental demand shocks to either the
ETF or its underlying securities, and to what extent can it predict subsequent returns of
                                  the ETF?

Furthermore, we answer the research question through the creation of portfolios sorted
on ETF Flow where the return is predicted over various time horizons between 2017-
2023. The model used to sort the portfolios shows that ETF Flows are symptomatic of
non-fundamental dislocation which effectively separates prices from fundamental values
(see equation A11 to A13 in Appendix A). Consequently, the model succeeds in not only
performing a profitable portfolio, but also showing its statistical significance. To aim for
precision and further understanding of the outcome, we conduct additional robustness
checks in section five to account for firm fixed-effects, time fixed-effects and lagged
controls, striving to add further viability of the returns. Additionally, a market perspective
of the portfolio results will be assessed by incorporating risk-adjusted return factors.

As with stocks and mutual funds, observing fundamental shocks and assessing managerial
skill is inherently difficult, according to Berk and Green (2004), potentially inflating the
result when determining the non-fundamental part of a shock (Brown et al., 2021). The
broad ETF market offers a unique characteristic that makes it possible to distinguish
between non-fundamental and fundamental shocks (Appendix A11). An ETF is built on
an underlying value based on a basket of securities, constituting the Net Asset Value
(NAV) of the ETF. When the law of one price is violated, resulting in a difference in the
ETF price and the price of the underlying basket of securities, there is a non-fundamental
component dislocating the equilibrium. To prevent this, Authorized Participants operate
in the primary market, where their job is to create and redeem shares to restore
equilibrium, ultimately ensuring fair asset prices. This procedure is called Flow, which is
the base for the model by Brown et al. (2021). Figure II explains the relationship between
the primary- and the secondary market and the transactions between the participants,
ultimately showing how the ETF ecosystem works (Lake, 2018).

Additionally, the model is developed by Brown et al. (2021), where our thesis, to the best
of our knowledge, is the only paper that has tested the model in addition to Brown et al.
(2021). Concludingly, regarding the immaturity of the model, the growth of the ETF
industry, and the importance this asset has and will have on the market (Kaczmarski et
al., 2023), we have a clear and feasible motivation for creating this paper. Furthermore,
this research is also based on a new sample period.

                                   3
                         Stockholm School of Economics

Figure II. The ETF Ecosystem
  Notes: This figure explains how the flows work and how the assets are exchanged over both the
                                            2
primary- and the secondary market .

1.1. Literature Review

We contribute to the literature on investor flows, more specifically for ETFs in its primary
market. Moreover, we have closely examined the work of the study by Brown et al. (2021)
on whether ETF Flow can predict subsequent returns. With a sample from 2007-2016,
Brown et al. (2021) find evidence that shows how Authorized Participants in the primary
market, through trading, can signal non-fundamental demand shocks. Our contribution is
built upon a suggestion from Brown et al. (2021) subject to future research. Explicitly,
we extend the return- and holding-related time horizons by adding nine and twelve
months to the already existing one, three and six months. Furthermore, we introduce a
new sample period which the model will be tested on, starting from 2017 through 2023,
aiming to provide a clearer determination of its applicability.

The ETF Flow model is created in a concise way to depict the effect the flow has on
subsequent returns and timings. In line with the flow pattern is the article written by (Berk
and Green, 2004), showing how mutual fund flows can reflect the non-fundamental
demand for specific managers. Our thesis excludes the manager view and explains that
ETF Flow signals non-fundamental demand shocks. Concerning flows and the
performance of ETFs, there has not been any published article, to the best of our
knowledge, that contributes to the literature with a similar sample period as our thesis,
which provides this research area with an additional perspective in terms of temporal
scope.

2
  Figure is from IPE Magazine, stemming from JP Morgan Asset Management (2018).

                                   4
                         Stockholm School of Economics

Other papers offering research into ETF and fund flows in relation to returns are Staer
(2017), Clifford, Fulkerson and Jordan (2014), Ben-David et al. (2018) and Ben-Rephael,
Kandel and Wohl (2011). Staer (2017) finds a correlation between ETF flow and price
pressure. We build on his work by using the model from Brown et al. (2021) to provide
a clear performance/flow causality and distinguishment between fundamental and non-
fundamental demand shocks. Additionally, Clifford et al. (2014) investigate what drives
ETF flows and find that past returns and high volumes are good predictors and that this
is caused by the broader ETF investor base. Again, we build on that by providing a clear
and distinct description of how arbitrage activity by the Authorized Participants drives
the ETF Flow.

Moreover, to get a sense of the causality involved in the performance/return relationship,
we use insights from the study by Ben-Rephael et al. (2011). With intraday data from
Israel, they found that mutual fund flows create temporary price pressures, where
approximately half of the price is reversed, on average, within ten days. The price reversal
effect indicates that the flow works as a non-fundamental driver for the price. Our thesis’s
contribution is distinct from theirs for two reasons. Firstly, our thesis shows that the
Authorized Participants are the underlying enablers behind the non-fundamental demand
shocks since this thesis investigates ETFs. Consequently, mutual funds might have other
characteristics such as managerial skills that inflate the findings (Brown et al., 2021).
Secondly, we deploy daily data instead of intraday data, which we further convert into
monthly aggregation to prevent time trends and different sample sizes from distorting the
results (Brown et al., 2021). However, the findings from Ben-Rephael et al. (2011) are
very relevant and provide a guideline for this thesis subject to how flow can affect returns.

Furthermore, another contributor to our text is the work done by Ben-David et al. (2018).
They find that non-fundamental characteristics such as the liquidity of the ETF affect the
volatility of the asset. Through their findings together with the findings of Da and Shive
(2018) who find a relationship between ETF activity and excess return comovement, we
can arrive at a more nuanced explanation of the relationship between ETF returns and
ETF Flow. Moreover, we build upon their findings to support our discussion subject to
the excess volatility and price discrepancies caused by the ETF Flow movements.

Additionally, we answer one question related to large within portfolio volumes, trading
activity, and associated returns with the help of Easley, Michayluk, O’Hara and Putnins
(2021). They find that ETFs with larger flows in their portfolios generate a higher return.
We build on this notion and suggest this as a potential explanation as to why one of our
subsamples displays such high returns.

Overall, this study contributes to the prevailing literature on ETF flows. Subject to the
increased level of awareness and size of the ETF market, this thesis has the ambition to
contribute towards two explicit areas. Firstly, to support the statement that ETF Flow can
act as a predictor of ETF performance, and how that can be done by building on existing
research with a new sample period. Secondly, to also bring an understanding of how the
primary- and secondary ETF markets relate to each other.

                                   5
                         Stockholm School of Economics

                   II. Model and Theory

Since the ETF Flow model by Brown et al. (2021) is a relatively new model and its
prevalence is not yet fully acknowledged, it is important to understand the underlying
drivers, the key players facilitating the ETF Flow, and also the limitations of the model.
As a result, this section will be split into three parts where the flow, the key players, and
limitations are considered.

2.1. ETF Flow

To fully understand the model and the underlying drivers, the law of one price must be
understood subject to the flow mechanism. Imagine that you have two different assets C
and D, consisting of the same underlying assets, ultimately implying that they should
have the same fundamental value (C = D). If there appears to be a difference in their
respective overall value (C ≠ D), the difference (|C – D|) can be considered a non-
fundamental shock causing the mispricing (Brown et al., 2021). Hence, trading activity
exploiting this mispricing is an arbitrage activity and will initiate the realization of that
non-fundamental demand shock. Furthermore, the non-fundamental shock might stem
from a fundamental shock, such as an over- or under-reaction of news connected to
earnings (Brown et al., 2021). Alternatively, the shock might also stem from non-
fundamental factors such as liquidity trading, noise, or managerial skill (Berk and Green,
2004). However, one characteristic of the ETF is its passiveness, implying that there is
no risk in rationally picking an ETF with a stronger manager. As a result, apart from the
managerial skill, there is effectively a non-fundamental component distorting the asset
price (Brown et al., 2021). As is explained in the article by Brown et al. (2021), the ETF
Flow model always signals a non-fundamental shock (Appendix A11).

For clarity, having a fundamental shock to associated assets will either increase or
decrease the fundamental value of asset C (the ETF) and asset D (the underlying securities
the ETF consists of), however, they will still have the same fundamental value and no
mispricing is apparent (C – D = 0). The fundamental value (or book value) of the ETF is
the NAV (Chen, 2024).

2.2. Role of Authorized Participants

Below, we provide a brief explanation of how the Authorized Participants operate, since
this concept is crucial for the understanding of this thesis. Moreover, in order for the non-
fundamental shocks to be restored to their fundamental value, there has to be someone
restoring the price discrepancy. These actors are called Authorized Participants. They are
institutional investors operating in the primary market that trades with the ETF issuer
(BlackRock for instance, Figure III) to utilize the arbitrage opportunity, pay the associated
                                                                  3
transaction fees, and ultimately restore the equilibrium . The procedure facilitating these
trades is called creation and redemption activity of the ETF- and the underlying shares

3
 Primary market is where the Authorized Participants operate, where they act as market makers creating
and redeeming ETF shares. Ultimately, these shares are sold on an exchange in the secondary market
(Blackrock Investment Management, 2023).

                                   6
                         Stockholm School of Economics

(Bae and Kim, 2020). Accordingly, a creation process is initiated by the Authorized
Participant when the price of the ETF is higher than the underlying basket of securities.
Then, the AP will buy the basket on the exchange since it is cheap (step 1a in Figure III)
and sell that basket to the issuer (step 2a) in return for the ETF comprising these securities.
The transaction occurs with two assets having the same fundamental value, hence the
only reason for the AP to incur in these transactions is subject to some mispricing.
However, to empirically quantify the opportunity of this mispricing, transaction costs
must be considered. As will be explained in the model limitations, the transaction costs
are not considered in the thesis. Moreover, the exchange/trade between the AP and the
issuer is called an in-kind transaction (Brown et al., 2021). Furthermore, when the AP has
received the ETF from the issuer (step 3a), the AP will then sell this ETF to the exchange,
ultimately yielding an arbitrage profit (step 4a). The economic mechanisms behind the
redemption process work in the opposite direction, in accordance with Figure III. There,
the initial starting point is where the price of the ETF is smaller than the price of the
underlying basket. Here, the strategy for the AP is straightforward. Buy the ETF (step
1b), sell the ETF to the issuer (step 2b), the issuer gives the AP the underlying basket of
securities (step 3b) (which has a higher value than the ETF). Finally, the AP can sell the
relatively expensive underlying basket to the exchange and make an arbitrage profit (step
4b).

As these transactions occur, a price pressure on the underlying securities makes their
prices increase (creation process) while the price of the ETF, since it is the selling asset
(step 4a), decreases, effectively adjusting prices back to equilibrium (Ben-Rephael et al.,
2011). The ETF Flow (equation 1) captures these price reversal effects and shows whether
these non-fundamental shocks can predict return or not (Brown et al., 2021).
Consequently, by sorting creation-intensive ETFs into decile 10 for one month’s lagged
value of ETF Flow, the next month should see a decrease in the value of the ETF (and
vice versa for decile 1). Moreover, the role of the Authorized Participants is to restore
equilibriums, ensure fair asset pricing and efficient markets.

                                   7
                         Stockholm School of Economics

Figure III. Creation and redemption processes, the underlying process of ETF Flow.
 Notes: Demonstration of the creation and redemption processes between the issuer, the market
maker (Authorized Participant), and the exchange at which the securities can be traded.
Furthermore, this figure is created by us to facilitate an understanding of the processes.

2.3. Model Limitations

To begin with, this model assumes that the cost of arbitrage capital is zero. Engaging in
arbitrage activities might be costly for the Authorized Participant, which effectively might
have a potential effect on the attractiveness of the transaction (Brown et al., 2021).
Furthermore, Bae and Kim (2020) state that illiquid ETFs might pose higher transaction
costs for the Authorized Participants, ultimately slowing down the pace at which the
arbitrage opportunity is executed. This effectively lowers the expected return on the
arbitrage opportunity. Consequently, as Table III reports, the different subsamples in our
sample exhibit differences in the bid-ask spread, implying that the risk for the associated
bid-ask differences affecting the transaction cost for an ETF trade becomes apparent. This
is something that the model does not consider.

Additionally, the fact that restoring equilibrium in one ETF might affect another ETF that
shares components of the underlying assets, potentially leading to further mispricing and
spillover in that ETF is ignored (Brown et al., 2021).

Alternatively, as of now, the model is only designed to predict future ETF returns based
on ETF Flow caused by non-fundamental demand shocks. However, no specific
allocation subject to different types of non-fundamental demand shocks will be solved in
this model.

Furthermore, it is also assumed that the Authorized Participant only focuses on one
individual arbitrage trade. Consequently, the model misses the risk of having an AP
choosing between two opportunities, rendering the unchosen ETF to still be mispriced
(Brown et al., 2021).

                                   8
                         Stockholm School of Economics

Continuously, Brown et al. (2021) address an additional measure to predict ETF returns
called ETF Premia. However, in their sample, they found the measure insignificantly
predicting the returns. Above that, they also put significantly less weight on the discussion
surrounding ETF Premia, presumably subject to the weak findings that can be found in
their data statement. Hence, due to the ambiguity of the measure, a vague description by
Brown et al. (2021) surrounding the economic theory behind the measure, and the scope
of our thesis, we have chosen not to include ETF Premia in the results and discussions.
However, to address the ETF premia issue subject to our sample, relevant reporting can
be found in Appendix B.

2.4. Concluding Remarks

Having that said, this model provides a solid foundation to build upon when testing if
non-fundamental demand shocks through ETF Flow can predict subsequent ETF returns.
Given the nature of the creation/redemption activity, the model will identify mispricing
in at least one direction, either through the underlying assets or the ETF share (Appendix
A7) (Brown et al., 2021). The non-fundamental demand shocks attributable to the flow
might come from, but are not limited to market frictions, liquidity shocks, or investor
sentiment reactions (Brown et al., 2021). As the model does not consider the origin of the
demand shocks, it would be something addressable for future research.

                                   9
                         Stockholm School of Economics

                          III. Data

The data section begins by describing the data sources, followed by the data cleaning
process. Next, data limitations are considered. Furthermore, we introduce a description
of the cleaned data followed by a report of relevant summary statistics. Lastly, we show
the replications we have done subject to Tables II and V by Brown et al. (2021). This is
motivated by the importance of showing that our sample and code have been done in a
manner that allows us to further continue the research through a new sample period and
to elaborate and test the extensions.

3.1. Data Sources

To be able to test our research question and run our empirical analysis, we use ETF data
from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP), which can be extracted from
Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS). Daily data for price, net asset value, shares
outstanding, trading volume, bid, ask, and return are extracted for all US-listed ETFs from
2007 through 2023. By only extracting securities with a share code equal to 73, we make
sure that we only obtain ETFs. However, as noted by Brown et al. (2021), some ETFs are
classified with share code 74. Those ETFs are included as well (Appendix C Table 2).
Furthermore, monthly data from CRSP is extracted for shares outstanding for share codes
73 and 74. This results in a sample of 4,688 ETFs in total spanning from 2007 through
2023. Monthly data for the Fama and French three-factor model (Fama and French, 1993)
and the momentum factor (Carhart, 1997) are added from Professor Kenneth French’s
website (French, 2023).

Furthermore, whether an ETF is leveraged or not is decided by hand-classifying them by
analyzing the Lipper codes, ETF names, and company information. Again, the
classification of leveraged and unleveraged stems from the data we have retrieved from
CRSP. The hand-classified ETFs can be found in Appendix C.

3.2. Data Cleaning

We follow several different steps outlined by Brown et al. (2021) to make sure that the
data is clean and reliable without any missing values. However, as will be discussed in
the data limitations, Brown et al. (2021) use Bloomberg and CRSP as their data sources,
which means that some of the steps they do are not possible for us to replicate since we
only have access to CRSP.

There are 4,688 unique ETFs in the sample spanning from 2007 through 2023 that are
involved in the following data cleaning steps. Firstly, missing values of daily shares
outstanding are replaced by lagged values of up to five trading days. This results in three
missing values remaining, which are then filled with the first forward observation.
Secondly, missing values of monthly shares outstanding are replaced by the average of
the two surrounding months’ observations. The reason behind taking the average is to
avoid any abrupt changes or distortions in the data caused by simply filling missing values
with a single value. Thirdly, missing values of NAV are handled in the same way by
filling it with the lagged value of up to five trading days, and if the value is still missing,

                                  10
                         Stockholm School of Economics

we fill it with the value from the closest date. Fourthly, missing values of return are filled
with the calculated implied values given by the price data. Lastly, missing values of price
are first filled with the lagged values of up to five trading days. This results in six missing
values remaining, which are then filled with the closest observation. CRSP reports
negative numbers when the closing price is not available. Negative prices are handled by
using the absolute value. Further, if data for volume is missing, it is set to zero.

We control for erroneous observations of daily price, shares outstanding, and NAV in a
similar way as Brown et al. (2021). This is done by checking if there are prices, shares
outstanding, or NAV values that experience more than a 50% decrease or a 100% increase
between two subsequent days. If the values from the prior day and the next day are within
5% of each other, the suspect values are substituted with the lagged value of one trading
day.

Furthermore, in line with Brown et al. (2021), the daily data is converted to monthly data
by aggregating volume and return, while month-end (last trading day) values are used for
prices, and NAV. This data is merged with the monthly shares outstanding data to obtain
month-end shares outstanding. This means that the ETF Flow is calculated on month-end
values. Furthermore, the bid-ask spread percentage is calculated on month-end values.

Finally, each ETF needs to have at least twelve monthly observations to be included in
the overall sample, which Brown et al. (2021) also do. This is done to obtain a more
reliable sample that allows for enough data to draw meaningful conclusions. This step
reduces the number of unique ETFs from 4,688 to 4,031. From 2007 through 2023, there
are 4,031 unique ETFs in our sample. However, when only using our sample period
spanning from 2017 through 2023, there are 3,568 unique ETFs.

3.3. Data Limitations

The main limitation of the data is that we only extract it from one source, CRSP. Brown
et al. (2021) extract data from Bloomberg and CRSP and use both sources as
complements. This allows them to replace missing values in the CRSP data with data
from Bloomberg or vice versa. Further, Brown et al. (2021) point out that Bloomberg
updates their shares outstanding data more frequently than CRSP. Hence, when splitting
the sample into subsamples and classifying them as mature, we use a lower threshold than
Brown et al. (2021). To classify an ETF as mature, Brown et al. (2021) require that
creation or redemption activity have taken place during at least 50% of the trading days
of the month. However, since the CRSP data updates with a lower frequency, we use 25%
as the threshold for classifying an ETF as mature. Moreover, Brown et al. (2021) use
Bloomberg as their NAV variable, while we use CRSP as the corresponding data source.

                                  11
                         Stockholm School of Economics

3.4. Data Description and Statistics

Results from Tables I and III provide our study with necessary summary statistics and an
understanding of the data spanning from 2017 through 2023. Moreover, the reasoning
behind our choice of using a sample starting at the beginning of 2017 is that the sample
of Brown et al. (2021) lasts until the end of 2016, hence we do not want our sample to
intersect with theirs in order for our results to be fully independent. Furthermore, given
the fact that we want to be able to work with full years in combination with a reached
data extraction limit, it was only possible for us to extract data until the end of 2023.

Table I exhibits a time-series from 2007 to 2023, displaying the number of ETFs and
market capitalization for each ETF subsample. The sample we use for the portfolio sorting
spans from 2017-2023. However, to compare and justify our data with Brown et al.
(2021), 2007-2016 has also been included since that period is subject to the study of
Brown et al. (2021) (see comparison between Tables I and II, and Tables IV and V).
Moreover, to compare Table I with Table II, the number of ETFs and their market
capitalization for All ETFs and $50M + are similar. Hence, we are working with close to
the same sample as Brown et al. (2021). As stated in the data limitation subsection, the
step where we split the data from $50M + to Mature ETFs results in fewer observations
due to the activity of the ETFs. However, even though that might potentially affect the
results subject to the portfolio returns for the subsamples Mature, Mature unleveraged
and Mature leveraged, we are still working with a very similar sample as Brown et al.
(2021). Concludingly, the biggest subsample, $50M + is similar to Brown et al. (2021) in
terms of both the number of ETFs but also its characteristics, which is unaffected by the
limitations seen in the other subsamples.

                                  12
                         Stockholm School of Economics

Table I. Yearly ETF Time-Series Sample: number of ETFs and associated Market cap.
 Notes: The $50M + sample includes ETFs from their first month in which their Market
capitalization exceeds $50M. Once that has been achieved, that particular ETF always belongs to
the $50M + sample. Furthermore, the $50M + ETF sample is considered mature from its first
month in which at least 25% of the trading days were reported as active in terms of creation or
redemption. Once this trading activity is reached, that ETF will always stay in the mature
subsamples. For each year, the market capitalization is the sum of all the number of associated
ETFs. Numbers and Market capitalizations are measured at the end of each year. Finally, Market
capitalization is reported in billions of dollars.

Table II. Brown et al. (2021) Yearly ETF Time-Series Sample: number of ETFs and associated
Market cap.
 Notes: Table from Brown et al. (2021) where they depict the number of ETFs and their associated
market capitalization.

                                  13
                         Stockholm School of Economics

To mitigate the impact of inflated results subject to illiquidity (Brown et al., 2021), the
ETF sample has been limited to only those ETFs with a market capitalization higher or
equal to $50M. Looking at the total number of ETFs in 2023 (2,939) compared to $50M
+ in 2023 (2,196), the reduction results in a decreased number of approximately 25%.
However, the ETFs that fall behind the benchmark of $50M only account for
approximately 0.14% of total market capitalization.

To put more emphasis on the active markets of ETFs, the subsample Mature ETFs is
introduced. Mature ETFs are classified as mature once they experience one month where
at least 25% of the trading days had some change in their shares outstanding (creation or
redemption activity). Accordingly, this is done to emphasize the trading activity of the
ETFs, ultimately amplifying the flow effect subject to the model by Brown et al. (2021).

Moreover, the Mature ETFs are also split into two subsamples, unleveraged and leveraged
ETFs. There are valid reasons for this split. According to Brown et al. (2021), one
characteristic of leveraged ETFs is that they are exposed to more extreme flows and more
investors who trade the asset, affecting the activity of the ETF. Above the short holding-
approach connected to the leveraged ETFs, these ETFs pose significantly higher turnover,
bet-alike characteristics, and constitute a smaller share of institutional investors.
Furthermore, Easley et al. (2021) find that ETFs with large within portfolio volume and
trading activity are subject to higher returns. Hence, the leveraged asset is subject to larger
flows (Table III) and should ultimately give a stronger return prediction according to the
model and the ex-ante expectation of Brown et al. (2021). Additionally, the number of
Mature ETFs constitutes approximately 18% of the $50M + subsample, with 400 ETFs
in 2023. Mature ETFs constitute a small part of the sample, in terms of both market
capitalization and the quantity of ETFs available on the market, which can be considered
a limitation with regards to that specific subsample. Again, the relative reduction
compared to Brown et al. (2021) is associated with Brown et al. (2021) having stronger
shares outstanding data from Bloomberg.

Table III shows summary statistics for the different subsamples. Comparing the entire
sample (All ETFs) to the other subsamples, the bid-ask spread percentage is substantially
wider (lower liquidity) with 0.27% compared to the $50M + subsample (0.19%),
indicating higher activity among the subsamples compared to All ETFs (Ben-David et al.,
2018). Given the percentage of active days which is smaller for the entire sample (5.89%
compared to 7.26% for the $50M + subsample), the bid-ask spread relation is reasonable
since ETF Flow activity positively affects liquidity (Bae and Kim, 2020). Moreover,
when the $50M + subsample is divided into Mature ETFs, there is a substantial increase
in Percentage of active days and Average creation/redemption activity. Dissecting the
Mature unleveraged and Mature leveraged, there are some discrepancies. Firstly, the Bid-
ask is lower for the Mature leveraged, implying higher liquidity. This is reasonable since
the trading activity and volumes are larger, consistent with the characteristics of leveraged
ETFs. Secondly, there is a discrepancy in the average monthly volume, where Mature
leveraged exhibits substantially larger monthly volumes (248.91 million) while Mature
unleveraged only reports a 15.70 million in volume. Looking at these results subject to
flow, using ETF Flow as a predictor seems reasonable.

                                  14
                         Stockholm School of Economics

Table III. ETF subsample characteristics for 2017-2023.
 Notes: Sample- and subsample construction are the same as in Table I. However, having an
active day as an ETF implies that the shares outstanding of the ETF have changed under a day.
Effectively, this means that there has been some creation or redemption activity causing shares to
differ. Average creation or redemption activity is defined as the aggregated absolute value of the
daily percentage changes in shares outstanding on a monthly basis.

3.5. Replication Justification

As a further validation to prove that our sample and code are in line with the article we
are replicating, two tables are compared. Table V shows the reported numbers from the
main table in the article by Brown et al. (2021). Subject to the return direction, all
portfolios give a positive return, however not all of them can be considered significant.
Portfolios from subsamples $50M + and Mature ETFs show significant returns for almost
all the time horizons. Furthermore, Table IV contains reporting of our numbers on the
same sample period as Brown et al. (2021), using our own sample but for the period 2007-
2016.

Table IV. Portfolio sort on ETF Flow for different time horizons: ETF return.
 Notes: This table is constructed using our data. In order to justify the relevance of our data and
that we are able to replicate the work of Brown et al. (2021), this table is constructed. Portfolio
construction and associated returns are subject to the period 2007-2016. Furthermore, the
maximum leverage for going long is set to 3x, while the maximum leverage for going short is -
3x (Brown et al., 2021). Finally, all the return numbers are reported in percentages (%).

                                  15
                         Stockholm School of Economics

Table V. Brown et al. (2021) portfolio sort on ETF Flow for different time horizons: ETF return.
  Notes: This table is taken from the article by Brown et al. (2021), where they show the portfolios
constructed and the associated returns for the period 2007-2016. Finally, all the return numbers
are reported in percentages (%).

In accordance with Brown et al. (2021), our table gives approximately the same results.
In the one-month horizon, three out of four subsamples give the same direction and
significance as Brown et al. (2021). For six months, three out of four subsamples show
the same direction while the $50M + shows very similar significance. However, Mature
unleveraged are subject to different results, both in terms of significance and direction.
The underlying reason for these deviations is presumably subject to the quality of the
data. Brown et al. (2021) use shares outstanding data (constituting the ETF Flow measure)
through both Bloomberg and CRSP, while we only have access to CRSP. Additionally,
the variable in question is more solid using Bloomberg’s database according to Brown et
al. (2021). Having that said, the biggest and most important part of the sample ($50M +)
is similar to Brown et al. (2021). To address the above concern, we perform fixed-effect
and lagged control adjusted returns, aspiring to give additional viability to the model and
our sample.

Concludingly, our data and the results displayed in Table IV managed to successfully
replicate Table V of Brown et al. (2021), effectively laying the foundation of our study.

                                  16
                         Stockholm School of Economics

                 IV. Empirical Findings

This section demonstrates the empirical outcomes we derive from examining our sample
data. Firstly, the ETF Flow measure is outlined and explained, followed by the portfolio
sorting. Secondly, ETF returns based on ETF Flow are examined and discussed for our
sample period, where there will be subsections dedicated to the subsamples. Lastly, the
same reporting is done for NAV returns based on ETF Flow. Potential limitations and
how they can be addressed are also mentioned for the ETF Flow returns, respectively.

4.1. ETF Flow Measure

When using the model created by Brown et al. (2021), we show that ETF Flow (equation
1) signals non-fundamental demand shocks in the primary market, ultimately causing the
mispricing between the value of the ETF share and the underlying assets. Subject to the
law of one price, the null hypothesis tells us that non-fundamental characteristics should
have zero predictability on the return of an asset. Stated differently, the difference
between the fundamental price and the shock caused by non-fundamental factors should
be either too small or corrected too fast in order for market players to capitalize and gain
on the opportunity (Brown et al., 2021). This section will analyze and discuss the findings
subject to how lagged ETF flows relate to subsequent returns, and how to interpret the
                                                 4
results relating to different time horizons .

To begin with, the used measure of the model should be defined. ETF Flow is measured
based on the creation and redemption activity of each ETF, which effectively is the flow
of the shares in and out of the asset. Hence, flow is defined as the percentage change of
ETF 𝑖’s shares outstanding at time 𝑡,

                                                               𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑠 𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑡
                           𝐸𝑇𝐹 𝐹𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑖,𝑡 =                           − 1.                      (1)
                                                      𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑠 𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑡−1

In this way, ETF Flow can be captured. As a result, from the ex-ante expectations from
Brown et al. (2021), constructing a portfolio based on the ETF Flow should give positive-
and predictable returns. The sorting attributable to the portfolio construction is explained
in the portfolio sorting section below.

4
 Lagged ETF Flows are considered as the flow from the prior period (month) in relation to the return that
is measured (Brown et al., 2021).

                                  17
                         Stockholm School of Economics

4.2. Portfolio Sorting

The sorting construction is done at a monthly level, to prevent the results from being
inflated by time trends and sample size (Brown et al., 2021). Furthermore, the measure
used to determine the predictable power of the model is ETF returns from the month
followed by the portfolio construction. The sorting is done based on share
creation/redemption activity. Moreover, the ETFs with the largest share inflows (share
creation) for the month prior to where the return is taken from are placed in decile 10.
Conversely, the ETFs with the largest outflow of shares (share redemption) are placed in
decile 1. As per Ben-Rephael et al. (2011), this portfolio sorting is designed to capture
the price reversal in the flow/performance relationship.

4.3. ETF Returns in Different Time Horizons on ETF Flow:
Results & Discussion

To begin with, Table VI provides return results based on lagged flows and for how long
the investor holds the portfolio, called the time horizons, for the period 2017-2023. Return
portfolios are constructed both by equal and value-weighted portfolios based on market
capitalization. Additionally, for each time horizon of one, three, six, nine and twelve
months, a long-short strategy has been performed. Starting by looking at the biggest
subsample results for all the ETFs ($50M +), the long-short strategy exhibits a positive
return for all time horizons within the equally weighted portfolios.

4.3.1. $50M + Subsample

Over the course of twelve months, the equally weighted portfolio strategy not only
performs better than the value-weighted, but it also possesses higher significance. The
results for the equally weighted strategy are in line with Brown et al. (2021) findings and
even manage to continue the success of the strategy until months nine and twelve with a
long-short average return of 2.645% (5.914% - 3.269%) for the twelve-month horizon
(Table VI). Moreover, it implies that, according to the model, the price reversal for the
$50M + subsample does not recover back to equilibrium, and that there are still price
discrepancies between ETF and NAV which significantly predicts a positive result (Ben-
Rephael et al., 2011). This is seen as a proof of the persistence and predictability of the
model. Furthermore, it is also in line with Duffie (2010), referring to the slow movement
of capital in the markets.

                                  18
                         Stockholm School of Economics

Table VI. Portfolio sort on ETF Flow for different time horizons: ETF returns
 Notes: For every month, the ETFs are sorted on the prior month’s ETF Flow. Consequently, the
time horizon formation is considered as the average return by holding the portfolio in one, three,
six, nine and twelve months. ETFs with the highest redemption activity (negative change in shares
outstanding) are sorted into decile 1 while decile 10 consists of ETFs with the highest creation
activity (positive change in shares outstanding). Raw returns (without incorporating the risk-free
rate) are reported by creating long-short portfolios, going long in decile 1 and short in decile 10.
Further, ***, ** and * constitute statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% thresholds.
Additionally, by using Newey-West standard errors with the lag equivalent to the return horizon
in months, the risk for overlapping periods is controlled. Furthermore, the maximum leverage for
going long is set to 3x, while the maximum leverage for going short is -3x (Brown et al., 2021).
Finally, all the return numbers are reported in percentages (%).

Furthermore, the value-weighted portfolio in the $50M + subsample shows positive and
predictable return only at the twelve-month horizon. This implies that for the one, three,
six and nine months for the value-weighted portfolio sorting, the returns are not
significantly different from zero. Alternatively, if one sticks to the value-weighted
strategy for three, six, and nine months it will see positive results, but will not be
statistically different from zero until holding it for one year.

Subject to the price reversal effect, this result is slightly concerning. According to Da and
Shive (2018), the excessive non-fundamental movement should imply non-fundamental
price changes, effectively steering prices away from fundamentals. Interpreting this, there
should be predicting returns at the beginning of a horizon with subsequent price
corrections over time, ending up with insignificant returns the further away you are from
the shock. Instead, we see the opposite. To address this concern and provide potential
answers, the absence of the distinguishment of different noises (non-fundamental shocks)
in the model by Brown et al. (2021) must be considered. Moreover, one of the limitations
of this model is that it does not account for different non-fundamental shocks, making it
possible to have different noises simultaneously distorting the ETF- or NAV prices.
According to Xin, Jun and Jiang (2013), a shortage of arbitrage capital among big market
players (Authorized Participants) might negatively affect liquidity, ultimately creating
additional noise around the traded assets. Applying this to our sample and Table III, where
the bid-ask spread for the $50M + subsample averaging at 0.19%, further investigation
would allow us to better understand the liquidity situation. Consequently, potential
market illiquidity noise might in this case cause additional noise which distorts the ETF
Flow opportunity created by the Authorized Participants in the first place, ultimately
making it hard for the model to distinguish between different noises. If this additional

                                  19
                         Stockholm School of Economics

noise would last until month twelve for the value-weighted portfolio, there might be an
explanation as to why ETF Flow cannot be captured until month twelve. To partially
capture the liquidity and other noise of the trade, we perform a panel regression as a
robustness check to increase the probability of only isolating the noise stemming from
ETF Flow and the activity of the Authorized Participants (Brown et al., 2021).

Furthermore, another explanation for the result seen in the twelve month time horizon
might be caused by the length of the time horizon. Consequently, the longer one holds a
portfolio, the higher the probability that the securities in the associated deciles experience
additional ETF Flow exposure, ultimately affecting the non-fundamental portfolio
returns. To better capture these time horizon differences, disentangling the driving returns
for each month within respective horizon would give additional insight.

Alternatively, to better understand the noises, we would need longer time horizons to see
if the return significance is persistent or if it adjusts back to equilibrium, or a model that
can better capture the different noises. Concludingly, since this thesis is the first one to
test this model on these time horizons, model-deviating results might have different
potential explanations.

4.3.2. Mature Subsample

Moving over to the mature ETFs, which are based on the trading activity done by the
Authorized Participants. As stated, the mature subsample is based on the notion of
activity. The higher the activity, the more volumes and fluctuations in the flows (Brown
et al., 2021). Based on this characteristic and following Ben-David et al. (2018), a higher
volatility in the flow should imply a higher non-fundamental variation, which according
to both Ben-David et al. (2018) and Staer, (2017) should give a stronger price reversal
effect and ultimately predict higher and significant returns for the strategy.

However, when the Mature subsample results are framed in the table (Table VI), neither
equal-weight nor value-weight formed portfolios give a significant result throughout all
horizons. Comparing this to the study done by Brown et al. (2021), the results can be
identified as contradicting. What they find is that the mature portfolios pose significant
and positive results for periods of one, three and six months. When we test the model for
nine and twelve months in the mature subsample, the portfolio sorting does not give
significant predictions of the results. This can be explained by Da and Shive (2018), who
state that ETFs with high activity in creation/redemption might face non-fundamental
shocks causing excessive price movements, driving the prices up which subsequently
infer a price reversal. Applying the findings of Da and Shive (2018) to our Table VI and
the Mature subsample, would imply that the price reversal effect seems prominent already
before one month since no return predictability can be identified. Accordingly, the prices
are back to their fundamental value and no additional return can be captured using the
strategy for the subsample in question.

                                  20
                         Stockholm School of Economics

4.3.1. Splitting the Mature Subsample

Alternatively, by splitting the mature ETFs into leveraged and unleveraged ETFs,
different results are seen. As stated in section three, leveraged ETFs are subject to larger
flows and should ultimately give a stronger return prediction (Brown et al., 2021).

The results confirm the ETF Flow expectations. Brown et al. (2021) found strong
predictability for the mature leveraged ETFs for their time horizons. When we extend the
horizons to nine and twelve months, positive and predictable returns are found in all
horizons. The long-short strategy provides a highly significant return for both equal-and
value-weighted portfolios with 19.976% and 21.810% (Table VI) respectively, holding
the portfolio in one month. Holding it for twelve months, the equally weighted portfolio
performs a highly significant result of 36.416% while the equivalent value-weighted
portfolio gives 34.230% in return (Table VI). Upon applying an intuitive answer to the
results, and considering the structure of the model, it becomes apparent that having
leveraged ETFs in a portfolio will increase the volatility of the activity, ultimately
amplifying the flow even more (Brown et al., 2021). Effectively, the return differences
for decile 1 and decile 10 should be relatively large. Moreover, Ben-David et al. (2018)
take the same view by explaining how the activity of the ETFs amplifies the volatility of
the underlying securities, effectively steering them away from the fundamental value and
causing the recovery of the price reversal effect to take even longer time to achieve.

Additionally, Mature leveraged ETFs (Table III) exhibit substantially larger volumes in
conjunction with higher trading days activity than the other subsamples over the sample
period. In accordance with Easley et al. (2021), volume and activity act as explanatory
factors for ETF returns, which might reflect the Mature leveraged ETF returns.

As a result, non-fundamental distortions can still predict return even after nine and twelve
months for the Mature leveraged subsample. Brown et al. (2021) provide two associated
evidence (Appendix A12), stating firstly that ETFs with more variation in their shares
outstanding are characterized by larger non-fundamental demand shocks. Secondly, they
stipulate the fact that leveraged ETFs have a more dispersed clientele, which also impacts
flow volatility. To conclude the analysis regarding mature leveraged ETFs, the model
succeeds in predicting returns for the subsample in question, effectively extending the
findings of Brown et al. (2021) and their ex-ante expectations of the model. Finally,
looking at the provided Table III, the Mature leveraged ETFs are those with the highest
percentage of active days and average creation/redemption activity, which strengthens the
theoretical explanations by Ben-David et al. (2018) and Easley et al. (2021). However, as
can be seen in the comparison between Tables I and II, having a substantially lower
number of Mature leveraged ETFs might have an impact on the result since a lower
number will add volatility and uncertainty to the within subsample results. As a
consequence, by increasing the number of observations subject to the leveraged
subsample, we believe that a stronger conclusion can be drawn.

Additionally, Mature unleveraged exhibit negative and significant returns for the first
month, while having subsequent price reversals in line with Ben-Rephael et al. (2011).
Resorting to the replication justification, this presumably originates from the data

                                  21
                         Stockholm School of Economics

limitation and the fact that the shares outstanding connected to the mature subsamples are
not as good for CRSP as for Bloomberg.

4.3.4. Conclusion ETF Returns

Concludingly, the ETF return results shown in Table VI subject to ETF Flow give some
interesting findings. Most importantly, we show that our sample manages to confirm the
findings Brown et al. (2021) did regarding the $50M + subsample. Explicitly, all time
horizons for the equally weighted portfolio, including the incremental horizons, give
positive and significant predictability. Conversely, we find contradictive results in the
value-weighted portfolio, where we resort to potential explanations by Xin et al. (2013)
and Da and Shive (2018). Furthermore, the Mature subsample shows zero predictability,
which we explain partially through a fast price reversal effect, and partially through
sample limitations. Lastly, by splitting the Mature subsample into leveraged and
unleveraged, we see that leveraged exhibits large returns and significant predictability,
where arguments of trading activity and sample limitations are used. On the contrary,
Mature unleveraged shows negative and significant returns, which, as we explain, might
stem from our data limitations. These data limitations and the ambiguous results seen for
the value-weighted portfolio in the $50M + subsample are results we will consider in
section five in the shape of a panel regression, to make sure these results are not driven
individually by ETFs or time-related shocks.

4.4. NAV Returns in Different Time Horizons on ETF Flow:
Results & Discussion

While testing for return predictability of the ETF shares, looking at the NAV share return
predictability is also of interest. Since the two assets share the same underlying value,
having differences in price reversal pace would hypothetically indicate that there are still
non-fundamental differences between the assets. Looking at the results, NAV returns, and
ETF share returns display discrepancies in the pace of restoring the mispricing. While the
ETF return strategy exhibits positive and significant predictability in holding the portfolio
for twelve months (Table VI), the equivalent NAV portfolio only gives return
predictability for one ($50M + with equal and value weight), three and six ($50M + with
value weight) months (Table VII). These discrepancies are not found by Brown et al.
(2021), who instead find similar predictability and price reversal for the ETF and NAV
returns.

                                  22
                         Stockholm School of Economics

Table VII. Portfolio sort on ETF Flow for different time horizons: NAV returns
 Notes: For every month, the ETFs are sorted on the prior month’s ETF Flow. Consequently, the
time horizon formation is considered as the average return by holding the portfolio in one, three,
six, nine and twelve months. ETFs with the highest redemption activity (negative change in shares
outstanding) are sorted into decile 1 while decile 10 consists of ETFs with the highest creation
activity (positive change in shares outstanding). Raw NAV returns (without incorporating the
risk-free rate) are reported by creating long-short portfolios, going long in decile 1 and short in
decile 10. Further, ***, ** and * constitute statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10%
thresholds, respectively. Additionally, by using Newey-West standard errors with the lag
equivalent to the return horizon in months, the risk for overlapping periods is controlled.
Furthermore, the maximum leverage for going long is set to 3x, while the maximum leverage for
going short is -3x (Brown et al., 2021). Finally, all the return numbers are reported in percentages
(%).

However, this thesis’s findings might not contradict the literature. Our finding implies
that the same underlying asset does not, given different circumstances (one is an
individual stock, and the other one is the same stock bundled in an ETF), display the same
returns. According to Krause, Ehsani and Lien (2014), ETF Flow has a spillover effect
and causes the underlying asset to incur in variation not directly attributable to the
security. Furthermore, Ben-David et al. (2018) also find a volatility spillover effect,
implying that the underlying securities get involved in excess variance. Given this, the
differences in NAV and ETF predictability over certain time horizons might be caused
by non-fundamental spillover effects, causing the same underlying asset to display
different variations over time. However, according to the model (Appendix A13), the
return predictability of ETF and its underlying assets should in theory be the same. This
thesis’s NAV results contradict those findings, nevertheless prior literature helps us
explain the discrepancies. Another simpler explanation for the discrepancy can be found
in the model. This model is relatively new and unexplored over time, deploying a different
sample period (as this thesis does) might give concerns to the assumptions of the model.
Finally, as stated in the data limitations, we use NAV from CRSP and Brown et al. (2021)
from Bloomberg, some discrepancies in the results might be caused by that.

                                  23
                         Stockholm School of Economics

4.4.1. Conclusion NAV Returns

Concludingly, the empirical findings of our NAV sample show a stronger and faster
recovery than its associated ETF, which we deem explainable through two angles. Firstly,
the spillover effect according to Krause et al. (2014) and Ben-David et al. (2018) might
amplify the volatility in any of the assets (ETF or NAV), resulting in different states that
affect the recovery speed towards equilibrium prices. Secondly, the immaturity of the
model is considered, where sample period and model assumptions are mentioned as
explanations for the findings. Finally, the immaturity of the model in conjunction with
obtaining the NAV data from CRSP creates some uncertainty, where resorting to further
research to clarify the contradictory findings seems reasonable.

4.5. Concluding Remarks

Overall, the empirical findings show that, through the ETF Flow (equation 1), ETF returns
and NAV returns can be significantly predicted by non-fundamental demand shocks.
With the $50M + subsample as the most substantial subsample in terms of similarities
with Brown et al. (2021), we can confirm that the model holds for our sample. As a result,
positive significant ETF returns cannot only be found for the same time horizons, but also
for the newly implemented ones in nine and twelve months. Moreover, the Mature
subsample shows insignificant ETF returns, where we refer to Da and Shive (2018) who
use the price reversal effect as a potential explanation. Additionally, the Mature leveraged
subsample displays positive and significant ETF returns, while the Mature unleveraged
subsample displays negative and significant returns for the one-month time horizon, to
subsequently experience insignificant returns. Lastly, caused by model implications and
data validation within the mature subsamples, we address further viability of the model
for future research. As per the NAV returns, we find a price reversal effect that contributes
to the NAV returns experiencing a faster recovery speed in relation to the ETF returns.

                                  24
                         Stockholm School of Economics

               V. Robustness Check

To add further robustness and creditability to our research and the model outcomes, two
robustness checks are made. Specifically, we include firm-fixed effects to examine
whether any firm-specific drivers are causing our returns, hence removing the potential
bias of unobserved firm-level heterogeneity (Brown et al., 2021). Secondly, to make sure
there are no periods in the sample that drive specific returns and push the returns in any
direction, we will apply time-fixed effects. This is conducted through a panel data analysis
in a similar way to Brown et al. (2021). Additionally, the other robustness check is a
market-adjusted perspective where we analyze the real-world return viability of the
results by looking at the alpha of the strategy when incorporating the Fama-French three-
factor model and the momentum factor.

5.1. Panel Regression

Table VIII. Panel regressions of ETF returns for different time horizons on ETF Flow.
 Notes: For every month, the ETFs are sorted on the prior month’s ETF Flow. The table reports
the robustness of the prior portfolio sorts by presenting panel regressions with time fixed-effects
and firm fixed-effects. Monthly ETF returns are regressed on activity and lagged fund control
variables in line with the model:

                         (𝐸𝑇𝐹 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛)𝑖,𝑡+ℎ = 𝛽𝐷𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑙𝑒𝑖,𝑑,𝑡 + 𝛾𝑡 + 𝛿𝑉𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜖𝑖,𝑡+ℎ

(𝐸𝑇𝐹 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛)𝑖,𝑡+ℎ is the monthly return of ETF 𝑖 in period 𝑡 at horizon ℎ, where ℎ is either one,
three, six, nine, or twelve months. 𝐷𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑙𝑒𝑖,𝑑,𝑡 is an indicator variable that indicates whether ETF
𝑖 is in decile 𝑑 in period 𝑡. 𝛾𝑡 represents that time fixed-effects are included in the model. 𝑉𝑖,𝑡 are
the different lagged fund controls that are used for ETF 𝑖 in period 𝑡. Moreover, the lagged fund
controls, 𝑉𝑖,𝑡 include two lags of ETF return, ETF trading volume, ETF market capitalization, and
ETF Premia. Furthermore, the ETF trading volume and ETF market capitalization have been
standardized with a logarithmic transformation, which ultimately stabilizes the variance.
Additionally, ***, ** and * constitute statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% thresholds.
Finally, the return numbers are reported in percentages (%).

                                  25
                         Stockholm School of Economics

Notably, most of the deciles exhibit significant returns, even when we control for time-
and firm fixed-effects, and lagged controls. More specifically, we have addressed a few
disparities in the text that would benefit from a robustness check for additional viability.
Firstly, the value-weighted portfolio in Table VI for the $50M + subsample was expected
to contain different non-fundamental noise, distorting the isolation of ETF Flow related
returns (Brown et al., 2021). Table VIII shows that the $50M + subsample still displays
positive and significant returns even for the twelve-month horizon. Ultimately, this
suggests that even though we control for different noises and market capitalization
through lagged controls, we still find return predictability. To clarify, having market
capitalization as a control variable is important in this case, to establish that no large ETF
drives deviating returns in any direction.

      2
The 𝑅 - values across the subsamples might explain some of the variation in the mature
subsamples. As stated in section four, the Mature leveraged subsample poses significantly
higher ETF returns, which is attributable to either theoretical explanations or data
                                                                                     2
limitations. What we see in Table VIII is that the subsample in question has a lower 𝑅
than the other subsamples, implying that the model is worse in explaining the return
                                                                          2
variation for this subsample compared to the other ones. Concludingly, the 𝑅 - values act
as an additional potential explanation as to why the results stemming from the Mature
leveraged subsample might be subject to data limitations and can hence not be explained
by the model, ultimately confirming the uncertainty around the subsample.

Finally, looking at the results more generally, the panel regression manages to establish
that most of our deciles significantly show results, where the biggest subsample, $50M +
gives significant and positive returns for every time horizon.

                                  26
                         Stockholm School of Economics

5.2. Market-Adjusted Perspective

The market-adjusted perspective adds a different angle, displaying how the different long-
short portfolios perform in reality by incorporating risk-adjusted returns. Table IX shows
that the $50M + subsample and the Mature leveraged subsample display a positive and
significant return-adjusted alpha, while all portfolios fail to do so after three months. Most
interestingly is the evolution of the $50M + subsample’s risk-adjusted return. Moreover,
in the first month, the return is positive and significant, implying that the market (FF3 +
Momentum) cannot control for the non-fundamental return associated with ETF Flow.
However, after three months, the return is positive but insignificant, and after six months
negative and insignificant. Concludingly, subject to the most substantial subsample, the
market-incorporated price reversal effect seems to be captured already in the third month
(Ben-Rephael et al., 2011), imposing a different perspective of the model and its real-
world applicability.

Table IX. Monthly ETF alpha for the different long-short portfolios for different time horizons
when regressing the excess return on the FF3- and Momentum factors, and CAPM.
 Notes: For every month, the ETFs are sorted on the prior month’s ETF Flow. The table checks
the robustness of the long-short portfolio returns when incorporating the Fama and French three-
factor model and the momentum factor. Monthly long-short portfolio excess returns are regressed
on the FF3- and momentum factors:

 (𝐸𝑥𝑐. 𝑅𝑒𝑡)𝑝,𝑡+ℎ = 𝛼𝑝,𝑡+ℎ + 𝛽1(𝑅𝑀𝑡+ℎ − 𝑅𝐹𝑡+ℎ ) + 𝛽2𝑆𝑀𝐵𝑡+ℎ + 𝛽3𝐻𝑀𝐿𝑡+ℎ + 𝛽4𝑀𝑂𝑀𝑡+ℎ + 𝜖𝑝,𝑡+ℎ

(𝐸𝑥𝑐. 𝑅𝑒𝑡)𝑝,𝑡+ℎ is the monthly excess return for portfolio 𝑝 in period 𝑡 at horizon ℎ, where ℎ is
either one, three, six, nine, or twelve months. Additionally, ***, ** and * constitute statistical
significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% thresholds. Finally, all the alpha numbers are reported in
percentages (%).

                                  27
                         Stockholm School of Economics

5.3. Concluding Remarks Robustness Check

Concludingly, the results from Table VIII add further viability to the ETF Flow model by
addressing disparities in the discussion such as additional non-fundamental noise and
large ETFs driving the results. Most importantly, the biggest subsample, $50M +,
manages to give significant and positive returns for all time horizons. Furthermore, by
applying a real-world perspective and comparing the return against FF3 + MOM risk
adjustments (Table IX), we find that price reversal can be seen at a faster pace, even
though we still find positive alpha predictability in the $50M + subsample for the first
month. As a result, a robustness check in the shape of a panel regression and a risk-
adjusted return perspective succeeds by further explaining the results and adding further
viability to the model.

                                  28
                         Stockholm School of Economics

                     VI. Conclusion

In this paper, we build on the work by Brown et al. (2021) on ETF Flow and returns
associated with their model. This has been done by investigating ETFs and their
underlying assets in the US market from 2017-2023. In particular, we find that ETF Flow
in the most robust and substantial subsample ($50M +) for the equally weighted portfolio
succeeds in predicting ETF returns for all the time horizons. Additionally, by
incorporating the suggestion for future research by Brown et al. (2021), we do not only
predict positive and predictable returns for our sample on their time horizons but also for
the new ones that cover nine and twelve months as holding periods. We also find that
ETFs with leverage perform the best out of our subsamples. However, the model is
subject to limitations, such as explicit incorporation of liquidity differences and
transaction costs. We explain that some of the variations in the returns might be subject
to these limitations and that further research is necessary in order to tackle these concerns.
Additionally, ETF Flow is able to predict significant NAV returns for three out of four
subsamples in the first time horizon, to later see the price reversal effect making the
returns insignificant. The price reversal effect is the main explanatory phenomenon of the
ETF- and NAV price recovery in this thesis. In accordance with the main findings of our
paper, we can confirm that the ETF Flow, for our sample, can act as a signal for non-
fundamental demand shocks to both the ETF- and the NAV price, which ultimately
predicts their returns.

For future research around the topic of ETF Flow, we suggest three directions. First, to
disentangle non-fundamental demand shocks. As an alternative, to investigate the impact
liquidity has and if it can act as a return- and predictability driver. Secondly, to
incorporate the transaction costs involved with the trades of the ETFs, to ultimately see
if that might have an impact on the return and predictability. Lastly, as discussed in the
value-weighted returns for the $50M + subsample, there has not been any investigation
from either us or Brown et al. (2021) into whether there are any particular parts of each
horizon that have been working as the main driver for the results. By investigating that,
one could add a new dimension to the ETF Flow in the shape of timing.

                                  29
                         Stockholm School of Economics

                    References

Bae, Kuounghun and Kim, Daejin, 2020, Liquidity risk and exchange-traded fund returns,
variances and tracking errors, Journal of Financial Economics, 138, 222-253.

Ben-David, Itzhak, Franzoni, Francesco and Moussawi, Rabih, 2018, Do ETFs increase
volatility?, The Journal of Finance, 73(6), 2471-2535.

Ben-Rephael, Azi, Kandel, Shmuel and Wohl, Avi, 2011, The price pressure on aggregate
mutual fund flows, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 46(2), 585-603.

Berk, Jonathan. B and Green, Richard C., 2004, Mutual fund flows and performance in
rational markets, Journal of Political Economy, 112(6), 1269-1295.

Blackrock Investment Management Australia, 2023, Authorized participants and market
makers – Part 1, Blackrock.com. Available at:
https://www.blackrock.com/au/intermediaries/ishares/authorized-participants-and-
market-makers

Brown, David C., Davies, Shaun William and Ringgenberg, Matthew C., 2021, ETF
Arbitrage, non-fundamental demand and return predictability, The Review of Finance,
937-972.

Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, The Journal of
Finance 52(1), 57–82.

Chen, James, 2024, Net Asset Value: Definitions, formula, examples and uses,
Investopedia. Available at: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/n/nav.asp

Clifford, Christopher P., Fulkerson, Jon A. and Jordan, Bradford D., 2014, What drives
ETF flows?, The Financial Review 49, 619-642.

Da, Zhi and Shive, Sofie, 2018, Exchange traded funds and asset return correlation,
European Financial Management, 24, 136-168.

Duffie, Darrell, 2010, Presidential address: asset price dynamics with slow-moving
capital, The Journal of Finance 65, 1237–1267.

Easley, David, Michayluk, David, O’Hara, Maureen and Putnins, Talis J., 2021, The
Active World of Passive Investment, The Review of Finance 10, 1433-1471.

Fama, Eugene F. and French, Kenneth R., 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on
stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33(1), 3–56.

French, Kenneth, 2023, Data Library. Available at:
https://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html

                                  30
                         Stockholm School of Economics

Kaczmarski, Kamil, Farrar, Sean, and Zelter, Philipp, 2023, The renaissance of ETFS:
Exchange-traded funds are fueling market opportunities, Oliver Wyman, LLC.
Available at: https://www.oliverwyman.com/our-expertise/insights/2023/may/exchange-
traded-funds-are-fueling-market-opportunities.html

Krause, Timothy, Ehsani, Sina and Lien, Donald, 2014, Exchange-traded funds, liquidity
and volatility, Applied Financial Economics, 24(24), 1617-1630.

Lake, Bryan, 2018, Implementation: The future is active, IPE Magazine, October.
Available at: https://www.ipe.com/implementation-the-future-is-active/10027002.article

Sirri, Erik R., and Tufano, Peter, 1998, Costly search and mutual fund flows, The Journal
of Finance 53(5), 1589–1622.

Staer, A., 2017, Fund flows and underlying returns: the case of ETFs, International
Journal of Business 22(4), 275–304.

Xing, Hu. G., Jun, Pan, and Jiang, Wang, 2013, Noise as Information for illiquidity, The
Journal of Finance 68(6), 2341-2382.

                                  31
                         Stockholm School of Economics

                   Appendix

Appendix A. The Model

In this section of the Appendix, the model created by Brown et al. (2021) will be
presented. This model ultimately shows how ETF Flow must imply a non-fundamental
deviation from underlying value and that ETF Flow signals non-fundamental mispricing.
What should also be mentioned is that the model relies on several assumptions, however,
the important insights are not driven by these.

To begin with, at period 𝑡, there is a market value of each ETF share, denoted 𝑝𝑡. For
each unit of the ETF’s underlying value, there is an unobservable fundamental value
which is denoted as Ω𝑡, simultaneously as its tradable value is the NAV, denoted 𝜋𝑡. To
capture the ETF premium, the model assumes that the number of units of the underlying
assets held by the ETF is the same as the number of ETF shares, denoted as 𝑞𝑡. For each
period, ETF premium is denoted as,

                                𝜓 ≡ 𝑝 − 𝜋                            (A1)
                                                            𝑡       𝑡       𝑡

Identifying a non-zero value of 𝜓𝑡 means that the law of one price is violated which
effectively opens up for an arbitrage opportunity by creating a long-short strategy.
Finally, ETF fundamental mispricing is defined as the difference between ETF share price
and its underlying unobservable value,

                                    𝜑𝑡 = 𝑝𝑡 − Ω𝑡                              (A2)

By the same approach, the NAV fundamental mispricing is defined as the difference
between NAV share price and its underlying unobservable value,
                             𝛼 = 𝜋 − Ω                         (A3)
                                                            𝑡       𝑡       𝑡

Moving over to the view of the Authorized Participants, each AP 𝑖’s arbitrage demand
(creation or redemption) at time 𝑡 as 𝛿𝑡,𝑖, while the corresponding aggregate demand for
all APs at time 𝑡 equals,

                                                                   𝑁
                         Δ = ∑ 𝛿                      (A4)
                                                                               𝑡                𝑡,𝑖
                                                  𝑖=1

hence Δ𝑡 can be said to be the aggregate flow demand (either net creation or redemption).
Going forward, this measure is now called flow. To compute the market price for the ETF
share, ETF share supply and aggregate ETF investor demand is determined,

                                                                  𝑒𝑡𝑓                              (A5)
                              𝑝𝑡 = Ω𝑡 + 𝛽 − 𝜂𝑞𝑡 + 𝜖𝑡

                                  32
                         Stockholm School of Economics

where Ω𝑡 is the latent underlying fundamental value and 𝛽 is constructed so that the initial
                                                         𝑒𝑡𝑓
shares outstandings are positive (𝛽 ≥ 0). 𝜖𝑡   is the non-fundamental component drawn
                                                         2
from a zero-mean distribution with associated variance 𝜎𝑒 . The function is downward
sloping based on primarily one factor. Investors exhibit risk aversion (Brown et al., 2021),
implying that a higher price of the ETF will lower investor demand. Consequently, since
𝜂 ≥ 0 (investors’ sensitivity to the measure of shares), a lower value of 𝜂 means that ETF
Flow exhibits less price impact.

For the NAV, which is given by,

                                                  𝑛𝑎𝑣                                    (A6)
                               𝜋𝑡 = Ω𝑡 + 𝜖𝑡   + 𝜆Δ

                                                                           𝑛𝑎𝑣
where Ω𝑡 has the same function as in equation A5. As with 𝜖𝑡   , it includes any distortion
from the NAV connected to non-fundamental anomalies. 𝜆 is described as the trading
activity from the APs (𝜆 ≥ 0). Consequently, 𝜆 might, according to Brown et al. (2021),
be determined by investor risk aversion, and if there is a net negative flow, a higher
trading activity from the AP will negatively impact the NAV price.

The latent underlying value, which is the same for both NAV and ETF price, is computed
as,

                                Ω𝑡 = Ω𝑡−1 + 𝜔𝑡                           (A7)

where 𝜔𝑡 is any fundamental shock. Again, the variable is distributed across a zero-mean
distribution. Due to the construction of the latent value Ω, the model allows shocks to
occur on both the ETF and the NAV side.

                                                                   𝑒𝑡𝑓        𝑛𝑎𝑣
Subject to the correlation between the error terms 𝜖𝑡    and 𝜖𝑡    , which is denoted as,

                                                                  𝑒𝑡𝑓   𝑛𝑎𝑣
                                                  𝐶𝑜𝑣(𝜖𝑡   , 𝜖𝑡    )                                    (A8)
                             𝜌 =
                                                                      𝜎𝑒𝜎𝑛

each error term at t = 0 can be considered as equal to zero (Brown et al., 2021). Given
that the error terms are equal to zero, 𝜋0 = Ω0. At t = 0, the asset is considered to be fairly
priced subject to its fundamental value, and the ETF shares 𝑞0 are configured so that the
                                                                                             𝛽
ETF premium initially does not exist. Henceforth, 𝑞0 ≡   solves at time = 0,
                                                                        𝜂

                               𝜋0 = 𝛽 + Ω0 − 𝜂𝑞0.                         (A9)

To simplify the model for stronger intuition, Brown et al. (2021) have modified some
parameters as 𝜌 = 1, 𝜎𝑒 ≠ 𝜎𝑛, and N goes to infinity (N → ∞).

                                  33
                         Stockholm School of Economics

Demand Shock

After the demand shock is realized at t = 1, each AP 𝑖 solves the true arbitrage opportunity
by choosing a length 𝛿1 ∈ ℜ of shares to either redeem or create and solves the following
optimization,

                               max 𝛿𝑖( 𝑝2(𝛿𝑖|𝛿−𝑖) − 𝜋2(𝛿𝑖|𝛿−𝑖)),                       (A10)
                           𝛿∈ℜ

where 𝛿−𝑖 is the activity of the other APs.

Aggregate ETF Flow

Through the model, the economic interpretation of the ETF flow,

                                                                 𝑒𝑡𝑓       𝑛𝑎𝑣
                                              ∗    𝜖𝑡   − 𝜖𝑡
                         lim Δ =                             (A11)
                              𝑛→∞         𝜆 + 𝜂

implies that, if the shock caused by the ETF share is bigger than the shock caused by the
NAV share, on aggregation there will be net creation of shares, and vice versa.
Additionally, this is affected by the magnitude of the activity and sensitivity of the
investors. By equation A11, there is no component directly connected to the fundamental
value of either the ETF asset or the underlying asset, suggesting that ETF Flow offers a
clean signal that a demand shock, not attributable to fundamental factors, has occurred.
Furthermore, the variance of the ETF flow is,

                                           2     2
                                        ∗    𝜎𝑒 + 𝜎𝑛 − 2𝜌𝜎𝑒 𝜎𝑛
                      lim Var(Δ ) =            2                    (A12)
                        𝑛→∞                (𝜆 + 𝜂)

             ∗                  2       2
where Var(Δ ) increases with 𝜎𝑒 and 𝜎𝑛 while decreasing in 𝜌𝜎𝑒 𝜎𝑛. When variations in
ETF and NAV are prominent, variations in the flow and subsequent non-fundamental
demand shocks follow. Conversely, when variation in ETF and NAV correlates,
variations in flow and subsequent non-fundamental demand shocks decline. Through
these model constructions, dilemmas such as beliefs of managerial skills (Berk and Green,
2004) or the size and marketing effort of the fund (Sirri and Tufano, 1998) can be
excluded.

Equilibrium ETF and NAV Fundamental Mispricing

Below is the equilibrium for the ETF fundamental mispricing and NAV fundamental
mispricing for t = 2,

                                  ∗            ∗      𝑒𝑡𝑓 𝜆        𝑛𝑎𝑣 𝜂
                   lim 𝜑 = lim 𝛼  = 𝜖         + 𝜖                     (A13)
                   𝑛→∞      𝑛→∞           𝜆 + 𝜂        𝜆 + 𝜂

where * is placed to emphasize that the equations (A13 and B1) are equilibriums.

                                  34
                         Stockholm School of Economics

Also, Brown et al. (2021) assume that when t = long-term, prices for both ETF and its
NAV will converge back to their underlying latent value, hence restoring the mispricing.
Further, this is backed by findings by Duffie (2010) referring to slow-moving capital.

Finally, the model checks how ETF Flows relate to future returns depending on whether
either ETF or underlying shares are more sensitive to non-fundamental shocks. The slope
coefficient, which is given by the sign of the relation, is created from a regression of long-
term ETF flow returns,

                                 ∗   ∗                    𝑒𝑡𝑓        𝑛𝑎𝑣     𝑒𝑡𝑓      𝑛𝑎𝑣
                𝐶𝑜𝑣(−𝜑 , Δ )   𝐶𝑜𝑣(−(𝜆𝜖    + 𝜂𝜖   ), 𝜖    − 𝜖   )         (A14)
                           ∗     =                  𝑒𝑡𝑓     𝑛𝑎𝑣
                   𝑉𝑎𝑟(Δ )              𝑉𝑎𝑟(𝜖    − 𝜖   )

                                     (𝜎𝑛 − 𝜎𝑒)(𝜆𝜎𝑒 + 𝜂𝜎𝑛)
                         =                                      (A15)
                                         𝑉𝑎𝑟(𝜖𝑒𝑡𝑓 − 𝜖𝑛𝑎𝑣)

Having 𝜎𝑛 − 𝜎𝑒 determining the direction. Here, a negative direction would imply that
ETF share demand is relatively more sensitive to non-fundamental demand shocks.

                                  35
                         Stockholm School of Economics

Appendix B. ETF Premia Results

Brown et al. (2021) provide limited discussion and rationale behind the ETF Premia
measure and how it can capture the price reversal effect. According to Table I Appendix
B, only a few portfolios give significant returns. However, these returns are negative,
suggesting the opposite weighting of the deciles in this sample. Alternatively, given that
Brown et al. (2021) use data from Bloomberg instead of CRSP, having that as an
argument for an ambiguous result (Table I Appendix B) cannot be excluded. To further
assess the measure and gain a fundamental understanding of its construction, we attribute
it to further research. We also present the calculation behind the ETF Premia return in
equation B1.

Equilibrium ETF Fundamental Premium

Below is the equilibrium for the ETF fundamental premium for t = 2,

                                ∗                   𝑁       𝑒𝑡𝑓     𝑛𝑎𝑣
                  lim 𝜓 = lim ( 1 −    )( 𝜖   − 𝜖   ) = 0            (B1)
                 𝑛→∞      𝑛→∞     𝑁 + 1

having a large N will imply that ETF premium 𝜓 goes to zero in equilibrium in the model.
The result is prominent in a market close or perfect in competition.

Further, the measure for ETF Premia Change for ETF 𝑖 at time 𝑡 is defined as follows:

                                                                𝑝𝑡              𝑝𝑡−1
                 𝐸𝑇𝐹 𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑎 𝐶ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑖,𝑡 = (   − 1) − (     − 1)           (B2)
                                                              𝜋𝑡             𝜋𝑡−1

where 𝑝𝑡 is the price at time 𝑡 and 𝜋𝑡 is the NAV at time 𝑡. 𝑝𝑡−1 is the price at time 𝑡 − 1
and 𝜋𝑡−1 is the NAV at time 𝑡 − 1. Thus, we subtract the ETF premium at time 𝑡 − 1
from the ETF premium at time 𝑡.

                                  36
                         Stockholm School of Economics

Table I Appendix B. Portfolio sort on ETF Premia: ETF return.
 Notes: For every month, the ETFs are sorted on the prior month’s ETF Premia Change (equation
B2). Here, ETFs with the largest increase in premia in the past month are sorted into decile 10
while decile 1 consists of ETFs with the largest decrease in premia. Consequently, the time
horizon formation is considered as the average return by holding the portfolio in one, three and
six months. Additionally, by using Newey-West standard errors with the lag equivalent to the
return horizon in months, the risk for overlapping periods is controlled. Finally, all the return
numbers are reported in percentages (%).

                                  37
                         Stockholm School of Economics

Appendix C. Data Selection

Table I for Appendix C displays the names of the ETFs we have classified into the Mature
leveraged subsample. They have been categorized by hand classification through research
regarding the words that characterize leveraged ETFs. Specifically, those words have
been ultra, bull, bear, short, long and leverage. Table II exhibits the PERMNO for each
respective ETF that has been included from share code 74.

Table I Appendix C. Hand-classified selection of the Mature leveraged subsample.
 Notes: Displayed are the names of all the ETFs we have classified as Mature leveraged. We have
also included their associated PERMNO to facilitate transparency.

                                  38
                         Stockholm School of Economics

Table II Appendix C. ETFs with share code 74 that have been included in the sample.
 Notes: Displayed are the PERMNOs of all the ETFs with share code 74.

                                  39
                         Stockholm School of Economics

Appendix D. AI Disclosure

We would like to clarify and state the extent to which we have used generative AI.
Moreover, we have used ChatGPT in order to get help on certain coding issues and how
to tackle those problems that have occurred. Furthermore, to check for minor grammatical
errors, we have used Grammarly as a tool.

                                  40