UNVEILING THE PILLARS OF
M&A PERFORMANCE IN US.
PHARMA

A QUANTITATIVE STUDY ON SHORT-TERM SHAREHOLDER
VALUE IN THE PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY

AISLING BARRY

SELMA DEUMIC
  Bachelor Thesis

  Stockholm School of Economics

  2024

  UNVEILING THE PILLARS OF M&A PERFORMANCE IN US PHARMA:
  A quantitative study on short-term shareholder value in the pharmaceutical
  industry

Abstract:
       This paper examines the performance of mergers and acquisitions (M&As) within the
        US pharmaceutical industry during the period of 2019 to 2023. Through an analysis of
        cumulative abnormal returns in an event study, measuring financial ratios pre- and post
        the merger and their correlation in a multiple linear regression we aim to answer our
        research question. An inverse relation between profit margin and the cumulative
       abnormal return was discovered, which showed statistical significance. However,
        looking at the overall results and financial stability we found no evidence of significant
        gains associated with a merger. Consequently, rejecting the hypothesis that mergers and
        acquisitions generate short-term value for shareholders. Thus this paper raises the
        possibility for alternative reasons as to why mergers and acquisitions take place and
        remain a strategy of interest.

Keywords:

      Mergers and acquisitions; Pharmaceutical industry; Market impact; Cumulative abnormal
      returns; Financial Performance

Authors:

       Aisling Barry (25283)

       Selma Deumic (25256)

Tutors:

       Emil Bustos, Researcher, Department of Finance Examiner:

        Adrien D’avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Aisling Barry and Selma Deumic, 2024
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

INTRODUCTION

The impact caused by mergers and acquisitions (M&A) has been a topic of interest with
various researchers examining whether there is any shareholder wealth associated with
M&As in different sectors and geographic locations, Kiesel, Ries and Tielmann (2017). The
driving forces behind this strategic approach is to encompass efficiency gains manifested in
reduced costs and increased profits, geographical diversification, and enhancement in
competitive positioning. Houston and Ryngaert (1994) examine merger activity and
emphasize efficiency gains as the primary driver of value creation, while the overall rise in
revenue generated tends to be modest. Previous research has mainly focused on the impact of
M&As on research and development (R&D). A study performed by Pang, Folwell, Osborne,
Tung, Vasiliou, Boliter, Murphy and Szücs (2020) found that M&A has a mixed impact on
product development and technological expertise. Our study will therefore instead focus on
the financial implications within an industry with high economies of scale as described by
Turner, Hollingsworth and Anderson (2018). The US is the largest market for
biopharmaceuticals, accounting for around ⅓ of the global market and has an overall impact
on the US economy (International Trade Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce).
The largest number of new entities and pharmaceuticals between 2013 and 2017 was
generated by the US which can be seen in Figure 1.

The pandemic caused by COVID-19 impacted the financial landscape of societies such as an
increase in stock market volatility and thus creating instability. Despite these difficulties,
some sectors were affected differently, one sector in particular was the pharmaceutical sector.
Findings from Cho, Singh and Lo (2024) argue that the pandemic gave an additional boost to
the industry that already had significant growth potential, providing it with access to a source
of revenue that it did not have in prior years. Furthermore, Thakor, Anaya, Zhnag, Vilanilam,
Siah, Wong and Lo (2017) have found that pharmaceutical companies outperform the broader
market returns.

This study incorporates a significant societal dimension by examining data from both pre-
and post- COVID-19 pandemic periods, which is essential for understanding the evolving
economic landscape discussed in this paper. The pandemic's impact, characterized by
economic downturns, disruptions in supply chains, shifts in consumer behavior and
regulatory challenges, has compelled M&A practitioners to approach deal-making cautiously.
Therefore, investigating the M&A landscape in the post-pandemic era offers invaluable
insights into how businesses adapt to unforeseen challenges and how these adaptations shape
contemporary economic and market environments. Furthermore, according to Haowen &
Junkai (2024), M&A deals play a pivotal role in enabling companies to achieve external
growth through capital concentration, particularly when they struggle to generate sufficient
revenue and need to identify new developmental paths. As a consequence of the pandemic,
companies were compelled to reassess their vision and future development direction and thus
M&A became their resolution.

In addition, Ascher, Bansal, Dhankhar & Kim in a research article by McKinsey (2020)
suggests that historical trends underscore the pharmaceutical industry's inclination towards
mergers and acquisitions, driven by three overarching motivations: Firstly, the pursuit of
innovation remains a cornerstone for pharmaceutical firms. Given the intricate nature of drug
development, where numerous small compounds and processes converge to create a

                                             1
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

successful product, acquiring smaller, more creative firms has emerged as a strategic
imperative. Secondly, the quest for economies of scale dominates the pharmaceutical
landscape. With the development and manufacturing of pharmaceutical products entailing
substantial costs, industry players face persistent pressure to streamline expenses.
Consequently, M&A activities offer a pragmatic pathway for companies to realize financial
and operational efficiencies. Thirdly, portfolio realignment emerges as a critical consideration
for pharmaceutical companies. Managing commercial pipelines that necessitate years of
development, coupled with the imminent threat of patent cliffs, underscores the need for
continual monitoring and refinement of product portfolios. As strategic landscapes evolve,
particularly amidst uncertain times such as the pandemic, the imperative for portfolio
realignment remains of utmost importance.

Given these motivators, we want to examine financial differences prior to and post mergers
within the pharmaceutical industry. Therefore, our research question for this thesis is
formulated as follows:

How do mergers and acquisitions influence the short-term shareholder value of
pharmaceutical companies in the US?

The primary focus of this study is to determine whether the strategic utilization of M&As
contributes to short-term shareholder value within the pharmaceutical industry. Our findings
are derived from a three-step methodology. Firstly, we evaluate the impact of M&A
announcements using an event study. Secondly, we measure profitability and efficiency by
analyzing changes in financial instruments both before and after a merger and acquisition.
Finally, we merge these approaches by conducting a multiple linear regression to assess the
significance level of our model and determine the correlation between abnormal returns and
the actual financial health of the firms. The findings, consistent with Campa and Hernando
(2006), indicate that applying mergers and acquisitions as a strategic approach is not directly
correlated with improvements in the overall well-being of pharmaceutical firms in the US.
Despite observing subtle changes in financial ratios post-merger, these changes have not
proven to be significant and therefore do not have a tangible influence on short-term
shareholder value. These results offer insights into additional strategic motives prompting
firms to continue in applying this type of approach, despite the absence of clear financial
gains. This prompts further research within the field, potentially addressing a broader
question concerning why the merger and acquisition strategy persists.

                                             2
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

Source: IMAA – Institute for Mergers, Acquisitions, and Alliances (2024)

                                             3
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

LITERATURE REVIEW

This thesis revolves around three main articles, focusing on the derivation of key variables
and analysis methodology which creates a three-step approach for performance evaluation.
The exhibited literature lays the theoretical foundation for the thesis and provides testable
quantitative predictions for short-term stock market reactions and shareholder value.

M&As performance in the European financial industry

Campa and Hernando (2006), explore the difficulties in exploiting efficiency gains from an
M&A, especially in the case of cross-border transactions, which are reflected in the stock
market reaction upon the announcement of an M&A transaction. There is abundant literature
using event study methodology trying to ascertain whether bank mergers create value. Most
of these studies refer to events in the US banking system. Their analysis is supplemented by
research tools for shareholder value creation in financial M&As.

Campa and Hernando base their research on a three-step approach, beginning their analysis
with an event study around announcements of M&A transactions announced in the European
Union. They further evaluated the excess return to the target and acquirer through three
distinct periods: the pre-announcement period, the announcement period and the
post-announcement period. They discovered that target firms benefit from an increase in
excess returns prior to merger announcements, along with a noticeable positive excess return
just before and on the day of the announcement itself. Conversely, acquirers exhibit no
significant increase in excess returns during the pre-announcement phase and generally
experience negative average excess returns.

To better understand the economic evolution of the firms before and after the transaction,
they utilized descriptive statistics of financial ratios from both target and acquirer banks.
Given their interest in the economic performance of banks, they used the following financial
instruments: Return on equity (ROE), net financial margin (NFM), solvency (capitalization
ratio [CAP]), efficiency (cost to income ratio [EFF]), lending intensity (net loan to total assets
[LOAN]), risk profile (loan loss provision to total loans [PROV] and loss provision to net
interest revenue [RISK]). They performed a detailed analysis of a restricted sample of
financial firms in the banking sector where the main attention was to showcase the
differences in the intensity of value creation of the merging enterprises in terms of the
geographical scope of the merger and the relative size of the merging companies. Their
interest in this study partly derived from the significant increase in M&A activity from the
late 1900s to the early 2000s, particularly in the euro area where the M&A operations
increased by over 47% during the period 1997-2000 according to Cabral, Dierick and Vesala
(2002).

Further, in the study, Campa and Hernando did not find a direct relationship between mergers
and acquisitions and the financial performance or risk profiles of acquiring banks in the short
term based solely on the financial ratios gained. However, subtle improvements in the
efficiency- and equity ratios were shown following their acquisition which indicates that
acquiring banks maintain or enhance their efficiency compared to other banks on the market.

                                             4
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

The final step in their research is to analyze the ex-post performance by running a regression.
This allows for a nuanced understanding of the merger's effectiveness by statistically
isolating the effects of broader economic and regional factors on their performance outcomes.

In our analysis, we delve deeper into the dynamics of mergers and acquisitions within the
pharmaceutical sector in the US. Our methodology for assessing the ramifications of these
transactions on market outcomes borrows from the framework commonly applied in the
paper. Despite the differences like M&A activities specific to the pharmaceutical sector and
the varying circumstances under which they occur, the core approach remains fundamentally
consistent. Nevertheless, a distinguishing factor of our research is the volatile market
environment it examines, which is influenced by the global crisis triggered by COVID-19.
This contrasts sharply with analyses conducted in this paper which were conducted in more
stable financial periods. Thus, by integrating these methodological foundations with the
unique context of a global health crisis, our study not only provides insights into the
pharmaceutical sector's M&A dynamics during an unprecedented period but also contributes
to the broader understanding of how such events shape market responses and strategic
corporate behaviors.

Event Studies in Economics and Finance

Mackinlay (1997) demonstrates the effects of an economic event on the value of a firm.
Event studies, introduced by Fama, Fisher, Jensen & Roll (1969), produce useful evidence
on how stock prices respond to information. In his study, Mackinlay demonstrates the various
applications that an event study has as well as the procedures to perform said method. The
article provides valid reasonings for how event studies dominate the empirical research
within corporate finance. Furthermore, the research provides an illustrative example of an
event study revolving around quarterly earning announcements. This literature provides the
reader with descriptions of when certain models should be applied instead of other methods.
One example of this is when certain economic models such as the Capital Asset Pricing
Model (CAPM) and the Arbitrage Pricing Theory (APT) should be used. Mackinlay also
elaborates on the measure and analysis of abnormal returns for an accurate assessment of the
impact of the specific events.

From the research, we will apply the methodology described and perform it on a different
event. We will therefore take into account the various alternatives that exist for this method.
Continuously, this article gives further reasons as to why we chose our method as this
provides the reader with information on the validity. In combination with our third closely
related article, our event methodology section will be carried out.

The impact of mergers and acquisitions on shareholders' value: an empirical study of
pharmaceutical companies

Cerri, Gigante and Leone (2023) assess the short-term value creation or destruction for
shareholders of pharmaceutical companies between 2009 and 2019. The research is focused
on 400 deals. The research aims to demonstrate a possible correlation between an M&A
transaction announcement and a short-term abnormal return for the acquirer shareholders’
value. The methodology applied is the event study which exhibits the impact of a specific
event in a short time window. The objective is to determine an abnormal return due to an
M&A deal announcement on the acquirer side, the calculation compares the actual and

                                             5
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

forecasted returns of stocks. The expected returns were calculated according to the market
model using a simple linear regression where all the expected returns are computed for all
days included in the event. The analyzed event window covers a period of 1 day [0;0], 3 days
[-1;+1] and 7 days [-3;3]. The maximum span of event window possible is 41 days [−20;
+20].

The analysis of this research confirmed that there was an existence of a significant positive
abnormal return. Furthermore, return on equity and return on asset show a positive
correlation with the cumulative abnormal return. This article provides us with an event study
methodology for a short time window. The methodology builds upon the research
improvements provided by Fama et al. (1969) as this also applies statistical tests. The
methodology relies on three assumptions; marker efficiency, event novelty and the absence of
concurrent events biasing the study.

The analysis offers an overview of short-term positive stock price reactions for
pharmaceutical acquirer companies involved in an M&A transaction. In our analysis, we will
build upon the mentioned methodology in order to delve deeper into the short-term value of
acquiring companies within a selected region, the United States.

                                             6
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

DATA AND METHODOLOGY

Our thesis aims to study if there exists a relationship between short-term shareholder value
and M&A activities. In order to test this empirically two research papers will serve as a
structural framework. We will follow the event study methodology used by Mackinlay (1997)
and Gigante et al (2023), additionally we will derive appropriate measures and ratios similar
to Campa and Hernando (2006).

Data Selection

This research aims to understand and demonstrate with evidence a possible correlation
between an M&A transaction announcement and a short-term abnormal return from the
acquirer shareholders’ value. In order to demonstrate the stated hypothesis, the research
investigates M&A transactions that occurred between 2019 and 2023 in the pharmaceutical
sector. The transactions were gathered from the Eikon database in the selected time frame and
within the healthcare-, macro-industry and in particular pharmaceutical mid-industry. Data
were primarily collected from Eikon and secondarily, residual missing data were gathered
from income statements of specific firms as well as stock prices that were obtained from
CapitalIQ.

In detail, the selection settings criteria on Eikon were:

    (1) Database: All mergers and acquisitions
    (2) Target nation: United States of America
    (3) Acquirer nation: United States of America
    (4) Acquirer macro industry (Code): Healthcare
    (5) Acquirer mid-industry (Code): Pharmaceuticals
   (6) Date of announcement: 01/01/2019 to 31/12/2023
    (7) Acquirer status: Public
    (8) Deal value: > $250 million

The criteria mentioned yielded an output of 57 deals with the completeness of the metrics
observed. Only acquirers from the United States were taken into consideration. This was to
avoid any country of origin bias affecting transactions. The selected period, from January
2019 to December 2023, was decided to grant a time frame where there has been an increase
in the trend of performing mergers and acquisitions according to Mckinsey & Company
(2020), and the years of the pandemic served as an overreaching baseline of this study. As
explained by King, Slotegraaf and Kesner (2008), the target should be large enough to
generate a measurable impact on the acquirer shareholders’ value. Considering the analyzed
literature, the minimum transaction value of US$250 million was determined to select
high-volume deals. Additionally, animal pharmaceutical deals were excluded, along with
transactions lacking public financial information. This resulted in a total of 46 deals in the
output. It is recognized that the data sample is smaller than the research papers that are being
referenced; however, in line with research by Bartholdy, Olson and Peare (2007) the number
of firms has to be a minimum of 25 events to obtain an acceptable size and power in
statistical tests. Furthermore, the detected abnormal performance will be less than 1%. Table

                                             7
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

1 provides an overview of the sample data, indicating a highly diversified dataset that should
be further considered in this paper.

Note: We could not retrieve data for Lundbeck LLC, Xeris Pharmaceuticals INC and Capstar Special Purpose Acq.
Relative size was calculated by dividing deal value with market cap.

Event Study Application

We performed an event study around the announcement date of the merger denoted (t).
According to the event study methodology, stock prices react and reflect the effects of an
event, incorporating the perception of the market regarding the event itself. In order to assess
value creation or destruction for shareholders of the acquiring companies, event studies
around the announcement have been applied. Event studies demonstrate the impact of a
specific event in a short time window. Since the first application, the event study has been
reviewed and sophisticated over time. Another influential study was done by Ball and Brown
(1968), however, did not provide statistical tests; for that reason, we have decided to follow
Fama and Macbeth (1973) as the main reference. According to Mackinlay (1997), the
methodology relies on three assumptions based on; the efficiency of the market, the newness
of the event and the absence of concomitant events that can bias the study.

The event window represents the period during which the impact of an event is analyzed,
denoted as (t1, t2), with the announcement date of the event typically designated as day 0.
However, should the announcement become public after the stock market has closed, day 0
will be adjusted to the trading day following the announcement date as suggested by Ding,
Cheng and Zhou (2018). When opting for a standard performance model, it's necessary to
establish the estimation window. Typically, the preferred option, if viable, involves utilizing
the period preceding the event window as the estimation window. The authors suggest that a
large event window can bias the correlation between the event (M&A announcement day)
and the effect on the cumulative abnormal return. A short time window would therefore
suggest a reduction in interference of reactions to rumors and other events in days before and
after the event Gigante et al (2023). Considering that the study revolves around the
short-term value, the event study will be (-20;+20) to capture market activity associated with
the announcement and thus isolate the announcement event as much as possible.

In order to understand the event’s impact, a measure of the abnormal return will be
calculated. The abnormal returns calculation compares the actual and expected returns of
stocks and the method applied will be presented. Usually, actual returns are calculated as
percentage variation between stock price on day t and day t-1:

                                             8
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

                                                                                             (1)

where:
Rt is the return for time t;
Pt is the stock price for time t;
Pt-1 is the stock price for time t-1;

There are two common choices for modeling the normal return: the constant mean return
model and the market return. The difference between the methods is the definition of the Xt
whether it is constant or the market return. Despite the development of more sophisticated
models, many researchers still use the market model. Brown and Warner (1985) state that the
market model yields similar results to other models. Campbell, Lo and MacKinlay (1997)
also recommend the market model, arguing that the variance of abnormal returns is not
reduced by using more sophisticated methods. By taking into account the nature of our event,
being company-specific, research by Cohen, Hawawini, Maier, Schwarts and Whitcomb
(1983) has discussed that a market return model is preferred to multi-factor models. The
underlying assumption for the market model is that a stock’s return is primarily influenced by
market movements, along with a stock-specific idiosyncratic component (the announcement).
The model's linear specification follows from the assumed joint normality of asset returns.
The returns of the stock (Ri) and the market (Rm) are, respectively, the explanatory and
independent variables. This is a statistical model that correlates the stock’s return to the
market’s return Mackinlay (1997). In particular, for a stock i, the market model is:

                                   ERit = αit + βiRmt + εit (2)

                                                                   2
                        ( ε   = 0) 𝑣𝑎𝑟 ε(   ) = σ
                                                 𝑖𝑡                                        𝑖𝑡            ε

where:
ERit is the return for stock i on period t;
Rmt is the return of the market portfolio m on period t;
α , β i and ε  are the parameters of the market model.
   𝑖                𝑖

                                             9
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

                                                       2
The market model performance indicator is the R of the regression. Considering that the
pharmaceutical sector over-performed the market during the pandemic as discussed by
Esparica and López (2022), we have performed our event study on both market return as well
as industry-specific returns. Utilizing these two returns will give insights into the
performance comparison of M&A announcements against the overall market and the
pharmaceutical market.

Furthermore, to compute the parameters an ordinary least squares calculation has been
applied as a robust estimation procedure of the market model parameters. Then, abnormal
returns due to the event analyses can be calculated as the difference between the actual and
the expected return for stock i in a specific time t:

                                      ARit = Rit − ERit (3)

The different abnormal returns are clustered by company stock and time span, between t1 and
t2. Furthermore t1 ≤ t2 where t1 ≥ T1 and t2 ≤ T2 . T1 and T2 represent the extremes of the
event window. In this paper, T1 coincides with the 20th day before the announcement date and
simultaneously T2 is the 20th day after the announcement date, as performed by Mackinlay
(1997). It is typical for the estimation window and the event window not to overlap. The
design provides estimators for the parameters of the normal return model which are not
influenced by the returns around the event. Including the event window in the estimation of
the normal model parameters could lead to the event returns having a large influence on the
normal return measure. The analyzed event window covers a period of 1 day [0; 0], 3 days
[-1; +1] and 7 days [-3; +3]. Wide event windows can be biased by other companies or
market events that are not related to the analysis of this paper. It is acknowledged that
potential asymmetry can occur when announcements are released during trading hours.
Despite this issue, these windows are optimal for studying acute market responses, as well as
following prior research such as Gigante et al (2023). The cumulative abnormal returns need
to be aggregated within the event window selected computing the average cumulative
abnormal return given N events in order to statistically test the abnormal returns which will
give relevance and validation to the research:

                                                                                          𝑡2
                                   CARi(t1,t2) =  ∑ 𝐴𝑅                                (4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                              𝑖
                                                               𝑡 = 𝑡
                                                                            1

Once equation 4 is performed, the average cumulative abnormal return is aggregated in
accordance with the stock and time dimensions, this should be tested against the null
hypothesis H0 = 0. The alternative hypothesis is stated as HA: CAR ≠ 0.

The null hypothesis of the average cumulative abnormal returns was statistically tested by
running a t-test with α equal to 5%. Following the methodology from Markides and Ittner
(1994), the t-statistic was computed as follows:

                                            10
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

                                                                                              (5)

where:
SCA(t1, t2) is the standard deviation of the selected event window;
N is equal to the number of deals in our sample.

If the average cumulative returns are significantly different from 0, the null hypothesis is
rejected in our equation 5. Thus, it is possible to assume a short-term value reaction for
pharmaceutical companies involved in M&A transactions on the acquiring side.

Performance analysis

To better assess the economic state of pharmaceutical companies, an analysis was conducted
aiming to evaluate each firm's condition before and after a transaction. The profitability,
solvency and efficiency of these companies were measured using the following financial
indicators: Return on Equity (ROE), Return on Assets (ROA), Capitalization Rate (CAP),
Cost Efficiency Ratio (EFF) and Profit Margin (PM). The analysis spans two distinct periods:
one year preceding the announcement date of both target and acquiring firms and two years
following the announcement date for acquiring firms. This approach allows for discerning
any changes in performance resulting from the merger.

Given that the analysis covered a three-year timeframe (one year prior to the announcement
and two years post-announcement), adjustments were made in cases where deals were
announced before the month of March in a given year. In such instances, financial statements
from the year preceding the announcement were utilized to ensure an accurate depiction of
the company's financial health prior to the merger. Similarly, when deals were finalized
beyond the month of October, financial statements from the appropriate year were selected to
maintain consistency and capture the relevant financial period for our analysis which aligns
with previous research by Campa and Hernando (2006).

Additionally, the values of each ratio are presented as both the mean, median and at each
quartile of the sample distribution to mitigate the impact of potential outliers that could skew
the mean value during subsequent analysis. Furthermore, the industry aggregate financials for
ROE and ROA, are obtained from the S&P Capital IQ database, as a comparative benchmark
against the sample ratios.

This approach enables a deeper insight into the financial well-being of the firms involved,
thereby facilitating an examination of whether mergers and acquisitions indeed exert a
tangible impact on the companies' financial health.

                                              11
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

Multiple linear regression

Finally, a multiple linear regression analysis was conducted with the cumulative abnormal
returns (CAR) of the acquiring pharmaceutical company as the dependent variable. Where
the independent variables consisted of financial metrics calculated previously, including
ROE, ROA, CAP, EFF and PM. A time window of -3 to +3 was chosen, as this interval
showed the closest to being statistically significant compared to the other two event windows
that were retrieved in the generated sample data. This was in line with Gigante et al (2023)
in order to understand how each predictor influences the response variable.

            CAR=β0 +β1 ×ROE+β2 ×ROA+β3 ×CAP+β4 ×EFF+β5 ×PM (6)

                                            12
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

EMPIRICAL FINDINGS

This section is devoted to illustrating the empirical results that we obtain through the analysis
of our sample data. We combine descriptive statistics with plots and a written review of our
results. This is concluded by a brief statement concerning whether or not the hypothesis is
statistically confirmed.

Based on the methods applied we can confirm that M&A announcements do not influence
the short-term shareholder value of pharmaceutical companies within the US market. From
our short-term time frame, financial benchmarks such as ROA, ROE, EFF and CAP are
moderately affected. However, the changes following the merger suggest a very moderate
effect. Furthermore, the M&A announcement does not generate a competitive strategy for
firms to outperform the pharmaceutical market. Following the diagnostic test, it is possible to
discuss the empirical findings of the multiple linear regression model, which is our most
conclusive model, we find that several variables do not significantly influence shareholder
returns. We notice as well that the only variable that showed significance was the PM
variable and had an inverse relationship with the CAR, which highlights financial skepticism
regarding mergers and acquisitions. Our results suggest that the current state of the
pharmaceutical market might generate liquid financial wealth and not isolated M&A.

R-squared

The R-squared is considered a poor performance indicator of this specific regression model
(as seen in Appendix 2). Suggesting that the independent variables do not explain the
variability in the dependent variables. When testing the correlation within the estimation
window, the conclusion further signifies that the relationship is not linear.

The utilization of an event study allows us to concentrate on the interference of other
variables, outside of the M&A announcement scope, that can impact the stock price.
However, by limiting the variables, our low R-squared could be explained by our model not
including all relevant factors that are industry-specific as well as unpredictable variables.
Furthermore, a relatively small sample size could also impose difficulties in detecting the
variability between the independent and dependent variables, however, our real-world data
imposes the ability to expand our sample size.

Predicted Return vs. Actual Returns

The predicted returns show how the event window would look if the event, i.e. the
announcement, would not occur on the market. From our abnormal return, the difference
between the actual return and our expected return, we can conclude that the difference is
modest, which suggests that the M&A announcement does not generate a result that
outperforms the market.

We also performed our event study on the market return for the pharmaceutical industry to
establish whether the M&A announcements could outperform competitors in this specific
market. The application was made in order to capture the pharmaceutical market’s
movements during COVID-19 without being affected by the overall market. From the
pharmaceutical market return, our model still shows on average a positive abnormal return

                                            13
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

meaning that our actual return is slightly higher than our predicted return. However, the
abnormal return difference is small, meaning that the announcement does not have a strong
impact on the market reactions.

In Figure 3, you can see a graph of average abnormal returns (ARs) by the day of the event
based on the market return. From the figure we can conclude that there is a slight increase in
the abnormal returns after the day of the announcement which follows a similar result of
Gigante et al (2023).

Time Window T-test

The performance of our t-test generated a result where there is no statistical evidence to reject
the null hypothesis. This means that an M&A announcement does not generate short-term
abnormal returns for pharmaceutical companies’ stocks involved in an M&A transaction on
the acquiring side. Below we present the event study results in our time window revolving
around our t-test.

                                            14
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

From the table, the returns within this period, the cumulative abnormal return across the
market and industry-specific returns generate predictions that are closer to the actual return.
This is coherent with the findings of Gigante et al (2023). The mean on the announcement
date is similar to the literature. However, the remaining time windows differ in results.

The t-test as derived from Table 2, with 𝛼 equal to 5% for all event windows is not significant
(p-value > 0.05) , and thus we can not reject the null hypothesis.Meaning that the
announcement has a small impact on the actual return. Not rejecting the null hypothesis in a
t-test suggests that any observed differences between the predicted and actual returns, despite
positive abnormal returns, are nevertheless statistically insignificant. Furthermore, other
research performed by Cho et al (2023) has found that other sectors, such as biotechnology,
have greater sensitivity in their stock price compared to pharmaceutical companies which is
due to pharmaceutical companies being influenced by general financial news rather than
merger-associated news. Considering the influence, it could therefore be argued that the
reason for our different results is based on the timeframe of the study compared to Gigante et
al (2023).

Distribution of performance measures for the target and acquiring firms involved in a sample of 46 completed M&A transactions involving
US pharmaceutical firms in the period 2018–2024. Each measure is calculated for the target and acquirer firm in the year prior to the
announcement date of the M&A and for the acquirer firm in the second year after the announcement date. The last column, reports the
industry aggregate financials, reported as S&P Capital IQ database
(1) The definition of the variables is reported in the Appendix.

                                            15
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

Effects on performance of pharmaceutical M&As

In our analysis of the values presented in Table 3, we have uncovered evidence pivotal to
addressing our research question. We observed moderate fluctuations in the financial metrics
of target firms compared to acquiring firms from one year to the next. Initially, the target
firms displayed a significantly higher average Return on Equity (ROE) than the acquiring
firms. However, a closer inspection of the median ROE reveals that target firms had negative
values, in stark contrast to the positive values seen in acquiring firms, suggesting that outliers
may be inflating the mean ROE for target firms.
A trend was noted in the Return on Assets (ROA), with a slight positive shift from the
median ROA of target firms to acquiring firms. Conversely, Capital (CAP) metrics remained
largely unchanged, indicating stability across the observed financial characteristics. A
significant outlier in Efficiency (EFF) suggests that the mean value might be misleading, as
supported by the notably lower 75th percentile compared to the mean. However, the median
EFF values indicated enhanced efficiency post-merger and acquisition. Moreover, the Profit
Margin (PM) demonstrated a notable improvement, transitioning from negative to positive
values following the merger and acquisition.

The lower panel of Table 3 provides a comparative analysis of the same financial ratios for
acquiring firms two years post-transaction. Here, we observed minimal overall changes in
financial performance based on median values, although mean values indicated some outlier
effects as noted previously. While the mean ROE showed a slight improvement, this seems
more reflective of industry trends rather than the impact of the M&A. In reviewing profit
margins, we again noticed a positive trend in median values from target to acquiring firms
over two years.

Our data reveals significant outliers impacting the mean values of ROE, ROA, EFF and PM,
suggesting a highly diverse sample. This diversity is further illustrated in Table 1, particularly
when examining the minimum and maximum market capitalization values, which
demonstrate a wide range of data. This variance must be considered carefully and taken into
account when analyzing generated results. Our findings align with previous research gathered
from Campa and Hernando (2006), suggesting no significant changes in the financial health
of firms pre- and post-M&A, thus supporting the conclusions drawn by other scholars in the
field.

Multiple linear regression

To further analyze the impact on which the abnormal results from M&As are associated with
the financial health of the firms in the sample, we completed a regression to show potential
impact and to answer whether M&As create shareholder value in the short term. Despite
relatively low R-squared and adjusted R-squared values, indicating that the model explains
only a portion of the variability in the response variable, the F-statistic suggests statistical
significance. This implies that at least some predictor variables reliably forecast the response
variable. However, the limited explanatory power of the model suggests that other
unaccounted variables may influence the results, aligning with the common understanding
that stock market excess returns around announcements may not reliably predict the
economic performance of the involved firms.

                                            16
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

The analysis reveals that the Return on Equity (ROE), Return on Assets (ROA), Cost of
efficiency (EFF) and Capitalization ratio (CAP) do not significantly influence shareholder
returns, suggesting that these ratios should be interpreted with caution. In contrast, the Profit
Margin (PM) demonstrates a statistically significant correlation with the dependent variable,
indicating a meaningful relationship. Specifically, there exists an inverse relationship between
the Profit Margin and the Cumulative Abnormal Return (CAR) during a merger and
acquisition announcement within a -3 to +3 day window. This negative correlation suggests
that financial markets might perceive a higher profit margin as a potential risk to the
sustainability of earnings post-merger, hence the negative impact on CAR.

Moreover, a higher Profit Margin is associated with lower CAR, which may raise concerns
among investors regarding the long-term viability of high margins following mergers. This
observation is further supported by a low standard error (0.01) of the PM coefficient,
affirming the statistical robustness and reliability of this finding. This analysis underscores
the market's skepticism about the benefits of mergers and acquisitions when firms report
high-profit margins, reflecting concerns over future financial health and the strategic
positioning of the companies involved.

When evaluating the results found in both the performance section with the regression, our
findings suggest that although there are some improvements in the financial performance of
the firms after a merger in terms of profitability and efficiency. Nevertheless, most of the
results were not statistically significant which also is in line with results found in Leepsa and
Mishra’s (2012) research.

                                            17
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

Considering the pharmaceutical performance on the financial market, in comparison to the
broader market returns, a multiple linear regression on the industry-specific CAR was
performed. From this regression, we can derive that, similarly to the market return, the
variables ROE, ROA, CAP and EFF are not statistically significant. Furthermore, the profit
margin continues to have a negative relation to the CAR. Therefore, our findings suggest that
the reasons for the pharmaceutical industry's high performance regarding the broader market
performance are not due to returns associated with M&A announcements or the financial
health of the firms. As seen in Table 7 and especially looking at the F-statistics and the
p-value it suggests that the overall regression model with an industry-specific CAR is
statistically significant, which is also seen in the previous regression. Further, the output from
the regressions is also in line with the results computed in the event study, where the variance
between the market CAR and industry-specific CAR is subtle. This further supports the
overarching results found in this thesis.

                                            18
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

Target return on equity

The return on equity of the target company computed as a ratio between net income and total
equity, is a metric of performance. It refers to the ability of the target company to generate
profit from its resources. In the analysis ROE has a coefficient near zero (0.00) and a very
high p-value (1.00), suggesting that changes in ROE have no significant effect on the
response variable.

Target return on assets

The return on assets of the target company, calculated as a ratio between net income and total
assets, is considered a measure of efficiency. It compares profit and total assets, measuring
the capacity to generate earnings from the company's assets. The regression shows a
coefficient of 0.15 with a p-value of 0.40, meaning it's not statistically significant, though the
coefficient suggests a moderate positive relationship.

Target capitalization rate

The capitalization rate of the target company is computed as a ratio between total equity and
total assets, it is a metric related to a company's financial structure and risk profile. The
output in the regression model shows that CAP is not statistically significant.

Target efficiency ratio

The efficiency ratio of the target company, calculated as a ratio between operating expenses
and net interest revenue plus other income, is considered a measure of operational efficiency.
EFF has a coefficient of 0.07, with a p-value of 0.16, suggesting a potential positive
relationship, but it's not statistically significant.

Target profit margin

The profit margin of a target company, calculated as a ratio between net income and
revenues, describes the ability to generate profit from revenues. This ratio is statistically
significant and indicates a negative relationship between PM and the response variable. Each
one-unit increase in PM is associated with a decrease of 0.04 units in the response variable.

                                            19
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

CONCLUSION

Our paper examines the relationship between mergers and acquisitions in the pharmaceutical
industry amid the COVID-19 pandemic years, analyzing their impact on the financial health
of the involved firms and their predicted returns. Studying US firms, we found evidence that
suggests that there are some short-term effects on financial profitability and efficiency when
comparing financial characteristics from target firms and acquiring firms post M&As.
Further, there are some effects on short-term market return however the impact is not
statistically significant in order for it to outperform the market. The following analysis
concluded by the multiple regression model also strengthens the hypothesis that there are no
significant, short-term effects on the overall financial gains for acquiring firms in this
industry.

By performing an event study, we gathered that the actual returns are similar to our predicted
returns emphasizing the lack of implications that announcements have on market activity.
Simultaneously, the financial performance of the target firms in contrast to the acquiring
firms showed subtle changes in the overall financial health of the firms. One distinguishing
characteristic that showed significance was the profit margin suggesting that M&A
announcements still hold a skepticism in the pharmaceutical industry due to the inverse
relationship between the variables.

Further research could be extended to analyzing long-term effects post mergers and
acquisitions in a financially stable environment as well as analyzing a broader range of
variables such as research and development, company size and cross-border deals in order to
gain a more comprehensive outlook on the strategic reasoning behind mergers and
acquisitions.

                                            20
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

REFERENCES

Ball, R., & Brown, P. (1968). An Empirical Evaluation of Accounting Income Numbers.
Journal of Accounting Research, 6(2), 159–178.

Bartholdy, J., Olson, D., & Peare, P. (2007). 'Conducting Event Studies on a Small Stock
Exchange'. The European Journal of Finance, 13(3), 227–252.

Brown, S. J. and Warner, J. B. (1985). Using daily stock returns: the case of event studies,
Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 3-31.

Cabral, I., Dierick, F., & Vesala, J. (2002). 'Banking integration in the euro area'. ECB
Occasional Paper Series No. 6, 3368.

Campa, J. M., & Hernando, I. (2006). 'M&As performance in the European financial
industry'. Journal of Banking & Finance, 30, 3367–3392.

Campbell, J. Y., Lo, A. W. and MacKinlay, A. C. (1997). The econometrics of financial
markets, NJ: Princeton University Press. 149-180.

Cho, J., Singh, M., & Lo, A. W. (2024). 'How does news affect biopharma stock prices?: An
event study'. PLoS ONE, 19(1).

Cohen, K. J., Hawawini, G. A., Maier, S. F., Schwartz, R. A., & Whitcomb, D. K. (1983).
“Friction in the Trading Process and the Estimation of Systematic Risk.” Journal of Financial
Economics, 12(2), 263–278.

Ding, L., Lam, H. K. S., Cheng, T. C. E., & Zhou, H. (2018). 'A review of short-term event
studies in operations and supply chain management'. International Journal of Production
Economics, 200, 329–342.

Esparcia, C., & López, R. (2022). 'Outperformance of the pharmaceutical sector during the
COVID-19 pandemic: Global time-varying screening rule development'. Information
Sciences (New York), 609, 1181–1203.

Eugene F. Fama, Lawrence Fisher, Michael C. Jensen & Richard Roll "The Adjustment of
Stock Prices to New Information," Int. Econ. Rev., Feb. 1969, 10(1), pp. 1-21.

Florian Kiesel, Jörg M. Ries, Artur Tielmann. (2017). 'The impact of mergers and
acquisitions on shareholders' wealth in the logistics service industry'. International Journal of
Production Economics, 193, 781–797.

King, D. R., Slotegraaf, R. J., & Kesner, I. (2008). 'Performance implications of firm resource
interactions in the acquisition of R&D-intensive firms'. Organization Science, 19(2),
327-340.

Leepsa, N. M., & Mishra, C. S. (2012). 'Post Merger Financial Performance: A Study with
Reference to Select Manufacturing Companies in India'. International Research Journal of
Finance and Economics, Issue 83, 1450-2887. EuroJournals Publishing, Inc.

                                            21
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

MacKinlay, A. Craig. (1997). 'Event Studies in Economics and Finance'. Journal of
Economic Literature, 35(1), 13–39. American Economic Association.

McKinsey & Company. (2020). 'A new prescription for M&A in pharma'. McKinsey &
Company.

Pang, T., Folwell, B., Osborne, A., et al. (2020). 'Study on the impact of mergers and
acquisitions on innovation in the pharmaceutical sector'. European Commission,
Directorate-General for Research and Innovation.

SelectUSA. (n.d.). 'Biopharmaceuticals Industry'. International Trade Administration.
https://www.trade.gov/selectusa-biopharmaceuticals-industry

Thakor, R. T., Anaya, N., Zhang, Y., Vilanilam, C., Siah, K. W., Wong, C. H., & Lo, A. W.
(2017). 'Just how good an investment is the biopharmaceutical sector?'. Nature
Biotechnology, 35(12), 1149–1157.

Tian, H., & Wang, J. (2023). 'Navigating the storm: How the COVID-19 pandemic
transformed the M&A landscape'. Finance Research Letters, 59, 104834.

Turner, H. C., Toor, J., Hollingsworth, T. D., & Anderson, R. M. (2018). 'Economic
Evaluations of Mass Drug Administration: The Importance of Economies of Scale and
Scope'. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 66(8), 1298–1303.

Fama, E. F., & MacBeth, J. D. (1973). 'Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests'.

                                            22
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

APPENDIX

Calculation Clarification

Return on equity (ROE) = (Net income/Total equity)

Return on assets (ROA) - (Net profit/Total assets)

Capitalization ratio (CAP) = (Equity/Total assets)

Cost to income ratio (EFF) = (Operating expenses/(Net interest revenue + Other income)

Profit margin (PM) = (Net income/ Revenue)

                                            23
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

Appendix 1: Financial metrics

Note: Financial metrics for each acquiring company at defined point in time

                                            24
                                     Stockholm School of Economics

Appendix 2: r-squared based on market return

Note: R-squared based on market return.

                                            25