PAY TO WIN?

THE EFFECT OF COMMISSIONED EQUITY RESEARCH ON
STOCK PRICES

JONATHAN TOPOLSKI

LUCAS KARLBERG

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2024
Pay to Win? The Effect of Commissioned Equity Research on Stock Prices

Abstract:

   This thesis examines the impact of coverage initiation reports by commissioned
   equity research analysts on stock prices, with a unique focus on Swedish small- and
   mid-cap stocks. The sample encompasses companies receiving coverage from six
   different financial institutions between 2014 and 2024. A comprehensive event study
   using the market model is conducted on the sample containing stocks that have
   initiated coverage with a first financial institution to find average and cumulative
   average abnormal returns. A significant increase in the average abnormal returns on
   the day the report is published demonstrates that initiating coverage leads to a short-
   term positive shock on the stock prices. Further analysis is conducted by comparing
   subsamples, such as companies that had coverage terminated compared to companies
   that are still receiving coverage, companies initiating coverage with specialized
   research firms compared to companies initiating coverage with larger banks, and
   companies initiating coverage with their first financial institution compared to
   companies initiating coverage with a second financial institution. Significant average
   abnormal returns on the initiation day are found for all subsamples except the sample
   containing companies initiating coverage with a second financial institution.

Keywords:

   Event Study, Coverage initiations, Abnormal returns, Commissioned research

Authors:

   Jonathan Topolski (25359)
   Lucas Karlberg (25242)

Tutor:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Jonathan Topolski and Lucas Karlberg, 2024

                                   1
1 Introduction

Following the global financial crisis of the late 2000s, several financial shocks severely im-
pacted the financial markets, including a decrease in analyst coverage. This has negatively
affected many firms, especially smaller firms, and firms with fewer analysts, as these firms
experienced real effects of decreases in total investment and total financing [Derrien and
Kecsk´es, 2013]. Subsequently, the standard solution for smaller firms is to pay financial
institutions to research them. However, introducing a contractual agreement between the
firm and the institution providing the research creates a potential conflict of interest that
would not have occurred before commissioned equity research.

    The effect of initiating coverage published by analysts for stocks listed in America is
the topic of several research papers. [Womack, 1996] finds evidence that the issuance of
buy recommendations immediately impacts stock prices, presenting substantial increases
in stock price. [Bradley et al.] find that analyst coverage is often initiated after the expira-
tion of the IPO quiet period and that these reports frequently have a favorable recommen-
dation, which leads to significant abnormal returns around the event day.

    [Michaely et al., 1999] state that the recommendations by the underwriters show sig-
nificant evidence of bias, and the market does not recognize these biases. This evidence
supports the theory that the analysts are biased when conducting their analysis, as they
may be incentivized to give a ”buy” recommendation to ensure that the company does not
terminate the contract with the bank. Part of the reason that markets do not recognize these
biases is due to financial illiteracy being widespread in many financial markets [Lusardi
and Mitchell, 2011]. Therefore, equity research affects the market as it decreases the dif-
ficulty for investors in understanding a stock’s valuation. The research reports could lead
to investors having a better understanding of the companies and what they do, as well as
what their financial situation is like. This can have a negative effect as the investors might
rely too much on equity research, leading to poor investments if the reports are biased.

    However, little research has been published about commissioned equity research and
no research on how it affects the Swedish stock market. The closest related article analyz-
ing the effect of stock recommendations in Sweden was [Lid´en, 2006], which examined
how analyst recommendations and stock recommendations in Swedish printed media af-
fected stock prices from 1995 - 2000. He found that journalist recommendations affected
stock prices more than analyst recommendations. Furthermore, he found that if investors
follow the ”buy” recommendations, they will not outperform the market, while investors
who can follow the ”sell” recommendations will make profitable trades. However, there

                                   2
are significant differences between [Lid´en, 2006], considering we are specifically analyz-
ing coverage initiations of commissioned equity reports while also using a sample from a
different time period.

   A reason for the increased number of Swedish firms offering commissioned equity
research is the European Union’s regulation changes in early 2018. MiFID II intends
to increase transparency, improve investor protection, and enhance trust in the European
financial markets [V¨ardepapper (Mifid/Mifir) — Finansinspektionen, n.d.]. Financial in-
stitutions must explicitly and formally state the fees companies pay for equity research.
This led to decreased coverage of smaller companies from traditional research firms as
it was no longer a worthwhile venture for them. Currently, large banks and other finan-
cial institutions produce commissioned equity research, with the price being quoted at 0.3
MSEK to 0.6 MSEK per year [Ahmadi, 2020].

    This recent increase in commissioned equity research is intriguing because although
many retail investors recognize these reports, there have been no studies on either the short-
or long-term effects of initiating coverage on stocks in Sweden. Therefore, this paper
analyzes the impact of specifically commissioned equity research on Swedish small—to
medium-cap firms. An event study using the market model is conducted, with the event
day being the day the coverage for that stock is initiated. The total sample includes all
possible Swedish stocks with ”buy” recommendations from paid-for reports available to
the public. With this study, we aim to answer the following research question:

    What effect does the initiating coverage of commissioned equity research with a ”buy”
recommendation have on stock prices?

    This paper contributes by specifically analyzing commissioned equity research in Swe-
den and testing if there is evidence of effects to studies analyzing initiating similar events
for stocks listed on the American stock exchanges. Furthermore, this paper investigates
the different sub samples, such as stocks that have terminated coverage with the respective
financial institutions and stocks that have initiated coverage with a second financial insti-
tution. [Irvine, 2003] analyzed the incremental impact of analyst coverage initiation and
found that the market responds more positively to analysts’ initiation than other recom-
mendations. Our analysis found no significant average abnormal return for the event day
with the sample of stocks receiving initiating coverage from a second financial institution.

    This paper also analyzes the phenomena of the firm terminating its contractual agree-
ment with the financial institution. This is done to account for the fact that there is a strong
survivorship bias in our sample. Due to the unique conditions where firms are paid to

                                   3
research companies, there is a lack of academic articles further analyzing such a situation.
[Li and You, 2015] analyze exogenous coverage terminations and find that this leads to
increased information asymmetry and decreased investor recognition the following year.
Important to note is that this paper examines the effect of initiating coverage and its ef-
fects before the actual termination occurs. Furthermore, the terminations in [Li and You,
2015] are due to brokerage mergers or closures, while the terminations in this paper are
due to the command of the company paying for the research. To our knowledge, this is the
first paper to analyze these specific sub samples for stocks listed on the Stockholm Stock
Exchange.

    We find significant results for the average abnormal return for the sample containing
companies initiating coverage with their first financial institution on the event day, which is
the day the initiation reports are published. Furthermore, we find significant results for av-
erage abnormal returns on the event day for all other sub samples, except the sub samples
containing companies initiating coverage with a second financial institution. Therefore,
small-to mid-cap companies can essentially ”purchase” a short-term positive increase us-
ing commissioned equity research. Furthermore, this study also takes a more long-term
approach to analyze the stock prices after the event day. However, it is important to note
that while there are general trends that can be explored, none of the other days in the event
window displayed significant t-statistics or significant p-values, meaning there are exter-
nal events such as interest rate changes, pandemics, and increased inflation that could have
impacted certain stocks, therefore, affecting the results.

    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the theoretical back-
ground to this thesis, including an explanation of the efficient market hypothesis, a litera-
ture review, and an explanation of commissioned equity research. The following section
explains the methodology and hypothesis. Section 4 describes the process of collecting
and cleaning the necessary data. In section 5, the results of the event study are analyzed.
Section 6 is a discussion of possible limitations along with the generalizability of this
study. Ultimately, section 7 includes a conclusion and a discussion of possible further
research.

                                   4
2 Theoretical Background

2.1 Efficent market hypothesis

The efficient market hypothesis states that stock prices should incorporate all available
information and be the best approximation of a stock’s value [Fama, 1970]. There are three
different forms: weak, semi-strong, and strong. According to the weak form, stock prices
take into account historical prices, and prices should move randomly and be independent
of one another. Accordingly, conducting technical analysis on the stocks should not make
a profitable trading strategy possible. The semi-strong form indicates that prices will react
to new information made available to the public and that the utilization of technical or
fundamental analysis should not be able to grant you a profitable trading strategy. Finally,
the strong form indicates that all public and private information is incorporated into the
stock price, meaning no investor has an advantage.

    Therefore, if you assume that strong form efficiency is true, then any published analyst
recommendations should not affect stock prices, as this private information should already
be incorporated into the stock price before the reports are publicly released.

2.2 Commissioned equity research

The concept and purpose of commissioned equity research can be understood from Carnegie’s
website: ”Carnegie Commissioned Research aims to increase visibility and knowledge
around small and medium-sized listed companies. Equity research is a tool to analyze
metrics, both operational and financial, as well as clarify the investment case. Increased
transparency benefits both the turnover in the share and investor confidence. Commis-
sioned research means that the analyzed company compensates Carnegie for the work.”
[About Commissioned Research - Carnegie, 2024]. The article Kirk [2011] finds that
firms that have more uncertain cash flows and harder-to-value assets, lower turnover, and
lower institutional ownership are more likely to be the recipients of commissioned equity
research. According to Billings et al. [2014], commissioned equity research can bene-
fit investors in small and mid-cap equity markets and provide information on the stock
when conventional sell-side research has declined. The tool used to increase visibility
and knowledge are reoccurring equity research reports published in exchange for payment
from the covered company. The first equity research report the analyst publishes on the

                                   5
company is an initiation coverage report.

    The content and structure of the report will differ from bank to bank. However, each re-
port will provide a general analysis of the stock’s financial statements and indicate whether
the stock is deemed worthy to buy, sell, or hold. In our study, we have noticed that an-
alysts will provide a target range in the stock price reflecting the motivated value of the
stock rather than outright providing a ”buy,” ”hold,” or ”sell” recommendation. This is
also something that Womack [1996] observed about conventional, non-commissioned eq-
uity research reports and analyst recommendations. Womack [1996] argues that the costs
of issuing ”sell” recommendations are greater than those of ”buy recommendations,” refer-
encing that ”sell” recommendations present more risk due to being less frequent and hence
more visible. The notion that the covered company also pays for the analysis adds more to
the cost of ”sell” recommendations. Intuitively, one could figure that a company would not
be willing to pay for a negative analysis or a ”sell” recommendation and might sever its
links with the analyst bank and exit as a customer. A similar idea is found in Malmendier
and Shanthikumar [2007] while examining the effect of underwriter relationships on stock
recommendations. Those firms with underwriter relationships with the covered company
significantly bias their recommendations upward, and very few ”sell” recommendations
exist. While the analyst banks provide a motivated stock value, some are ambivalent about
whether these constitute a recommendation or investment advice.

2.3 Related literature

Much literature examines the effect that analyst recommendations have on stock returns.
As found in Womack [1996], analyst recommendations significantly affect stock prices.
The article examines buy and sell recommendations and uncovers systematic discrepan-
cies between prices before and on the recommendation date without coinciding with the
release of material information. The article [Michaely et al., 1999] studies the effect of
conflicting interests when analyst banks have investment banking relationships with the
covered company. Such relationships impose two interests on the analyst bank, namely
cultivating the relationship with the company while also providing quality research as a
sell-side researcher. The authors find that recommendations issued by underwriter banks
significantly perform more poorly than recommendations of unaffiliated analysts and that
there exists a bias among underwriter relationships that the market does not realize the
full extent of. Malmendier and Shanthikumar [2007] find that analysts bias stock recom-
mendations upward, primarily if they are affiliated with the company behind the stock.
Kirk [2011]) uses a sample of stock returns between 1999 and 2006 that have received

                                   6
paid-for analyst coverage in the U.S. stock market. This article helps us understand the
functioning and economics behind commissioned equity research. The article Billings
et al. [2014] studies the topic of paid-for sell-side research on the U.S. stock market, albeit
with a different method to ours. The authors regress future earnings reports on analyst
recommendations while also constructing portfolios to determine whether to go long on
stocks with ”buy” recommendations and short on stocks with ”sell” recommendations. As
this study was performed on the U.S. market, the authors have significantly more data
points available than our study on the Swedish stock market. A database comparable to
the one they used is unavailable for the Swedish stock market, so their method would not
be feasible.

    This article contributes to the related literature by examining the effect of commis-
sioned analyst recommendations on stock prices, a novel phenomenon few have studied.
While most academic research articles analyze a sample of stocks listed in the U.S., our
article examines the Swedish stock market. Furthermore, our research is performed on
more recent analyst recommendations and stock returns than published articles. We also
study the effect of initiation reports published by other banks after the first bank’s initia-
tion report. In addition, we also look at the difference in impact from analyst coverage that
has subsequently been terminated from those that are ongoing. Furthermore, we add to the
literature by exploring potential differences in the performance of stock recommendations
between different analyst banks and firms.

                                   7
3 Methodology and Hypothesis

The related literature has shown that the coverage initiation of analyst recommendations
for American stocks leads to statistically significant increases in stock price on the day
the reports are published. Therefore, we believe that the results of commissioned equity
reports will have a similar impact, which is why our hypothesis is:

    The coverage initiation of commissioned equity research from a Swedish financial in-
stitution will lead to a significant positive increase in the average abnormal return on the
event day of the stock price.

    In order to test this hypothesis, we have conducted an event study. An event study mea-
sures the effect a specific event can have on the value of a firm and, in our case, the stock’s
price. Event studies have a long history and rely on the efficient market hypothesis, namely
that the effects of an event should be reflected in the stock prices immediately [Mackinlay,
1997]. For our event study, we use the market model, as outlined in Mackinlay [1997].
The benefit of this model, over, for example, the constant mean period model, is that by
adjusting our return calculation for variations in the market portfolio, we reduce the vari-
ance of the abnormal return and more easily detect the impact of our event. Furthermore,
a simple return model is appropriate because the event is not systematic but firm-specific.
As our study concerns daily returns, having an estimation period of 100 days is feasible
and similar to the methodology prescribed in Mackinlay [1997], where an estimation pe-
riod of 120 days is discussed. The event window used in this study is 105 days, from five
days before the event day until 100 days after.

   We assume a constant beta between the stock and market returns over time. To ap-
proximate the market portfolio, the OMX Stockholm Price Index is used, and this index
includes all stocks that are traded on the Stockholm Stock Exchange. Using the estimated
Beta and Alpha values, we then estimate the normal returns of the stocks in our sample
during the event window, which can be seen in equation 1. In order to find the abnormal
return, we have to subtract our estimated normal return from the actual normal return for
each stock. We then compute abnormal returns as the difference between actual and ex-
pected returns. Additionally, we calculate average abnormal returns, which you can find
by taking the average of all abnormal returns in our sample.

                        ARi,t = Ri,t − (αi + βi ∗ Rm,t) (1)

                      XN
                          AARt = 1/N    ARit
                                                        i=t1

                                   8
We further compute the stocks’ cumulative abnormal return and cumulative abnormal av-
erage return. The CAR and CAAR measures help assert the long-term effects of the event,
as they allow us to observe the cumulative effects and subsequent developments after the
event date.
                                 Xt2
                               CARi(t1, t2) =    ARt (2)
                                                          i=t1

                                 Xt2
                            CAAR(t1, t2) =    AARt
                                                         i=t1
In addition to the 100-day estimation period, we introduced an 11-day break between the
end of the estimation period and the event window to prevent effects related to the event
from influencing the estimated parameters. While Womack [1996] has used an estimation
period of 60 calendar months, this is not feasible for our research question and sample. A
great deal of the stocks in our sample do not have return data spanning that far backward.
The stocks included in our sample are generally growth companies that have recently been
founded.

                                   9
4 Data

4.1 Data collection

The raw data required for this paper includes the date of the coverage initiation for the
stock, the recommendation of the initial coverage report, and the historical returns of the
respective stocks. To get the best results possible, we intended to start with the largest
possible sample of stocks paying for commissioned research from banks in Sweden that
was available to us. Therefore, we gathered a list of all stocks with publicly available
commissioned equity research coverage listed on the Nasdaq Stockholm Exchange. The
banks publicly publishing such information in Sweden are Carnegie Investment Bank,
RedEye, Carlsquare, Nordea, ABG Sundal Collier, and SEB.

    Finding the initiation date involved manually reviewing each stock on the websites to
identify the date of the first published report for each stock. After that, it was necessary
to discover if the first report gave a ”buy”, ”hold”, or ”sell” recommendation. In Sweden,
the reports do not provide explicit recommendations and instead offer a justified value of
the stock according to the analysis performed by the bank, often using a discounted cash
flow. This required us to cross-check the stock price at the initiation date with the justified
value from the bank. In instances where the stock price was lower than the justified value,
we classified it as a ”buy” recommendation; when the prices were equal, it was classified
as a ”hold” recommendation; and when the stock price was lower than the justified value
it was classified as a ”sell” recommendation. In cases where there was a justified value
for a bear, base, and bull case, we used the base case justified value. Furthermore, for the
reports that included a range for a justified value, we took the midpoint of the range as the
base case.

    Collecting the data for the stocks with terminated coverage was significantly more
challenging due to the public access to these reports being removed from most financial
institutions. The reports for the stocks that had terminated coverage with Carnegie Invest-
ment Bank were still accessible using a filtered Google search despite being removed from
the bank’s website. We replicated the abovementioned process for these stocks, therefore
adding 20 additional stocks to the sample.

    The stock return data was gathered using Yahoo Finance, which led to collecting data
for 296 stocks between 2012-06-01 and 2024-04-02. Since all the data was manually
collected, we implemented a meticulous process that included double-checking the data

                                   10
the other person had collected to minimize potential errors. Consequently, our original
sample consisted of 296 separate Swedish stocks that received coverage from at least one
bank, with multiple stocks receiving commissioned equity research from numerous banks.

4.2 Data processing

First, we restricted our sample to only include stocks with coverage initiation after 2014.
This is due to some of the older reports not being accessible or some of them not presenting
a justified value for the stock, which means they were unusable to us. This means that our
final sample included stocks with an initiation date between 2014 and 2024. Furthermore,
for this paper, we are only interested in the effect of reports with a ”buy” recommendation.
In our original data set, only ten stocks had a ”hold” or ”sell” recommendation, and these
stocks were subsequently removed.

    Additionally, a few of the reports had been published either before the IPO or within
one month of the IPO. Due to the requirements for our estimation window, these stocks
also had to be removed. Finally, a small number of stocks were receiving commissioned
equity research, but they were not listed on the Nasdaq Stockholm Exchange. These stocks
were also removed from the sample. Therefore, after processing our data, we were left
with a final total sample of 258 separate research reports of 222 unique stocks. The reason
for this difference is that the sample contains 36 stocks which received coverage from a
second financial institution as well. Below, Table 1 depicts the size of our total sample and
the different sub-samples analyzed in this paper.

                         Table 1: Sample Summary Statistics
                   Total number of initiation coverage reports 258
                    Number of first initiation coverage reports 202
                  Number of second initiation coverage reports 36
                Number of terminated initiation coverage reports 20
      Number of first initiation coverage reports from RedEye and Carlsquare 119
 Number of first initiation coverage reports from Carnegie, ABG, Nordea, and SEB 83

                                   11
5 Event Study Results

5.1 Initiation of coverage reports

The sample for Table 2 consists of 202 stocks and their first initiation coverage reports. We
have not included the observations where another bank has initiated coverage on a stock
already covered by another commissioned sell-side analyst, as these are quite different
events. An interesting statistic is the significance of the event date, where we observe a
very high t-statistic of 9.690. The abnormal return on the event date is also very high at
4.140%, indicating a large jump in the stock price when the initiation coverage report is
released. This supports the findings of Irvine [2003] of a large incremental impact with
the first coverage initiation, albeit the observed average abnormal return is much larger
in our case. This coincides with the liquidity hypothesis as presented by Brennan et al.
[1995] and Irvine [2003], meaning that the incremental impact of initiation coverage will
always be positive as the stock recommendation increases the liquidity and demand of the
stock. This supports the findings of Kirk [2011] that paid-for analyst research generates
positive abnormal returns in the immediate period after the publication of the research.
The average abnormal returns we observed are also much larger than those observed by
Kirk [2011].

                         Table 2: Average Abnormal Return
             T-2 T-1 T T+1 T+2 T+3 T+4 T+5
   AAR 0.165% 0.119% 4.140% 0.207% 0.219% -0.210% -0.071% -0.435%
 T-statistic 0.558 0.521 9.690 0.741 0.848 -0.080 -0.252 -1.601
     σ 4.424% 3.441% 6.327% 4.157% 3.821% 3.860% 4.100% 4.076%
  P-value 0.577 0.602 0.000*** 0.459 0.396 0.936 0.801 0.109
              Note: P-values significance: * < 0.05, ** < 0.01, *** < 0.001

    Figure 1 presents the average cumulative abnormal returns for all stocks for the period
five days before the event date and 100 days after. While the event date is significant and
leads to a sharp and robust increase in the stock price, we observe a clear negative devel-
opment in the stock price after the release of the initiation coverage report. These results
for the whole sample contradict the findings of Womack [1996], that the immediate reac-
tions to the release of the analyst recommendation seem to be permanent. Furthermore,
these results seem to contradict the findings of Billings et al. [2014] that a portfolio of long

                                   12
stock with commissioned ”buy” recommendations can generate positive returns. Instead,
our sample indicates the opposite.

                     Figure 1: Cumulative Average Abnormal Return

             4%                   CAAR

              2%

              0%

            −2%
               Mean CAR (%)
            −4%

                         0 20 40 60 80 100
                                Day

5.2 Terminated coverage compared to ongoing coverage

An important concern is the presence of a survivorship bias. For this reason, we have per-
severed in including terminated analyses and recommendations as well. By intuition, the
analyst bank might want to hide analyses that have fared poorly. Furthermore, the com-
pany behind the stock might terminate the commissioned coverage if it does not contribute
to the stock’s return, and it’s no longer in the company’s interest to continue paying for
commissioned research if they are not content with the result. As a result, analyst banks
could potentially conceal their bad performance by hiding these analyses. Another cause
for concern could be that a poorly performing analyst bank might go out of business. This
is, however, not an issue in our case. The analyst bank Remium went out of business
in 2018; however, ABG Sundal Collier subsequently bought their commissioned equity
research operation, which we have included in our sample. The sample of terminated an-
alyst recommendations consists of 20 stocks. In addition, no similar banks or financial
institutions have gone out of business. Table 3 presents the results of the immediate period
before and after the publication of the initiation coverage report. We still observe signifi-
cant positive abnormal returns for the event date, albeit with a lower significance level, as

                                   13
reflected in the t-statistic and p-value. On the event date, the average abnormal return is
3.933% with a t-statistic of 3.338, which is slightly less than those stock recommendations
that have not been terminated by the bank or company. On the topic of terminated analyst
coverage, the literature is scarce thus far. We can merely infer by logical reasoning that
analyst coverage that has performed poorly will more often be terminated as both the bank
and the commissioning company will unlikely be content to have the continue. While the
event is still significant for these stock recommendations, the relatively lower t-statistic
and average abnormal return speak to a lesser impact on the stock price.

                   Table 3: Average Abnormal Return (Terminated)
             T-2 T-1 T T+1 T+2 T+3 T+4 T+5
   AAR -0.395% 0.506% 3.933% -0.145% -0.171% 1.063% 2.045% -0.436%
 T-statistic -0.706 0.827 3.338 -0.182 -0.253 1.338 1.575 -0.564
     σ 2.226% 3.606% 5.160% 4.736% 3.226% 3.226% 5.824% 3.466%
  P-value 0.487 0.417 0.003** 0.857 0.802 0.802 0.130 0.578
               Note: P-value significance: * < 0.05, ** < 0.01, *** < 0.001

    Figure 2 presents the average cumulative abnormal return of terminated analyst cov-
erage relative to ongoing analyst coverage, with results spanning from the event date to
100 days after the event. There is a stark contrast between ongoing and terminated analyst
coverage concerning the performance of the recommendation in the long run. This further
strengthens the notion that analyst coverage that performs poorly is more often terminated.
We see that the average cumulative abnormal return at the end of the observation period
goes down as far as -22.41%, while ongoing analyst coverage experiences a much less
steep negative development as time progresses and drops to -3.41% at day 100. There are,
however, other potential explanations for this phenomenon. Firstly, the smaller sample
size of terminated analyst coverage reports means we are more prone to statistical noise
as we have fewer observations to extrapolate. Secondly, economic reasoning could infer
that these are troubled companies experiencing performance issues leading to underper-
formance in their stock price. It’s logically sound to assume that such companies will be
less able to continue commissioning costly research reports. There were no bankruptcies
for any of the terminated stocks, except one de-listing due to a buyout. Once again, these
results seem to contradict the findings of Womack [1996] and Billings et al. [2014]. As de-
scribed in Kirk [2011], a company cannot withdraw or prevent unfavorable research from
being published but can only withdraw afterward. However, it does seem like companies
can hide unfavorable reports after withdrawal, as we could only uncover these reports with
the help of internet archival tools.

                                   14
                     Figure 2: Cumulative Average Abnormal Return

              5%

              0%
            −5%

           −10%

            −Mean CAR (%)15%
            −20%     CAAR (Ongoing)
                           CAAR (Terminated)
                         0 20 40 60 80 100
                                Day

5.3 Coverage from specialized research firms compared to larger banks

Table 4 presents the results for the immediate period surrounding the event date for com-
missioned stock recommendations published by investment banks Carnegie Investment
Bank, ABG Sundal Collier, Nordea, and SEB. While the results are similar to those of the
whole sample, we observe a lower average abnormal return on the event date of 3.240%
coupled with a lower, albeit still highly significant t-statistic at 4.191, along with a p-
value of 0.001. Carnegie Investment Bank, ABG Sundal Collier, Nordea, and SEB are
full-service investment banks that do not solely focus on commissioned equity research
in their business model. As presented in Table 6, these banks have lower average abnor-
mal returns and t-statistics than the smaller research firms. Still, SEB, Carnegie Investment
Bank (formerly Erik Penser Bank) [About Commissioned Research - Carnegie, 2024], and
ABG Sundal Collier were ranked as the top-performing commissioned research providers
[Rankings-2022, 2024]. However, it should be noted that these rankings were based on
interviews and not directly observable return data as in our case.

                                   15
       Table 4: Average Abnormal Return for Carnegie, ABG, Nordea, and SEB
             T-2 T-1 T T+1 T+2 T+3 T+4 T+5
   AAR 0.128% 0.249% 3.240% 0.097% 0.702% -0.458% -0.108% -0.919%
 T-statistic -0.364 -0.838 4.191 0.182 1.695 -1.180 -0.266 -1.859
     σ 3.23% 2.75% 7.11% 4.97% 3.77% 3.61% 3.72% 4.58%
  P-value 0.7117 0.4044 0.001*** 0.8560 0.0937 0.2413 0.7909 0.0665
              Note: P-values significance: * < 0.05, ** < 0.01, *** < 0.001

    Figure 3 presents the average cumulative abnormal return for the stock recommenda-
tions published by Carnegie Investment Bank, ABG Sundal Collier, Nordea, and SEB.
We see that the recommendations published by the larger, full-service investment banks
in the longer run, according to our sample, have a significant effect on the stock price at
the event date. However, this effect is short-lived as the stock prices decrease to a large
extent post-recommendation. We observe a similar negative trend to our overall sample of
stocks. In this case, the average cumulative abnormal return at day 100 at the observation
period is -8.23%, while the positive abnormal returns generated on the event date are gone
by day 30. As such, we still observe strongly contradicting results if we compare ours to
the findings of Womack [1996] and Billings et al. [2014], who find significant as well as
seemingly permanent gains post-event.

 Figure 3: Cumulative Average Abnormal Returns for Carnegie, ABG, Nordea, and SEB

                                CAAR
            4%
            2%
            0%
          −2%
          −4%
           Mean CAAR (%)−6%
          −8%

                       0 20 40 60 80 100
                               Day

                                   16
   Compared to the previous table, Table 5 presents the average abnormal returns for
stocks given stock recommendations by the research firms RedEye and Carlsquare. These
are smaller firms that are more specialized in equity research and commissioned equity
research, with a lesser focus on traditional banking services. The table shows that stock
recommendations published by these two firms generate significant positive average ab-
normal returns on the event date of 5.196% with a highly significant t-statistic of 8.327
and p-value of 0.000. We find that these results are much stronger compared to the results
for the traditional full-service investment banks presented in Table 4.

            Table 5: Average Abnormal Return for RedEye and Carlsquare
             T-2 T-1 T T+1 T+2 T+3 T+4 T+5
   AAR 0.393% 0.473% 5.196% 0.004% 0.061% -0.119% -0.138% -0.135%
 T-statistic 0.768 1.320 8.327 0.010 0.161 -0.312 -0.368 -0.380
     σ 5.626% 3.947% 6.836% 4.514% 4.120% 4.210% 4.146% 3.911%
  P-value 0.444 0.189 0.000*** 0.992 0.872 0.756 0.714 0.705
               Note: P-value significance: * < 0.05, ** < 0.01, *** < 0.001

    Figure 4 presents the average cumulative abnormal returns for stocks that receive cov-
erage from the smaller firms RedEye and Carlsquare. We see a large initiation positive
reaction to the publication and a much more stable development post-event compared to
the stocks in Figure 3. Unlike the other stocks, the positive cumulative abnormal return
generated by the stock recommendations published by RedEye and Carlsquare seems to
be more permanent over time. We observe that at the end of the observation period, at day
100, the average cumulative abnormal return is 1.97%. This is more in line with the results
of Womack [1996] indicating that the research does provide value to the investors as there
is a permanent increase to the stock price post-recommendation. This also supports the
similar findings of Billings et al. [2014] relating to a more permanent positive effect post-
recommendation. This indicates that smaller research firms are better at picking stocks
and providing valuable research to their customers relative to their larger counterparts.

                                   17
      Figure 4: Cumulative Average Abnormal Returns for RedEye and Carlsquare

                                CAAR

            4%

            2%

              Mean CAR (%)
            0%

                       0 20 40 60 80 100
                               Day

    Figure 5 presents the cumulative average abnormal return of the stocks that initiated
coverage with the specialized research firms (RedEye and Carlsquare) compared to that
of the stocks that initiated coverage with the larger banks (Carnegie, ABG, Nordea, and
SEB). The reasoning behind the division between traditional banks and those primarily
focused on equity research is that the latter will presumably be perceived as a more trust-
worthy source of information to investors. The smaller, niche research firm will contribute
a larger share of resources to research and likely face more reputational damage if they
perform poorly. At the more prominent, traditional banks, the equity research function
can essentially be viewed as a function to generate revenue for their sales and trading de-
partments Michaely et al. [1999]. Firms specializing in equity research will instead earn
the majority of their income through disseminating said research. For example, RedEye
offers retail investors subscriptions for their research services [Memberships - Redeye,
n.d.]. This might be recognized by investors who then perceive those firms as more trust-
worthy and could potentially be why we observe greater average abnormal returns when
such firms publish stock recommendations.

                                   18
 Figure 5: Cumulative Average Abnormal Return for Specialized and Large Financial Institutions

               4%
               2%
               0%
             −2%
             CAAR (%)−4%
             −6%
                              CAAR (Large)
             −8%
                              CAAR (Specialized)
                          0 20 40 60 80 100
                                  Day

5.4 Initiating coverage for the first time compared to the second time

Another interesting question would be to examine the difference in effect when a stock
is initiated by a commissioned equity researcher for the first time compared to initiating
coverage on companies already covered by other banks. While these events might seem
similar, they would, by reasoning, differ in the amount of incremental information they
confer on investors in the market. The incremental impact on a stock with no coverage will
presumably be greater than that of a stock with already existing coverage. Irvine [2003]
finds a significant difference in abnormal returns between initiation coverage reports and
continuation coverage reports performed on a stock by the same analyst bank. In Table 6
we observe no significant average abnormal return on the event date for stocks initiating
coverage with a second financial institution, with an average abnormal return of 0.564%
and a t-statistic of 0.639. These results differ greatly from our previous findings concerning
the initial initiation coverage reports and the findings of Womack [1996] and Billings
et al. [2014] with no significant effects. A potential explanation for this finding could be
that less new information is disseminated to investors when an initiation coverage report
follows another analyst bank’s coverage. If something is interesting said about the stock,
by reasoning, the previous analyst bank has likely said it already, and there is, therefore,
no significant abnormal return on the event date. Furthermore, it could also be the case
that the two ”buy” recommendations contained in the commissioned research are highly

                                   19
similar and that the market has reacted to the information published earlier.

          Table 6: Average Abnormal Return for a Second Coverage Initiation
             T-2 T-1 T T+1 T+2 T+3 T+4 T+5
   AAR 0.304% 0.142% 0.564% -0.448% 0.127% -0.061% 0.217% 0.357%
 T-statistic 0.654 0.176 0.639 -0.720 0.163 -0.087 0.044 0.883
     σ 2.783% 4.839% 5.294% 3.732% 4.679% 4.196% 2.990% 2.424%
  P-value 0.517 0.861 0.527 0.476 0.871 0.931 0.965 0.383
               Note: P-value significance: * < 0.05, ** < 0.01, *** < 0.001

    As presented in Figure 6, the stocks with initiation coverage reports published follow-
ing another analyst bank experience the same negative trend in average abnormal returns
as the rest of the sample. An interesting but surprising result is a sharp increase in the av-
erage cumulative abnormal return, peaking at 6.84% on day T + 18 and then experiencing
a sharp decline, as observed earlier in our results. The reason behind this increase in the
average abnormal return remains unclear. It does not occur within the immediate period
around the publication of the initiation coverage report. This may be due to unrelated
events, as the sample size for these initiation coverage reports is relatively small compared
to the samples we have presented the results for previously.

      Figure 6: CAAR for Initiating Coverage from a Second Financial Institution

                                CAAR
            6%

            4%

            2%

            0%
           Mean CAAR (%)−2%

          −4%
                       0 20 40 60 80 100
                               Day

                                   20
    Figure 7 presents the difference between the average cumulative abnormal return after
publishing the first initiation coverage report on a stock and the second initiation cover-
age report from another bank on the same stock. While the first initiation coverage report
on the stock generates significant positive abnormal returns on the event date, we do not
find the same results for the second initiation coverage report. The general trend for both
samples is roughly the same. However, each day’s cumulative average abnormal return is
much more volatile for the sample, including stocks that have received a second recom-
mendation from a different financial institution. One key point to note is that this sample
is significantly smaller, meaning outliers will considerably impact the cumulative average
abnormal return for each day. Furthermore, exogenous circumstances during the event
window will also have a substantially larger impact.

 Figure 7: Cumulative Average Abnormal Return for First and Second Initiating Coverages

                                          CAAR (First)
              6%               CAAR (Second)

             4%

             2%

             0%
            Mean CAAR (%)−2%

           −4%
                        0 20 40 60 80 100
                                Day

                                   21
6 Discussion

Considering the context of this study, the data used has some limitations. One issue is that
our sample is significantly smaller than the ones used in the related literature. While our
sample consists of 258 unique stocks, the related articles analyzing the effects of analyst
recommendations on American stocks have samples containing over 1000 stocks. There-
fore, exogenous effects and other external factors might impact our results more, especially
when analyzing the smaller sub samples. However, when looking at the larger samples we
used (80 or more stocks), this will not have an impact that considerably changes the result
and the overall outcomes of the analysis. We have a smaller sample size for multiple rea-
sons, the most prominent reason being that the Swedish stock market has notably fewer
stocks than the American stock market. As of March 2021, there are 832 companies listed
on the NASDAQ Stockholm exchange, while there are over 7,000 stocks listed on the
major US stock exchanges. Furthermore, our analysis is only conducted on small- and
mid-cap firms since these firms pay for commissioned equity research, which further re-
stricts our sample. Additionally, some of the related literature analyzes recommendation
changes, allowing for an increased total sample, while our paper is solely focused on the
initiation of commissioned equity research. With the difficulties in finding the initiation
reports of the stocks that terminated coverage, there are also several additional stocks that
we could not add to our sample.

    Another point to note is the potential conflicts of interest that can occur in commis-
sioned equity research. While the financial institution is motivated to give the company a
more favorable rating to prevent the company from terminating coverage, the firms also
have strong incentives to protect their reputations, similar to credit rating agencies [Kirk,
2011]. This is also the case in Sweden, for example, with RedEye having a solid rep-
utation and being able to significantly affect the stock price on the event day as can be
seen in our event study results. This is only possible because retail investors take the Red-
Eye reports into account when making their investment decisions. The subject company
pays commissioned equity research, and the compensation is determined exclusively by
research management and senior management, while the investment banking department
is not involved in this transaction. The new MiFID II regulations mean that the finan-
cial institutions publishing the reports can no longer receive indirect compensation related
to the specific recommendations contained in the reports, as there is a requirement for
increased transparency. Therefore, according to the new MiFID II regulations, commis-
sioned research is deemed to constitute an acceptable minor non-monetary benefit [ABG
Sundal Collier - Disclaimer, n.d.].

                                   22
    To ensure our results accurately represent the actual effect of initiating coverage, we
conducted some robustness checks, including altering the estimation period. As mentioned
previously, we used a 100-day estimation period; however, we also used estimation periods
of 50 days and 150 days to identify if there were any significant differences. While there
were minor differences, the verdicts from the analyses were the same. We used a 100-day
estimation window because we had to constrict the sample due to a lack of historical stock
prices for some stocks when using a 150-day estimation window. Furthermore, we tested
the sensitivity of the results by conducting the event study with different event windows.
For example, we started by analyzing short event windows (T-2 to T + 2) and moving
on to longer event windows (T - 30 to T + 30) to discern any possible patterns or trends.
However, this was not the case, and we ended up settling on an event window of T - 5 to
T + 100 since this captured the relevant results for our specific research topic.

    The generalizability of this study using the same methodology is possible, especially
in other countries in the European Union that also have to follow the MiFID II regulations.
An example of such a country would be Germany, where some financial institutions pro-
vide services similar to those in Sweden. Additionally, some bigger banks, such as SEB
or Nordea, already provide commissioned equity research services to companies listed
on a German stock exchange. While these companies were removed from our sample,
they could be added to a sample analyzing the effect of commissioned equity research on
German companies. However, our sample only contained small- to mid-cap companies,
meaning a study examining a sample containing a wider variety of stocks may produce
a dissimilar result. This is due to our sample having relatively higher volatility because
of the average company size, and these companies will have stronger reactions to events
similar to that of a coverage initiation.

                                   23
7 Conclusion

This paper studies the impact of commissioned coverage initiations on stocks traded on the
Stockholm Stock Exchange between 2014 and 2024. We find that commissioned coverage
initiations generate significant abnormal returns on the date of the publication of the cov-
erage initiation report, therefore confirming our hypothesis. In a sample of 222 stocks re-
ceiving the first initiation coverage reports, we observe a 4.140% average abnormal return
on the event date. This result is consistent with the findings of Kirk [2011] and Billings
et al. [2014]. However, we fail to confirm the finding of Billings et al. [2014] that paid-for
analyst research adds value to investors since the increase in the stock price post-event
is short-lived. An exception is found in the results for smaller, research-focused firms,
where we observe more permanent positive abnormal returns post-recommendation. We
also observe significant positive average abnormal returns on the event day for the other
sub samples we analyzed in this paper. However, we fail to observe significant abnor-
mal returns at the event date for firms that another commissioned research provider has
already initiated. However, the limited sample size could limit the robustness of this re-
sult. Therefore, we find that commissioned equity research coverage positively impacts
the stock price, but this effect does not persist over time which confirms our hypothesis.

    Lastly, we have recommendations for further research, the first of which is to segment
the sample of Swedish stocks further by market value or industry. These sub samples
could yield different conclusions, and further research could investigate whether they pro-
duce different results than the sub samples we used. Due to the small potential sample
of stocks in Sweden, there were not enough ”sell” recommendations to analyze and find
significant and reliable results. However, in the United States of America, it is possible
to create a large enough sample where further research could investigate if it would be
possible to create a profitable trading strategy from the coverage initiations. This would
involve creating a portfolio going long on the stocks with a ”buy” recommendation and
”short” on the stocks with a sell recommendation and evaluating such a strategy’s potential
profitability or feasibility.

                                   24
8 Appendix

List of 222 stocks in our total sample:

   • Abliva AB (publ)         • eEducation Albert AB     • Midsummer AB
    • Acroud AB (publ)            (publ)                       (publ)
   • ALM Equity AB     • Elanders AB (publ)       • MilDef Group AB
      (publ)                                                      (publ)
                                 • Elicera Therapeutics
    • Alzinova AB (publ)          AB (publ)                 • OptiCept Technolo-
                                                               gies AB (publ)
    • Angler Gaming plc        • Enzymatica AB (publ)
                                                          • Orexo AB (publ)
   • Arcoma AB              • Eolus Vind AB (publ)
                                                        • Raketech Group
    • Arise AB (publ)           • Ependion AB
                                                       Holding PLC
    • Arlandastad Group     • Fingerprint Cards AB
                                                            • Rottneros AB (publ)
      AB (publ)                   (publ)
                                                   • SaveLend Group AB
    • Besqab AB (publ)         • Gaming Innovation
                                                                  (publ)
   • Ascelia Pharma AB       Group Inc.
                                                         • Sensys Gatso Group
      (publ)                    • Guard Therapeu-
                                                           AB (publ)
   • Bergman & Beving       tics International AB
     AB (publ)                  (publ)                    • SenzaGen AB
   • Beyond Frames AB     • Iconovo AB (publ)        • Senzime AB (publ)
     (publ)                                               • Spago Nanomedical
                                 • Initiator Pharma A/S
    • Bj¨orn Borg AB (publ)                                   AB (publ)
                                 • Intervacc AB (publ)
    • BTS Group AB (publ)                                  • Tourn International
                                • Irisity AB (publ)             AB (publ)
    • Candles Scandinavia
     AB (publ)                • Karolinska Develop-     • Transtema Group AB
                                ment AB (publ)
   • Clemondo Group AB                                • Upsales Technology
      (publ)                    • Klaria Pharma Hold-       AB (publ)
                                   ing AB (publ.)
    • CodeMill AB (publ)                                  • Vivesto AB
                           • Maha Energy AB
    • Corline Biomedical                                 • Vo2 Cap Holding AB
                                    (publ)
    AB                                          (publ)
                               • Medivir AB (publ)
   • Diamyd Medical AB                               • Waystream Holding
      (publ)                     • Mentice AB (publ)           AB (publ)

                                   25
• XMReality AB (publ)      • Nil¨orngruppen AB         • Sdiptech AB (publ)
• Alcadon Group AB     • OrganoClick AB     • Better Collective A/S
  (publ)                        (publ)
                                                            • Vertiseit AB (publ)
• Awardit AB (publ)         • Ovzon AB (publ)
                                                • W5 Solutions AB
• B3 Consulting Group     • Prevas AB                  (publ)
  AB (publ)                • Projektengagemang
                                                         • Surgical Science Swe-
• Cavotec SA                Sweden AB (publ)          den AB (publ)
• Christian Berner Tech     • Qlosr Group AB     • Paxman AB (publ)
  Trade AB (publ)             (publ)
                                                    • Hexatronic Group AB
• Clavister Holding AB     • Actic Group AB       (publ)
  (publ.)                        (publ)
                                                    • Bonesupport Holding
• Copperstone Re-     • CDON AB                AB (publ)
  sources AB               • Duni AB (publ)
                                                • ADDvise Group AB
• DistIT AB (publ)          • FluoGuide A/S              (publ)
• Eastnine AB (publ)       • Footway Group AB     • TagMaster AB (publ)
• Ecoclime Group AB       (publ)                   • Stille AB
  (publ)                     • Gapwaves AB (publ)
                                                       • Smart Eye AB (publ)
• Embellence Group     • Nelly Group AB
  AB (publ)                                         • SciBase Holding AB
                                (publ)
                                                              (publ)
• Ferronordic AB (publ)     • SyntheticMR AB
                                                         • Safeture AB (publ)
• Flexion Mobile Plc           (publ)
                                                       • QleanAir AB (publ)
• Freemelt Holding AB     • Tobii AB (publ)
  (publ)                                                 • Modelon AB (publ)
                             • Cibus Nordic Real Es-
• G5 Entertainment AB       tate AB (publ)            • M.O.B.A. Network
  (publ)                                                   AB (publ)
                           • Lagercrantz Group
• Green Landscaping       AB (publ)                • InfraCom Group AB
  Group AB (publ)                                         (publ)
                           • Vitec Software Group
• Inission AB (publ)           AB (publ)                 • Hanza AB (publ)
• IRLAB Therapeutics     • Truecaller AB (publ)       • ES Energy Save Hold-
  AB (publ)                                              ing AB (publ)
                             • CellaVision AB (publ)
• I-Tech AB               • Sleep Cycle AB     • Dignitana AB (publ)
• Nanexa AB (publ)           (publ)                    • Nepa AB (publ)

                                26
• LifeClean Interna-     • Enad Global 7 AB     • Lipum AB (publ)
  tional AB (publ)             (publ)                     • Lipigon Pharmaceuti-
• Gasporox AB (publ)       • Xbrane Biopharma       cals AB (publ)
                             AB (publ)
• Embracer Group AB                             • Heliospectra AB
  (publ)                   • Wyld Networks AB       (publ)
                                (publ)
• Devyser Diagnostics                                 • Coala-Life Group AB
  AB (publ)                 • Strax AB (publ)             (publ)
• CombinedX AB     • Starbreeze AB (publ)      • Cantargia AB (publ)
  (publ)                      • Sprint Bioscience AB      • Artificial Solutions In-
• Calliditas Therapeu-        (publ)                       ternational AB (publ)
  tics AB (publ)            • Newbury Pharmaceu-     • Annexin Pharmaceu-
                                ticals AB (publ)              ticals AB (publ)
• Thunderful Group AB
                          • Nanologica AB (publ)     • AlzeCure Pharma AB
• TH1NG AB (publ)
                             • Inhalation Sciences        (publ)
• Stillfront Group AB
                              Sweden AB (publ)         • Alligator Bioscience
  (publ)
                         • Impact Coatings AB       AB (publ)
• Speqta AB (publ)            (publ)
                                                   • Active Biotech AB
• Sedana Medical AB     • Fantasma Games AB       (publ)
  (publ)                        (publ)
                                                        • Acarix AB (publ)
• Scandinavian Enviro     • Episurf Medical AB
  Systems AB (publ)                                   • Prostatype Genomics
                                (publ)
                                                        AB (publ)
• Northbaze Group AB     • Bong AB (publ)
                                                      • Hoylu AB (publ)
  (publ)
                         • Binero Group AB
                                                       • Amniotics AB (publ)
• Ngenic AB (publ)            (publ)
                                                      • Scandion Oncology
• Mestro AB (publ)          • AroCell AB (publ)
                                                 A/S
• Kontigo Care AB     • Tessin Nordic Hold-
                                             • NeoDynamics AB
  (publ)                       ing AB (publ)
                                                              (publ)
• Integrum AB (publ)       • SOZAP AB (publ)
                                                 • ChromoGenics AB
• Image Systems AB        • Saniona AB (publ)
                                                       • Abera Bioscience
• FlexQube AB (publ)       • Q-linea AB (publ)           AB(publ)
• Egetis Therapeutics     • Nitro Games Oyj          • Arctic Minerals AB
  AB (publ)                • Mendus AB (publ)           (publ)

                                27
• Boozt AB (publ)         • Magle Chemoswed     • EQL Pharma AB
                               Holding AB (publ)           (publ)
• Aktiebolaget Fastator
  (publ)                     • Avensia AB (publ)         • Lipidor AB (publ)
• Hitech & Develop-     • Eniro Group AB     • MAG Interactive AB
  ment Wireless Swe-       (publ)                      (publ)
  den Holding AB     • Ortoma AB (publ)        • Bio-Works Technolo-
  (publ)                                                     gies AB (publ)
                      • BeammWave AB
• InCoax Networks AB       (publ)                   • Exsitec Holding AB
  (publ)                     • Scandinavian                (publ)
• Kancera AB (publ)         ChemoTech AB     • SpectrumOne AB
                                (publ)                        (publ)
• Samh¨allsbyggnadsbolaget
  i Norden AB (publ)        • TalkPool AG             • AAC Clyde Space AB
                             • Rolling Optics Hold-        (publ)
• Zinzino AB (publ)
                             ing AB (publ)             • Premium Snacks
• KebNi AB (publ)
                            • Instalco AB (publ)           Nordic AB (publ)
• Maven Wireless Swe-     • Checkin.Com Group
                                                 • HUBSO AB (publ)
  den AB (Publ)              AB (publ)
                                                  • New Bubbleroom
• Stockwik F¨orvaltning     • Tempest Security AB       Sweden AB (publ)
  AB (publ)                   (publ)
                                                • Humble Group AB
• Svedbergs Group AB     • OssDsign AB (publ)         (publ)
  (publ)
                            • ScandiDos AB (publ)      • Sivers Semiconduc-
• Zwipe AS                • Medicover AB (publ)        tors AB (publ)
• Rederiaktiebolaget         • Everysport Group AB     • Physitrack PLC
  Gotland (publ)               (publ)
                                                  • Aino Health AB
• Seafire AB (publ)          • Immunovia AB (publ)        (publ)

                                28
                      References

Bruce K. Billings, William L. Buslepp, and G. Ryan Huston. Worth the hype the relevance
  of paid-for analyst research for the buy-and-hold investor. Accounting Review, 89(3):
  903–931, 2014. ISSN 00014826. doi: 10.2308/accr-50681.

Daniel J Bradley, Bradford D Jordan, and Jay R Ritter. The Quiet Period Goes out with a
  Bang. Technical report.

Michael J Brennan, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, and Anderson. Investment analysis and
  price formation in securities markets. Technical report, 1995.

Franc¸ois Derrien and Ambrus Kecsk´es. The real effects of financial shocks: Evidence
  from exogenous changes in analyst coverage. Journal of Finance, 68(4):1407–1440, 8
  2013. ISSN 00221082. doi: 10.1111/jofi.12042.

Eugene F Fama. Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work.
  The Journal of Finance, 25(2):383–417, 1970. ISSN 00221082, 15406261. doi:
  10.2307/2325486. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/2325486.

Paul J. Irvine. The incremental impact of analyst initiation of coverage. Journal of
  Corporate Finance, 9(4):431–451, 9 2003. ISSN 09291199. doi: 10.1016/S0929-
  1199(02)00053-6.

Marcus Kirk. Research for sale: Determinants and consequences of paid-for analyst re-
  search. Journal of Financial Economics, 100(1):182–200, 4 2011. ISSN 0304405X.
  doi: 10.1016/j.jfineco.2010.11.002.

Kevin K. Li and Haifeng You. What is the value of sell-side analysts? Evidence from
  coverage initiations and terminations. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 60(2-3):
  141–160, 11 2015. ISSN 01654101. doi: 10.1016/j.jacceco.2015.08.006.

Erik R. Lid´en. Stock recommendations in Swedish printed media: Leading or mislead-
  ing? European Journal of Finance, 12(8):731–748, 12 2006. ISSN 1351847X. doi:
  10.1080/13518470500531093.

Annamaria Lusardi and Olivia S. Mitchell. Financial literacy around the world: An
  overview. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, 10(4):497–508, 10 2011. ISSN
  14753022. doi: 10.1017/S1474747211000448.

A Craig Mackinlay. Event Studies in Economics and Finance. Technical Report 1, 1997.

                                   29
Ulrike Malmendier and Devin Shanthikumar. Are small investors naive about incen-
  tives? Journal of Financial Economics, 85(2):457–489, 8 2007. ISSN 0304405X.
  doi: 10.1016/j.jfineco.2007.02.001.

Roni Michaely, Kent L Womack, Franklin Allen, Stephen Brown, John Elliott, Bob Gib-
  bons, Les Gorman, Marty Gruber, Gustavo Grullon, William Gruver, Susan Helfrick,
  Jeff Hubbard, Paul Irvine, Charles Lee, Bob Libby, Avner Kalay, Abbott Keller, Dan
  Myers, Maureen O’hara, Meir Statman, Jeremy Stein, David Stierman, Sheridan Tit-
  man, and Ingo Walter. Conflict of Interest and the Credibility of Underwriter Analyst
  Recommendations. Technical Report 4, 1999.

Kent L Womack. Do Brokerage Analysts’ Recommendations Have Investment Value?
  Technical Report 1, 1996.

   Online Sources

    ABG Sundal Collier - Disclaimer. (n.d.). ABG Sundal Collier Commissioned Re-
search. Retrieved April 28, 2024, from https://cr.abgsc.com/foretag/catella/disclaimer2

   About commissioned research - Carnegie. (2024, April 15). Carnegie. Retrieved May
22, 2024, from https://www.carnegie.se/en/commissioned-research/about-commissioned-
research/

    Ahmadi, J. (2020, October 26). Marknaden f¨or uppdragsanalyser exploderar – de ¨ar
st¨orst. Dagens Industri. Retrieved April 14, 2024, from https://www.di.se/nyheter/boom-
for-uppdragsanalyser-kommer-fordubbla-var-kundbas/

    Memberships - Redeye. (n.d.). Retrieved April 10, 2024, from https://www.redeye.se/premium

    Rankings-2022. (2024, February 1). Kantar. Retrieved April 21, 2024, from
https://www.kantarsifo.se/erbjudande/prospera/rankings-2022

   V¨ardepapper (Mifid/Mifir) — Finansinspektionen. (n.d.). Retrieved May 2, 2024,
from
https://www.fi.se/sv/marknad/vardepappersmarknad-mifidmifir/

                                   30