SUSTAINABLE INVESTING IN
THE NORDICS:  WHAT IS MOST
IMPORTANT  –
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL OR
GOVERNANCE SCORES?

A TIME-SERIES REGRESSION ANALYSIS ON THE NORDIC
STOCK MARKET

SARA GLÜCKMAN

ELSA BRISMAR

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2024
Sustainable Investing in the Nordics: What is most important – Environmental,
Social, or Governance scores?

Abstract:

   This thesis investigates the relationship between ESG scores and financial
   performance in the Nordic region from 2013 to 2022, utilizing a sample of over 400
   stocks. It also explores which aspect of ESG  –  Environmental, Social, or Governance
   –  has the greatest influence on financial performance. The findings indicate that
   stocks with higher ESG scores outperformed those with lower scores during the
   study period.  Additionally, the results suggest that the social and governance
   components of ESG significantly  impact financial performance, with the social
   aspect having the strongest effect. However, while the environmental component has
   a significant impact when considered in isolation, its influence became insignificant
   when assessed alongside the other ESG factors.

Keywords:

   ESG,  Sustainable Investing,  ESG Investing,  Environmental, Social, Governance

Authors:

   Sara Glückman  (25352)
   Elsa Brismar  (50811)

Examiner:

   Adrien d´Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in  Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Sara Glückman and Elsa Brismar, 2024

                                   1
1 Introduction

Sustainable finance refers to the process of taking environmental, social and governance

factors into consideration when making investment decisions (EU commission, 2023). Sus-

tainable investing has grown in popularity in the bond and stock markets globally over the

past decade (Pastor, Stambaugh & Taylor, 2022) not only due to stricter regulation but also

due to social trends and institutional investors that incorporate ESG commitments into their

mandates (Baldauf, Garlappi, & Yannelis, 2020; Ilhan, Krueger, Sautner, & Starks, 2023;

Krueger, Sautner, & Starks, 2019).

   Several studies have investigated whether sustainable investments can produce a signif-

icant return premium or not with mixed results. The largest focus has been on the envi-

ronmental impact of firms, and 88% of the clients of BlackRock, the world’s largest asset

manager, rank environment as ”the priority most in focus” among ESG criteria (BlackRock,

2020). While a body of literature suggests that green firms may generate substantial outper-

formance (Klassen and McLaughlin, 1996; Chava, 2014; Eliwa, Aboud, Saleh, 2021; Pastor et

al., 2022), other studies posit that brown firms may also yield return premiums in investments

(Larcker and Watts, 2020; Bolton and Kacperczyk, 2021; Bolton, Halem and Kacperczyk,

2022).

   Prior studies of socially responsible investments (SRI), have shown similar results exem-

plified by the research of Revelli and Viviani (2013) and Revelli and Viviani, (2015) where

they reported mixed evidence. Their first meta-analysis (2013) concluded that socially re-

sponsible investments had a positive impact on financial performance in 40 of the papers,

a neutral impact in 80 of the papers, and a negative impact in 41 of the papers. In the

second meta-analysis (2015), based on 85 studies and 190 experiments, they argued that the

inclusion of corporate social responsibility in the construction of stock market portfolios is

neither a weakness nor a strength in comparison with conventional investments.

   Existing literature shows that well-governed firms face lower variability in stock returns

compared to poorly governed firms and that firms that have independent boards that protect

                                        3
its shareholders’ rights and disclose its governance-related policies experience lower firm-level

risk (Koerniadi, Krishnamurti, Tourani-Rad, 2014). Wolfgang Drobetz, Andreas Schillhofer,

Heinz Zimmermann (2004). Wolfgang Drobetz et al. (2004) found that when using an

investment strategy that bought high corporate governance rated firms and shorted low

corporate governance rated firms in Germany, earned abnormal returns of around 12% on

an annual basis during the sample period. Using US data, John, Litov, and Yeung (2008)

on the other hand find that good governance at the firm level is associated with greater risk

taking.

   Despite the extensive research on sustainable investment and its financial returns (Nagy,

Kassam, Lee, 2016; Pastor et al., 2022), there remains a knowledge gap regarding the

sustainability-related equity premium and its driving factors in the Nordic region. Nordic

corporations are renowned for their strong sustainability performance (Strand, Freeman, and

Hockerts, 2015). Therefore, researching this topic is deemed highly important and interesting.

Additionally, previous research lacks a comprehensive breakdown of ESG (Environmental,

Social, and Governance) factors and their respective impact on the returns performance of

public companies. One of the key questions we aim to address in this thesis is which of these

factors - environmental, social, or corporate governance - has the most significant impact on

stock performance.

   To investigate the relationship between ESG ratings and return performance of Nordic

public companies, we collect monthly return data and MSCI ESG ratings for each company in

our sample from 2013 to 2022. We compute environmental, social, and governance scores for

each company and month, following a methodology similar to Pastor et al. (2022). For our

monthly time-series regression, we divided our data sample into three groups based on their

ESG score. Thereafter, we used the return difference between a portfolio of companies with

sustainability scores in the top third and a portfolio of companies with scores in the bottom

third as the dependent variable. We name this factor SMU (sustainable minus unsustainable).

The sustainability score is calculated by summing the environmental, social, and governance

                                        4
scores for each company. To control for additional risk factors, we include the Fama-French

(1993) factors in our regression analysis. Additionally, we conducted individual regressions

on the environmental, social, and governance factors by creating portfolios and comparing

the return difference in the same manner as with the sustainability scores.

   The findings of this thesis suggest that Nordic companies with higher ESG scores ex-

perienced greater returns compared to those with lower ESG scores over the study period.

Moreover, the analysis indicates that the return difference between sustainable and unsus-

tainable portfolios is influenced by the size and value factors of the Fama French model, with

a bias towards large stocks and growth stocks. Additionally, the study reveals that the social

and governance factors of ESG play a role in the return premium of sustainable firms. How-

ever, the impact of the environmental factor remains unclear based on the results. Further

investigation may be needed to understand the specific influence of the environmental factor

on the stock returns.

    The study is structured into seven sections. Section 2 provides a literature review related

to the research topic. Section 3 covers the setting, data and summary statistics, while Section

4 describes the research design. The main results are presented in Section 5, followed by a

discussion and conclusion of the results in Section 6.

2 Literature Review

Pastor et al. (2022) compares the realized performance of green versus brown stocks in the

US from November 2012 to December 2020. Using monthly stock returns and constructing

stock-level environmental scores based on MSCI ESG Ratings Data, the paper evaluates

how environmentally sustainable firms are performing in the stock market relative to non-

sustainable firms. The paper computes an unadjusted greeness score of firm i at the beginning

of month t as:

                                        5
                    Gi,t−1 = − (10 − Escore,i,t−1) × Eweight,i,t−1/100

   Where Escore,i,t−1 and Eweight,i,t−1 are from company i’s most recent MSCI ratings date

before month t, looking back no more than 12 months. The quantity 10−Escore,i,t−1 measures

how far the company is from a perfect environment score of 10. The product 10−Escore,i,t−1)×

Eweight,i,t−1 measures how brown the firm is, specifically, the interaction of how badly the firm

scores on environmental issues and how large the environmental impacts are for the industries

typical firm (i.e. Eweight,i,t−1). The initial minus sign converts the measure from browness to

grenness. Furthermore, they then construct an environmental score that describes firm i’s

greeness compared to the value-weighted average of G across all firms i.

   A key finding is that green stocks indeed have outperformed brown stocks over the last

decade. They show that these high returns were unexpected, reflecting news about environ-

mental concerns rather than high expected returns. This thesis uses Pastor et al.´s paper as

a starting point, replicating its method of constructing the “greenness factor” to construct a

sustainable factor. Furthermore, this thesis aims to extend their research by focusing on the

whole ESG performance of firms and applying it on another geographical scope, the Nordics.

   Additionally, Xiao-Na Yin (2023) dissects whether companies that have high ESG scores

have higher returns within the Chinese stock market from 2011 to 2020 . Findings in the

study shows that ESG factors positively affect stock returns, especially for non-state-owned

companies, like the ones in our thesis. Despite the fact that the analysis is primarily focused

on the aggregate ESG scores rather than dissecting the individual contributions of E, S, or G,

it is highly relevant considering our research question and will work as a suitable springboard

for our thesis. The intention of this thesis is to extend their research by analyzing the

individual components of ESG to see if the ESG impact on return is driven by a specific

factor. As of today, the number of papers focusing on ESG investing is rising, mostly they

either examine the aggregate ESG scores, or one of the components, impact on stock returns.

                                        6
3 Setting, Data and Summary Statistics

In this segment, we provide a thorough description of the study’s setting, including the

geographical region and the chosen time-period. We delve into the background of ESG

factors relevant to our analysis, and discuss the data sources used. Additionally, we present

summary statistics for the variables used in the study, along with an industry rating to

provide further context.

3.1 Setting

3.1.1 Geographical setting

Our analysis focuses on the Nordic stock market, that is Sweden, Denmark, Norway and

Finland. Iceland has been excluded from the analysis because MSCI did not report data

for Iceland before 2018. As depicted in Figure 1, showcasing the number of companies per

country and year, our data sample is predominantly composed of Swedish public companies.

This finding may as somewhat expected, considering Sweden boasts the highest number of

public companies among the Nordic countries (SVD, 2021). We have chosen the Nordics as

the geographic area for several reasons. Firstly, using four countries compared to only using

Sweden gives us a larger data sample. Secondly, the Nordic countries have similar approaches,

laws and regulations towards ESG (Greenly, 2024). Third, the Nordic countries all have a

relatively high ESG score. According to the 2022 ESG Index released by the Global risk

profile (GRP), Sweden, Denmark, Norway and Finland all lie within the top ten countries

of highest ESG scores, with Sweden, Norway and Finland in the top four. The ESG index

measures risks related to the environment, human rights, and the health and safety of people

around the world (Global Risk Profile, 2022).

                                        7
       250

       200

       150

       100

        50
     Number of Companies

             2013   2014   2015   2016   2017   2018   2019   2020   2021   2022   2023
                                   Year

                       Country      DK      FI      NO      SE

Figure 1: This figure displays the number of companies per country and month. The green
line represents Sweden, the blue line represents Denmark, the organge line represents Finland,
and the red line represents Norway. As of the end of 2022, the sample included a total of
379 companies. Among these, 214 are Swedish, 50 are Danish, 51 are Finnish, and 64 are
registered in Norway.

3.1.2 ESG

The empirical analysis is based on the ESG ratings of public companies. ESG is an acronym

for Environmental, Social and Governance and is a framework for evaluating the sustainabil-

ity and ethical impact of a company or investment. ESG issues in business have been a fast

growing phenomena and much attention has been paid by companies in recent years. For

example, in the early 1990s only 20% of S&P 500 companies reported ESG data. By 2011

the share had risen to 86% (Serafeim 2014). The interest in ESG issues is not limited to

companies but is also prevalent in the asset management and investment industry. The rise

in ESG interest among corporations and investors is closely linked to a broader shift in con-

                                        8
sumer preferences towards sustainable practices. As consumers increasingly opt for products

and services from companies that prioritize environmental stewardship and social responsi-

bility (Capgemini, 2020) , businesses are compelled to adopt ESG frameworks. This change

is further supported by regulatory pressures, as governments (influenced by international

agreements such as the Paris Agreement) impose sustainability standards on businesses and

investors in order to reduce their environmental footprint and guarantee social justice.

   An important piece of the ESG information investors use is the concept of ratings that

is produced by various raters.Different ratings include, MSCI, KLD, Sustainalytics, Moody’s

ESG ratings, Refinitv, and SP Global. These ratings seek to inform decision makers how well

a firm is managing its ESG risks and opportunities. Often raters use proprietary methodolo-

gies, including hundreds of metrics and then weighing those metrics to produce an aggregate

rating. A challenge when using ESG ratings is that they differ depending on which rating

agency that is used. The biggest reason (56%) for the difference of ESG ratings between

agencies, is due to different measurement procedures (Berg, K¨olbel and Rigobon (2022).

3.2 Data

In order to properly test the effect in focus in this thesis, a number of variables of data is

needed to be sourced. The variables include, companies’ stock returns, ESG ratings, and

corporate characteristics data.

3.2.1 Data sources

The main data sources used in this thesis is FactSet and MSCI. ESG ratings and firm spe-

cific characteristics (e.g. ISIN, Country and sector classification) are collected from MSCI.

Monthly stock returns and market capitalization are collected from FactSet.

   We compute stock-level sustainability scores using environmental ratings based on ESG

data from MSCI, a leading provider of ESG ratings. There are several advantages with the

MSCI ESG ratings data. Firstly, MSCI is the world’s largest provider of ESG ratings and is

                                        9
used by more than 1700 clients, including asset managers, consultants, pension funds, banks

and advisers (Eccles and Stroehle, 2018). Moreover, compared to other ESG ratings such

as KLD, RobecoSAM, Sustainalytics, and Asset4, MSCI covers the most firms. Secondly,

a study by Berg et al. (2021) which compared eight data vendors, found that the MSCI

data is the least noisy one. The ratings generated by MSCI are based on a large number

of sources, and the MSCI research unit consists of more than 200 analysts and incorporates

artificial intelligence, machine learning, and natural language processing. The ratings are also

updated at least annually. A third advantage of the MSCI ESG rating data is that it offers

both industry-adjusted data and industry-unadjusted data (MSCI, 2023). Without industry

adjustment a company in an industry typically deemed as unsustainable such as Oil and Gas

and Tobacco is classified as very unsustainable, but with industry-adjusted data, such an

unsustainable firm is classified sustainable if it has better ESG practices than other firms in

the unsustainable industry. The ESG rating of MSCI composite is industry-adjusted, as are

also ESG ratings from other rating agencies. However, the MSCI also offers granular data,

which allows us to compute an ESG rating that is not industry adjusted. For our analysis,

we will use the granular data which is reasonable since our results will show that the effects

we identify are strongly associated with industry-level greeness.

   As previously mentioned we use FactSet to collect monthly stock returns and firm specific

characteristics. FactSet, with over 200k users, is a leading data provider that employs a com-

prehensive methodology for collecting and analyzing data from over 800 sources (FactSet,

2024). In order to gather data for the Excess Market Return Fama-French factor two addi-

tional sources have been used. OMX 30 Stockholm data is collected from Yahoo Finance,

and interest rate data from the Swedish Central Bank (Riksbanken).

3.2.2 Sample selection

A methodology similar to that of Pastor et al. (2022) was adopted for sample selection in this

thesis, with several steps taken to construct an appropriate dataset for regression analysis.

                                       10
Initially, the dataset from MSCI was utilized, with MSCI only including companies with

reported ESG ratings. Subsequently, the MSCI dataset was refined to encompass only the

relevant geographical region (the Nordics, excluding Iceland) as well as the relevant factors.

Throughout the period of 2013-2022, there were instances where monthly ESG data was

missing. To address this issue, yearly average scores for ESG, Environmental, Social, and

Governance scores were calculated. These average scores were then merged into a single file

for each year, replicated twelve times to ensure each month was represented. The combined

scores were then merged with a manually curated date file. Subsequently, the ESG scores

were merged with the return data for each year. In cases where FactSet was unable to provide

the corresponding return data, these companies were excluded for each year to ensure data

integrity. This meticulous approach aimed to address missing information and create a

robust dataset. Evidently, by following these measures, a representative sample of Nordic

firms during the period specified was obtained with 37,500 observations, including more than

400 firms.

   To obtain the necessary Fama-French factors, we conducted manual calculations. The

size factor was derived using market capitalization data sourced from FactSet. We computed

a small portfolio, containing the companies of market capitalization in the bottom third, and

a big portfolio, containing the companies with market capitalization in the top third. For the

value factor we manually computed the book-to-market ratio for each company, also with data

sourced from FactSet.One portfolio was created consisting of the companies in the top third

of the highest book-to-market ratio and one portfolio for the bottom-third. Furthermore,

to calculate the excess market return we utilized data from the OMX 30 Stockholm index

along with historical risk-free rates from Sweden. As illustrated in Figure 1, Sweden is the

most prominently represented country in our data sample. Given this predominance, it was

reasonable to base our calculations for excess market returns on the Swedish market.

                                       11
3.3 Summary statistics

The summary statistics Table 1 includes an overview of all variables included in the research

design.

Table 1: This table presents summary statistics of key variables used in this study. ”N”
refers to the number of non-missing observations for each specific variable. The table includes
the mean and standard deviation calculated across these observations. Additionally, the
minimum and maximum values of the variable distribution are provided.

    Pastor et.al (2022) contributes to the foundation of how the ESG score is calculated in this

thesis. We create three variables, E, S and G by using MSCI variables “Environmental pillar

score” (E score) and “Environmental pillar weight” (E weight), “Social pillar score” (S score)

and “Social pillar weight” (S weight), “Governance pillar score” (G score) and “Governance

pillar weight” (G weight).

   E is created to measure the greenness of firm i:

                                      
                                                       Eweighti,t−1
                    Ei, t − 1 = −(10 − Escorei,t−1) ×
                                                     100

   Where Escore,i,t−1 and Eweight,i,t−1 are from company i’s most recent MSCI ratings date

before month t, looking back no more than 12 months. The quantity 10−Escore,i,t−1 measures

how far the company is from a perfect environment score of 10. The product 10−Escore,i,t−1)×

Eweight,i,t−1 measures how brown the firm is, specifically, the interaction of how badly the firm

scores on environmental issues and how large the environmental impacts are for the industries

typical firm (i.e. Eweight,i,t−1). The initial minus sign converts the measure from brownness

to greenness.

                                       12
    S is created to measure the social responsibleness of firm i:

                                      
                                                           Sweighti,t−1
                     Si, t − 1 = −(10 − Sscorei,t−1) ×
                                                    100

   Where Sscore,i,t−1 and Sweight,i,t−1 are from company i’s most recent MSCI ratings date

before month t, looking back no more than 12 months. The quantity 10 − Sscore,i,t−1 measures

how far the company is from a perfect social score of 10. The product 10 − Sscore,i,t−1) ×

Sweight,i,t−1 measures how socially irresponsible the firm is, specifically, the interaction of how

badly the firm scores on social issues and how large the social impacts are for the industries

typical firm (ie, Sweight,i,t−1). The initial minus sign converts the measure from socially

irresponsible to responsible .

   G is created to measure how well governed firm i is:

                                      
                                                      Gweighti,t−1
                    Gi, t − 1 = −(10 − Gscorei,t−1) ×
                                                     100

   Where Gscore,i,t−1 and Gweight,i,t−1 are from company i’s most recent MSCI ratings date

before month t, looking back no more than 12 months. The quantity 10 − Gscore,i,t−1measures

how far the company is from a perfect governance score of 10. The product 10 − Gscore,i,t−1) ×

Gweight,i,t−1 measures how bad the firm’s governance are, specifically, the interaction of how

badly the firm scores on governance issues and how large the governance impacts are for the

industries typical firm (ie, Gweight,i,t−1). The initial minus sign converts the measure from

badly managed to well managed.

   To construct the “sustainable factor” we add each score:

                       Sustainablei,t−1 = Ei,t−1 + Si,t−1 + Gi,t−1

    Sustainablei,t−1 provides a comprehensive assessment of firm i’s sustainability performance

by integrating environmental, social, and governance factors, offering insights into its overall

commitment to sustainable practices and responsible corporate behavior.

                                       13
   We have manually calculated the Return variable using monthly stock price data. More

specifically:

                                                            pt,i
                                  Returnt,i =
                                                        pt−1,i

   where t and i represent the date (month) and the firm, and p is the price of the first day

of the month.

   In table 2, the rankings of industries are presented based on their average ESG scores at

the end of 2022. In the appendix, rankings of industries based on average Environmental,

Social and Governance score are also presented. Among the 62 industries analyzed, only 18

displayed positive average ESG scores by the end of 2022. Out of these positively rated indus-

tries, only two sectors, Telecommunication Services and Leisure Products, achieved positive

scores across all three categories: Environmental, Social, and Governance. The top three

highest-ranked industries for the Average ESG score include Telecommunication Services,

Oil and Gas Refining, and Energy Equipment and Services. While the high ranking of the

Oil and Gas industry may seem surprising at first glance, a closer look at the breakdown

of ESG components reveals the underlying reasons for this outcome. For instance, although

Oil and Gas ranks low in the Environmental category, as expected, it excels in the Social

dimension. Oil and Gas companies often make substantial investments in social initiatives

to counterbalance their adverse environmental impact. This observation highlights that in-

dustries with deficiencies in one ESG category can still attain a positive overall ESG score

by performing exceptionally well in another category. A similar trend is evident in the Tex-

tiles, Apparel and Luxury Goods industry. Despite receiving negative scores in both the

environmental and social dimensions, its strong governance practices effectively offset these

shortcomings, resulting in an overall positive ESG rating.

                                       14
Table 2: This table displays industries ranked by their ESG scores. Avg ESG is the ESG
score averaged across firms within each MSCI industry at the end of 2022. MSCI uses the
GICS sub-industry classification.

4 Research Design

4.1 Empirical Model

Pastor et.al (2022) contributes to the foundation of the empirical model used in this thesis.

To investigate the relationship between firm’s ESG scores and stock performance, we use the

following multiple linear regression model:

            SM U = β0 + β1 · GM B + β2 · SM S + β3 · GM GB + β4 · F F 3 + ε

   In the specified model, the dependent variable SMU indicates the difference in returns be-

tween the sustainable and unsustainable portfolios. We divided the stocks in the data sample

into three groups based on their ESG scores. The sustainable portfolio represents stocks with

ESG scores in the top third and the unsustainable portfolio represents stocks with ESG scores

                                       15
in the bottom third. The dependent variables encompass three distinct components of the

ESG score: Environmental, Social, and Governance. GMB, SMS and GMGB are all similar

to the SMU, but each represents one part of ESG. Specifically, GMB (GreenminusBrown) is

the return difference between the green and brown portfolios, focusing on the environmental

aspect. Meanwhile, SMS (SocminusSIN) measures the return differential between socially

conscious and socially irresponsible portfolios. Lastly, GMGB (GoodminusBadgovernance)

captures the difference in returns between good and bad governance portfolios, emphasizing

the governance dimension of ESG.

   To further investigate which part of ESG has the largest impact on the returns of the

Nordic companies, we create three separate linear regressions for GMB, SMS and GMBG

respectively. We use the following model for investigating the relationship between Environ-

mental scores and stock performance:

                GM B = β0 + β1 · SM B + β2 · HM L + β3 · M ktRF + ε

   The dependent variable GMB represents the difference in returns between the green and

brown portfolios. The green portfolio represents stocks with Environmental scores in the top

third and the brown portfolio represents stocks with Environmental scores in the bottom

third. We use a similar model to investigate the relationship between Social scores and stock

performance:

                SM S = β0 + β1 · SM B + β2 · HM L + β3 · M ktRF + ε

   The dependent variable represents the difference in returns between a portfolio of social

conscious stocks and a portfolio of social irresponsible stocks. The socially conscious portfolio

represents stocks with Social scores in the top third and the socially irresponsible portfolio

represents stocks with Social scores in the bottom third. Lastly, we use the following model

to investigate the relationship between Governance scores and stock performance:

                                       16
               GM BG = β0 + β1 · SM B + β2 · HM L + β3 · M ktRF + ε

   The dependent variable is the difference in returns of the good and bad portfolio. The

good portfolio represents stocks with Governance scores in the top third and the bad portfolio

represents stocks with Governance scores in the bottom third.

   To enhance the models’ robustness and account for additional factors, the Fama-French

3factor model (FF3) has been incorporated. Within the FF3 framework, MktRF reflects

the excess market return, while SMB and HML delineate the size and value factors of Fama

French (1993).

                                       17
5 Main Results

5.1 Realized sustainable stock returns

      160%

      120%

       80%

      Cumulative Return (%)40%

               2013  2014  2015  2016  2017  2018  2019  2020  2021  2022
                                      Year

Figure 2: Cumulative returns of value-weighted sustainable and unsustainable portfolios.
The green line represents the sustainable portfolio and the brown dashed line represents the
unsustainable portfolio. The values of the sustainable and unsustainable lines at the end of
2022 are 85 and 67 respectively, implying sustainable stocks outperformed unsustainable by
85 − 67 = 18 percentage points over this period.

Sustainable stocks strongly outperform unsustainable stocks in recent years. Figure 2 displays

the performance of “sustainable” and unsustainable stocks from January 2013 to December

2022. The green line, representing the sustainable stocks, plots the value-weighted cumulative

return on the portfolio of stocks with ESG scores in the top third. The brown dotted line,

representing unsustainable stocks, plots the corresponding return for stocks with scores in the

bottom third. We see that sustainable stocks strongly outperformed unsustainable during

                                       18
our chosen time period, with a return difference reaching its maximum between 2019 and

2022, when the difference in cumulative returns of sustainable and unsustainable stocks

grew to 93%. The monthly return difference, which we denote SMU (sustainable-minus-

unsustainable), averaged 34% per month. The monthly Sharpe ratio of SMU is 0.99, larger

than even the market portfolio’s Sharpe ratio over the same period.

   The first three rows of table 3 report the results of regression GMB on the three-factor

models of Fama and French (1993). For the market excess return, SMU’s alpha (regression

constant) is not statistically significant. However, SMU’s alpha is statistically significant for

the size and value factors. SMU’s lowest alpha in Table x, occurs where we adjust for the size

and value factors of Fama-French. For SMB, the coefficient is significantly negative (0.13),

implying that smaller firms underperform compared to larger firms in terms of sustainability.

The coefficient of HML is also significantly negative (0.33), indicating that value stocks

underperform growth stocks in terms of sustainability. That is, the exposures to SMB and

HML indicate that SMU tilts toward large stocks and growth stocks.

                                       19
Table 3: We estimate monthly time-series regressions using data from January 2013 to
December 2022. The dependent variable is the difference between the returns on the sustain-
able and unsustainable portfolios (SMU). SMB and HML are the size and value factors of
Fama and French (1993) and the Market Excess Return is the Market Excess Return of the
Swedish stock market. The figure displays both default t-statistics and robust t-statistics in
parentheses.

                                               Dependent variable:

                                         Default Robust

                                                (1) (2)

                                                   ∗∗∗                    ∗∗∗
           SMB −0.131   (0.010) −0.131   (0.010)

                                                   ∗∗∗                    ∗∗∗
           HML −0.328   (0.053) −0.328   (0.058)

             Market Excess Return 0.217 (0.125) 0.217 (0.126)

            GMB 0.178 (0.099) 0.178 (0.099)

                                                  ∗∗∗                    ∗∗∗
            SMS 0.544   (0.088) 0.544   (0.088)

                                                   ∗∗                     ∗∗∗
            GMBG 0.228  (0.077) 0.228   (0.057)

                                                   ∗∗∗                     ∗∗
           Intercept −0.093   (0.024) −0.093  (0.031)

             Observations 120 120

                 2
           R                         0.970 0.970

                            2
             Adjusted R                   0.969 0.969

                                                        ∗          ∗∗          ∗∗∗
           Note:  p<0.05;  p<0.01;   p<0.001

5.2 The GMB, SMS and GMBG

The final three rows of Table 3 correspond to distinct components of the overall ESG score,

crucial delineating criteria for categorizing sustainable and unsustainable portfolios. Within

these components the GMB coefficient exhibits a positive value of 0.18, nearing statistical

                                       20
significance. This positive coefficient suggests a tendency for environmentally conscious com-

panies to potentially outperform their less environmentally focused counterparts. However,

it is important to note that the statistical significance of this result remains inconclusive due

to its marginal nature.

   On the other hand, the SMS factor showcases a significant positive effect with a coeffi-

cient of 0.54. This finding indicates that companies embracing better social practices tend

to generate superior returns compared to those exhibiting lesser social responsibility. Addi-

tionally, the GMBG factor also demonstrates a positive and statistically significant impact,

with a coefficient of 0.23. This result implies that well-governed companies exhibit stronger

performance relative to poorly governed counterparts.

5.3 Environmental

Table 4, shows the result of time-series regressions where the dependent variable is the differ-

ence between the returns on the green and brown portfolio, using data from January 2013 to

December 2022. The green portfolio consists of stocks with environmental scores in the top

third and the brown portfolio of stocks with environmental scores in the bottom third. The

independent variables are the market excess return and the size and value factors of Fama

and French (1993). The coefficient for SMB is negative and significant (0.078) and the HML

coefficient is also negative and significant (0.482). This indicates that GMB tilts towards

large stocks and growth stocks, consistent with the SMU factor. Also similar to SMU, the

market excess return factor is not significant, which implies that the overall market returns

do not significantly impact the return difference between the green and brown portfolios.

        2                  2
Both R and adjusted R are 0.851 and 0.847, respectively, indicating that about 85% of the

variability in the dependent variable can be explained by the independent variables in our

model.

   Call: lm(formula = GMB SMB + HML + excessmarketreturn, data = summarydata)

   Residuals: Min 1Q Median 3Q Max -0.182073 -0.073441 -0.004803 0.077845 0.148005

                                       21
   Coefficients: Estimate Std. Error t value Pr(¿—t—) (Intercept) 0.202124 0.017552 11.516

¡ 2e-16 *** SMB -0.077738 0.004521 -17.196 ¡ 2e-16 *** HML -0.482129 0.057829 -8.337 1.78e-

13 *** excessmarketreturn -0.210494 0.188342 -1.118 0.266 — Signif. codes: 0 ’***’ 0.001

’**’ 0.01 ’*’ 0.05 ’.’ 0.1 ’ ’ 1

   Residual standard error: 0.08951 on 116 degrees of freedom Multiple R-squared: 0.8508,

Adjusted R-squared: 0.847 F-statistic: 220.5 on 3 and 116 DF, p-value: ¡ 2.2e-16

                                       22
Table 4: GMB.We estimate monthly time-series regressions using data from January 2013 to
December 2022. The dependent variable is the difference between the returns on the green and
brown portfolios (GMB). SMB and HML are the size and value factors of Fama and French
(1993) and the Market Excess Return is the Market Excess Return of the Swedish stock
market. The figure displays both default t-statistics and robust t-statistics in parentheses.

                                               Dependent variable:

                                         Default Robust

                                               (1) (2)

                                                         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
            SMB −0.078       −0.078

                                             (0.005) (0.006)

                                                         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
            HML −0.482       −0.482

                                             (0.058) (0.062)

              Market Excess Return −0.210 −0.210

                                             (0.188) (0.179)

                                                        ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
                 Intercept 0.202            0.202

                                             (0.018) (0.021)

                Observations 120 120

                     2
               R                      0.851 0.851

                                2
                Adjusted R                0.847 0.847

                                                    ∗          ∗∗          ∗∗∗
              Note:  p<0.05;  p<0.01;   p<0.001

                                       23
5.4 Social

Table 5 presents the results of time-series regressions where the dependent variable (SMS) is

the difference between the return on a portfolio of socially responsible stocks and a portfolio

of socially irresponsible stocks, using data from January 2013 to December 2022. The socially

responsible portfolio includes stocks with high social scores from social responsibility ratings,

whereas the socially irresponsible portfolio comprises stocks with low scores in these areas.

The independent variables are the market excess return and the size and value factors of Fama

and French (1993). The coefficient for SMB is negative and significant at 0.044, suggesting

that the SMS factor tilts towards larger stocks. This is consistent with what was observed in

the GMB factor, indicating a general pattern where both socially and environmentally focused

portfolios underperform in smaller stocks relative to larger stocks. The HML coefficient is

positive at 0.140, though not statistically significant, which suggests that, unlike the GMB

factor, the SMS factor does not exhibit a clear tilt towards either growth or value stocks.

Similarly to the GMB factor, the market excess return factor for SMS is not significant, with a

coefficient of 0.340. This indicates that overall market returns do not have a significant impact

on the difference in returns between the socially responsible and irresponsible portfolios. The

  2                  2
R and adjusted R values are both at 0.328 and 0.311, respectively. While these values are

considerably lower than those observed in the GMB factor, they still indicate that a moderate

portion of the variability in the SMSdependent variable can be explained by the independent

variables included in the model. This suggests that other factors, potentially specific to

social responsibility criteria, may also play significant roles in influencing the performance

differences observed between socially responsible and irresponsible portfolios.

                                       24
Table 5: SMS.We estimate monthly time-series regressions using data from January 2013 to
December 2022. The dependent variable is the difference between the returns on the green and
brown portfolios (SMS). SMB and HML are the size and value factors of Fama and French
(1993) and the Market Excess Return is the Market Excess Return of the Swedish stock
market. The figure displays both default t-statistics and robust t-statistics in parentheses.

                                               Dependent variable:

                                         Default Robust

                                               (1) (2)

                                                         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
            SMB −0.044       −0.044

                                             (0.006) (0.008)

               HML 0.140 0.140

                                             (0.078) (0.112)

                 Market Excess Return 0.340 0.340

                                             (0.255) (0.280)

                                                        ∗∗       ∗
                 Intercept 0.064            0.064

                                             (0.024) (0.026)

                Observations 120 120

                     2
               R                      0.328 0.328

                                2
                Adjusted R                0.311 0.311

                                                    ∗          ∗∗          ∗∗∗
              Note:  p<0.05;  p<0.01;   p<0.001

                                       25
5.5 Governance

Table 6 illustrates the regression results for the GMBG factor, which assesses the return

difference between portfolios of stocks with good governance and those with bad governance,

utilizing data from January 2013 to December 2022. The “good” portfolio comprises stocks

with governance scores in the top third, and the “bad” portfolio comprises stocks with gover-

nance scores in the bottom third. The independent variables used in the regression are market

excess return and the size and value factors as defined by Fama and French (1993). The co-

efficient for SMB is significantly positive at 0.115, indicating that smaller companies tend

to yield higher returns in the good governance portfolio compared to the bad governance

portfolio. This finding suggests a notable market reward for smaller firms that adhere to

good governance practices, contrasting with the general trend observed in the environmental

(GMB) and social (SMS) factors, where SMB had a negative influence. The HML coefficient

is positive at 0.114 but lacks statistical significance, suggesting that the booktomarket value

does not substantially influence the return differential related to governance. The Market

Excess Return coefficient, at -0.203, is not significant, echoing findings in the GMB and SMS

factors, which indicates that broader market trends do not significantly affect the return

disparities between good and bad governance portfolios. The intercept is notably negative at

-0.214 and highly significant, implying that, on average, stocks with bad governance exhibit

a baseline higher return compared to those with good governance when all other variables are

                        2                  2
zero. Both the The R and adjusted R are 0.869 and 0.866, respectively. These high values

indicate that approximately 87% of the variability in the dependent variable is accounted for

by the variables included in the model.

                                       26
Table 6: GMBG. We estimate monthly time-series regressions using data from January
2013 to December 2022. The dependent variable is the difference between the returns on
the green and brown portfolios (GMBG). SMB and HML are the size and value factors of
Fama and French (1993) and the Market Excess Return is the Market Excess Return of the
Swedish stock market. The figure displays both default t-statistics and robust t-statistics in
parentheses.

                                               Dependent variable:

                                         Default Robust

                                               (1) (2)

                                                        ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
               SMB 0.115          0.115

                                             (0.005) (0.006)

               HML 0.114 0.114

                                             (0.063) (0.103)

              Market Excess Return −0.203 −0.203

                                             (0.206) (0.239)

                                                         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
             Intercept −0.214        −0.214

                                             (0.019) (0.022)

                Observations 120 120

                     2
               R                      0.869 0.869

                                2
                Adjusted R                0.866 0.866

                                                    ∗          ∗∗          ∗∗∗
              Note:  p<0.05;  p<0.01;   p<0.001

                                       27
5.6 Summary of Results

To summarize our findings, the analysis of sustainable versus unsustainable Nordic stocks

from January 2013 to December 2022 indicates that sustainable stocks significantly outper-

formed their unsustainable counterparts. Among the ESG components, the social factor

(SMS) showed the most robust positive impact on stock performance, suggesting that com-

panies with superior social practices tend to yield higher returns. Conversely, while the

environmental (GMB) and governance (GMBG) factors also contributed positively to stock

returns, their impacts were less pronounced compared to the social factor. When analyz-

ing the three ESG components in isolation governance displayed a complex dynamic where

smaller firms with good governance practices outperformed, unlike in environmental and so-

cial contexts where larger firms tended to do better. The analysis consistently found that

market excess return did not significantly influence the ESGrelated performance differences,

reinforcing that ESG factors have distinct influences on stock returns independent of broader

market movements. In the context of ESG components affecting stock performance within

the SMU framework, the social aspect holds the most significant positive influence on sus-

tainable stock outperformance.

5.7 Robustness test

A number of measures have been taken to further increase the trustworthiness of the esti-

mates presented in this thesis. Firstly, in the construction of the ESG factor, we utilized

both industry-adjusted data and industry-unadjusted data. This framework was used to in-

corporate ESG practices in industries typically deemed as unsustainable such as for example

Oil and Gas and Tobacco. Without industry adjustment such firms are classified as very bad

environmentally and socially respectively, but with industry-adjusted data, such firms are

classified as less bad if it is better than other firms in its unsustainable industry. Secondly, to

handle possible heteroscedasticity issues and ensure the impact of variables on SMU remains

valid even if the error terms do not have constant variance across observations, we utilized

                                       28
robust t-statistics which showed that the results remained significant.

6 Discussion and Conclusion

This section provides a discussion of the empirical and sample-related constraints, followed

by a discussion of our findings.

6.1 Sample-related Limitations

Before delving into the results, it is crucial to address certain empirical and sample-related

constraints that could influence the conclusions drawn. Firstly, relying on a singular ESG

score to represent a firm’s specific ESG rating presents a limitation to the study findings.

Various ESG scores, such as those provided by Sustainalytics and Refinitiv Eikon, offer dis-

tinct perspectives, prompting a dilemma regarding the choice of score to adopt. However,

combining diverse ratings could introduce internal validity issues, notably with respect to po-

tential selection biases (Winship and Mare, 1992) Also, incorporating multiple rating agencies

and conducting separate analyses for each would prove unfeasible for this thesis. Moreover,

using only the Fama-French three-factor model as a control in the empirical model introduces

potential limitations due to omitted variable bias and model misspecification. Historically,

the FF3 model, which includes market risk, size, and value factors, has been effective in

explaining stock returns. However, it may not fully account for additional influential di-

mensions that have become relevant in recent times. Incorporating further factors, such as

momentum, profitability, investment, liquidity, and volatility, into the model could mitigate

these risks and provide a more accurate representation of the underlying dynamics affecting

stock returns.

                                       29
6.2 The performance of SMU

6.2.1 Overall market results

To begin, sustainable stocks substantially outperformed their unsustainable counterparts

from 2013 to 2022, as evidenced by the significant differences in cumulative returns noted in

Figure 2. This findings aligns with the research conducted by Xiao-Na Yin et al. (2023), who

documented a positive correlation between ESG performance and stock returns among listed

companies in China. Furthermore, the focus on ESG investments, particularly in European

markets through negative screening strategies as outlined by Dyck, Lins, Roth and Wagner,

(2019), underscores the growing investor recognition and incorporation of ESG factors into

investment decisions during the sample period. Notably, the Nordic region, renowned for

its strong commitment to sustainability and corporate responsibility, provides an exemplary

context for investigating the relationship between ESG ratings and realized stock returns.

During the years 2019 to 2022, the divergence in cumulative returns between the sustain-

able and unsustainable portfolios notably widened. This significant return difference can be

attributed to what has been referred to as the ’greentech bubble’ in the Nordic financial

markets, where many green stocks experienced meteoric rises followed by sharp declines in

late 2022. Another explanation for the significant return difference could be that high ESG-

rated European firms had higher abnormal returns compared to their counterparts during

the Covid- 19 crisis (2019 to 2023) (Engelhardt, 2021).

   Additionally, the analysis in Table 3 reveals positive and significant results for the SMS

and GMBG factors. These results suggest that the SMU tends to favor stocks with higher

social and governance scores, with social scores exerting the most substantial impact. Con-

versely, the environmental scores do not appear to significantly influence the performance of

SMU, indicating that while social and governance aspects of ESG are strong contributors to

portfolio performance, environmental factors may not be as impactful in this context.

                                       30
6.2.2 The negative intercept

The presence of a negative intercept in Table 3 may initially seem counterintuitive given the

observable outperformance of the sustainable portfolio compared to the unsustainable one.

In the context of the model, this negative intercept implies that, under a hypothetical sce-

nario where all predictors are at zero, the expected difference in returns would be negative.

However, such scenarios where all predictors are zero do not exist in our dataset, suggesting

that the intercept represents a theoretical situation that does not manifest in reality. Despite

the negative intercept implying a potential disadvantage for sustainable companies, the sig-

nificant and positive effects of factors like SMS and GMBG indicate that these specific ESG

components are indeed contributing positively to SMU returns. Therefore, the actual im-

pact of ESG factors serves to drive returns into positive territory, counteracting the negative

baseline suggested by the intercept. Moreover, the intricate dynamics of the model, encom-

passing interactions among various predictors and their respective scale may play a crucial

role in offsetting the negative base proposed by the intercept when these predictors assume

non-zero values. This interplay underscores the complexity of the model and emphasizes how

the combined influence of different factors can outweigh the initial disadvantage implied by

the intercept value.

6.3 The individual performance of ESG components

The social score affected the return the most. The effect on returns was positive and signif-

icant both when looking at the variable in isolation (the constant of 0,064 in Table 4) and

in combination with the other ESG factors (0.544 in table 2). The negative and significant

coefficient for SMB in the regression for the SMS indicates that the return difference between

socially responsible and irresponsible portfolios tend to favor larger companies. The reason

for this might be that larger companies have more resources to invest in CSR activities, po-

tentially leading to better implementation and greater acknowledgement from stakeholders.

Smaller firms also need to focus on their financials more than larger firms which might lead

                                       31
them to not focus as much on CSR as larger firms do.

   The positive and significant impact of GMBG on SMU shows that governance plays an

important part in the return difference. The reason for a higher return of well governed firms

could be that firms with strong governance mechanisms facilitate well-calculated strategic

risks by providing a framework where decisions are thoroughly vetted and aligned with long-

term goals. Effective governance structures can support strategic decision making processes

that involve taking prudent risks to achieve growth or innovation objectives. Well calculated

risks are good for the return since investors demand a higher return to support the risk they

are taking.

   When viewing GMBG in isolation it was shown that firms with good governance under-

performed relative to firms with bad gouvernance as shown by the negative and significant

coefficient in Table 5. This finding contradicts the paper of Wolfgang Drobetz et al (2004)

that found that when using an investment strategy that bought high corporate governance

rated firms and shorted low corporate governance rated firms in Germany, earned abnormal

returns of around 12% on an annual basis during the sample period. The quality of a com-

pany’s corporate governance system is widely considered to be a critical factor in its future

success (Larcker and Tayan, 2019). However, many of the structural features commonly as-

sociated with good governance (such as board structure, share structure, etc.) are not shown

to have a consistent relation with performance (Lacker,et al., 2019).

   The green minus brown factor behaved differently than the other two factors in the ESG

score. It was not significant when analyzing its impact on SMU. However, it still had a

positive and significant value of 0.202 when looking at the variable in isolation. Pastor et al

(2022) supports the results that a portfolio of green (high environmental score) stocks should

have performed better than a portfolio of brown (low environmental score) stocks during this

period. The fact that the environmental score did not have a significant impact on the SMU

could be because of multicollinearity where the variables share a high correlation with other

predictor variables. The reason could also be because of mediating variables such as if the

                                       32
environmental factor is mediated through for example the gouvernance factor. Governance

quality might mediate the effect of environmental policies on financial performance. For

instance, firms with robust governance structures could be better equipped to implement

and benefit from environmental initiatives, translating into enhanced financial outcomes.

Conversely, in firms with weaker governance, even strong environmental performances may

not translate into better financial results due to poor execution or strategic alignment.

6.4 Future Research possibilities

There are several ways to enhance and broaden this research, which could yield more nuanced

insights. Firstly, future studies might consider incorporating additional variables, such as

momentum or liquidity. These variables could help further elucidate the subtleties in stock

performance in relation to environmental scores. Moreover, the time period covered in this

research includes significant market events that likely influenced stock behavior significantly.

Specifically, the COVID-19 pandemic between 2020 to 2023 and the invasion of Ukraine at

the beginning of 2022 are two critical events that are anticipated to have substantial impacts

on stock performance. Therefore, it would be valuable for future research to explore these

impacts by analyzing, for example, stock returns before and after COVID-19, or by extending

the study period to assess the longer-term effects. This approach could provide a deeper

understanding of how such global events influence the performance of SMU. An additional

possibility for future research involves expanding the sample set to include European stocks

beyond just the Nordic markets. Including stocks from major European economies such as

Germany, France or the UK could provide a more comprehensive view of the relationship

between ESG scores and stock performance. This expansion would also allow for comparisons

across different regulatory and economic environments within Europe. Another promising

direction for future research is to conduct an industry-specific analysis. By isolating industries

such as energy, finance, or technology, future research could identify patterns and effects that

might be obscured in broader market analyses. Lastly, in this analysis, it has been observed

                                       33
that stocks with high ESG scores yield higher realized returns compared to those with low

ESG scores. However, this raises the question: Does this observation hold for expected

returns as well? Investigating the relationship between the ESG scores of Nordic companies

and their expected returns would be a compelling area for future research.

6.5 Concluding remarks

This paper examines how companies’ ESG practices impact their stocks returns, between

January 2013 and December 2023 in the Nordic Region. Using the Fama and French three-

factor model, we are able to conclude that firms with good ESG practices yield higher returns

than those with less good ESG work during our studied period. We can also conclude that the

exposures to SMB and HML indicate that SMU tilts toward large stocks and growth stocks.

In addition, a conclusion that the sustainability and governance factors in ESG impact the

return premium of sustainable firms can be drawn. The results of how the environmental

factor affects the performance of firms stocks is unclear from our results. If the findings are

deemed to be accurate, and continue to be so, they entail practical implications for investors.

As we find evidence implying that it is possible to achieve higher returns when investing

in sustainable stocks, it suggests that a relatively simple strategy can be implemented by

private investors as well as institutional ones to generate higher returns.

                                       34
7 References

Alexander Dyck, Karl V. Lins, Lukas Roth, Hannes F. Wagner, 2019, Do institutional

investors drive corporate social responsibility? International evidence, Journal of Financial

Economics, Volume 131, Issue 3, 2019, Pages 693-714, ISSN 0304-405X

Berg, Florian, Julian F. Koelbel, and Roberto Rigobon, 2020, Aggregate confusion: The

divergence of ESG ratings, Working paper, MIT.

BlackRock, 2020, Global Sustainable Investing Survey

https://ir.blackrock.com/news-and-events/press-releases/press-releases-

details/2020/BlackRock-Survey-Shows-Acceleration-of-Sustainable-Investing/default.aspx

Capgemini Research Institute, 2020, Consumer Products and Retail: How sustainability is

fundamentally changing consumer

preferences.https://www.capgemini.com/gb-en/news/press-releases/sustainability-in-cpr/

Chava, S. (2014). Environmental Externalities and Cost of Capital. Management Science,

60(9), 2223–2247.

Christophe Revelli and Jean-Laurent Viviani, 2013, The Link Between SRI and Financial

Performance: Effects and Moderators, Management international / International

Management / Gesti`on Internacional, 17(2), 105–122

David F. Larcker, Brian Tayan, 2019, Loosey-goosey governance: four misunderstood terms

in corporate governance, Stanford Closer LOOK series - CGRP79, 1-18

David F. Larcker, Edward M. Watts, 2020, Where’s the greenium?, Journal of Accounting

and Economics, Volume 69, Issues 2–3, 2020, 101312, ISSN 0165-4101

Eccles, R. G., Ioannou, I., and Serafeim, G, 2014, The Impact of Corporate Sustainability

on Organizational Processes and Performance. Management Science, 60(11), 2835–2857

                                       35
Emirhan Ilhan, Philipp Krueger, Zacharias Sautner, Laura T Starks, 2023, Climate Risk

Disclosure and Institutional Investors, The Review of Financial Studies, Volume 36, Issue 7,

July 2023, Pages 2617–2650

Eugene F. Fama, Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks

and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics, Volume 33, Issue 1, 1993, Pages 3-56, ISSN

0304-405X

Factset, 2024, Why Choose FactSet? https://www.factset.com/why-factset

Florian Berg, Julian F Kolbel, Roberto Rigobon, 2022, Aggregate Confusion: The

Divergence of ESG Ratings, Review of Finance, Volume 26, Issue 6, November 2022, Pages

1315–1344

Global Risk Profile, 2023, ESG index 2022 https://risk-indexes.com/esg-index/

Hardjo Koerniadi, Chandrasekhar Krishnamurti, Alireza Tourani-Rad, 2012, Corporate

Governance and Risk-Taking in New Zealand, Australian Journal of Management,

Forthcoming, 1-36

Jonas Ekblom, 2021, St¨orst aktiemarknad i Europa: ”Unikt”, Svenska Dagbladet

https://www.svd.se/a/wOvOM1/aktiemarknaden-isverige-ar-europas-overlagset-storsta

Klara Anderson, 2024, How Nordic countries are facing climate change together, Greenly,

https://greenly.earth/en-us/blog/ecology-news/how-nordic-countries-are-facing-climate-

change-together

Klassen, R. D., and McLaughlin, C. P., 1996, The Impact of Environmental Management

on Firm Performance. Management Science, 42(8), 1199–1214

Kose John, Lubomir Litov, Bernard Yeung, 2005, Corporate Governance and Managerial

Risk Taking: Theory and Evidence, 1-33

Lubos Pastor, Robert F. Stambaugh, Lucian A. Taylor, 2022,ˇ                                                                Dissecting green returns,

Journal of Financial Economics, Volume 146, Issue 2, 2022, Pages 403-424, ISSN 0304-405X

                                       36
Markus Baldauf, Lorenzo Garlappi, Constantine Yannelis, 2020, Does Climate Change

Affect Real Estate Prices? Only If You Believe In It, The Review of Financial Studies,

Volume 33, Issue 3, March 2020, Pages 1256–1295

MCSI, 2023, MSCI ESG Leaders Indexes Methodology,

https://www.msci.com/eqb/methodology/meth docs/MSCI ESG Leaders Methodology May2023.pdf

Nils Engelhardt, Miguel Krause, Daniel Neukirchen, Peter N. Posch, 2021, Trust and stock

market volatility during the COVID-19 crisis, Finance Research Letters, Volume 38, 2021,

101873

Patrick Bolton, Marcin Kacperczyk, Do investors care about carbon risk?, Journal of

Financial Economics, Volume 142, Issue 2, 2021, Pages 517-549, ISSN 0304-405X

Patrick Bolton, Zachery Halem, Marcin Kacperczyk, The Financial Cost of Carbon,

Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, Volume 34, Issue 2, p. 17-29

Philipp Krueger, Zacharias Sautner, and Laura T. Starks, 2019, The Importance of Climate

Risks for Institutional Investors, ECGI Working Paper Series in Finance, Working Paper N°

610/2019

Revelli, C., and Viviani, J.-L., 2015, Financial performance of socially responsible investing

(SRI). What have we learned? A meta-analysis. Business Ethics: A European Review,

24(2), 158–185

Robert G. Eccles, Judith C. Stroehle, 2018, Exploring Social Origins in the Construction of

ESG Measures, Pages 1-36

Strand, R., Freeman, R.E. and Hockerts, K, 2015, Corporate Social Responsibility and

Sustainability in Scandinavia: An Overview. J Bus Ethics 127, 1–15 (2015)

The European Commission, Overview of sustainable finance. Finance.

https://finance.ec.europa.eu/sustainable-finance/overview-sustainable-finance en

Winship, C., and Mare, R. D. (1992). Models for sample selection bias. Annual Review of

Sociology, 18, 327–350

                                       37
Wolfgang Drobetz, Andreas Schillhofer, Heinz Zimmermann, 2003, Corporate Governance

and Expected Stock Returns: Evidence from Germany, 1-46

Xiao-Na Yin, Jing-Ping Li, Chi-Wei Su, 2023, How does ESG performance affect stock

returns? Empirical evidence from listed companies in China, Heliyon 9 (2023) e16320

Elsevier Ltd, 1-10

Yasser Eliwa, Ahmed Aboud, Ahmed Saleh, 2020, ESG practices and the cost of debt:

Evidence from EU countries, Critical Perspectives on Accounting Volume 79, September

2021, 102097

Zoltan n Nagy, Altaf Kassam, Linda-Eling Lee, 2015, Can ESG Add Alpha? An Analysis of

ESG Tilt and Momentum Strategies, Journal of Investing, Vol. 25, No. 2

                                       38
8 Appendices

Table 7: Industry ranking:Environmental.This table displays industries ranked by their En-
vironmental scores. Avg Environemtnal is the Environmental score averaged across firms
within each MSCI industry at the end of 2022. MSCI uses the GICS sub-industry classifica-
tion.

                                       39
Table 8: Industry ranking:Social.This table displays industries ranked by their Social scores.
Avg Social is the Social score averaged across firms within each MSCI industry at the end of
2022. MSCI uses the GICS sub-industry classification.

Table 9: Industry ranking:Governance. This table displays industries ranked by their Gov-
ernance scores. Avg Governance is the Governance score averaged across firms within each
MSCI industry at the end of 2022. MSCI uses the GICS sub-industry classification.

                                       40
   AI. In this research AI has been used to help produce the Rstudio code, graphs, tables,

regressions and models. It has also been used for grammar and spelling check.

                                       41