UNPACKING PERFORMANCE

A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF VALUE-ADDED AND ALPHA
METRICS IN PREDICTING SWEDISH MUTUAL FUND
MANAGER PERFORMANCE

ANDREAS CHAMIA

TIM ERLANDSSON

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2024
Unpacking Performance: A Comparative Study of Value-Added and Alpha
Metrics in Predicting Swedish Mutual Fund Manager Performance

Abstract:
   This study explores the usage of the gross alpha and value-added metrics to evaluate
   actively managed mutual fund manager performance in Sweden, inspired by the
   seminal research of Carhart (1997) and Berk & van Binsbergen (2015). By tailoring
   and combining their methodologies to the Swedish market, known for its unique
   investment culture, the paper aims to uncover the predictive power of these metrics in
   assessing such performance between 2006 and 2019. The empirical findings, derived
   from a comprehensive dataset from Morningstar Direct, reveal that the value-added
   measure offers a more precise prediction of mutual fund manager performance as
   compared to the gross alpha measure. However, the study also highlights the difficulty
   of definitively attributing fund performance to managerial skill, given the complex
   interplay of various factors influencing fund returns, coupled with the challenges of
   data collection inherent in focusing on such a narrowly defined geographical area.
   These insights contribute to the broader discourse on mutual fund management
    efficiency, especially within the context of the Swedish investment landscape.

Keywords:
   Comparative study, Value-added, Alpha, Mutual fund, Mutual fund manager
   performance, Benchmark, Fama-French-Carhart

Authors:
   Andreas Chamia (25413)
   Tim Erlandsson (25410)

Tutors:

   Ran Xing, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance at Stockholm University

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Andreas Chamia and Tim Erlandsson, 2024
1 Introduction

The subject of mutual fund managerial performance has been a widely debated topic
amongst financial academia since the conversation started with Jensen’s (1968) highly
influential paper. Introducing the so-called Jensen’s Alpha, hereafter referred to as the
“alpha”, through the already established capital asset pricing model, or CAPM, Jensen
laid the groundwork for a decades-long debate still left unsettled despite numerous
scholarly attempts to do so. In our research, numerous contenders have emerged in
making such attempts, whether it be Fama’s (1970) efficient market hypothesis, Carhart’s
(1997) paper on the persistence of mutual fund performance, or Berk and van
Binsbergen’s (2015) paper on measuring skill. Ultimately, despite their various
methodologies and approaches, the same lack of consensus remains, as no definitive
answers have been produced. At first glance, this debate might seem confined to
academia, however, we contend that it also carries practical applications, particularly in
the investment sector. This stems from the fact that actively managed mutual funds and
their proposed competitor passive index funds make up a lot of the public attention in the
area, which subsequently means that settling this debate could potentially have
implications for the future of investing.
       Considering the above, it is evident that this area of finance is one filled with
contention surrounding not only the method of measuring such managerial skill but also
its existence in the first place. Furthermore, in conducting the preparatory research for
this paper, we have found a persistent geographical focus, namely the United States. This
paper aims to combat not only the narrow-minded geographical focus of existing research
by focusing on Sweden but also the existing contention within the space. Particularly
relevant are the two papers by Carhart (1997) and Berk and van Binsbergen (2015), as
the methodology employed in the analysis conducted in our paper is mostly inspired by
their respective methodologies, but also due to their contrasting conclusions on the
subject matter serving as the major motivation for conducting this study. We propose that
by comparing two methods of measurement, namely the alpha metric and the value-added
metric as defined by the aforementioned authors, this research paper can move towards
an answer to the question of the existence of mutual fund managerial skill and which
method is the most accurate in measuring such skill if it exists within the given scope of
this paper. Selecting Sweden as the geographical focus of the study also offers a unique
opportunity to look at an otherwise underrepresented area of focus given the context,
which is simultaneously characterized by factors appealing to such research. These
factors include a high level of stock market participation and an early history of mutual
fund investing. Additionally, by choosing a singular country instead of a broader scope,
such as Europe in its entirety, the dataset benefits from a relatively high level of
homogeneity that minimizes the risks of unwanted statistical noise that might stem from
a heterogeneous dataset. Sweden is also in a unique position due to its role as a financial
hub in the Nordics, its corporate environment and culture, its long history of innovation,
the start-up prevalence, its taxation law concerning financial products, concentrated
corporate ownership, and the results stemming from the combination of all of these
factors. We believe that this creates a unique investing environment that is underutilized
as a research focus within the subject, making it an excellent candidate for expanding the
available literature.
      We have derived three separate hypotheses centered around these set objectives.
Our first hypothesis, henceforth also known as H1, concerns whether or not mutual fund

                                   1
managerial skill can be proven to exist. Our belief, and subsequent hypothesis, is that
such skill can be observed within our research scope and dataset where the resulting null
hypothesis is that such observations cannot be made. In many ways, this first hypothesis
constitutes the foundation for the others, and the importance of confirming it should not
be understated. The second hypothesis, or H2, serves as another crucial piece of the
analysis, namely the comparison between the alpha and value-added measurements. We
hypothesize that similar to Berk and van Binsbergen (2015) and contrary to Carhart
(1997), the value-added measurement will be a better predictor and estimator of mutual
fund manager performance. The related null hypothesis to H2 is that the alpha
measurement will be superior in this regard. Our third and last hypothesis, or H3, is
related to the second one and examines the subject of whether the benchmark portfolio
and the subsequent benchmark factors inspired by Berk and van Binsbergen (2015) are
better predictors and estimators of mutual fund manager performance. Our hypothesis is
that the benchmark factors will serve better for the intended purpose than the Fama-
French-Carhart, or FFC, factors to which they are compared, and the subsequent null
hypothesis with regard to H3 is thus that the FFC factors will be superior.
        Through analyzing the above-stated three hypotheses, we have confidence that
this paper will be able to fulfill the initially set objectives concerning filling the identified
gaps in existing literature resulting from, amongst other things, empirical blind spots as a
consequence of geographical narrow-mindedness as well as making significant strides in
settling the contentious debate around the subject. For instance, when considering the first
hypothesis of this paper regarding the existence of managerial skill, Carhart (1997) denied
that such a skill could be observed, while Berk and van Binsbergen (2015) came to the
opposite conclusion, albeit with a few caveats. Our research thus serves as a valuable
addition to the existing literature on the subject, especially given the geographical context.
Moreover, outside of academia, there is also some potential for practical results. As
mentioned, the available attention span related to investing revolves around the existence
of fund managerial skill indirectly, as it entails answering whether to invest in a passively
managed index fund versus investing in an actively managed mutual fund. By answering
if such a skill exists and, if so, what the best way to measure it is, we believe that this
paper has some, albeit geographically limited, potential to affect the future of investing
positively.
       The aim when designing the desired empirical analysis and the steps involved was
to try and replicate the work done in the previously mentioned papers as closely as
possible within the context of our comparative study, that is, the comparison of the two
chosen performance metrics and their predictive value in evaluating mutual fund manager
performance. In doing so, we have utilized their respective methodologies, together with
our own original additions, in order to effectively conduct our cross-sectional analysis.
The alpha measurement, more specifically the gross alpha, mostly based on Carhart’s
(1997) work, utilizes a linear regression of monthly Swedish mutual fund returns over
either the FFC factors as designated in his paper or the benchmark factors as inspired by
Berk and van Binsbergen (2015). As for the value-added measurement, it is calculated by
utilizing the previously described alphas together with the monthly assets under
management, or AUM figure for each mutual fund in the dataset as designated by Berk
and van Binsbergen (2015). As a consequence, four sets of monthly values for the
individual mutual funds have been acquired, which are then subsequently used to sort the
funds into decile portfolios based on their performance according to the respective
measurements, those being FFC alpha, benchmark alpha, FFC value-added, and

                                   2
benchmark value-added, respectively. The portfolio values for these measurements, as
well as the relevant betas and other statistical measurements, are then calculated and
compiled for cross-sectional comparison. Concerning the research focus, for reasons that
will be further elaborated upon in subsequent sections, this paper will look at Swedish
mutual funds between 2006-01-01 and 2019-12-31. The data used consists of four
separate datasets: one containing the monthly gross returns of the 461 mutual funds; one
containing the AUM values for those same funds, one containing the benchmark fund
returns used to construct the benchmark containing the returns of eight index funds, and
lastly, one containing the FFC factors in the designated time frame. Acquiring this data
involved two different sources of data; for the first three, Morningstar Direct was utilized,
while for the latter one, the Swedish House of Finance Research Data Center was used.
        Looking at the structure of this paper, it consists of ten parts, of which nine remain
after the present introduction and which will be explained in order of appearance. Starting
with the Theoretical Background, the paper will dive deeper into the existing literature
related to our research, as well as the justifications and motivations behind it. In the Data
section, the datasets used in the analysis will be further examined, including their sources,
data selection methods, cleaning procedures, handling of missing values, and other steps
taken in their procurement. The Methodology section is a closer look at the steps taken to
produce our desired results, it is an elaboration on what is described above and includes
any potential details necessary for replication. Next, in the Results section, we carefully
describe the acquired results from the analysis as well as present our tables in a procedural
manner to effectively facilitate subsequent discussion and interpretation. In the
subsequent Discussion section, the results presented in the previous section are
interpreted in due course, including the statistical measures, as well as compared where
appropriate. Following, in the Limitations section, any potential issues in producing the
aforementioned results, including data procurement problems, compromises, and any
other relevant topics that could have compromised the results and subsequent conclusions
stemming from them, are brought up. This sets the stage for the last written section of the
paper, namely the Conclusion section, in which everything produced thus far is tied
together and used in order to come to any potential conclusion with regard to the stated
hypotheses. Lastly, in the References and Appendix sections, we provide our sources in
the first, as well as any other relevant information or material used in the latter.

2 Theoretical Background
A The Existence of Skill
The question of which predictor most accurately represents the skill of mutual fund
managers derives from the broader question of whether or not mutual fund managers have
some inherent skills that they can use to beat the market consistently.
       One of the earliest papers from our knowledge that covers the topic of managerial
skill is Jensen’s (1968) paper on the performance of mutual funds, in which the author
investigates the ability of portfolio managers to create greater returns by successfully
predicting future stock prices. Jensen finds that on average, actively managed funds were
not able to beat a buy-and-hold strategy of the market and that any of the mutual funds
that beat the market could not be statistically differentiated from arbitrary luck. Another
of the early papers covering this topic was Fama’s (1970) paper on the efficient market
hypothesis, in which he establishes that stock prices fully reflect all available information
in the market. Hence, it would not be possible for actively managed funds to consistently

                                   3
beat the market by finding mispriced assets. The conclusion Jensen and Fama drew in the
late 1960s and early 1970s is later revisited by Carhart (1997) in his paper on the
persistence of mutual funds. Carhart measured the alpha for mutual funds and concluded
that there was no supporting evidence that skilled or informed mutual fund managers
existed that could consistently beat the market over long periods of time. He further
emphasizes this point by concluding that if you want to maximize your wealth from
investing in mutual funds, you should avoid actively managed funds with higher costs or
fees as they have a direct negative impact on performance outcomes. Moreover, these
papers also similarly conclude that the performance of actively managed mutual funds is
very uncertain and hard to predict.
       Conversely, there have also been several studies that suggest that mutual fund
managerial skill does exist. Two authors that have together contributed significantly to
this topic are Grinblatt and Titman. One of their initial papers, “Mutual Fund
Performance: An Analysis of Quarterly Portfolio Holdings” (1989), established that some
mutual funds had significantly higher gross returns than what would be possible if you
were simply utilizing a well-known passive investment strategy. Furthermore, in another
paper, Grinblatt and Titman (1992) found further evidence of the existence of fund
manager skills. By creating a new benchmark free from biases related to firm size, past
returns, CAPM betas, and so forth, they established evidence of a difference in
performance for mutual funds that is persistent over time, which is consistent with the
idea that mutual fund managers have the ability to earn abnormal returns by utilizing their
skills for added mutual fund performance. Grinblatt and Titman (1993), also found that
some mutual fund managers performed better than the market when you accounted for
their portfolio holdings. More specifically, they found that the skills of fund managers
who held aggressive growth portfolios could influence the risk-adjusted returns at a
statistically significant level. Wermers (2000) is another contributor who found that
portfolios held by actively managed mutual funds outperform broad market indices by
around 1.3%, of which 70 basis points can be solely attributed to their stock selection
skills. More recent contributions include Berk and van Binsbergen's (2015), where the
authors measure the skills of a manager by the additional value they can create over a
benchmark. Their finding was that the average manager demonstrate skill as they
generate, on average, an additional $3.2 million per year from the capital market over a
comparable benchmark portfolio.
       In between, there are papers who argue that both sides may be correct; it all
depends on the context. One such example is Fama and French (2010), where they tried
to determine if abnormal mutual fund returns were based on luck or skill. When looking
at mutual fund managers' net returns, they found that they underperformed the returns of
a CAPM, three-factor, or four-factor benchmark portfolio. In short, the mutual fund
managers needed more skills to cover the costs. Simultaneously, when looking at the
results for gross fund returns, they found that there is an existence of managerial skill,
both positive and negative.
       With that in mind, as mentioned in the introduction, our proposed research builds
upon two of the papers above, namely Carhart (1997) and Berk and van Binsbergen
(2015), and their respective methodologies and measurements used in evaluating mutual
fund managerial skill, which will be further described next.

                                   4
B The Alpha Measurement
The alpha measurement, or more precisely Jensen’s alpha, has, since its introduction in
Jensen (1968) stood as a staple of the financial industry together with the Capital Asset
Pricing Model, or CAPM for short, in evaluating the performance of a given investment
portfolio or fund manager. Representing the abnormal return generated by a portfolio in
excess of the expected return as defined by the CAPM, in theory, it effectively isolates
that of the portfolio's performance, good or bad, which can be attributed to the active
management of that particular portfolio. In essence, it allows investors and analysts to
gain a nuanced understanding of a fund’s value addition, separate from any potential
effects of luck or market trends.
       However, this is all theoretical, and the measure has its fair share of critics.
Additionally, as was claimed by Fama and French (1993), a large amount of the abnormal
returns could be explained by other risk factors outside those traditionally part of the
model. By adding additional risk factors to the CAPM regression, they argued that a larger
amount of the abnormal returns previously attributed to the alpha variable could be
explained. These two additional factors that Fama and French found were the book-to-
market equity ratio, also commonly referred to as the high minus low factor, or HML,
and the size factor, also referred to as small minus big, or SMB. The book-to-market
equity ratio reflects what a firm's book value is compared to its common stock. The size
factor, relates to a company's market capitalization, which is the per-share price times the
outstanding number of shares. When adding these two factors together with the market
excess return factor, originally from the CAPM model, a larger amount of what was
previously thought of as the alpha could now be explained. In this paper, we will use a
combination of the three-factor model and an additional factor called the momentum
factor, established by Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), which together create what is known
as the Fama-French-Carhart model, or as the FFC model. The momentum factor, or
simply MOM, is calculated by taking the average return of the top 30% of stocks minus
the returns of the bottom 30% of stocks. By utilizing this model, it is theorized that any
resulting alpha is an actual representation of abnormal performance not easily explained
by other risk factors, as compared to that calculated through the CAPM.
C The Value-added Measurement
Building on this discussion, Berk and van Binsbergen (2015) brings up additional
criticism of the alpha measurement in their paper, mainly relating to how it cannot be a
valid proxy for skill as, on average, non-zero net alpha investment opportunities must be
competed away, which invalidates the measure in its current format for this purpose.
Instead, they suggest an alternative measure, the value-added measurement. The value-
added measurement encompasses not only the alpha as calculated from, for instance, the
FFC model or a benchmark model approach but also the size of the fund, otherwise known
as the assets under management figure, as an additional factor in attributing performance.
It is argued that the size of a fund is an indication of how well a fund is perceived and, in
theory, of how it has performed in the past, as people, if acting rationally, will only buy
successful funds. In combining the two measures, they argue that a better, all-
encompassing measurement of manager and fund performance has been created. Put
differently, funds that perform better over time will draw more capital investments, and
as a result, they will have a larger value-added, which will be a reflection of their
manager's superior skill. This measure, as described, is what will be used in this paper as
the comparative metric to the alpha.

                                   5
D Contribution
Our study aims to contribute to the already existing literature by conducting a
comprehensive comparison between the value-added and alpha measurement methods in
the context of evaluating a fund manager's performance. As the prior literature has
predominantly focused on the US market, our paper will examine Swedish mutual funds,
offering an alternative perspective through a previously underutilized geographical
research area. In doing so, we hope to bridge the current gap in academia and broaden the
available knowledge on mutual fund managerial performance, as well as strengthen future
empirical evidence.

3 Data
A Mutual Fund Data
In conducting the analysis for this paper, a large amount of data pertaining to Swedish
mutual funds, index funds, and FFC factor data was required.
       The mutual fund data was gathered through the database known as Morningstar
Direct. Our extracted dataset contains the necessary information on 461 actively managed
Swedish mutual funds needed to conduct our analysis. The relevant data points are the
gross monthly return and the monthly assets under management (AUM) of each fund and
extend across a time-based scope between 2006-01-01 and 2019-12-31. Moreover, the
AUM figures of each fund have been inflation-adjusted to December 2019 based on
values from SCB, or Statistics Sweden, as the currency used for those figures was the
Swedish krona (SEK).
       Arriving at this specific dataset required following a rigorous data selection
process, as inspired by Carhart (1997) and Berk and van Binsbergen (2015). More
specifically, the mutual funds in the dataset had to be an equity fund, they had to be sold
in Sweden, they had to originate from a Swedish company, they had to have a net asset
allocation of equity that was greater than 75%, they had to have had an inception date
prior to 2017-12-31 to ensure at least 24 months of data, and lastly, they could not be an
index fund. The way in which most of these criteria were enforced was through the built-
in filtering measures featured on the Morningstar Direct platform. However, due to the
nature of our data gathering and the procedures of said platform, one criterion had to be
manually enforced, namely that the funds should originate from a Swedish company. This
was only applicable when a fund was domiciled outside of Sweden, where the most
common such case was funds in the dataset domiciled in Luxembourg while being
managed by a Swedish company, for a Swedish market, and so forth. In such cases and
similar ones, some additional manual steps had to be taken to ensure that the funds
actually originated from a Swedish company. As this was a manual process, we do
acknowledge the risk of the dataset containing a small amount of funds that do not adhere
to the set criteria, and simultaneously that there might be funds missing that were wrongly
categorized. This was a particularly big issue when a fund had been out of existence for
a long period of time, however, we deem the potential inaccuracies that this may have
caused to be relatively small, if not non-existent, as it was an uncommon issue.
       Cleaning and processing the aforementioned dataset was primarily a process of
ensuring our two data values, those being monthly gross returns and AUM, could be
cross-referenced. Essentially, we needed to ensure that there was a value for each
corresponding data point when looking at a specific fund and month, as this was crucial
for our regressions. Nevertheless, that caused another issue, namely that the criteria set

                                   6
out above when initially acquiring the data were in some cases no longer fulfilled, more
specifically the ones related to the minimum amount of data for each fund to be included
in the dataset. To solve this issue, we enforced a 24-entry per-fund minimum, similar to
the demands set by our required inception date from Morningstar Direct. Subsequently,
it became a cyclical process of enforcing the minimum requirements set and ensuring
simultaneous data points until both were met. Then, for additional statistical accuracy, we
chose to enforce the additional criteria of a minimum of 30 entries per month of reported
returns for a mutual fund for the first and every subsequent month. The first month that
fulfilled these criteria became the starting date for the dataset. At last, we were left with
a dataset containing the chosen data points of 461 unique Swedish mutual funds that
existed in some capacity between 2006-01-01 and 2019-12-31. Still, issues persisted, as
the values reported by Morningstar Direct for AUM contained frequent gaps for many of
the mutual funds. In most cases, this is assumed to be due to quarterly reporting.
Nonetheless, this means that the data was not complete, and to fill in the missing values,
we utilized linear interpolation. This decision was based on many factors, primarily the
extent of the calculation, the length of the gaps, and reasonability concerns. The summary
statistics of the completed dataset are presented in Table 1 below.

We are confident that this dataset, having followed the described criteria, will be
sufficient to arrive at a result adequate for drawing conclusions around our posed
hypotheses. That being said, we are not oblivious to the problems in the data and those
that we have come across in acquiring it. For instance, as described, manual processes
have been utilized, both in the data selection process and in handling missing values. For
the latter, we also acknowledge that by filling in missing values, we have altered the
dataset in such a way that it risks not accurately reflecting the true nature of the market
during the period. However, as this was an uncommon problem, meaning most funds had
complete data within the timeframe, we deem the statistical impact of this to be small.
Furthermore, due to what we are assuming to be differing reporting standards as well as
a relatively smaller financial market, the data that has been available for this particular
study is significantly smaller than that utilized by the papers cited as our inspirations. In
other words, compromises had to be made as to the length of the data as well as the funds
included in said dataset.
B Benchmark Fund Data
As was done by Berk and van Binsbergen (2015), a benchmark portfolio encompassing
the market, in this case, the Swedish market, was needed to conduct our analysis. Through
data gathered from Morningstar Direct, in a similar manner to the process utilized when
constructing the mutual fund dataset, such a portfolio was constructed, albeit with an

                                   7
entirely different set of considerations and criteria. However, unlike Berk and van
Binsbergen (2015), in choosing to perform our analysis on the Swedish mutual fund
market, we also exposed ourselves to a considerably less diverse passively managed index
fund market as compared to the one in the U.S. Ultimately, this resulted in a portfolio
consisting of 8 index funds, which is smaller than the 11-fund benchmark portfolio
utilized in the paper by the above-mentioned authors. The data spans the same timeframe
as before, that is between 2006-01-01 and 2019-12-31.
        Deriving these 8 index funds required a careful selection process where great
considerations were made to as accurately and closely as possible match those market
considerations made in the construction of the benchmark portfolio used as inspiration,
albeit applied to a smaller and different economy. One such consideration was the
popularity of ownership of a given index fund carrying a certain type of market exposure;
as described by Berk and van Binsbergen (2015), they were supposed to be so-called
market leaders. In making such a determination, data on the popularity of ownership was
gathered from two of the largest Swedish stockbrokers, Avanza and Nordnet. It is
acknowledged that this data collection is somewhat limited and could lead to arbitrariness
in the selection process; however, given other considerations, it was deemed sufficient.
Two major impairments emerged during the selection process: for one, the fees of our
chosen benchmark portfolio are significantly higher than the ones charged by the
Vanguard funds used by Berk and van Binsbergen (2015). For the other, as the Swedish
mutual fund market compared to the U.S. is smaller, the exposure to the same market
factors is also not as extensive. Another important point to consider is that a large amount
of the funds in our benchmark are so-called “index-near” funds, which means that they
exclude certain types of investments based on ESG factors. As such, they are not entirely
passively following the index; only nearly, but no alternatives were found that still
fulfilled other considerations.
       In the data cleaning and processing step of constructing the benchmark, a major
adjustment to the data had to be made. Looking at Table 2 below, it can be observed that
the inception dates for the funds are considerably different, giving rise to another
procedure utilized by Berk and van Binsbergen (2015), namely the orthogonalization
process involved in filling out the missing values of the benchmark dataset. In doing so,
we utilized QR decomposition to construct an orthogonal basis set based on the initial
benchmark dataset, where some slight modifications were made to enable viable results,
including replacing the missing values with zeroes. Next, the missing values in the initial
benchmark dataset are replaced with the values for the respective funds in the newly
constructed orthogonal basis set. After which, the whole process is repeated once more,
ultimately creating the complete benchmark factor portfolio. The funds in the benchmark

                                   8
portfolio, relevant summary statistics, and other relevant information can be seen in Table
2 below.

It is our firm belief that despite its shortcomings, the benchmark portfolio, although
lacking the extensiveness of its inspiration, still encompasses the same broad market
considerations and, as such, can be described as sufficient for the analysis in this paper.
Simultaneously, we acknowledge that those shortcomings might have affected the
accuracy and statistical significance of the related regressions. For one, the higher fees
and certain funds being “index-near” rather than strictly following an index presents a
significant departure from that which was described in Berk and van Binsbergen (2015),
meaning that any potential conclusions come with an asterisk and comparisons are not as
easy even notwithstanding the geographical concerns. For the other, the benchmark risks
not having the same explanatory value related to the overall market conditions by not
being as broad. Furthermore, by filling in the missing values of the dataset, we risk
compounding that effect, as the data risks no longer reflecting the true market conditions
for the relevant months. Having said that, given the conditions, we deem the constructed
benchmark a worthwhile compromise for the analysis.
C Factor Portfolio Data
In enabling our FFC regressions, the factor portfolios constructed by Aytug, Fu, and
Sodini (2020), gathered from the Swedish House of Finance Research Data Center
website, relating to Sweden and its market conditions between 1983 and 2019, have been
utilized. Solely relying on Swedish FFC factor data is a decision motivated by relevance.
Given the funds in the dataset, we deem these factors the most applicable. We do,
however, acknowledge that this is a compromise given the investment scope of the
included mutual funds. The time scope of our analysis spans the period between 2006-
01-01 and 2019-12-31, which subsequently means that our dataset of FFC factor portfolio
data only contains data for that period.

4 Methodology
A Alpha Measurement
In evaluating the gross alpha measurement, two separate functions for deriving the alpha
will be considered, namely the FFC factor model and the benchmark factor model. For
the FFC factor model, we will be utilizing the contributions of Carhart (1997), as
previously described, to construct the model, as can be seen below in eq. (1):

                                   9
Here, MKT, SML, HML, and MOM represent the four-factor portfolios of excess return
on the market: small minus big, high minus low, and momentum, respectively.
Additionally, the beta factors, or 𝛽, represent the risk exposures of the i’th mutual fund,
which are estimated through a regression of the fund's monthly returns onto the FFC
factors that, as mentioned in Subsection 3C, are gathered from Aytug, Fu, and Sodini
(2020). Furthermore, the alpha factor, or 𝛼, represents the excess return of the funds that
cannot be explained by the other risk factors and thus theoretically represents, within the
limitations of the regression, the added performance of the funds as a result of the
manager's skill. This alpha measure is the gross alpha as a result of the inputs into the
function being regarded as being prior to adding any fees involved in obtaining it.
      The benchmark factor model will follow the same broad template as the one
utilized in deriving eq. (1), but instead of the FFC factors, we will utilize our constructed
benchmark portfolio as described in Subsection 3B, as inspired by Berk and van
Binsbergen (2015). The model can be seen below in eq. (2):

In this equation, BMF1 through BMF8 represent the monthly returns of the funds in the
constructed benchmark portfolio as illustrated by Table 2. Similar to eq. (1) the beta
factors (𝛽) represent the risk exposures of the i’th mutual fund, which are estimated
through a regression of the fund's monthly returns onto these benchmark fund returns, or
factors. Once more, the alpha factor (𝛼) represents the excess return of the funds that
cannot be explained by the other risk factors and is explicitly known as the gross alpha
measurement.
        These models, both eq. (1) and eq. (2), are then utilized to obtain the individual
monthly gross alphas for the respective mutual funds in the dataset. That is to say that for
each mutual fund, we obtain two separate gross alphas, one based on the FFC factors and
another based on the benchmark factors. Carrying out this process involves running a
linear regression, containing a rolling window loop with a time window of 18 months, in
order to smooth out short-term fluctuations and provide a clearer view of long-term
trends. Following, the 461 mutual funds, as described in Subsection 3A, are sorted into
ten separate decile-ranked portfolios based on the obtained mutual fund monthly gross
alphas, coming with a one-month lag. The ranking of the portfolios works such that for
each month, the mutual funds having a gross alpha value within the top 10% will be sorted
into Portfolio 1, the funds having a gross alpha value within the lowest 10% in Portfolio
10, and so forth. For clarity, as two sets of monthly gross alphas have been obtained, the
result of this process is two sets of portfolios based on the gross alphas obtained from
their respective models. These portfolios will then be updated monthly throughout our
period of examination, that being 2006-01-01 to 2019-12-31. One important thing to note
regarding the sorting process is that since the inception dates and termination dates of the
mutual funds in our original dataset differ, all mutual funds will not have an alpha value
for every month in our dataset. When the portfolios are sorted monthly, it will thus only
be the mutual funds with alpha values available for that particular month that will be
considered, and not all of the 461 mutual funds.
       Having performed the portfolio sorting step of the process, we calculate the
monthly gross returns for each portfolio. In addition, a Long-Short portfolio is added to
enhance the subsequent analysis, which can be briefly explained as representing an

                                  10
investment strategy of having a long position in Portfolio 1 and a short position in
Portfolio 10. Finally, a linear regression is run based on these portfolios, utilizing eq. (1)
and eq. (2), whichever is relevant, out of which a gross alpha is obtained for each of the
portfolios, including any relevant statistical measures based on these regressions such as
the adjusted R-squared, significance levels, t-statistics, and the betas of the individual
factors. The data is then summarized and presented in Tables 3 and 4 for the FFC model
and in Tables 5 and 6 for the benchmark model.
B Value-added Measurement
Assessing the value-added measurement, as described by Berk and van Binsbergen
(2015), involves utilizing the excess gross return of a given fund, see eq. (2) in Subsection
4A, the calculated benchmark portfolio return, see eq. (3) below, together with the
inflation-adjusted (2019-12) assets under management (AUM) figure, to derive our value-
added measurement.

In eq. (3), n(t) represents the total number of funds available in the benchmark at time t
        𝑗
and 𝛽𝑖 is the factor found utilizing eq. (2) and running the linear regression, obtaining the
individual betas for each of the funds in the benchmark factor portfolio as represented by
    𝑗
𝑅𝑡 . Utilizing these two equations, we can derive our measurement for value-added as
defined in eq. (4):

Here, the variable q represents the assets under management (AUM) of a given fund one
period prior to the current, that is to say, the assets utilized in obtaining the current return
                               𝑔
figure. In addition, the 𝑅𝑖𝑡 variable is the excess gross return of a mutual fund in a given
month, as calculated in eq. (2). To clarify, eq. (4), can be described as the product of the
benchmark alpha for a given fund and month, together with the corresponding AUM.
         However, as we have two separate factor models, and the above-mentioned
value-added calculations only apply to the benchmark factor portfolio, we require
additional equations. Accordingly, eq. (5) and eq. (6), as seen below, represent the
corresponding calculations related to the FFC factor portfolio to obtain a second set of
value-added values. In calculating our equivalent to the benchmark return, we calculate
the FFC factor portfolio return as seen in eq. (5):

The differences when comparing to eq. (3) is that instead of having betas derived from
                                                                             𝑗
eq. (2), they are derived from eq. (1), and instead of 𝑅𝑡 representing the returns of the
benchmark factor portfolio funds, it will represent the FFC factors. Subsequently, we can
derive our second set of value-added values as defined in eq. (6):

                                                                                                      𝐵
Similarly, eq. (6) follows that which was set out in eq. (4), but instead of using 𝑅𝑖𝑡 we
                                          𝐹𝐹𝐶
will be utilizing the values for 𝑅𝑖𝑡   as calculated in eq. (5). Once more, eq. (6) can be

                                  11
described as the product of the FFC alpha for a given fund and month, together with the
corresponding AUM.
      Using these two sets of equations, two sets of monthly value-added values for
each mutual fund are obtained, one based on the FFC factors, and one based on the
benchmark factors. Thereafter, similarly to the alpha-sorted portfolios in Subsection 4A,
the mutual funds, of which there are 461, are sorted into ten decile-ranked separate
portfolios based on these two sets of monthly value-added values. The mutual funds
having a value-added value within the top 10% will be sorted into Portfolio 1, the funds
having a value-added value within the lowest 10% in Portfolio 10, and so forth, with the
result being two sets of portfolios based on their respective models for calculating the
value-added measure. Moreover, the additional clarifications related to the two previous
sets of portfolios in Subsection 4A are still applicable. These portfolios will then be
updated monthly throughout our period of examination, that being 2006-01-01 to 2019-
12-31.
       Similar to the alpha-sorted portfolios, having performed the portfolio sorting step
of the process, the gross returns of each portfolio, including the Long-Short portfolio, are
then calculated. Finally, a linear regression is run based on these portfolios, utilizing eq.
(1) and eq. (2), whichever is relevant, out of which a gross alpha is obtained for each of
the portfolios, including any relevant data statistical measures based on these regressions
such as the adjusted R-squared, significance levels, t-statistics, and the betas of the
individual factors. The data is then summarized and presented in Tables 7 and 8 for the
benchmark model and in Tables 9 and 10 for the FFC model.

5 Empirical Results
A Preamble
Through the utilization of the methodology described in Section 4, a series of four
separate sets of portfolios, divided in deciles have been derived, based on either FFC
alpha, benchmark alpha, FFC value-added, or benchmark value-added. In the four
subsequent sections, a total of eight tables containing the regression results of the
performed analysis will be presented. Each respective measure and section are assigned
two such tables, where one contains the results stemming from the run regressions on that
particular portfolio set, and the other table contains its related statistical measures.
B FFC Alpha Sorted Portfolios
Tables 3 and 4 contain the results stemming from the analysis of the set of portfolios
sorted based on the values for the FFC alpha and the related statistical measures,
respectively. These outputs are the result of a linear regression where we regress the
monthly excess returns for the 10 decile-ranked portfolios in the set on the monthly values

                                  12
for the four FFC factors, namely being excess market return, or RMRF, small-minus-big,
or SMB, high-minus-low, or HML, and the momentum factor, or MOM.

In Table 3, several observations can be made. Examining the monthly excess return values
for this particular set of portfolios, it is clear that neither their size nor their sign displays
any discernible pattern, except for a rough generalization that they are descending in size
correlated to the ranking of the portfolios, with Portfolio 2 having the highest and
Portfolio 9 the lowest. Furthermore, the values for standard deviation are relatively
consistent, roughly hovering around 0.45% to 0.49%, with the Long-Short portfolio being
the outlier at 0.42%. Therefore, these values seem to indicate similar levels of volatility
across the portfolios except for the Long-Short portfolio being slightly lower, potentially
as a result of its self-explanatory hedging characteristics. Moving to the values for the
gross alpha, it can be broadly stated that they exhibit the same pattern as the monthly
excess return, but interestingly, the alphas exhibit a contextually larger range between the
worst-performing and best-performing portfolios. Portfolios 1, 2, 3, 5, and 7, together
with the Long-Short portfolio, have positive alphas, suggesting that they outperform
relative to the FFC benchmark, with Portfolio 2 performing the best. Portfolios 4, 6, 8, 9,
and 10 have negative alphas, implying the opposite. As for the regression coefficients,
starting with RMRF, it displays significantly larger values for its betas than for the other
three, with Portfolio 8 having the largest and Portfolio 2 having the lowest, indicating the
highest and lowest exposure to Swedish market conditions, respectively. However,
excluding the Long-Short portfolio, which has a negative beta for RMRF indicating
opposite directionality to the market, they generally hover within the same range. The
betas for SMB express a significantly larger amount of relative variance within the
portfolio set, as well as significantly lower values. Portfolio 7 exhibits the highest beta,

                                  13
which suggests a strong tilt toward small-cap stocks, whereas, conversely, Portfolio 2 and
the Long-Short portfolio have negative betas, suggesting a tilt towards large-cap stocks.
The HML factor betas are mostly comparable to the SMB factor betas when it comes to
their range and size; however, here, Portfolio 6 has the highest one, indicating a strong
preference toward high book-to-market stocks. On the opposite side, Portfolios 5 and 7
have negative betas, indicating a tilt toward growth stocks. Lastly, looking at the MOM
factor betas, again, they are roughly comparable to HML and SMB factor betas when
looking at their range and size. Portfolio 8 has the highest beta, implying that the funds
within it benefit significantly from following market trends. On the contrary, Portfolio 5
having a negative beta related to this factor could mean that the funds within it follow an
investment style that goes against such trends.
          Table 4 reports the values for the adjusted R-squared, p-value, and t-value. By
putting the regression results in relation to their statistical measures, we can contextualize
the results reported in Table 3.

The values for adjusted R-squared range from -0.007 for the Long-Short portfolio to 0.372
for Portfolio 8. The Long-Short portfolio is an outlier, with its negative adjusted R-
squared suggesting a non-existent predictive value of the model corresponding to it,
however, this can likely be attributed to the characteristics of that portfolio and its
creation, see Section 4. For the other 10 portfolios, the adjusted R-squared hovers around
0.170 to 0.375, indicating a moderate explanatory value of the designated model, but a
significant amount of the variance of returns remains unexplained. The p-values makes it
clear that none of the portfolios are close to the generally accepted threshold value of less
than 0.05. Thus, it becomes difficult to reject the null hypothesis of any of our three stated
hypotheses using the results of this particular regression and model. Through the reported
t-values, it becomes evident that they vary widely, with positive and negative values
displayed. Considering 460 degrees of freedom and a significance level of 5%, the
accepted t-value threshold for our one-sample t-test is approximately ±1.97, making it
clear that none of the portfolios meet such criteria. Nevertheless, the non-significant p-
values would negate such a value regardless.
       Overall, the reported values for the statistical measures seemingly indicate that
the FFC alpha model is not effective at explaining or predicting the performance of

                                  14
mutual funds, which is further corroborated by the reported values for monthly excess
return and alphas in Table 3 not displaying any discernible pattern in relation to the
conducted portfolio ranking procedure.
C Benchmark Alpha Sorted Portfolios
Tables 5 and 6 contain the results stemming from the analysis of the set of portfolios
sorted based on the values for the benchmark alpha and the related statistical measures,
respectively. These tables follow the same general structure as Tables 3 and 4, however,
exchanging the FFC factors for the benchmark factors. These outputs are the result of a
linear regression where we regress the monthly excess returns for the 10 portfolios in the
set on the monthly values for the 8 benchmark funds, namely, BMF1, BMF2, BMF3,
BMF4, BMF5, BMF6, BMF7, and BMF8.

Looking at Table 5 and the values for monthly excess return, it is observable that they are
fairly consistent across the 10 portfolios, generally ranging from 0.0523% to 0.0895%.
The noticeable outlier is Portfolio 9, which significantly underperforms the other
portfolios at 0.0018%. In addition, the range between the best-performing and worst-
performing portfolios is contextually rather large. As for the standard deviations, it can
be observed that they are relatively uniform across all the portfolios, ranging from around
0.45% to 0.49%, suggesting that the portfolios have similar levels of risk exposure.
Through the reported gross alphas, it can be stated, although not clear and consistent, that
there is some kind of relationship with regard to the portfolio rankings, with Portfolio 1
performing the best. However, moving down the list, the pattern becomes less discernible.
It is worth noting that all portfolios except for Portfolio 9 display positive alphas,
indicating outperformance relative to the benchmark, and also that the range of values
between best-performing and worst-performing is comparable to that for the monthly
excess return values. Turning to the betas for the regression coefficients and referring
back to Table 2, several observations can be made. Starting with BMF1, which represents
an index fund with a European focus, the betas are mostly negative or only slightly
positive, indicating an inverse relationship to that specific market exposure. Conversely,
the betas for BMF2 and BMF3, representing exposure to Swedish stocks and American
stocks, respectively, are noticeably high across the portfolios, signaling a significant
exposure to such market factors. The betas for BMF4 through BMF6 are mostly negative,
with BMF4 being the most extreme, suggesting a significant aversion to Japanese stocks.

                                  15
BMF7 is a mixed set of positive and negative betas, and BMF8 is a similar story, albeit
with fewer negative ones, but neither has a discernible pattern. This suggests that
exposure to Asian stocks, excluding Japanese ones, and to Swedish small-to-medium-cap
stocks, respectively, has no clear relationship with fund performance. Other specific
patterns or correlations are hard to come by, as the patterns exhibited by the betas are not
clearly correlated to the reported alphas outside those observations already stated. A
noticeable exclusion in the above analysis is the Long-Short portfolio, but as it builds on
the exposures of Portfolios 1 and 10, such an analysis is redundant, thus, we refer to those
portfolios on which it was based.
       Compared to the results reported in Subsection 5B for the FFC alpha regressions,
the reported monthly excess returns are mostly larger and exhibit a somewhat clearer
pattern. This is similar to the reported alphas also displaying such trends. The standard
deviations are mostly comparable, both in range and pattern. These results could indicate
that the benchmark factors are slightly better than the FFC factors as a predictor within
the context.
         Table 6 reports the values for the adjusted R-squared, p-value, and t-value. By
putting the regression results in relation to their statistical measures, we can contextualize
the results reported in Table 5.

The values for adjusted R-squared range between -0.005 for the Long-Short portfolio and
0.395 for Portfolio 8. Once more, similar to the FFC alpha regression, the Long-Short
portfolio is an outlier, having a negative adjusted R-squared, but this is to be expected.
For the other 10 portfolios, these values hover around 0.225 to 0.395, which, compared
to the results reported in the previous section, is slightly higher, though overall, it still
indicates a moderate explanatory value. Observing the reported p-values, although
trending lower than those reported for the FFC alpha regression, here, one portfolio clears
the designated threshold of less than 0.05, namely Portfolio 6. Though, similar to before,
it is difficult to reject the null hypothesis of our three stated hypotheses using the results
of this particular regression and model. In reference to the reported t-values, it is
observable that they vary widely, but only one clears the previously calculated t-value
threshold of ±1.97, namely Portfolio 6, which is also the portfolio displaying significant
results.

                                  16
         On the whole, outside of significant results for a singular portfolio, the reported
values for the statistical measures seemingly indicate that the benchmark alpha model is
not effective at explaining or predicting the performance of mutual funds, which is similar
to that stated about the FFC alpha model. However, unlike the FFC alpha model, the
reported values for monthly excess return and alphas, as seen in Table 5, exhibit a
somewhat more discernible pattern as related to the portfolio ranking procedure.
D Benchmark Value-added Sorted Portfolios
Tables 7 and 8 contain the results stemming from the analysis of the set of portfolios
sorted based on the values for the benchmark value-added and the related statistical
measures, respectively. These tables follow the same structure as Tables 5 and 6, but add
a value-added variable. These outputs are the result of a linear regression where we
regress the monthly excess returns for the 10 portfolios in the set on the monthly values
for the 8 benchmark funds, namely, BMF1, BMF2, BMF3, BMF4, BMF5, BMF6, BMF7,
and BMF8.

Referencing Table 7 and its reported values for monthly excess return, it is noticeable,
dissimilar from the models in the two previous sections, that they exhibit a significantly
clearer pattern with regard to the rankings of the portfolios. In exemplifying, we see that
Portfolio 1 has the largest return of the ranked portfolios at 0.1642%, and Portfolio 10 has
the lowest value by a margin at -0.0214%. Continuing the comparison, both the range and
size of these values are also larger. The standard deviations, however, exhibit a similar
pattern as the previous models, albeit with a slightly larger range, ranging from around
0.43% to 0.50%, but generally, they can still be interpreted as the portfolios having a
similar level of risk exposure. As for the reported gross alphas, what could be said about
the monthly excess return is still applicable in all respects. Portfolio 1 displays the highest
alpha of the ranked portfolios at 0.1417%, and Portfolio 10 is the lowest at -0.0368%.
This brings us to the reported values for value-added, which, once more, exhibit such a
pattern. Portfolio 1 performs the best of the ranked portfolios at 23,096,466 SEK, and
Portfolio 10 performs the worst at -7,082,294 SEK. Focusing on the Long-Short portfolio,
it can be stated that in all three aspects, it performs the best, which seems to solidify that,
at least superficially, the benchmark value-added model performs the best in predicting
performance thus far. Shifting emphasis towards the betas of the regression coefficients
and referring back to Table 2, it can be roughly stated that what was observed with respect
to the benchmark alpha model reported in Table 5 remains applicable here. Factor BMF1,
that being the exposure to European stocks, has betas that are mostly negative with a few

                                  17
outliers. Noticeably, Portfolio 4 has a beta of 0.6, indicating a larger exposure to this
market than the other portfolios. Similar to the results reported for the benchmark alpha,
the betas for BMF2 and BMF3, representing exposure to Swedish stocks and American
stocks, respectively, remain within the same size range; however, the relative size of the
individual portfolio betas has changed significantly. Furthermore, the betas for BMF4
through BMF6 remain mostly negative, with BMF4 being the most extreme, suggesting
a significant aversion to Japanese stocks here as well. BMF7 is still a mixed set of positive
and negative betas; however, BMF8 is where it starts to differ, as the betas are now
positive across the portfolios. This means that, although exposure to Asian stocks,
excluding Japanese ones, remains the same, exposure to Swedish small-to-medium-cap
stocks has turned positive. In addition, it can be observed that the individual factor betas
for the different portfolios have changed, and in some cases significantly so. This, coupled
with the reported performance values, seems to indicate that the benchmark value-added
model is better at predicting what types of market exposures are successful in the long
run and the subsequent performance benefits as compared to the previous two models,
but it should be noted that no such relationship can be definitely proven.
        Considering the above, when compared to the models utilized in Subsections 5B
and 5C, it is reasonable to argue that the benchmark value-added model seems to be a
better predictor of performance than the other two such models.
        Table 8 reports the values for the adjusted R-squared, p-value, and t-value. By
putting the regression results in relation to their statistical measures, we can contextualize
the results reported in Table 7.

Directing our attention to the reported values for the adjusted R-squared, we can see that
they range between -0.003 for the Long-Short portfolio and 0.378 for Portfolio 2. Again,
similar to the previous sections, the Long-Short portfolio is as expected an outlier, having
a negative adjusted R-squared. The values for the other 10 portfolios hover around 0.169
to 0.378, which is lower than those for the benchmark alpha but generally higher than
those of the FFC alpha. Still, it indicates a moderate explanatory value. When observing
the reported p-values, a difference emerges. For the benchmark value-added model, a
significantly larger amount of the portfolios exhibit acceptable levels of significance at
lower than 0.05 compared with the previous models. Notably, Portfolio 1, a crucial

                                  18
component of the analysis, has a significance level of approximately 0. Still, the small
majority, still exhibit levels of insignificance. Turning toward the p-values, they still vary
widely, but for the portfolios exhibiting acceptable significance levels, namely portfolios
1, 2, 3, 6, and the Long-Short portfolio, they all display t-values clearing the previously
calculated t-value threshold of ±1.97.
       Altogether, the statistical measures seemingly provide a relatively stable ground
on which a continued analysis is possible. Additionally, in contrast to the models in
Subsections 5B and 5C, the reported values for monthly excess return and gross alphas,
as seen in Table 7, are entirely in line with the portfolio ranking procedure. In other words,
by looking at the results of both Tables 7 and 8 and considering their implications, it is
reasonable to conclude that, unlike the previous models, the benchmark value-added
model seems to be significantly more effective in explaining or predicting the
performance of the mutual funds within our dataset. Thus, rejecting the null hypothesis
of our three stated hypotheses using these results seems significantly more realistic.
E FFC Value-added Sorted Portfolios
Tables 9 and 10 contain the results stemming from the analysis of the set of portfolios
sorted based on the values for FFC value-added and the related statistical measures,
respectively. These tables follow the same structure as Tables 3 and 4, but add a value-
added variable. These outputs are the result of a linear regression where we regress the
monthly excess returns for the 10 portfolios in the set on the monthly values for the four
FFC factors, namely the excess market return, or RMRF, small-minus-big, or SMB, high-
minus-low, or HML, and the momentum factor, or MOM.

In reference to Table 9 and the reported values for monthly excess return, it can be said,
similar to the values related to the benchmark value-added model, that they display a
clearly discernible pattern with regard to the portfolio rankings. Moreover, the range and
size of these values are also larger, with Portfolio 1 having the highest return of the
individual portfolios at 0.1660% and Portfolio 10 having the lowest at -0.0554%. The

                                  19
standard deviations exhibit a pattern similar to the previous three models, ranging
between roughly 0.42% and 0.51%, which can once again be interpreted as the portfolios
having a similar level of risk exposure. In terms of the gross alphas, in comparison to
Subsection 5D and Table 7, it can be stated that the range of these values is higher, but
the peak is lower, with the highest alpha at 0.1140% for Portfolio 1 and the lowest alpha
at -0.1229% for Portfolio 10, when considering the ranked portfolios. The values for the
value-added exhibit the same pattern, having a peak with Portfolio 1 at 22,066,987 SEK
for the ranked portfolios, with the corresponding lowest value attributed to Portfolio 10
at -13,237,819 SEK. Interestingly, the value-added measure seems to have an even split
of positive and negative values going directly down the middle of the portfolio set.
Pivoting towards the Long-Short portfolio, similar to that which was the case for the
benchmark value-added model, in all three aspects, it performs the best, even more than
the aforementioned model as a result of the wider range between best- and worst-
performing portfolios. Seemingly, this seems to support the other indications that the FFC
value-added is also relatively accurate when predicting performance. Transitioning to the
regression coefficients, the initial impression is that the reported betas for the individual
factors display a generally comparable behavior to that which was reported in Table 3.
The RMRF betas are significantly larger than those for the other three, with Portfolio 8
having the largest value and Portfolio 5 having the lowest value out of the ranked
portfolios, indicating the highest and lowest exposure to market conditions, respectively.
However, excluding the Long-Short portfolio, which has a negative beta for RMRF
indicating opposite directionality to the market, they typically hover within the same
range, which was also the case for the aforementioned model. Following, the betas for
the SMB factor are significantly smaller. Portfolio 7 exhibits the highest beta, which
suggests a strong tilt toward small-cap stocks, whereas, conversely, portfolios 8, 9, and
the Long-Short portfolio have negative betas, suggesting a tilt towards large-cap stocks.
As for the HML factor betas, their size and range are generally comparable to those of the
SMB factor betas, with Portfolio 6 having the largest value at 2.18, indicating a strong
preference toward high book-to-market stocks, and Portfolio 8 having the lowest value at
-0.24, indicating a tilt toward growth stocks. Proceeding to the MOM factor betas, again,
they are roughly comparable to the HML and SMB factor betas when looking at their
range and size, with Portfolio 10 having the highest beta at 1.54, implying that funds
within it benefit significantly from following market trends, and Portfolio 4 having the
lowest beta out of the ranked portfolios at -0.21, implying that the funds within it follow
an investment style that goes against such trends.
         By comparing these results with those stemming from the benchmark value-
added model in Subsection 5D and the two earlier models presented in Subsections 5B
and 5C, it is reasonable to argue that the FFC value-added model seems to be a better
predictor of performance than these two previously presented models when considering
what has been presented above. However, when comparing this model to the benchmark
value-added model, a clear interpretation is harder to achieve without also considering

                                  20
the related statistical measures and putting the two aspects in relation to each other;
therefore, Table 10 will be looked at next.

The values for the adjusted R-squared range from -0.014 for the Long-Short portfolio to
0.307 for Portfolio 8. Once again, similar to the previous models, the Long-Short portfolio
is an expected outlier, having a negative adjusted R-squared. The values for the other 10
portfolios hover around 0.181 to 0.307, which is the lowest out of all the presented
models. However, despite this model having the lowest adjusted R-squared values, they
still indicate a moderate explanatory value. Shifting focus to the reported p-values, they
tend to be lower than those reported for the benchmark value-added regression; however,
the number of significant values remains the same. Important to note, however, is that in
addition to Portfolio 1 having a significant value of 0, which was also the case in the
aforementioned regression, Portfolio 10 also has a significant value of 0.001. This is
remarkable because it means that the two arguably most critical results are significant.
Looking at the t-values further corroborates this fact, as all significant results also exhibit
t-values clearing the previously calculated t-value threshold of ±1.97, with the Long-
Short portfolio having the highest value at 5.461. Though it should be noted that the
majority of the portfolios still exhibit some level of insignificance.
         Considering all the above, the statistical measures seemingly provide a relatively
stable ground on which a continued analysis is possible. Furthermore, as was the case
with the benchmark value-added model, the reported values for monthly excess return
and gross alphas, as seen in Table 9, are entirely in line with the portfolio ranking
procedure. Put differently, by considering the implications of Tables 9 and 10, it is
reasonable to conclude that the FFC value-added model is at least equally effective as the
benchmark value-added model in explaining or predicting the performance of the mutual
funds within our dataset. As such, rejecting the null hypothesis of our three hypotheses
using the results of this particular regression seems realistic.

                                  21
6 Discussion
A Interpretation of Results
       In the preceding section, it was implied that multiple interpretations could be
made by observing the data gathered from our four respective models, as presented in
Tables 3, 5, 7, and 9.
        Comparing the monthly excess returns of the models, it is evident that a difference
exists between the results of the alpha-sorted portfolios and the value-added sorted
portfolios pertaining to the recognition of any patterns related to their returns.
Furthermore, in looking at the return spread of the alpha-sorted portfolios, it can be
observed that the difference between the highest and lowest return is only 0.0590% for
the FFC version and 0.0877% for the version using the benchmark factors. On the
contrary, when observing the portfolios sorted by the value-added measure, they have a
spread of 0.2214% for the FFC version and 0.1856% when utilizing the benchmark
factors. A wider spread could indicate that there is some sort of diversification when it
comes to the performance between the portfolios, and judging by the results we found,
the value-added sorting method seemingly captures it most effectively. This can be
corroborated by looking at the Long-Short portfolios of each version. To elaborate, since
the Long-Short portfolios are, put simply, the difference between portfolios 1 and 10 for
a given metric, the higher the value exhibited by the Long-Short portfolio, the better the
related model is at capturing and predicting the spread in the performance between the
best-performing and worst-performing mutual funds with regard to said metric. Taking
the excess monthly return of the four models and ranking them with regard to this
predictability power from highest to lowest, FFC value-added comes first, followed by
benchmark value-added, FFC alpha, and finally, benchmark alpha.
       When comparing the gross alphas between our four models, a similar pattern
emerges to the one displayed by the monthly excess returns. Surveying the Long-Short
alphas for the four models, we find that the FFC value-added has an alpha of 0.2368%,
the benchmark value-added has an alpha of 0.1785%, the FFC alpha has an alpha of
0.0314%, and finally, the benchmark alpha has the lowest alpha value of 0.0276%. In this
case, since both of the value-added models outperform their alpha model counterparts, as
well as display a more discernible pattern related to their respective portfolios and
rankings, it could be argued that the value-added models have a greater predictive ability
with regard to the alpha. Additionally, comparing the FFC versions with the benchmark
versions of our models, the FFC versions generally outperform the benchmark versions
when it comes to this ability. Though it should be noted that the difference between the
two is comparatively small when contrasted with the difference between the value-added
and alpha models.
        In analyzing the value-added values between the FFC and benchmark model, all
portfolios down until Portfolio 8 produce a positive value-added in the benchmark model,
whereas, conversely, in the FFC models, the last positive value-added portfolio is
Portfolio 5 before turning negative. When performing the Long-Short portfolio analysis,
it is reasonable to assert that the FFC factors outperform the benchmark factors when it
comes to the predictive capabilities with regard to the value-added metric. An interesting
thing to note is that the positive value-added numbers for both related models are larger
than the negative ones, so on an aggregate level, mutual fund managers seem to be adding
value to the market compared with a passive alternative. One explanation as to why the
overall value-added is positive is the tendency of investors to allocate more resources

                                  22
toward better-performing mutual funds, or, put differently, that better-performing mutual
funds attract more capital on average. If top-performing mutual funds can consistently
attract more capital and resources while still delivering positive returns, it could be an
indication of the existence of managerial skills. However, it is important to note that these
values do not include any potential fees charged by the mutual funds for the purposes of
this analysis; therefore, the value-added that makes its way to investors is not entirely
known, and as such, any potential practical implications are limited.
B Interpretation of Statistical Measures
Referring back to Tables 4, 6, 8, and 10, it is evident that the statistical measures of the
four different models of performance measurement varied widely in their effectiveness,
at least as interpreted by the measures reported in these four tables.
      When looking at the values for adjusted R-squared, it can be observed that,
although figures differ between the models, in general, they can all be categorized as
indicating that the models have a moderate explanatory value with respect to the
performance of the funds in the dataset. However, it should be noted that the models
utilizing the benchmark factors, exhibit observably higher explanatory values than those
showcased by the models utilizing the FFC factors. Furthermore, the adjusted R-squared
values resulting from the benchmark value-added regression, are the lowest ones. One
interpretation of the above is that, according to this specific measurement, the benchmark
factors seemingly better capture the market exposures that affect the performance of the
mutual funds present in the analysis. This is a natural effect of the plurality involved when
comparing the FFC factors versus the benchmark factors. As there are more benchmark
factors, encompassing a theoretically wider net of market considerations, one can imagine
that models utilizing them should exhibit a higher explanatory value. It is important to
note that although the effect is easily observed, it is not sufficiently large to change the
moderate explanatory value of the models. Furthermore, one should take into
consideration the difficulties involved when performing the kind of analysis performed
in this paper; constructing models explaining the performance of mutual funds is notably
difficult, so the achieved levels of explanatory values are deemed sufficient for the
purposes of this analysis. The moderate explanatory values of the four models could also
be construed as an indication that there are other factors at play in the performance of the
mutual funds in the dataset, which, among other things, could be an indication of the
existence of managerial skill as such factors are absent from the constructed models. An
additional note is that the small, slightly negative adjusted R-squared as expressed for the
Long-Short portfolios of all four models can most likely be explained by the fact that the
designated linear model has a hard time explaining the combined effect of the large
positive alphas of Portfolio 1 and the low and often negative alphas of Portfolio 10. The
model is not equipped to explain the combined results of the two portfolios with respect
to the benchmark factors or the FFC factors. Still, it should be noted that there are most
likely other such effects as well, this was simply deemed the major cause. That being said,
it is a natural effect of the construction of such a portfolio and therefore not an immediate
cause of concern in the context of the analysis and conclusions drawn from it.
       Following the above, in examining the p-values for the four models, an immediate
observation is that for the regressions related to the alpha models, whether based on
benchmark factors or FFC factors, they are mostly insignificant. Although it should be
noted that the values for the benchmark alpha model are noticeably closer to significance
in general, as well as there being one significant value. In the broader context, however,

                                  23
that is unimportant as the levels of insignificance in both related models lead to it being
hard to draw any concrete conclusion from their results as the relationship might be due
to random chance without there being any real pattern of effect between the variables.
Conversely, when looking at the value-added models, whether based on benchmark
factors or FFC factors, their reported values exhibit a significantly higher level of
significance. Both versions show significance for five of the portfolios in their respective
portfolio sets when including the Long-Short portfolio. Furthermore, both models exhibit
an exceptionally high significance level of 0.00 when looking at the results of Portfolio
1, a crucial part of the conducted analysis. However, the benchmark value-added model
performs significantly worse in the lower half of the portfolio set, having only
insignificant values from Portfolio 7 onwards. Notably, in the FFC value-added model,
Portfolio 10, another crucial part of the analysis, exhibits a significant value of 0.01,
which puts it ahead of the benchmark value-added model. It should also be noted that for
both the benchmark value-added model and the FFC value-added model, the Long-Short
portfolio exhibits significance levels of 0.00. All in all, the reported p-values for these
latter two models make it a significantly more reasonable possibility to draw tangible
conclusions with respect to the posed hypotheses, as there is a 5% or less risk of making
a Type I error when analyzing the applicable values.
        Lastly, by considering the t-values for the four models, it can be stated that
roughly the same conclusions as those drawn in the previous paragraph are still
applicable. Looking at the alpha models, the majority of the portfolios in both sets have
t-values that are not clearing the previously calculated threshold of ±1.97. The t-value for
Portfolio 6 out of the benchmark alpha-sorted portfolios is the one exception, which is a
natural effect of that being the only significant value out of these two models. When
looking at the value-added models, it can be observed that all those portfolios that have
been identified as having significant results have t-values clearing this threshold of ±1.97.
This essentially indicates that those values identified as significant are also likely due to
that which is incorporated into the respective models, rather than random chance. Thus,
in combination with the results of the previous two paragraphs, drawing conclusions with
respect to the three hypotheses posed in the introduction is seemingly possible.
C Supplementary Interpretations
In conducting a deeper analysis of the beta values for the benchmark models, as seen in
Tables 5 and 7, the mutual funds in our dataset seem to have a greater exposure towards
BMF2 and BMF3, which are to Swedish and American stocks, respectively. An
explanation for the higher exposure to Swedish stocks can be attributed to our selection
of mutual fund data, where we specifically decided to focus on the Swedish mutual fund
market. Even though Swedish mutual funds are able to invest globally, there seems to be
an overexposure to Swedish stocks, which a familiarity bias could partially explain. It
could also be explained by the fact that Swedish mutual fund managers most likely
possess greater knowledge when it comes to Swedish companies and how the
macroeconomic environment is currently affecting the local stock market, and as a result,
the portfolios of their mutual funds have a relatively greater weight towards the Swedish
market as compared to the rest of the world. The large exposure to the American stock
market can be explained by the sheer size of the U.S. stock market, which is the largest
in the world. Since most of the largest and most successful companies in the world are
traded on the U.S. stock market, a great number of investors, including Swedish ones, are

                                  24
interested in it. Subsequently, it is not surprising that many Swedish mutual funds provide
alternatives where Swedish investors can get exposure to these markets.
       Following this line of reasoning, the argument for utilizing Swedish FFC factors,
initially described in Section 3, is further strengthened since, as mentioned in the
paragraph above, there is an over-indexing towards the Swedish market. Thus, the
Swedish FFC factors are more relevant and applicable to our mutual fund dataset
compared to what an alternative geographical version of the FFC factors would provide.
For instance, if FFC factors related to Europe as a whole were utilized, since the exposure
to the European market, as seen with BMF1, has negative beta values, it would perform
poorly in comparison. Naturally, when performing comparisons of performance, they will
be more accurate when the market exposure of both the mutual funds that make up our
dataset and model factors are the same, which we achieve by utilizing the Swedish FFC
factors as well as benchmark factors tuned to such an exposure. It should be noted,
however, that the comparatively large exposure to the U.S. stock market could validate
the choice of an American set of FFC factors, but as seen in the above-mentioned tables,
exposures of several kinds exist, and not all of them can be included in such factors. The
choice of Swedish FFC factors, as well as the designated benchmark portfolio, was a
compromise based on the fact that we believed that exposure to the Swedish market would
be most relevant, and, as can be seen with the betas for BMF2 and BMF8, such an
indication is prevalent. In addition, the Swedish economy should be sufficiently
interconnected with the American economy, being a major trade partner, to provide
representation for such factors at a satisfactory, albeit not perfect, level with regard to the
conducted analysis.
        Overall, this seems to confirm that the compromises made when choosing the
methodology and related datasets were justified, which subsequently strengthens our
confidence in the accuracy and trustworthiness of our results and the conclusions drawn
from them.
D Implications
Following that which has been expressed in the previous parts of the section, it becomes
apparent that for the purposes of this paper, the results stemming from the models utilizing
solely the alpha measurement, having an overwhelming majority of insignificant results,
are inept in their current form, and for this set of data, in evaluating that which was set
out in the posed hypotheses. In stark contrast to the alpha models are the value-added
models, which, although not perfect in their own right, improve in this aspect to such a
degree that it is possible to draw concrete conclusions from them. Before moving further,
however, it seems prudent to elaborate on the adjusted R-squared values presented. As
was presented in Section 5 and developed earlier in this section, they are all in the realm
of giving a moderate explanatory value to all four models, which is to be expected given
the circumstances. Furthermore, it could also serve as an indication that other factors are
at play, including the potential for managerial performance. However, it should be noted
that managerial performance is unlikely to make up the entirety of the unexplained
variance in these models, and it is likely that other unidentified factors make up the
majority of it. Nonetheless, this potential for the existence of managerial performance, in
combination with the implications from the other results as presented previously, is
intriguing.
         Expanding on this discussion, in interpreting the results of the value-added
models, a couple of things are perceivable. For one, both models exhibit a somewhat

                                  25
cohesive and discernible pattern stemming from the alpha values and value-added values
with respect to the ranking of their respective sets of portfolios. Portfolio 1 performs the
best of the ranked portfolios, and Portfolio 10 the worst, a consistent finding for these
models and this measurement. This essentially proves that the ranking procedure, as
described in the methodology, works as intended, which subsequently implies that the
value-added measure is effective in predicting and measuring the performance of the
mutual funds. Furthermore, the Long-Short portfolio, an additional indication of such an
interpretation, consistently performs the best out of all portfolios in these two models.
Essentially, the results indicate that there are unexplained performance gains and losses
in the mutual funds within the dataset, both with regard to alpha and value-added. These
gains are then consistently predicted and measured by the two models utilizing the value-
added measurement, which together with the adjusted R-squared interpretation makes it
a reasonable observation that mutual funds on the Swedish market benefit from
managerial skills.
        The next development is to ascertain which of the two methods of calculating
the value-added, namely the benchmark factors or the FFC factors, is most effective. A
case can certainly be made for both of them, but as was described when interpreting the
statistical measures, only the FFC factors performed with regard to the significance of the
results when looking at the lower half of the portfolio set. As it is not possible to solely
rely on the portfolios performing well, the importance of Portfolio 10 in particular cannot
be understated, and the risk of committing a Type I error when utilizing the results for
these portfolios stemming from the benchmark value-added model is deemed too great,
it cannot be confidently used in answering our hypotheses. Together with the earlier
implications, this then leaves the FFC value-added model as the sole version fitting in
accurately predicting and measuring the overperformance and underperformance of the
Swedish mutual funds making up our dataset, as well as the subsequent managerial
performance, within the context of the performed analysis.
E Linkages to Previous Literature
Our paper, as mentioned in the introduction, is inspired by the works of Carhart (1997)
and Berk and van Binsbergen (2015), and it could therefore be interesting to compare the
results as derived in this paper with theirs, even though they are not directly comparable.
To elaborate, since we have not used the same datasets and the methodology, as a result
of being a modified combination of the two, is not directly comparable to either,
comparing the results directly between the papers will not provide any concrete answers
with respect to potential conclusions. Rather, the reasoning behind this comparison is to
get an understanding of the reasonability of the general trends or the direction of the
results as presented above, albeit at differing magnitudes.
       Looking at the monthly excess returns and standard deviations between our
models and Carhart’s (1997), we find that our values are significantly lower compared
with the values reported in Table 3 from Carhart's paper. The reported monthly excess
return for his 1 (high) portfolio is, for instance, 0.68% meanwhile the highest monthly
excess return we have for any portfolio out of the four models is significantly lower at
0.1660%. Additionally, the standard deviation Carhart found is anywhere between 4 and
5 percent, meanwhile, our range is roughly between 0.4 and 0.5 percent for all our models.
The reason for this difference in both the size of returns and standard deviation, which
are inherently related, could be the result of different market conditions between the U.S.
and Sweden. In addition, the different time periods of the datasets might have had an

                                  26
effect due to the possibility of higher returns in earlier years of the data, which could be
why Carhart found larger monthly returns.
        Furthermore, in observing the adjusted R-square values between Carhart’s model
and our four models, it is evident that our models have a much lower score compared with
his. The range in his paper is approximately between 0.8 and 0.98, while ours is roughly
between 0.2 and 0.4. The only common trend between our adjusted R-square values is
related to the Long-Short portfolio, where both have a considerably lower value compared
with the rest of the portfolios. The fact that our regressions have lower adjusted R-square
values is in itself not a problem per se, as it is notably difficult to predict mutual fund
returns, thus values between 0.2 and 0.4 should be considered reasonable considering the
context of the analysis. Explaining why Carhart’s paper reports higher adjusted R-square
results overall could be related to how U.S. mutual funds tend, to a greater extent, only
be exposed to the U.S. market, while our Swedish mutual funds, as previously described,
have exposure to Swedish, U.S., and other markets. Subsequently, they are therefore less
homogeneous compared to their American counterparts. Although U.S. funds
undoubtedly also have global market exposure to some extent, in general, this is deemed
to be smaller. Thus, effectively capturing mutual fund performance using regression
analysis is deemed significantly harder when utilizing Swedish factor portfolios such as
those utilized in this paper.
       Continuing, and looking at the value-added models and comparing them with the
results of Berk and van Binsbergen, we find that in our case, around half of our mutual
funds produced a positive value-added in the FFC version, which is roughly equivalent
to the 41% of mutual funds that produced a positive value-added in Berk and van
Binsbergen’s case when they used FFC factors. An interesting thing to note, however, is
that the difference between positive value-added results between the model based on the
benchmark factors and the model based on the FFC factors is only 2% in Berk and van
Binsbergen’s paper, but in our paper, the difference is 20%. One possible explanation for
this can be found in the construction of our benchmark portfolios. Connecting to the
discussion in Subsection 3B and Table 2, our benchmark portfolio exhibits significantly
higher fees compared to the Vanguard benchmark utilized by Berk and van Binsbergen.
Additionally, there are fewer funds in our benchmark, and some of the exposure to
markets that the Vanguard benchmark encompasses is not available in Sweden and
therefore absent. Put differently, the large difference between the value-added results
stemming from the benchmark factors and the FFC factors in our models could potentially
be explained by the inefficiencies of our constructed benchmark.
        Lastly, it could be interesting to look outside the direct inspirations and toward
the other papers mentioned in the theoretical background. A largely influential paper in
the research area of this paper is Fama’s (1970) paper on the efficient market hypothesis,
and our results could be interpreted as refuting the claim that it is not possible to
consistently beat the market by finding mispriced assets. Simultaneously, it should be
noted that the above statement of performance should be interpreted as being post any
potential fees charged by the mutual funds, as the analysis performed in this paper
excludes such a measure of performance, that being the net alpha, a distinct conclusion
in this regard is thus difficult to obtain given the circumstances. Nonetheless, it can be
loosely stated that the results of this study more closely resemble those not refuting the
existence of a potential mutual fund managerial skill than those denying its existence.
One such paper previously mentioned is Grinblatt and Titman (1992), which also found
evidence indicating the existence of such skill. The results are also, to some extent, in line

                                  27
with Fama and French (2010), who found indications of managerial performance and
subsequent skill when looking at gross measures. It is prudent, however, to note that when
looking at net measurements, they did not find such indications, something that this paper
has difficulty refuting.

7 Limitations

It is important to note, as related to the discussion in the previous section, that there are
some key problems and limitations that might have affected the overall outcome of the
paper, its subsequent results, conclusions, and their inherent credibility.
        In looking at the amount of available data for Swedish mutual funds, one sees that
it is significantly reduced when compared to the datasets used by both Carhart (1997) and
Berk and van Binsbergen (2015). Due to several reasons laid out in the data section, our
data stretches from January 2006 to December 2019, a period of 14 years, which is
significantly shorter as compared to the 30 and 50 years of data that the aforementioned
papers had at their disposal. Additionally, a lot of the mutual funds in our datasets are
incomplete when looking at the entire period. There are three main reasons for this: the
fund either became obsolete before the end of the chosen time frame; the fund was not
established at the start of our time frame; or there is a lack of reported values. For that
last part, essentially, before data clean-up and processing, in certain periods for certain
funds, data was not reported monthly but bi-monthly, or even quarterly. Furthermore, for
certain funds, data was simply missing without any discernible pattern or explanation.
The reasons behind this phenomenon cannot be confidently explained, but one theory is
that reporting standards have evolved in our chosen time frame. Nevertheless, in ensuring
data accuracy, we shortened the timespan of our data as much as possible, but we were
still left with a few missing values related to both sources, due to which we had to utilize
a different method to deal with them, namely filling them out with linear interpolation.
This decision was based on several factors and considered trade-offs before being
subsequently deemed the best. However, we are well aware of the limitations this may
impose on the potential conclusions we can draw from the analysis conducted. In the end,
the consequences of both the lesser data availability, the measures taken to fill out missing
intermittent values, and other factors mentioned previously are that the reliability of our
regressions and the models on which we built our analysis becomes less rigid since there
is a lesser amount of data available to run them on, which has been a consistent issue
throughout the research process.
       Another area where data availability has been an issue is when constructing our
eight Swedish fund benchmark factor dataset. As described in the data section, we did not
have the available returns for all funds for the entire period specified. Therefore, we had
to create an orthogonal basis set as described in the methodology. This follows Berk and
van Binsbergen (2015), however, our dataset contained a significantly larger number of
missing values than theirs, meaning that the result, namely the benchmark factor dataset
is not as statistically credible as theirs, which subsequently affects the analysis by
lowering the reliability of the regressions. Furthermore, when creating the benchmark,
the fees our Swedish funds charged were significantly higher when compared to the fees
charged by Vanguard index funds used by Berk and van Binsbergen. This is because
Swedish index funds tend to charge higher fees on an aggregate level as compared to U.S.
alternatives, even though both are passively managed. Moreover, some of the funds
included in the benchmark factor portfolio are not strictly speaking index funds, but rather

                                  28
so-called “index-near” funds, which essentially means that they exclude certain stocks
based on ESG factors as deemed by the company behind the fund. For a further
explanation of what an index-near mutual fund is, we refer back to Subsection 3B. The
combined implication this can have for our results is that our constructed benchmark
might not be perfectly representative of what an investor might choose as a passive
alternative investment strategy consisting of entirely passive index funds.
Simultaneously, constructing a perfect equivalent to their benchmark was deemed
impossible within the context of our research, and as such, our benchmark is deemed to
represent what was easily available to Swedish investors during the period. Put
differently, our constructed benchmark is a compromise between selecting as cheap,
widely traded, and passively managed funds as possible while at the same time adhering
to the market exposures as set out by Berk and van Binsbergen. In the end, we risk that
some of the returns in our benchmark might not be accurately representative of an entirely
passive investment strategy in reality, and therefore it might compromise the credibility
and comparison of the results and subsequent conclusions.
        Furthermore, as mentioned in earlier parts, there are problems inherent with using
a Swedish version of the FFC factors, such as the ones utilized in our paper. A better
alternative would therefore be if we could have used a combination of U.S. and Swedish
FFC factor values, as those were the largest individual market exposures in our mutual
fund dataset. If we had used them, we believe that our results for the FFC models would
have been even more accurate. However, such a combination is, to our knowledge, not
practically possible, and as such, we deemed the Swedish FFC factors the most fitting
compromise.
       Much of what has been brought up above can also be interpreted as having led to
the reported issues of significance and explanatory values of the models. The importance
of shedding light on this cannot be understated, especially considering that even the FFC
value-added model, used as a primary piece of evidence in motivating our conclusions,
suffers from significance issues with several of the results reported for its respective
portfolios. Although these concerns were to some extent laid to rest given the
circumstances of the analysis, they are still an issue that plagues it and its reliability,
which is something to keep in mind moving forward.
       Lastly, it is also important to note that outside of these above-mentioned
procedural problems, there is also one significant structural issue that, at the very least,
has affected the implications of the conclusions of this analysis, that is worthwhile
mentioning, namely the exclusion of the net alpha as a measurement. This is motivated
by several factors, including limitations to the scope of the paper, the methodologies used
by our inspirations, and others. Nonetheless, excluding the net alpha measure severely
limits the implications of the results in practical applications. In other words, if it cannot
be determined what part of the abnormal returns earned by mutual funds is actually
obtainable by investors, then outside of academia, such results have little meaning.
Having said that, since the reported gross alpha values, as seen in Tables 3, 5, 7, and 9,
are all significantly below the fees charged by our passively managed index funds, as seen
in Table 2, then one would assume that the fees charged by actively managed funds should
be higher and therefore that the amount obtainable by investors is less than zero.
However, as this cannot be definitely proven, this paper nevertheless carries mostly
theoretical implications.

                                  29
8 Conclusion

In this paper, we set out to perform a comparative analysis on the subject of mutual fund
performance as predicted and measured by the gross alpha and the value-added
measurement. In doing so, three distinctive hypotheses were posed surrounding the
subject. The previous sections of this paper explore the motivations, conduction, and
results of an analysis aimed at proving these hypotheses and expanding the available
literature in the area. At last, this paper has arrived at applying what has been discovered
to the initially posed hypotheses.
       Starting with the first hypothesis, or H1, which relates to the existence of mutual
fund managerial skill, we conclude that it does exist and thus reject the null hypothesis
that it cannot be observed. From the results in Section 5 and as mentioned in Section 6,
the value-added models reveal a clear, persistent pattern where the higher-ranked
portfolios demonstrate both greater monthly excess returns, larger alpha values, and
larger value-added values as compared to their lower-ranked counterparts, providing a
strong argument for the existence of managerial skill. Taking into consideration that the
adjusted R-squared values of the respective models left a considerable amount of
unexplained performance gains and losses of the mutual funds within the dataset, it seems
reasonable to assume that at least parts of the unexplained performance can be attributed
to managerial skill. This stems from the fact that managerial skill is deemed a major factor
affecting the characteristics surrounding a mutual fund as well as its positioning in the
market. This conclusion does not change even if this pattern is not visible for the alpha-
sorted models, as the results related to those models were deemed insignificant.
       Following, the second hypothesis, or H2, concerns the relative performance of the
alpha measurement versus the value-added measurement in evaluating and predicting
mutual fund manager performance. As has been derived in the previous sections of this
paper, especially the discussion in Section 6, the models related to the value-added
measurement performed significantly better in all aspects as compared to those derived
from the alpha measurement. Moreover, the results of the models related to the alpha
were deemed as largely insignificant and those stemming from the models related to the
value-added figure were deemed sufficiently significant for the purposes of this analysis.
Thus, given the confirmation of H1 above, it seems reasonable to reject the null
hypothesis as related to H2 and declare, for the purposes of this paper and the analysis
performed within it, that the value-added measurement is the better predictor and
measurement of Swedish mutual fund manager performance.
       Lastly, the third hypothesis, or H3, has to do with whether or not the benchmark
portfolio factors are the better predictor as compared to the FFC factors. Our benchmark
value-added model, as described in Section 6, has problems when it comes to the
significance levels for the lower-ranked portfolios, and thus, we cannot be certain of the
accuracy of the results stemming from it. The reason for this poor significance level could
be attributed to the issues related to the construction of the benchmark, and thus the
benefits of using the benchmark as advocated by Berk and van Binsbergen in their paper
are not evidently proven in our case. In contrast, the FFC value-added model performs
slightly better, namely because both the highest and lowest portfolios, which are the most
important portfolios, are significant. The portfolios in the middle are, however,
statistically insignificant. It is thus not possible to determine which of the two models is
the better predictor, and therefore we fail to reject the null hypothesis, meaning that, for

                                  30
the purposes of this paper, the FFC factors, serving as the default option, are the better
predictors of Swedish fund managerial performance.
       In conclusion, the first, H1, and second, H2, hypotheses could be accepted, while
the third, H3, could not and was subsequently rejected. That is to say, the results stemming
from the performed analysis have, within its context, confirmed the existence of Swedish
mutual fund managerial skill as well as accepted the value-added measurement as the
superior predictor and metric in evaluating it. However, the results were insufficient to
generate any concrete conclusion to answer the question of whether the benchmark
portfolio factors were better than the FFC factors for that same purpose. Thus, the default
option, as well as that which was related to the stated null hypothesis, namely the FFC
factors, are deemed superior for the purposes of this paper. These findings are to some
extent comparable to those achieved by Berk and van Binsbergen (2015), who also
confirmed the existence of fund managerial skill, as well as deemed the superior measure
in doing so to be the value-added measurement when looking at the U.S. mutual fund
market. It should be noted that the acceptance of H1 and H2 ought to be considered
conditional in light of the problems plaguing the conducted analysis, as mentioned in
Section 7. Most of these issues stem from the structure and availability of data related to
the Swedish mutual fund market; in particular, the prevalence of missing data points has
potentially affected the quality of our regressions. Despite efforts made to clean and
transform the data, there are still issues left that could not be avoided. Furthermore, the
much smaller offering of financial products, particularly when looking at products
tracking diverse indexes, has also had a detrimental effect on the analysis, as the
construction of the benchmark, a core aspect of the analysis, was severely limited.
Moreover, it is also the case that the conducted analysis omits the net alpha measurement,
leading to any practical implications being noticeably limited in scope. Hence, we believe
that further exploration in this field of Swedish mutual fund manager performance would
be appropriate to strengthen the findings of this paper; however, as has become evident
in this paper, the data availability might make such a venture difficult, which is why we
propose looking at additional data sources or venturing to other closely related markets,
such as the other Nordic countries in order to draw more far-reaching conclusions.
Building on these suggested extensions and expanding the analysis to include the
presently absent net alpha measurement, the practical implications would also be greatly
improved. In doing the above, albeit not perfectly, we believe that the analysis would
most optimally be adapted and expanded to move past the identified issues as well as
make further advances in this area of research.

                                  31
9 References

Barber, B. M., Huang, X., & Odean, T. (2016). Which Factors Matter to Investors?
Evidence from Mutual Fund Flows. The Review of Financial Studies, 29(10), 2600-
2642.
Berk, J. B., & van Binsbergen, J. H. (2015). Measuring skill in the mutual fund
industry. Journal of Financial Economics, 118(1), 1-20.
Carhart, M. M. (1997). On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance. The Journal of
Finance, 52(1), 57-82.
Fama, E. F. (1970). Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical
Work. The Journal of Finance, 25(2), 383–417.
Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (1993). Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
bonds. Journal of Financial Economics, 33(1), 3-56.
Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (2010). Luck versus Skill in the Cross-Section of Mutual
Fund Returns. The Journal of Finance, 65(5), 1915-1947.
Grinblatt, M., & Titman, S. (1989). Mutual Fund Performance: An Analysis of
Quarterly Portfolio Holdings. The Journal of Business, 62(3), 393-416.
Grinblatt, M., & Titman, S. (1992). The Persistence of Mutual Fund Performance. The
Journal of Finance, 47(5), 1977-1984.
Grinblatt, M., & Titman, S. (1993). Performance Measurement without Benchmarks:
An Examination of Mutual Fund Returns. The Journal of Business, 66(1), 47–68.
Jegadeesh, N., & Titman, S. (1993). Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers:
Implications for Stock Market Efficiency. The Journal of Finance, 48(1), 65–91.
Jensen, M. C. (1968). THE PERFORMANCE OF MUTUAL FUNDS IN THE PERIOD
1945–1964. The Journal of Finance, 23(2), 389-416.
Sodini, Paolo, Yao Fu, and Huseyin Aytug. (2020). Construction of the Fama-French-
Carhart Four Factors Model for the Swedish Stock Market Using the Finbas Data.
Swedish House of Finance Research Data Center. Retrieved February 10, 2024, from
https://www.hhs.se/en/houseoffinance/data-center/fama-french-factors/
Statistiska Centralbyrån. (2024, March 15). CPI, historical numbers, 1830–. Retrieved
March 15, 2024, from https://www.scb.se/en/finding-statistics/statistics-by-subject-
area/prices-and-consumption/consumer-price-index/consumer-price-index-
cpi/pong/tables-and-graphs/consumer-price-index-cpi/cpi-historical-numbers-1830/
Wermers, R. (2000). Mutual Fund Performance: An Empirical Decomposition into
Stock-Picking Talent, Style, Transactions Costs, and Expenses. The Journal of Finance,
55(4), 1655-1695.

                                  32
10 Appendix

Disclaimer Surrounding the Usage of Artificial Intelligence: In the making of this paper,
the large language models (LLMs) GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 by OpenAI were utilized as
assistance during the making of code used in the analytical regressions. Furthermore, such
models were also used in the context of verifying the function and results of such code to
ensure the stability of our analysis. In addition, the AI-enabled writing assistant
Grammarly was continuously used to check for grammatical errors during the writing
process.

                                  33