´

HOME MORTGAGE
CONSTRAINTS AND  RENTAL
MARKET FRICTIONS

LESSONS FROM NORWAY

HARALD BROBACKE

OSKAR GARHOLM BIRKELAND

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2024
Home Mortgage Constraints and Rental Market Frictions: Lessons from Norway

Abstract:

   We  investigate  frictions  in the housing market  affecting the dynamics between the
   tenant-  and  owner-occupied parts of the market  in a  predominantly  unregulated
   environment.  We  do  this  by  analyzing  the  Norwegian  housing  market.  Most
   prominently, we find  data indicating  that  the tightened  government-imposed  down
   payment  requirements  of 2011  alter  market  dynamics and  increase the pressure on the
   rental market.  Subsequently, we argue that those households affected by mortgage
   constraints in general  not  only include  low-income  households but  also  high-income
   immigrant households with a lacking credit history. Furthermore, our findings suggest
   that  some  private information  variables  can explain the variation  of  rents and prices,
   although this is  clearer for  purchase prices  than for rents.

Keywords:

   Household Finance, Housing Economics, Real Estate Finance

Authors:

   Harald Brobacke (25002)
   Oskar Garholm Birkeland (25536)

Tutor:

   Alvin Chen,  Assistant  Professor, Department of  Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas,  Assistant Professor, Department of  Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in  Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Harald Brobacke and Oskar Garholm Birkeland, 2024

                                   1
1. Introduction

1.1  Research Question and Related Literature

Homeownership is one of the largest investments  an average household can  make.  Thus,
deciding between renting and buying one’s home  is  perhaps the  most important financial
decision  for any household.  Furthermore, from a social perspective, it can be argued that
the financial security generated by homeownership is an important driver for economic
equality.  The dynamics  of housing markets  and the intuition behind  households’  housing
decision  should therefore be well understood.

The outcome of a  household’s housing decision  is  notoriously known to  turn out very
differently  depending  on the country  in which it is made.  In Norway, homeownership is
unquestionably   the   most   widespread   housing   option   for   households,   with   a
homeownership rate of approximately 80% (Eurostat, 2021).  For comparison, otherwise
comparable economies such as Sweden  and  Denmark have homeownership rates of
respectively 64.9%  and  59.2%  (ibid.,  2021).  At the same time, Norway has a highly
unregulated rental market, which cannot be said about the other mentioned countries. This
makes the Norwegian housing market a unique environment in which to examine housing
market frictions, which we will  do  in this thesis.  By doing so,  we aim  to  improve  the
understanding of  housing market dynamics  in general.

We will  investigate how down payment requirements for home mortgages might create a
friction  in the  rental  market,  by  increasing  the  demand for  rentals  and pushing up  rents.
We will also  consider  how  immigrants  from developed countries  in the Western world
might struggle to  receive a  mortgage  offer  despite  potentially high  earnings and ability to
post a down payment.  Thereby, we will  not only  attempt to contribute to  the explanation
for why rentals in Norway are not seen as a viable long-term  option.  Instead, we will also
explore how mortgage constraints in general might create frictions in the housing market,
as well as discussing which households are affected by these.

The literature is plentiful when it comes to frictions in the real estate market  increasing
rental demand, such as higher transaction costs related to collateral requirements for home

                                   2
mortgages, or higher transaction costs related to buying and selling a home, compared to
renting.

Gete  and Reher (2018)  analyze one  such friction, by  investigating  how  the  “contraction
of the mortgage credit  supply  has been a significant driver of housing rents and
homeownership since the 2008 crisis”.  They  find  this by  investigating how  regulatory
costs  in the banking sector,  following the  financial crisis, pushed  up  lending expenses for
households.  This, combined with frictions related to  substitution across lenders, led to
more households being denied credit. Consequently,  since  most  households  need a
mortgage to buy a home and because  the rental market supply elasticity is imperfect,
housing rents  increased,  and  the rent-to-price ratio decreased.  Similarly, we will in  this
thesis investigate  how  a  2011  regulatory change in Norway  restricted mortgage supply,
which  seems to have  pushed up rents  and  increased  rental market frictions.

Other related findings include Acolin, Bricker, Calem and Wachter (2016) who also show
how  tightening  mortgage supply  can significantly restrict  market entry  for  potential
homeowners  and  increase  rental  demand.  Furthermore,  Fuster  and  Zafar  (2016)
interestingly find that  even small  positive  changes  in down payment  requirements  can
decrease  consumer propensity for buying significantly. Intuitively  therefore,  in their
hypothetical scenarios,  Fuster and Zafar (2016)  find that these down payment effects are
particularly clear for financially constrained individuals.  In this thesis, we will show that
rents,  in relative terms,  are particularly high for  smaller homes  (i.e.,  rents are relatively
higher for those  homes  which  are likely to be inhabited by  financially constrained
households).

On the other hand,  there is no real consensus on frictions  that favor  purchasing a home,
partly since  these frictions  are under-measured and  under-modeled, according to Halket
and  di  Custoza (2015).  In their article, they  attempt to fill this gap,  creating  a  model  in
which scarcity of rentals is an equilibrium outcome. This  can  help  explain  why  rentals
are undersupplied in the Norwegian market  even though we argue that  particularly  rents
for  smaller  homes  in Norway  might be overpriced.  Halket and  di  Custoza (2015) argue
that  the availability of  rentals  is  constrained by private information  about how long
households intend to stay,  in theory  pushing people toward homeownership.  However, as

                                   3
we will establish,  people might also be constrained from purchasing a home, even though
this might be the best theoretical solution.

1.2 A Description of the Norwegian Housing Market

1.2.1 The Rental Market

Rental homes  in Norway  are  supplied  by  both  the  private and  the  public  sector,  primarily
regulated by  the Tenancy Act  of  1999  (LOV-1999-03-26-17,  Norwegian: Lov om
husleieavtaler) and  secondarily  regulated  by  the  Housing  Accountability Act  of 2022
(LOV-2022-12-20-121,  Norwegian: Lov om  kommunenes ansvar på det boligsosiale
feltet).  In large,  the rental market  in Norway  is uniquely  deregulated compared to other
European  and particularly Scandinavian  countries, as we will explain next.

The private  sector  market  is an almost entirely deregulated market,  where  landlords and
tenants can agree on any rent level  (LOV-1999-03-26-17,  Section 3-1),  as long as  it is not
considered  “unreasonable  compared  with  that  which  is  normally  obtained  when
concluding an agreement concerning the new letting of similar property on similar terms”
(LOV-1999-03-26-17,  Section  4-1,  official  translation).  This  kind  of  rent  setting
resembles  market rent.  However,  after  fixing the rent,  it  can only  be adjusted  annually  in
line with the retail price index (ibid., Section 4-2). Further adjustments can be made every
2.5 years,  but only to align with  “the current level of rents for similar property on similar
terms of agreement”  (ibid., Section 4-3).  Therefore,  it is an important notion that  rent
setting  in the rental  market  is  not frictionless, and  although  there is no rent control,  rent
growth  is  determined not entirely by market forces.

It is also worth mentioning  that  the  owner of  a  condominium  apartment (Norwegian:
Borettslagsleilighet,  Swedish:  Bostadsrättslägenhet)  can  be  denied  renting  out  his
apartment  by the  tenant owners’ association if he does not have any  explicit reason to do
so,  such as  studies, working abroad, etc. (LOV-2003-06-06-39,  Lov om  burettslag  2003,
Section 5-3 to 5-6). In 2024, approximately 14% (Statistics Norway, n.d. a) of Norwegian
homes are  condominiums, thereby creating another friction in the rental market.

                                   4
The public sector market consists of  municipality-owned homes, known as  municipal
social housing (Norwegian: Kommunale  boliger).  This kind of housing made  up
approximately 18% of  the rental market  in 2022 (Statistics Norway,  2023, n.d. a).  An
important notion is that  according to the Housing Accountability Act of 2022,  this kind
of  housing  is only meant for  those who  are  “disadvantaged in the housing market”,
meaning that they are  “not able to  look  after their own interests  in  the housing market,
and therefore  need  support  to  find  and  retain  suitable housing” (LOV-2022-12-20-121,
Section 4, own translation). Examples of such tenants are physically or mentally disabled,
low-income  individuals  (City of Oslo, n.d.).  Municipal  social housing is  furthermore
usually  meant to be a temporary solution for the tenants, until they  retain  suitable, long-
term housing  (ibid., n.d.).  According to the City of Oslo  (n.d.), the  average  duration of
stay in this kind of housing is 3-5 years. Due to its particular nature, and the modest supply
of  such housing, we will  not consider it any further in this thesis.

1.2.2 The  Owner-Occupied Housing Market

A unique feature of the Norwegian housing market is that a key goal of the housing policy
is to  assist individuals  in buying their own homes  (Royal Norwegian  Ministry of Local
Government  and Modernisation, 2020).  To facilitate this,  authorities  offer  subsidized
loans  to  households  which are  financially  disadvantaged  in the long run  and  unable  to
secure traditional  mortgages  from  private banks (ibid., 2020).  As an alternative, such
households might be granted a home mortgage by the Norwegian State Housing Bank
according to the Norwegian State Housing Bank Act of 2009 (LOV-2009-05-29-30,
Norwegian: Lov om Husbanken)  and  its corresponding regulations  of  2019  (FOR-2019-
11-18-1546,   Norwegian   name:   Forskrift   om   lån   fra   Husbanken).   Similarly,
municipalities,  in collaboration with the Norwegian State Housing Bank, are  encouraged
to  continuously assess whether  tenants of  municipal  social  housing  could  benefit from
and afford  purchasing  the  homes  which  they currently rent  (Royal Norwegian  Ministry
of Local Government and Modernisation, 2020).  When households are found to  do so,
they might qualify for the  “tenancy-to-ownership program” and  might  be granted a
mortgage  to purchase  their  current  home  (ibid., 2020).

                                   5
These two kinds of home mortgages are known as “start-up loans” (Norwegian: Startlån).
In 2023, the Norwegian State Housing Bank granted such mortgages amounting to a total
of  NOK 16 billion  (Norwegian State Housing Bank, n.d.).

2. Data  Description  and  Empirical  Methodology

2.1 Our Data

We base our thesis on  several  different information sources.  An  important source for us
has been the extensive publicly available data from Statistics Norway covering a range of
data  categories, including  homeownership,  income, employment,  gross  domestic  product
(GDP) and average credit rates.  Furthermore, we have been  able to access an exclusive
data set  to all sold homes  in Norway between  2021  and  2023, through  a collaboration
with  a  leading  Norwegian  statistics-  and  analytics group,  4CastGroup AS.  We have used
the data from the four largest cities (Oslo, Bergen, Stavanger, and Trondheim), amounting
to approximately  90,000 sales.  Our last source of data has been  the RSS feed of  finn.no,

                                                                                    1
from which we have extracted a data set of approximately 40,000 rental listings between
2021  and  2022  for the four largest cities in Norway.

Finn.no is a major platform for selling and renting property in Norway. Of course, its RSS
feed will not capture the entire spectrum of rentals for any given year, since rental
contracts may not be advertised online at all, or they might be advertised via other
services. Furthermore, the agreed upon rent between the landlord and tenant might differ
from the rent which is advertised on finn.no. We can also not be certain that all listed
rental homes have been matched with a tenant. The homes that are listed on finn.no are
also not a random sample of homes being rented out. That being said, considering our
data, the number of rental listings is approximately 45% of actual sales in the period, thus
we have likely been able to capture a large share of actual rentals, considering the
homeownership rate in Norway being 80%.

1
 The number of rental listings refers to the  number of listings we are left with after cleaning the raw data
from the RSS feed.

                                   6
We have modified the RSS feed data from finn.no in several ways. We removed all rental
listings  other  than  private homes, i.e.  keeping  villas,  row houses, studio  apartments,  and
duplex homes (Norwegian names in data: Enebolig, hus, leilighet, rekkehus, studio,
tomannsbolig). We chose to exclude parking spaces for obvious reasons, as well as farms
(only one data point), “hybel” and “rom i bofellesskap”. The latter two home types, which
roughly translate  to “rooms”,  we chose to exclude since  they are not private homes, but
rather part of someone else’s home. We also excluded the category “others” (“andre”)
since this category  contained  all the above categories,  including  parking spaces, etc.

We also removed those cells with  “abnormal”  rents or  square  meterage.  That is, we
excluded  those ads with monthly rents less than NOK 4,000  (only a  few homes),  since
these are clearly mispriced. Similarly, we removed those rental listings with monthly rents
above NOK 1,000,000. In addition, we excluded those cells with a square meterage below
10  (including those with no listed square meterage)  or above 1,000  since these would
likely  alter our  subsequent  classification into  size categories  due to  incorrect listed size.

The data set on sold homes and the data set on rental listings contain street address, asking
rent or selling price, size of the home in square meters, and the type of home (e.g.,
apartment or row house). The reason why we have used data from these four cities is that
the rental market is very limited outside them, and that Statistics Norway has more
detailed statistics for these municipalities.

2.1 Empirical Methodology

2.1.1 Definitions

We  will  make  use  of  three  geographical  definitions,  coinciding  with  the  data  from
Statistics  Norway.  The  smallest  of  these  is  a  “basic  statistical  unit”  (Norwegian:
Grunnkrets).  This  is  the smallest geographical unit used by Statistics Norway,  of which
there are in total approximately 2,500 in the four largest cities.  We eliminate, however,
approximately  1,500  of these due to  less than 10 rental listings and/or sold homes in our
data. Next,  the term  “statistical tract”  (Norwegian: Delområde)  refers to a collection of
basic statistical units.  Lastly,  the term “urban  district”  (Norwegian: Bydel) refers to a

                                   7
collection of statistical tracts.  Oslo has 17  urban districts, Stavanger has 9, Bergen has 8
and Trondheim has 4.

The term “size  category” refers  to a set of categories  describing  how  many square meters
a  home  is.  It  consists  of  nine  different  home  sizes,  A  to  I,  where  size  A  homes  are  less
than  30  square  meters,  and  size  I  homes  are  more  than  130  square  meters,  according  to
Appendix  A.  These  definitions  are  based  on  the  commonly  used  definitions  by  the
National  Federation  of  House  Owners  in  Norway  (Huseierne),  the  consumer  association
for homeowners. In this thesis, we have grouped together groups J and K with I. We have
done  this  since  such  large  homes  are  uncommon  in  urban  areas,  in  particular  in  the  rental
market,  and  we  wanted  to  keep  as  many  submarkets  as  possible.

Inspired by Halket and di Custoza (2015),  and Piazessi, Schneider and Stroebel  (2020),
adapted to a Norwegian context, we define a  “submarket”  as all housing for rent or sale
within an urban district and within a certain size category, e.g., Oslo-Marka-A or Bergen-
Fana-D. A market, on the other hand, is defined as a collection of submarkets within the
same city and size category, e.g., Oslo-A or Bergen-D. For rent-to-price ratios, we
calculate the average listing price and the average sales price for a given market and
submarket. We keep only those submarkets containing at least 10 unique rental listings
and at least 10 sold homes.

2.1.2 Quantitative Methodology

First, we  establish that there indeed are  frictions in the  rental market.  We do  this by
calculating imputed discount rates by comparing the  present  value  of  a  perpetuity  of
average rent income (based on listed rents on finn.no) with the average purchase price for
each  size  category  (data  from  4CastGroup  AS).  We  assume  a  rental  income  growth  of
4.0% annually, which was the average growth between 2012 and 2023 in the four largest
cities  (Statistics  Norway,  n.d.  b).  Furthermore,  we  assume  a  high  depreciation  rate  of
3.6% annually, inspired by the depreciation for rental property tax purposes in the United
States  (Internal  Revenue  Service,  2023),  representing  necessary  refurbishments  to
maintain the rent level. The choice of this depreciation rate is based on two main reasons:
We  wanted  a  high  depreciation  rate  for  good  measure,  and  the  Norwegian  Internal
Revenue Service offers no fixed discount rate for tax purposes on rental property (please,

                                   8
see  footnote  2  for  further  discussion  of  the  depreciation  rate).  We  calculate  the  imputed
discount  rates  for  each  size  category  according  to  the  discounted  cash  flow  model  below:

                          !"#$∗&
                                     =  𝑝,  where:
                            '#(

   §   CF is the average annual cash flows from renting out a home in each size category,
    §   d  is  the  annual  depreciation  rate  of  the  original  purchase  price  (3.6%),
    §   p  is  the  average  purchase  price  of  a  home  in  the  given  size  category,
    §   g  is  the  annual  growth  rate  of  the  rental  market  (4.0%),
    §   and  r  is  the  unknown  annual  discount  rate  which  we  back  out.

In  a  frictionless  housing  market,  we  would  expect  the  infinite  stream  of  rents  to  have  the
same  value  as  the  purchase  price  of  a  home,  since  there  would  otherwise  be  an  arbitrage

                                                                                              2
opportunity.  We  observe  that  all  imputed  discount  rates  are  relatively  high ,  between
3.7%  and  5.0%  (please,  see  Appendix  B),  and  have  a  negative  relationship  with  size.

In a frictionless housing market with perfect information, no mortgage constraints, search
costs,  transaction  costs,  or  vacancy  hazard,  it  would  be  difficult  to  argue  for  such  high
discount  rates  since  the  risk  would  be  minimal.  This  is  particularly  true  for  the  smaller
homes, which have the highest imputed discount rates according to this calculation. Under
the  mentioned  theoretical  circumstances,  the  discount  rate  would  be  close  to  the  risk-free
rate,  which  can  be  approximated  with  for  instance  the  10-year  Norwegian  government
bond.  The  annual  yield  to  maturity  of  such  bonds  have  been  on  average  less  than  3%
during  the  past  20  years  (Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  St.  Louis,  n.d.).

In  other  words,  we  can  assert  from  this  simple  calculation  that  there  indeed  are  frictions
in  the  rental  market,  and  that  these  are  more  prominent  for  smaller  homes.

Having  established  this,  we  continue  with  analyzing  different  kinds  of  frictions,  starting
with private  information.  To  do  this,  we  attempt  to  replicate  the  findings  of  Halket  and  di

2
 We would like to stress that we have chosen a very high depreciation rate, as not to exaggerate our
results. The economic depreciation is likely to be much lower than 3.6% in perpetuity. As we analyze a
frictionless benchmark, taxes are not included in the calculation. By choosing a lower depreciation rate,
for instance 2%, the imputed discount rates would be between 5.4% and 6.6%.

                                   9
Custoza (2015). We run two regression analyses, one on purchase prices and one on rental
prices  in  each  basic  statistical  unit,  using  the  data  from  4CastGroup  AS  on  sold  homes,
the  RSS  feed  of  finn.no  for  rental  listings,  and  public  data  from  Statistics  Norway.

The  independent  variables  we  use  are  average  income  per  household  (Statistics  Norway,
n.d.  h),  fraction  of  households  with  one  or  more  individual  being  35  years  of  age  or  older
(Statistics  Norway,  n.d.  i),  persons  per  household  (Statistics  Norway,  n.d.  j)  and  duration
of  stay  in  current  home  for  owner-  occupier-  and  renter-  households.  The  average  person
per household variable is given on an  urban district  level, while the  average  income
variable is given on  a statistical  tract level.  The  average  fraction-over-35  variable  given
on  a  basic statistical unit  level.  Our duration of stay variables  for owners and renters  are
estimates  by 4CastGroup AS on an  urban district  level.  For the variables  available only
on an  urban district-  or  a  statistical tract  level, we  uniformly apply  the respective data
points  across all basic  statistical units  within  each  urban district  or statistical tract.

Next,  we  continue  to  analyze  how  frictions  might  be  explained  by  the  government-
imposed  regulatory  changes  in  down  payment  requirements  in  the  wake  of  the  2008
financial  crisis.  In  March 2010, the Norwegian Government  obliged all financial
institutions to require a down payment for  all future  home mortgages  equal to  10% of the
home’s value  (The Financial Supervisory Authority of Norway, 2022).  Subsequently, in
December 2011,  it  increased  the  down payment requirement to  15% of the home’s value
(ibid., 2022). We will investigate how the national rent-to-price ratio  Statistics Norway,
n.d.  k, n.d. l)  responded  to  the 2011  regulatory change, controlling for  average  credit
interest  (Statistics Norway, n.d. e),  change in GDP  per capita  (Statistics Norway, n.d. f),
and unemployment  (Statistics Norway, n.d.  g).  Controlling  for  GDP  and  unemployment
is an attempt  to  capture the effect  of  general  wealth  changes which could contribute to
the ratio.  Similarly,  we control  for  the  mortgage  interest  rate  as lower rates make
mortgages less expensive, which can have a positive impact on home purchase prices.

Finally, we run a regression of homeownership on the income of different nationality-
groups of immigrants. This is an attempt to investigate whether labor migrants, who  on
average are finically stronger than other immigrant groups (e.g., refugees),  might be
restricted by  lacking  credit histories  to buy a home with a home mortgage.  For this

                                  10
analysis, we use data from Statistics Norway on homeownership and income for different
nationalities  in 2021  (Statistics Norway,  n.d. c, n.d. d),  and  data from  OECD  (n.d.)  on
duration  of stay  for immigrants of different nationalities  per 2021.

3. Results  and Implications

3.1  Rent-to-Price Ratio Analysis

                       Average Rent-to-Price by Size Category

Figure 1:  Average rent-to-price ratio by size category.

We have already established that smaller rental homes are more mispriced relative to the
frictionless benchmark.  We  also  observe that in those submarkets where purchase prices
are high, the rent-to-price ratio is lower than in those submarkets where purchase prices
are low  (Figure 1), suggesting that rental and purchase prices are only weakly correlated
overall. We can observe that, as the general prices of housing increase, the rent-to-price
ratio decreases  (Figure 2). This suggests that rents are less elastic than purchase prices.
In other words, we find a clear relationship between the rent-to-price ratio and purchase

                                  11
price. However, this relationship is much weaker between the rent-to-price ratio and rent
(Figure 3). Thus, the relationship between purchase price and rent is much weaker than
expected.  Finally, Figure 4 shows  how purchase price and home sizes  are correlated,
meaning that larger homes have a higher purchase price than smaller homes on average.

 Rent-to-Price Ratio vs.  Purchase Price         Rent-to-Price Ratio vs. Rent

Figure 2 (to the left): Average rent-to-price ratio compared to the average purchase price
within each  submarket.  Figure  3  (to  the  right):  Average rent-to-price ratio  compared to
the average  rent within each  submarket.

               Correlation Between Size Category and Sales Price

Figure 4: Purchase price distribution per size category.

                                  12
3.2  Private Information Effects on  Rents  and  Purchase Prices

The results from the regressions of private information variables on rents  (Table 1)  and
purchase prices  (Table 2)  are mostly as expected.  Most of them are strongly significant,
in line with the findings of Halket and di Custoza (2015). However,  in the case of rentals,

                             2
we also  observe  that  the  R value  is  very low.  Therefore,  variation in  rent  can only  sub-
optimally be explained by these variables.  Interestingly, we do not observe any
correlation between  the  duration of stay for renters  in  an  area  and the listed rents. This
might  be due to a range of explanations,  one of which  might be the strong  incentives  to
purchase a home, as previously laid out. This  might  in turn  lead  to  few  households
preferring to  rent a home in the  long run, and the data  on duration of stay for this group
would be  rather arbitrary.

                    Regression of Private Information on Rents
                  Variable                                  Estimate
 Average income                             4.930  x 10^-3  ‘***’
 Duration of stay (rent)                         -1.958  x 10
 Fraction 35+                                 -3.546  x 10^3 ‘***’
 Persons per household                         -1.799  x 10^3 ‘***’
 Adjusted R2                               0.2416
 N                                 891
Table 1:  Regression of private information variables on rents.  *, **, *** is equivalent to
p < 0.05, p < 0.01 and p < 0.001 significance levels, respectively.

Another explanation for this can be that  we  have not been able to access as detailed data
as have  Halket and di Custoza (2015).  While in their article, they had information  about
these variables on a submarket level  and distinguish between renters and owner-
occupiers,  we have  mostly  been able to  access data on a geographical level. For average
income  and fraction of individuals 35 year and older, we have accessed data on  a basic
statistical unit level.  Our duration of stay  variable is an estimate by 4CastGroup  AS  on a
urban district  level and is the only variable which is different  for  renters  compared to
owner-occupiers. The person per household variable  is given only on an  urban district
level.

                                  13
              Regression of Private Information on  Purchase Prices
                  Variable                                  Estimate
 Average income                             1.017 x 10 ‘***’
 Duration of stay (own)                         -6.169 x 10^4 ‘*’
 Fraction 35+                                -9,415 x 10^5 ‘*’
 Persons per household                       9.169 x 10^4
 Adjusted R2                               0.7265

 N                                 891
Table  2: Regression of private information variables  on purchase prices.  *,  **, ***  is
equivalent to  p <  0.05,  p <  0.01 and  p <  0.001  significance levels, respectively.

We can see for both regressions that income has a highly significant and positive effect
on both purchase prices and rents.  This is only natural, as more prosperous areas attract
wealthier people which raises demand for housing and incentivizes construction of
higher-quality  housing. We can, however, see that the difference in how large the income
effect is predicted to have on rental and purchase price respectively is vastly different. To
allow for  comparison between different scales of rent and purchase price, we  standardize
each estimate, by taking the estimate multiplied  by  the ratio between the standard
deviation  of income and the standard  deviation  of rent or purchase price. We find the
standardized estimate of income on rent to be  approximately  0.32  while the standardized
estimate of income on purchase price becomes  approximately  0.60.  A one standard
deviation increase in income thereby results in a larger fraction of a standard deviation
increase in purchase price compared to rents.  This suggests that, while income influences
both rental price and purchase price, average purchase price is more sensitive to changes
in average income than is average rent.

Moreover,  the fraction of households  with head of house at the age of  35 or older  in a
basic statistical unit  is  significantly  and  negatively  correlated with  rental price  and with
purchase price.  This suggests that, on average,  those households pay less  than  those
younger than 35.  This  indicates some age-related frictions in the market.

For the  variable on persons per household,  we  see significant results in the rental market
but not in the owner-occupied market.  There might be some multicollinearity issues here,
as  being over 35 can make it more likely  that the household is occupied by more people.

                                  14
Finally, we see no significant relationship between duration of stay in the rental market
and the price of rentals, which may indicate that the  landlords in Norway  on average
assumes  most households are in the rental market short-term.  In contrast, the duration of
stay variable is significant and negatively  correlated with purchase prices. This might be
because  purchase prices  have increased historically,  so those with long duration of stay
purchased their homes when prices were on average lower than they were when  our data
was collected.

3.3  Tightening Mortgage Supply

                Regression of  Policy Change on Rent-to-Price Ratio

               Variable                             Estimate
 Policy  Change                        7.385  x 10^-3  ‘***’
 GDP per  Capita                       -3.053  x 10^-9
 Unemployment  Rate                   2.176  x 10^-3
 Mortgage  Rate                        8.429  x 10^-4
 Adjusted R2                          0.7581
 N                             18
Table 3:  2011  policy change  effect  on rent-to-price ratios.  ‘***’ corresponds to p <
0.001.

For  the  introduction  of  the new  down payment  requirements,  we  computed the average
rent-to-price ratios for each year between 2006 and 2023 using data from  Statistics

          3
Norway . We created a dummy variable taking the value of  one  for any year 2012 or
above, to capture the effect of the policy change on the rent-to-price ratio, as  the down
payment requirement was tightened in December 2011. We controlled for changes in
GDP per capita growth, changes in unemployment and changes in mortgage interest rate,
to mitigate the risk of other variables influencing our regression results. We found that
the policy change dummy variable was positive and significant at the  0.1% level, while

3
 For the purchase price levels, we could choose between three different price indicators in the data:
“Single houses”, “row houses” and “apartments”. We calculated an average of these for the regression
above. However, we can see in Appendix C that this relationship would be strongly significant regardless
of the price indicator.

                                  15
the unemployment rate, the GDP per capita and interest rate variables were not significant
(Table 3).

                       Change in Rent-to-Price Ratio Per Year

Figure  5:  Graphical display of the rent-to-price ratio change  where the red dotted line
represents  the  date  2011-12-01,  when  the  new  down  payment  regulations  were
implemented.

At  the  one percent significance level, the regression results from the updated down
payment requirements shows a clear and positive correlation between the policy change
and the rent-to-price ratio. Simultaneously, the regression shows no significant effect
from  any of our control variables (unemployment rate, mortgage rate, GDP per capita).
This allows us to conclude that the increase in the down payment requirement, from 10%
to 15%, has a  strong correlation  vis-á-vis the rent-to-price ratio.

We could interpret this as households being close to fulfilling the previous down payment
requirement at 10% could no longer afford the necessary  down  payment  to purchase a
home in their preferred  size category. With no other option, those individuals had to look
for homes in a cheaper submarket or the rental market. For the least wealthy individuals,
predominantly those in the market for the first time, the only viable option  might have
been  to search in the rental market.  Consequently, therefore, this could explain why  the
rent-to-price ratio has  subsequently  increased,  following a  higher demand for rental

                                  16
housing.  (In Norway, restrictions on how much you can raise rental price of existing
rentals. Suggests new rentals became available to the market)

This conclusion is supported by our finding that the rent-to-price ratio is  decreasing  with
the size of the properties in a submarket, which  are  correlated with the price of properties
(Figures 1, 4). Intuitively, there are more alternatives for wealthier  households  than to
reside renting when the down payment requirements are raised. For  instance, wealthier
households  in the market for  owner-occupied housing  could decide to  purchase housing
in markets with lower absolute capital requirements  (i.e., smaller, less expensive homes).
For the poorest households being in the market for category A housing, this is on the other
hand not an option.

3.4 Effects  for Immigrants

   Regression of  Income on Homeownership by Immigrant Groups

               Variable                            Estimate

  Income                              7.691  x 10^-6  ‘*’
  Adjusted R2                        0,7639

  N                            5

Table 4:  Regression of income  of immigrants  on  rental  rate.  ‘*’  =  p < 0.05.

From this regression, we see a clear  positive  relationship between the average income of
immigrants from EU/EFTA and the UK, other European countries, North America, South
America,  Asia, Africa and Oceania, and  the corresponding  rental  rate  divided between
immigrants from the developed and the undeveloped world.  The developed world is for
simplicity defined as EU/EFTA and the UK, North America and Oceania. In other words,
immigrants from North America, Oceania  and  EU/EFTA and the UK  own their  own
homes  in Norway  to a  significantly lower extent than do immigrants from other  parts of
the world, although they on average have a  much  higher income  (Statistics Norway, n.d.
d).  Interestingly, this trend seems to be  completely opposite for the  population in general,

                                  17
as  high-income  households tend to  own their own homes to a larger extent than do low-
income households  (Statistics Norway, 2018).

Since there are not many data points, the results are  ambiguous. However,  this
relationship  might indicate another friction in the rental market, namely that  financially
strong immigrants  might struggle to buy their own home  due to  a  lacking  credit history.
Even though they might prefer to buy their own home, and would afford it, all else equal,
they might not have the opportunity to do so since Norwegian banks cannot access their
previous credit history.

Simultaneously, it is not clear that  higher-income immigrants necessarily want to
purchase a home. For one,  such  immigrants  might be  more  likely to  move to Norway due
to (temporary) work offers.  Their duration of stay might  therefore  be uncertain,  and they
might prefer renting  a home  as to  increase flexibility, avoid transaction costs  related to
purchasing property, etc.  To a larger extent, such immigrants might also have  their living
expenses  looked after by a foreign employer, thus being incentivized to rent.  In contrast,
immigrants from developing countries  might migrate  as  refugees or permanent job
seekers.  Instead, they might therefore  be in  the market for  buying a home.  The
permanency of stay also becomes clear  based on  OECD  statistics  (n.d.), showing  that
64% of  immigrants  from developed countries have stayed in  Norway  for more than five
years, while share number is  75% for immigrants from developing countries.  In addition,
cultural reasons might come into play as some developed countries have very low
homeownership rates (Eurostat, 2021).

Regardless of whether  high-income immigrants  prefer to  own their own homes,  there
seems to be a  tendency  showing  that they  oftentimes  do  not do so,  which  puts pressure
on the  rental market by increasing demand.  The  implication  of this behavior is that  the
demand for rentals  increases  relative to the demand for  buying  homes, which contributes
to the  high  rent-to-price ratio, which we previously have established.

The  optimal behavior for an agent  probing the Norwegian housing market is  commonly
seen as  to  buy housing. This is in line with our findings, constituting  the  relatively  large
difference between rent and purchase prices. However, the optimal behavior is naturally
different  for different agents  due to the various restrictions  and frictions  and there are

                                  18
several factors to  take into consideration.  Firstly,  a poor agent might have no other choice
but  to rent their  home.  Having no  initial or  accumulated wealth  will force  a student,  a
newly arrived immigrant,  or others incapable of accumulating wealth into the  rental
market. Similarly, a household moving from lower price-areas to areas with higher prices,
will face a new,  higher  down payment requirement for  a similarly sized property.  This
could lead to a transition period in the rental market before the down payment requirement
can be met. Additionally, our results indicate that the relative cost of rentals decrease with
increasing  home prices,  making rentals more  attractive  the more prosperous the area is.

Secondly, considering the expected duration of stay is important. Our results indicate that
the discount rate  necessary for rentals to appropriate  purchased property is high  because
frictions  make the purchase market less inclusive and more rigid.  For instance, students
knowing they will only  stay in  an  area for a few years,  labor  immigrants  on a  project  or
as seasonal workers,  can  avoid the  research and commitment necessary  to purchase  and
similarly the  uncertainty  regarding price fluctuations  by renting  instead.

4.  Discussion

4.1  External Validity

This study has been conducted using data on the Norwegian housing market, a market
which is relatively free from government intervention and thereby relatively free from
government induced frictions. The significant results from our test of the effects of  the
policy change introduction is therefore likely to be a valid indication of the effects of
frictions in any economy where the market decides the prices and rental costs for housing.
However, the magnitude of the effects might differ.

In  Norway,  as in most other countries,  homes  are  an essential source of accumulation of
wealth (OECD, 2022).  What is unique in Norway,  however, is that  the government is
actively encouraging homeownership,  by having set policies in place with the aim to
increase homeownership rates  (Royal Norwegian Ministry of Local Government and
Modernisation,  2020).  This can in part explain the high homeownership rates in Norway.
In other housing markets where homeownership is much lower than  in Norway,  the

                                  19
market dynamics can be very different.  Government incentives, homeownership rates,
cultural factors and demographical factors should play a role in how the market responds
to frictions.

4.2  Weaknesses and extensions

Although our study has been conducted with data sets of high quality, we would optimally
have utilized even more precise data. For instance, the data from the RSS feed of finn.no
does not capture the entire rental market in Norway. It is also not a random  sample of
actual rental homes nor a definite source of square meterage and prices. In the real world,
paid rents and actual home sizes might differ from those advertised via the website.

When it comes to the regression of private information on rents and purchase prices in
part 3.2,  it is also worth mentioning that  many other  private information variables, and
preferably more detailed ones, could have been included.  For instance, we have, in
contrast to Halket and di Custoza (2015), not been able to access as detailed demographics
data,  for instance distinguishing  the income of  renters from owner-occupiers.  We have
also not been able to  access all population data on an equally  small geographical level as
have Halket and di Custoza (2015).  By accessing such data, the explanatory value of our
private information regressions could be greatly improved.

Furthermore, reflecting the homeownership rate in Norway, while data on the owner-
occupied housing market are detailed and publicly available, data on the rental market are
largely not available. For instance, the Rental Market Survey of Statistics Norway  only
focuses on rental prices, and in general, its statistics on households do generally not
distinguish between households renting and owning their home.

A natural point of extension to our thesis, would be to compare the dynamics of the
Norwegian housing market, which has been outlaid, to other housing markets. Although
the rental market in Norway is highly unregulated compared to the case in many other
countries, renting is not the chosen option by most Norwegians, perhaps due to strong
government incentives to buy. It would be interesting to perform a similar analysis of
home mortgage constraints in a country where such incentives are less prominent.

                                  20
5. Conclusion

Having established that there are frictions in the housing market,  two  natural questions
arise: What  frictions  exist in an otherwise unregulated market, and who are affected by
them?

Similarly to previous literature, we find that parts of them can be explained by private
information, especially in the owner-occupied  part of the market, but that  much of the
variation cannot be explained by  these factors alone.

Next, we  analyze the 2011 policy change concerning  down payment requirements and
find that  available data indicates a  positive  relationship between stricter mortgage supply
and  higher rent,  likely  due to  less people being  able to  afford homeownership. Thus,
demand for rentals  increase  relative to  homes for sale,  subsequently making rentals
relatively more expensive.  A similar increase in the rent-to-price ratio was observed
during the financial crisis, perhaps due to  banks independently increasing their down
payment requirements.

Subsequently, we find  that the rent-to-price ratio  is decreasing in home size  and in
purchase price.  This  interestingly connects to the previous parts, since  it explains how the
rental market is more crowded for  lower-end housing. Those in the market for such
housing, intuitively we suggest low-income  households,  therefore  seems to be most
affected by the down-payment requirements.

Lastly, we  observe the  seemingly  suboptimal behavior in the housing market by  labor
migrants  with high incomes.  We cannot be certain about the reason for this behavior, but
one reason could be that they face difficulties related to obtaining a mortgage due to
lacking credit history.  This  observation  therefore makes for additional crowding of the
rental  market.

In conclusion, our findings point toward that private information details can explain some
housing market frictions. Furthermore,  stringent  mortgage constraints  and  other credit
regulations  might  contribute to  increased  housing market frictions and demand for rental
homes, in particular  for smaller and cheaper homes.

                                  21
6. References

Acolin, A., Bricker, J., Calem, P.  and  Wachter, S. 2016, “Borrowing Constraints and
Homeownership”,  The American Economic Review,  vol. 106, no. 5, pp. 625-629.

City of Oslo.  n.d.,  “Søke kommunal bolig”.  Accessed via oslo.no on  April 27, 2024:
https://www.oslo.kommune.no/bolig-og-sosiale-tjenester/bolig/kommunal-bolig/soke-
kommunal-bolig/

Eurostat. 2021,  “House or  flat  –  owning or renting”.  Accessed via europa.eu on  March
15, 2024:  https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/cache/digpub/housing/bloc-1a.html

Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. n.d.,  “Interest Rates: Long-Term Government Bond
Yields: 10-Year: Main (Including Benchmark) for Norway”.  Accessed via stlouisfed.org
on  April 27, 2024:  https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/IRLTLT01NOM156N

FOR-2019-11-18-1546. 2019,  Forskrift om lån fra Husbanken.  Accessed via lovdata.no
on  April 30, 2024:  https://lovdata.no/dokument/SF/forskrift/2019-11-18-1546

Fuster,  A.  and Zafar, B. 2016, “To Buy or Not to Buy: Consumer Constraints in the
Housing Market”,  The American Economic Review, vol. 106, no. 5, pp.  636–640.

Gete, P. and Reher, M. 2018, “Mortgage Supply and Housing Rents”,  The Review of
Financial Studies,  vol. 31, no. 12, pp. 4884-4911.

Halket, J. and di Custoza, M. 2015, “Homeownership and the Scarcity of Rentals”,
Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 76, pp. 107-123.

Internal Revenue Service.  2023, “Publication  527  (2023), Residential Rental Property”.
Accessed via  irs.gov on May  8:  https://www.irs.gov/publications/p527

LOV-1999-03-26-17.  1999,  Lov om husleieavtaler.  Accessed via lovdata.no on April 30,
2024:  https://lovdata.no/dokument/NL/lov/1999-03-26-17/KAPITTEL_3#§3-1

LOV-1999-03-26-17.  1999,  The Tenancy Act.  Accessed via  government.no on April 30,
2024:  https://www.regjeringen.no/en/dokumenter/the-tenancy-act/id270390/

LOV-2003-06-06-39. 2003,  Lov om  buretsslag.  Accessed via lovdata.no on April 30,
2024:  https://lovdata.no/dokument/NL/lov/2003-06-06-39/KAPITTEL_5-2#§5-3

LOV-2009-05-29-30. 2009,  Lov om Husbanken.  Accessed via lovdata.no on April 30,
2024:  https://lovdata.no/dokument/NL/lov/2009-05-29-30/§10

LOV-2022-12-20-121.  2022,  Lov om kommunenes ansvar på det boligsosiale feltet.
Accessed via lovdata.no on April 30, 2024:  https://lovdata.no/dokument/NL/lov/2022-
12-20-121

                                  22
Norwegian State Housing Bank. n.d., “Startlån”. Accessed via husbanken.no on April 30,
2024:  https://statistikk.husbanken.no/lan/startlan

OECD. n.d., “Immigrants by duration of stay”.  Accessed via  OECD.org on  April  27,
2024:  https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=DIOC_DURATION_STAY

OECD.  2022,  “Housing Taxation in OECD Countries”,  OECD Tax Policy Studies,  no.
29.  Accessed  via  OECD.org on  May  6, 2024:  https://doi.org/10.1787/03dfe007-en.

Piazessi,  M., Schneider, M.  and  Stroebel, J.  2020,  “Segmented Housing Seach”,  The
American Economic Review,  vol. 110, no. 3,  pp.  720-759.

Royal Norwegian  Ministry of Local Government and Modernisation. 2020, “We all
need a safe place to call home: National strategy for  social housing policies (2021-
2024)”.  Accessed via govnerment.no on April 30, 2024:
https://www.regjeringen.no/contentassets/c2d6de6c12d5484495d4ddeb7d103ad5/we-
all-need-a-safe-place-to-call-home-national-strategy-for-social-housing-policies-2021-
2024.pdf

Statistics Norway. n.d. a, “Table 10149: Dwellings, by type of building and type of owner
(M)  2012-2024”.  Accessed via ssb.no:  https://www.ssb.no/en/statbank/table/10149/

Statistics Norway. n.d. b,  “Table  09897:  Predicted  monthly rents, by price zone,  number
of   rooms   and   utility   floor   space   (NOK)   2012-2023”.   Accessed   via   ssb.no:
https://www.ssb.no/en/statbank/table/09897/

Statistics Norway. n.d. c, “Table  11036:  Tenure  status, by immigration  category”.
Accessed via ssb.no:  https://www.ssb.no/en/statbank/table/14073/

Statistics Norway. n.d. d, “13630: Employees, jobs and remuneration in cash  by
immigrant category  and  country background. Preliminary and final figures 2016M01  –
2024M03”.  Accessed via ssb.no:  https://www.ssb.no/en/statbank/table/13630/

Statistics Norway. n.d. e, “Table 08175: Interest rates in banks and mortgage companies”.
Accessed via ssb.no:  https://www.ssb.no/en/statbank/table/08175/

Statistics Norway. n.d f, “Table 09842: GDP and other main aggregates (NOK per capita)
1970-2023”.  Accessed via ssb.no:  https://www.ssb.no/en/statbank/table/09842

Statistics Norway. n.d. g, “Table  08517:  Unemployed persons,  by age and sex  1972-
2023”.  Accessed via ssb.no:  https://www.ssb.no/en/statbank/table/08517/

Statistics Norway. n.d.  h,  “Table 06944:  Household income, by type of household.
Number of households and median. Statistical tracts (M) (UD) 2005-2022”. Accessed via
ssb.no:  https://www.ssb.no/en/statbank/table/06944

                                  23
Statistics Norway. n.d. i,  “Table 06090:  Persons in  private  households,  by sex,
cohabiting arrangements and  age  2005-2023”.  Accessed via ssb.no:
https://www.ssb.no/en/statbank/table/04362/

Statistics Norway. n.d. j,  “Table 09747: Private households, persons in private
households and persons per private household (M) (UD) 2005-2023”.  Accessed via
ssb.no:  https://www.ssb.no/en/statbank/table/09747/

Statistics Norway.  n.d.  k, “Table  06035:  Freeholder. Average price per square meter and
number of sales (M) 2002-2023”.  Accessed via ssb.no:
https://www.ssb.no/en/statbank/table/06035

Statistics Norway. n.d.  l, “Table  06230:  Rental market survey.  Average monthly rents
and annual rents per sqm, by the period of tenancy  (NOK) 2006-2023”.  Accessed via
ssb.no:  https://www.ssb.no/en/statbank/table/06230

Statistics Norway.  2018,  “Mindre vanlig å eie bolig blant økonomisk utsatte grupper”.
Accessed   via   ssb.no   on   April   15,   2024:   https://www.ssb.no/bygg-bolig-og-
eiendom/artikler-og-publikasjoner/mindre-vanlig-a-eie-bolig-blant-okonomisk-utsatte-
grupper

Statistics Norway.  2023, “Municipal Housing”.  Accessed via ssb.no on  30, 2024:
https://www.ssb.no/en/bygg-bolig-og-eiendom/bolig-og-
boforhold/statistikk/kommunale-boliger

The Financial Supervisory Authority of Norway.  2022,  “Høringsnotat: Endringer i
forskrift  om finansforetakenes utlånspraksis  (utlånsforskriften)”.  Accessed via
government.no on  April 15, 2024:
https://www.regjeringen.no/contentassets/5692ba6a92574ed487baefe5781664c7/horing
snotat.pdf

                                  24
  7. Appendices

  7.1 Appendix A

   Definitions of size categories for  homes  in our analysis.

                 Size  Category                   Definition  (square  meters)
                    A                               0-29
                     B                               30-39
                     C                               40-49
                    D                              50-69
                     E                                60-79
                      F                                80-99
                    G                             100-119
                    H                             120-139
                       I                                  140  +

  7.2  Appendix  B

    Imputed discount rates for each size category.

Size Category        p            CF           g          d             r
      A          2,686,446       119,526        0.04        0.036          0.0485
      B           3,124,267       142,206         0.04        0.036          0.0495
      C          3,486,992       157,142        0.04        0.036          0.0491
      D          4,011,265       172,696        0.04        0.036          0.0471
      E           4,552,548       195,806         0.04        0.036          0.0470
      F           5,688,226       231,680         0.04        0.036          0.0447
      G          7,010,228       266,243        0.04        0.036          0.0420
      H          7,783,026       289,109        0.04        0.036          0.0411
       I           10,497,710       351,164         0.04         0.036          0.0375

                                     25
7.3 Appendix C

Regression of  policy change on rent-to-price ratio where price equals average prices for
respectively  “detached houses”, “row houses” and “multi-dwelling houses”. Clearly,
regardless of the chosen variable, the results are strongly significant.

                                  26
27