CAN INVESTORS ON NASDAQ
STOCKHOLM INTERPRET
PERCENTAGES?

NON-PROPORTIONAL THINKING IN A SWEDISH SETTING

PHILIP DE MARÉ

HENRIK EMANUELSSON

Bachelor thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2024
Can Investors on Nasdaq Stockholm Interpret Percentages? Non-Proportional Thinking
in a Swedish Setting

Abstract:

        We further test the theory of non-proportional thinking. It refers to investors thinking
       about price changes of stocks in nominal terms rather than percentage terms following
       news events, which induces higher volatility for lower priced shares. Investors have
       been shown to engage in non-proportional thinking on U.S. stock exchanges, but it has
       not thoroughly been investigated outside the U.S. We study non-proportional thinking
       on the Swedish stock market, a country where financial literacy is among the highest
        in the world. In line with the theory, our results suggest that a doubling in share price
        leads to a decrease in volatility of around 10%. In the U.S., the equivalent result was a
        20-30% decrease in volatility.

Keywords:

        Non-proportional thinking, Behavioral finance, Volatility, Share price, Stock splits.

Authors:

       Philip de Maré (25395)
       Henrik Emanuelsson (25236)

Tutor:

       Ye Zhang, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

       Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Philip de Maré and Henrik Emanuelsson, 2024

                                     1
The negative price-volatility relation is not a new phenomenon in the asset pricing literature,
and it has, among others, been documented by Black (1976). However, there has not been
complete agreement of the underlying causes of it. A recent explanation was provided by
Shue and Townsend (2021), which they termed non-proportional thinking. In short, it refers to
the tendency of investors to think in nominal terms rather than percentage terms when
evaluating how news impacts stock prices. Shue and Townsend (2021) have provided strong
                                                                                                    1
evidence for investors engaging in non-proportional thinking on U.S. stock exchanges, and
thus showing that it can be a valid explanation to the negative price-volatility relation. A
reason for investigating U.S. stock exchanges was that major communication sources in the
U.S., such as the Wall Street Journal and CNBC, reported nominal dollar price changes for
stocks, rather than percentages. However, whether investors engage in non-proportional
thinking on exchanges outside the U.S. is largely unexplored.
       Addressing this, we investigate the extent to which investors engage in
                                                         2
non-proportional thinking on Nasdaq Stockholm.  This is a valuable extension for various
reasons. Firstly, it will provide an indication of if non-proportional thinking is unique to the
U.S. or if it also exists on exchanges based in other countries. Secondly, given the extent to
which the bias is found to be present on Nasdaq Stockholm, it provides the possibility of
research for mechanisms that determine the amount of non-proportional thinking on an
exchange. Thirdly, the Swedish stock market may be of particular interest to examine because
Sweden is one of the most financially literate countries in the world according to S&P’s
Global Financial Literacy Survey (2016).
       As mentioned, non-proportional thinking entails that investors partially think in
nominal price terms rather than percentage terms when evaluating the effect of news events
on stock prices. The most important theoretical implication of the bias is that shares with a
lower price become more volatile when investors engage in non-proportional thinking. To
provide intuition for why this is the case, imagine that a share is impacted by a certain news
event, such as a favorable legal outcome. Under complete non-proportional thinking,
investors might associate such a news event with a 1 dollar increase for all shares that
theoretically would be affected by it. This would imply a price increase of 100% for a share
priced at 1 dollar, whereas it would only imply a 1% increase for a share priced at 100 dollars.
Thus, resulting in stocks with a lower share price becoming more volatile. However, the
nominal share price should theoretically not contain any real meaning and be unrelated to
volatility. This is because the share price is determined by the arbitrary amount of shares.
       In order to investigate the existence of non-proportional thinking on Nasdaq
Stockholm we replicate the methodology of Shue and Townsend (2021), which encompasses
various tests investigating the relation between share price and volatility. We begin by running
several regressions that include different volatility measures as the dependent variable, and
price as the independent variable. We strengthen robustness by adding additional control
variables that should be correlated with volatility. This is of importance to manage the
possibility that an omitted variable is driving any potential relationship between stock price
and volatility.
        In our regressions we find that there is a significant negative relationship between the
price of a stock and all three measures of volatility examined, namely total volatility,
idiosyncratic volatility, and market beta. The results are consistent when we introduce
additional control variables to the regressions, the same controls as Shue and Townsend
(2021). Our results suggest that price has a very high explanatory power for volatility,
consistent with the framework of non-proportional thinking. Accordingly, we find evidence

1
 The stock exchanges examined were NYSE, American Stock Exchange and NASDAQ.
2
 Nasdaq Stockholm was previously known as the Stockholm Stock Exchange, in Swedish it is commonly
referred to as “Stockholmsbörsen”.

                                     2
for the existence of non-proportional thinking on Nasdaq Stockholm. Specifically, the
magnitudes from our regressions show that a doubling in share price should result in a
decrease in volatility of approximately 10%, as this is the magnitude obtained when adding
additional control variables. Our findings can be compared with Shue and Townsend’s paper
(2021), where it is found that the volatility should decrease by around 20-30% when doubling
the nominal share price on U.S. stock exchanges. The difference in magnitude across the
studies suggest that the extent to which non-proportional thinking occurs is lower on Nasdaq
Stockholm compared to the U.S. stock exchanges.
       Next, we conduct an event study that examines volatility for stocks 6 months before
and 6 months after a stock split, following the methodology of Shue and Townsend (2021).
This is interesting because theoretically it is only the share price that changes following a
stock split. Thus, according to the theory of non-proportional thinking, there should be an
immediate increase in volatility following a split. For this reason, the event study should
further test the robustness of our results. We conduct the event study for 2-for-1 splits and
3-for-1 splits in order to compare them. This allows us to see if there is potentially an
additional increase in volatility for the 3-for-1 split, where the price drop is larger. However,
the results from our event study remain inconclusive since we do not find stable volatility
increases following stock splits for any of the ratios and volatility measures. We hypothesize
that the reason for this is our low sample size for the amount of stock splits. In addition, the
fact that non-proportional thinking seems to occur less on Nasdaq Stockholm compared to the
U.S. stock exchanges may also play a role.
       Given that non-proportional thinking seems to be less extensive on Nasdaq
Stockholm, we hypothesize regarding mechanisms that may determine the amount of
non-proportional thinking on an exchange.
        Firstly, we suggest that math proficiency and financial literacy are two investor skills
that are related with the risk of engaging in non-proportional thinking. Standard & Poor’s
Ratings Services Global Financial Literacy Survey (2016) shows that the Swedish population
exhibits higher financial literacy than the American population. Additionally, data from the
PISA Data Explorer provided by OECD show that Sweden has a significantly higher average
score in mathematics on the PISA tests compared to the U.S., based on all available test data,
                                                  3
which includes the period 2003-2022 . The majority of investors on the exchanges are of the
same nationality as the country the exchange is based in, according to SCB (2024) and the
Tax Policy Center (2020). Therefore, the data for math proficiency and financial literacy is
relevant and seems to be in line with the hypothesis as more non-proportional thinking seems
to occur on the U.S. exchanges compared to Nasdaq Stockholm.
        Secondly, we speculate that differences in the proportion of certain investor groups on
exchanges, that have varying skill levels, can explain the amount of non-proportional thinking
occurring on them. This hypothesis has empirical support because Shue and Townsend (2021)
found that institutional investors engage less in the bias, likely because they are more skilled
compared to other investors. This implies less non-proportional thinking on an exchange with
a larger proportion of institutional investors. The reasoning is analogous for other investor
groups of certain skill levels. However, we do not analyze data with regards to the theory of
investor groups.
       Overall, we encourage future research to empirically test our theory with regards to
investor skills and the proportion of investor groups. We consider understanding which
mechanisms determine the amount of non-proportional thinking on exchanges as a next step
in the non-proportional thinking literature.

3
 Sweden’s average score is 494 and the U.S. has an average score of 477. URL to PISA Data Explorer:
https://pisadataexplorer.oecd.org/ide/idepisa/

                                     3
                           I. Literature Review

       The theory of non-proportional thinking is grounded in psychology literature because
it is related to the “ratio bias” also known as “denominator neglect”. This bias refers to that
individuals focus excessively on numerators when comparing magnitudes of fractions, for
example leading to cancer being perceived as riskier when described as being fatal for 1286
out of 10,000 people (12.86%) rather than 24.14 out of 100 people (24.14%), as found by
Yamagishi (1997). Individuals putting excessive emphasis on the numerator is equivalent to
focusing on the nominal price change with regards to stock return fractions. Consequently, the
ratio bias implies that the same percentage change in price for two stocks that have been
affected by equivalent news, will be perceived to be lower for the lower-priced stock because
the numerator is lower. Accordingly, in order for the price change of the two stocks to be
perceived similarly, the price change for the lower-priced stock must be larger. Svedsäter,
Gamble, and Gärling (2007) provides support for this idea as they show that after identical
earnings news, participants of their experiment expect higher returns for low-priced stocks
compared to high-priced stocks. Consequently, the ratio bias may induce non-proportional
thinking among investors.
       Furthermore, effects related to non-proportional thinking have been documented by
several authors, but without clear explanations. For example, Ohlson and Penman (1984)
show that volatility significantly rises following a stock split, but do not find a reason for why
this is the case. Additionally, the negative relationship between price and volatility have been
documented in asset pricing literature by for example Black (1976). Shue and Townsend
(2021) show that non-proportional thinking can be an explanation to both of these findings,
and we add to this explanation by showing that the theory also seems to hold in a Swedish
setting.
       However, our paper´s main contribution is to that of Shue and Townsend (2021)
themselves. Besides from a Finnish bachelor thesis by Nikko (2021), we are the first to
investigate non-proportional thinking on an exchange outside the U.S. and thereby
demonstrate that the bias is not unique to U.S. exchanges. We also contribute to their paper by
hypothesizing about mechanisms that determine the amount of non-proportional thinking on
an exchange. These mechanisms are investor skill levels as well as proportions of different
investor groups that have varying skill levels.
        Non-proportional thinking is also related to other topics in finance literature. The bias,
for instance, explains how investors convert stock news into price changes. Thereby, the
non-proportional thinking literature also differs from other papers on stock news because the
focus is in most cases on investor inattention to news, which, for example, has been covered
by Hirshleifer and Teoh (2003), Barber and Odean (2008), and Giglio and Shue (2014). In
addition, non-proportional thinking is related to literature on how nominal share prices can
have an impact on investors. Thereby, it adds to the finding by Birru and Wang (2016) who
shows that investors think stocks with lower nominal prices have higher growth potential.
Additionally, it adds to Roger, Roger and Schatt’s paper (2018), which finds that the forecasts
provided by sell-side analysts tend to be more radical for stocks with lower nominal price.
       Worth noting is that subsequent to Shue and Townsend´s (2021) paper, few papers on
non-proportional thinking have been published. We acknowledge that not everybody supports
their theory, as Grullon, Kaba and van Oudheusden (2023) states that after addressing
methodological issues with Shue and Townsend´s (2021) paper, evidence consistent with
non-proportional thinking disappears. However, others have made empirical findings beyond
Shue and Townsend´s contribution that further supports the theory. Bourjade et al. (2022)
show that non-proportional thinking is also present in an IPO context in the U.S. Considering

                                     4
the sparsity of non-proportional thinking literature, we believe providing our paper to the
topic is of value.

                       II. Empirical Framework

       Imagine a share with a current price P and a hypothetical news event that affects the
stock’s valuation, represented by Z. The rational investor response to the news Z, reflected by
the theoretically correct percentage change, is denoted by δ. Non-proportional thinking is
captured by the variable X, denoting the nominal price change. Therefore, pure
                                                                                                           𝑋
non-proportional thinking in markets should give the return 𝑃 as a response to the news event
Z. In reality, the true return is a combination of these two returns as investors might only
partially engage in non-proportional thinking. This is portrayed by the following equation:

                                                 η   θ
                                       𝑟 = δ( 𝑃 )   (1)

       Where θ is defined for 0 ≤ θ ≤ 1, meaning it serves as a measure for the extent to
which investors engage in non-proportional thinking. This becomes clearly visible through
                                                                                                                                       𝑋
evaluating the end points of the domain of θ . η is a constant defined as η = δ

                                                     η   0
                            (θ = 0) ⇒ (𝑟 = δ( 𝑃 )  = δ)

                                                          η    1    𝑋
                            (θ = 1) ⇒ (𝑟 = δ( 𝑃 )  = 𝑃 )

      η can be interpreted as the price level such that the nominal price change X following
a news event, corresponds to the theoretically correct return, even under complete
non-proportional thinking. As visible in the expressions above, θ = 0 implies the rational
return response (𝑟 = δ) and θ = 1  implies the return response under complete
                                                           𝑋
non-proportional thinking (𝑟 = 𝑃 ).
        Additionally, it is worth noting that equation (1) states that | |𝑟  increases as P
decreases, consistent with the theory of non-proportional thinking. By applying the laws of
logarithms on equation (1), the expression for r can be formulated linearly as shown below.

                       𝑙𝑜𝑔(|𝑟|) = 𝑙𝑜𝑔(|δ|) + θ𝑙𝑜𝑔(η) − θ𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑃) (2)

       If we imagine that our stock is affected by whole series of news events, equation (1)
implies the following equation regarding stock volatility:

                                                   η   θ
                                 σ  = σ ( 𝑃 )   (3)
                                                𝑟        δ

       If investors engage in non-proportional thinking ( 0 < θ ≤ 1), it implies that higher
share price will lead to lower volatility. Equation (3) can also be converted into linear form.

                     𝑙𝑜𝑔(σ ) = 𝑙𝑜𝑔(σ ) + θ𝑙𝑜𝑔(η) − θ𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑃) (4)
                                          𝑟                   δ

                                     5
       Shue and Townsend (2021) suggests there is a possibility that P is orthogonal to δ and
η, especially when taking into consideration other characteristics of stocks, such as size. If δ
is orthogonal to P, that should be equivalent to σ  being orthogonal to P. Therefore, one
                                                          δ
could estimate θ from equation (4) through excluding σ  and η.
                                                          δ
       We start off our investigation by running regressions based on equation (4) excluding
𝑙𝑜𝑔(σ ) and θ𝑙𝑜𝑔(η). This allows us to examine the relationship between price and
        δ
volatility and provide an estimate of θ. Shue and Townsend (2021) also run regressions based
on equation (2) to examine how individual news events impact volatility, which is an
additional way of measuring θ. However, we do not conduct the test with individual news
events in the paper and therefore do not run any regressions based on equation (2).
        The theoretical prediction that stocks with a lower price should have a higher volatility
refers to several different types of volatility including total volatility, market beta and
idiosyncratic volatility. Regarding market beta it is worth noting that non-proportional
thinking amplifies the absolute value of beta. For example, if a stock has negative beta then
non-proportional thinking would amplify the negative return given positive market news and
vice versa. Moreover, idiosyncratic volatility will also be affected as non-proportional
thinking also amplifies price changes from firm-specific news.

                                   III. Data

A. Time Frame of Data

       The data sample used in the analysis consists of data from the period 2000 to 2019.
The reason why this time frame is selected, compared to 1926 to 2016, which is used by Shue
and Townsend (2021), is because of a finding made in their paper showing that the magnitude
of the non-proportional thinking effect is consistent over each decade. Therefore, based on the
                                                                          4
possibility that the same applies on the Swedish stock market,  using a dataset with two
decades of data should be enough to conduct the analysis. Moreover, our data ends in 2019
because the Fama French factors dataset does not cover data beyond 2019. Our analysis is
made on a monthly basis, but a number of variables included are calculated based on daily or
quarterly data.

B. Nasdaq Stockholm Data

       Data on stock prices and other fundamental data relating to the stock market is
collected from FinBas, which is a dataset provided by the Swedish House of Finance
Research Data Center. This dataset includes, for example, share price, market capitalization
and book value of equity. We use information from this dataset to calculate several variables.
The main measure of volatility, namely total volatility, is calculated from this dataset and we
define it as the monthly standard deviation of the returns of each stock based on daily data.
The value is then converted to annualized form. In order to obtain returns information, we
calculate the difference between the closing price and the opening price of the stock each day.
That difference is then divided by the opening price to obtain the returns in a format that can
be compared across firms. This is the same returns used to calculate stock excess returns in
our market beta regressions. Moreover, the variable market-to-book is calculated as the
market capitalization added with the book value of assets (from Compustat data) subtracted

4
  We further elaborate on this in the Limitations section of the paper.

                                     6
by the book value of equity, and then the value obtained is divided by the book value of assets
   𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝑐𝑎𝑝 + 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠 − 𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑡𝑦
( 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠            ). Additionally, volume turnover is calculated as the amount of
shares traded in each month divided by the number of shares outstanding (
 #𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑠 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑑 𝑒𝑎𝑐ℎ 𝑚𝑜𝑛𝑡ℎ
    #𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑠 𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔    ). The number of shares outstanding is calculated from the market
capitalization divided by the bid price. The reason for using bid price is that the providers of
the dataset computed market capitalization as the bid price multiplied by the number of shares
outstanding. Furthermore, bid-ask-spread percentage is calculated as the asking price minus
                                                                                                                                          𝐴𝑠𝑘 − 𝐵𝑖𝑑
the bid price divided by the asking price, and then it is multiplied by 100 ( 𝐴𝑠𝑘 * 100).
       In order to manage the risk of outliers impacting the reliability of our analysis, we
remove observations with stock price values in the bottom 1% and the top 1% for each month.
Additionally, we do not include observations without any variance in the nominal stock price
during the month. Only observations expressed in SEK are used. We only include stocks
traded on Nasdaq Stockholm in the sample used for analysis. However, observations with
stocks that have switched exchanges are also included, that is when the stock was also listed
at the other exchange. Most commonly these exchanges are NGM, Spotlight and First North,
which are other Sweden based exchanges. This only applies to a small amount of
observations.

C. Fama French Factors Data

      The Fama French factors dataset is provided by the Swedish House of Finance
Research Data Center, and it has data on Fama French factors based on stocks in Sweden. The
information we use from this dataset includes risk-free rate, market return, and market excess
return. One of the measures of volatility used in our analysis is monthly market beta. Market
beta is calculated by using a modified version of CAPM. The market beta is obtained by
running regressions with daily stock excess returns as the dependent variable and daily market
excess returns and lags 1-4 of daily market excess returns as the independent variables. We
assume that the slope of lags 2-4 is the same with the purpose to limit the amount of
coefficients. The regressions are run on data for each stock for each month. We then sum the
beta coefficients from these regressions and use it as our measure for market beta. This is the
same approach that is being used by Shue and Townsend (2021) to obtain the market beta
measures. The reason why the beta regressions are run in this way, is because market beta
values can be largely affected by non-synchronous prices when the betas are calculated during
short time periods. This method to obtain the betas is derived from two papers by Dimson
(1979) and by Lewellen and Nagel (2006), and should result in more reliable beta estimates.
The volatility measure idiosyncratic volatility is obtained by calculating the standard
deviation of the residuals from the market beta regressions. We then convert these values into
annualized form.

D. Firm Fundamentals Data

       To include variables controlling for company specific characteristics, accounting
based data is used in our analysis. The dataset used for this information is the Compustat
Global - Fundamentals Quarterly dataset. We use this dataset to calculate the variables
leverage and sales volatility. Since these variables are calculated using quarterly data, they
change on a quarterly basis. Leverage is calculated as short term debt and long term debt
                                                                                𝑆ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡 𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑚 𝑑𝑒𝑏𝑡 + 𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔 𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑚 𝑑𝑒𝑏𝑡
divided by the book value of assets ( 𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠       ). Sales volatility is obtained

                                     7
by computing the sales growth of each quarter compared to the equivalent quarter of the
previous year, and then calculating the standard deviation of the previous four quarters’ sales
growth. We remove observations from our sample with extreme values with regards to sales
volatility to reduce the risk that outliers affect the results.

E. Stock Split Data

       In order to obtain information on stock splits we use information from the stock split
                                                       5
calendar provided by the website investing.com. We manually create a table with data on the
split ratio, split date, name, and ISIN of the firms conducting the split. With the use of this
dataset, we can conduct our event study to examine how the stock volatility responds after a
stock split. This dataset includes splits on stocks from all Swedish stock exchanges. However,
our analysis is limited to splits on Nasdaq Stockholm. In the paper by Shue and Townsend
(2021) they examine 2-for-1 and 3-for-2 splits. However, because there is a limited number of
3-for-2 splits on Nasdaq Stockholm, we choose to study 2-for-1 and 3-for-1 splits.

F. Data Overview

       In Table I we include summary statistics of the variables used in the study, which
provides an overview of the data. When comparing this table to the equivalent table in Shue
and Townsend’s (2021) paper, it can be seen that the values we obtain are in general quite
similar. One specific observation that we make is that the mean and median of all our
measures of volatility are slightly lower compared to their study. In Table II a correlation
matrix is presented that provides an indication of the results that will be found in our
regressions. The correlation matrix shows that the nominal stock price is strongly negatively
correlated with the total volatility. Additionally, market capitalization is strongly negatively
correlated with total volatility, which shows that it is an important variable to control for in
our analysis. Bid-ask spread percentage also seems to be an important variable to account for
because it is strongly positively correlated with the total volatility of the stock returns.

5
 URL: https://www.investing.com/stock-split-calendar/

                                     8
                                                                    Table I
                                                     Summary Statistics

In this table we provide the number of observations, mean, median, and standard deviation for the variables that are in use. We use monthly observations
for each stock. Total volatility is the standard deviation of daily stock returns in annualized form. Market beta is obtained by running regressions on daily
stock excess returns with daily market excess returns and lags 1-4 of daily market excess returns as the independent variables. We assume that the slope of
lags 2-4 is the same with the purpose to limit the amount of coefficients. The sum of the coefficients from these regressions are used as the measure for
market beta. Idiosyncratic volatility is the standard deviation of the residuals from the market beta regressions converted to annualized form. Price is the
nominal stock price on the last trading day each month. Market capitalization is obtained from the last trading day of each month. Sales volatility is the
standard deviation of the sales growth of the four past quarters, where sales growth is defined as the increase in sales compared to the equivalent quarter
the previous year. Volume turnover is calculated as the amount of shares traded during a month divided by the number of shares outstanding (
 #𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑠 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑑 𝑒𝑎𝑐ℎ 𝑚𝑜𝑛𝑡ℎ
    #𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑠 𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔    ). Market-to-book ratio is the market capitalization plus the book value of assets, minus the book value of equity, and that value is
                                                                                          𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝑐𝑎𝑝 + 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠 − 𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑡𝑦
then divided by the book value of assets ( 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠           ). Book leverage is obtained by adding the short-term debt with the long-term debt and
                                                                                               𝑆ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡 𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑚 𝑑𝑒𝑏𝑡 + 𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔 𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑚 𝑑𝑒𝑏𝑡
then dividing by the book value of assets ( 𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠      ). Bid-ask spread percentage is calculated as the ask price subtracted by the bid
                                                                               𝐴𝑠𝑘 − 𝐵𝑖𝑑
price, divided by the ask price times 100 ( 𝐴𝑠𝑘 * 100).

                                              Obs Mean Median Std Dev

Total Volatility (Annualized)                      16973                 0.32                     0.28                   0.21
Idiosyncratic Volatility (Annualized)               16973                 0.27                     0.23                   0.19
Market Beta                                    16973                0.55                    0.57                  2.22
Price (SEK)                                    16973                57.58                   44.58                 49.83
Market Capitalization (MSEK)                  16973              19574                  2382                47859
Sales Volatility                                   16973                 0.26                     0.07                   0.74
Volume Turnover                               16973                0.16                    0.03                  1.34
Market-to-Book Ratio                            16973                1.50                     1.22                  1.23
Book Leverage                                 16973                0.26                    0.25                  0.16
Bid-Ask Spread (Percentage)                     16973                0.98                     0.51                   1.36

                                                        9
                                                               Table II
                                                 Correlation Matrix

In this table we provide the correlations between the variables that are central to our analysis. We use monthly observations for each stock.
Total volatility is the standard deviation of daily stock returns in annualized form. Price is the nominal stock price on the last trading day each
month. Market capitalization is obtained from the last trading day of each month. Sales volatility is the standard deviation of the sales growth
of the four past quarters, where sales growth is defined as the increase in sales compared to the equivalent quarter the previous year. Volume
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           #𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑠 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑑 𝑒𝑎𝑐ℎ 𝑚𝑜𝑛𝑡ℎ
turnover is calculated as the amount of shares traded during a month divided by the number of shares outstanding ( #𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑠 𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔    ).
Market-to-book ratio is the market capitalization plus the book value of assets, minus the book value of equity, and that value is then divided
                                                               𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝑐𝑎𝑝 + 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠 − 𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑡𝑦
by the book value of assets ( 𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠           ). Book leverage is obtained by adding the short-term debt with the long-term debt and
                                                                                            𝑆ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡 𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑚 𝑑𝑒𝑏𝑡 + 𝐿𝑜𝑛𝑔 𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑚 𝑑𝑒𝑏𝑡
then dividing by the book value of assets ( 𝐵𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠       ). Bid-ask spread percentage is calculated as the ask price subtracted by
                                                                                                   𝐴𝑠𝑘 − 𝐵𝑖𝑑
the bid price, divided by the ask price times 100 ( 𝐴𝑠𝑘 * 100). The variables are converted to the same form that they have in our
regressions (some are logged and some are lagged).

                              Price Std      Market    Sales    Market-to-     Volume     Bid-Ask Leverage
                                     Dev       Cap      Vol     Book Ratio    Turnover

Log(Lagged Price)              1
Log(Total Volatility)            -0.419       1
Log(Lagged Market Cap)       0.597     -0.399       1
Log(Lagged Sales Volatility)    -0.156     0.137      -0.170       1
Lagged Market-to-Book Ratio   0.205     0.040      0.149     0.025        1
Lagged Volume Turnover       -0.022     0.031      -0.137    -0.002      -0.068          1
Lagged Bid-Ask-Spread        -0.438     0.368      -0.517     0.130      -0.074       -0.030         1
Lagged Leverage              -0.011     -0.034      0.101     0.095      -0.185       -0.057      -0.002 1

                                                    10
                                 IV. Results

A. Prices, Total Volatility, Idiosyncratic Volatility and Market Beta

       Based on the discussion in Section II (Empirical Framework) about how volatility
relates to stock prices, the general version of the main model that we have created to conduct
our analysis is of the following form:

        𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 ) = β  + β 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒    ) + 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠 + τ + ϵ   (5)
                                   𝑖,𝑡         0        1               𝑖,𝑡−1                            𝑡      𝑖𝑡

         In equation (5), volatilityi,t is the volatility of stock i during period t. There are three
different measures of volatility used, which are, total volatility, market beta and idiosyncratic
volatility. Pricei,t-1 is the price that the stock is traded at during the last day of the previous
month. Controls are the variables that we include in the model to account for other aspects
that might impact the volatility of the stock returns except the stock price. Lagged values of
the price variable and the control variables are used in all regressions to prevent look-ahead
bias. τ represents time fixed effects based on the year and the month of the observation. In all
                   𝑡
of our results the standard errors are double-clustered based on the stock and the year-month.
By double-clustering standard errors, we handle the possibility of cross sectional and serial
correlation in our data. All the tests in this section are conducted on observations where we
have variable information available for all the control variables that are used in any
regression. In our analysis we have excluded outlier values by each month removing the
observations that are in the top and the bottom 1% in terms of stock price.
        In Table III Panel A we conduct cross sectional regressions with the logarithm of total
volatility (annualized standard deviation of stock returns) as our dependent variable.
Regarding controls, we conduct regressions controlling for size in two different ways, namely
by using the logarithm of lagged market capitalization, and by including fixed effects for size
categories created based on market capitalization. From these regressions we find results that
suggest investors engage in non-proportional thinking on Nasdaq Stockholm. The lagged
price coefficient is significant and negative suggesting that when the price of a stock increases
the volatility tends to decrease. In Table III Panel B we conduct the same regressions but on a
time series and include stock fixed effects in the model. These regressions also provide results
in line with the non-proportional thinking theory. Additionally, what can be seen from the
regressions in column (3) and (4) from Panels A and B is that the price coefficient remains
negative and significant when we control for the size of the firm. As a result, the theory that
the price of the stock does impact its volatility is strengthened.
       Based on the coefficient values we obtain when controlling for size in column (4), we
can estimate that a doubling in share price is according to the cross section regression
associated with approximately an 11% decrease in volatility for Nasdaq Stockholm.
Additionally, the time series regression suggests that a doubling in price would result in a
decrease of around 18% in volatility for Nasdaq Stockholm. This can be compared with Shue
and Townsend (2021), who estimate the decrease in volatility on U.S. exchanges after a
doubling of the stock price to 34% and 27%, for the equivalent cross section and time series
regressions respectively. Furthermore, from our results, when controlling for size, we can
approximate that the θ coefficient in equation (4) from Section II (Empirical Framework),
which is a parameter showing the level of non-proportional thinking that can vary between 0
and 1, is somewhere around 0.1-0.18 on Nasdaq Stockholm. This is a lower value than 0.3,
which is found on U.S. exchanges. Thus, our results indicate that investors engage in less
non-proportional thinking on Nasdaq Stockholm compared to the U.S. exchanges.

                                      11
       The results in Table IV also show that the effect remains robust for the two other
measures of volatility, namely idiosyncratic volatility and market beta. Accordingly, the
theory that non-proportional thinking exists on Nasdaq Stockholm is further strengthened.
Moreover, for these regressions we obtain relatively similar magnitudes for the stock price
coefficient as we did for the regressions on total volatility. The results in column (4) show that
a doubling in stock price should lead to a decrease of 11% and 10% for the idiosyncratic
volatility and the market beta respectively. These magnitudes are also lower compared to
Shue and Townsend’s (2021) results, which are that a doubling in share price leads to a
decrease of 35% and 31% in idiosyncratic volatility and market beta respectively. Therefore,
this also implies that non-proportional thinking seems to be more extensive on the American
exchanges. Worth noting with regards to these regressions is that the measure for market beta
is the absolute value of the market beta. The reason why the absolute market beta is used is
because the market beta should according to non-proportional thinking be amplified
regardless of if it is positive or negative. For instance, for a negative beta stock, positive
market news would result in an even more negative beta for a low-priced stock.

                                     12
                                           Table III
                            Baseline Results: Total Volatility

In this table we demonstrate the relationship between a stock's volatility and share price, with the
use of monthly data. The general form of the regressions are as follows:
𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦  ) = β  + β 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒    ) + 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠 + τ + ϵ   where 𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦   is the
                     𝑖,𝑡        0       1              𝑖,𝑡−1                           𝑡      𝑖𝑡           𝑖,𝑡
annualized return standard deviation of stock i at time t, 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒     is the stock price at the end of
                                                                                                                   𝑖,𝑡−1
the previous month, and τ are fixed effects for the year and month. Controls can be the logarithm
                                                                            𝑡
of the firm's market capitalization from the last day of the prior month, or categorical variables for
20 equally large size categories that are created with regards to the stock’s market capitalization.
Outliers for the price variable are removed, which is defined as the top and bottom 1% of the
variable each month. Double-clustering of the standard errors is conducted based on the stock and
the year-month. *, **, and *** represents statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% level.

                                 Panel A: Cross Section

                                                   Log(Total Volatility)

                              (1) (2) (3) (4)

Log(Lagged Price)       -0.161***                         -0.0995***     -0.105***
                          (0.0117)                            (0.0145)       (0.0131)
Log(Lagged Size)                       -0.0764***        -0.0493***
                                         (0.00618)          (0.00785)
Year-Month FE            Yes            Yes              Yes          Yes
Size Category FE         No           No             No         Yes
R^2                     0.348           0.351            0.383         0.390
Observations            15844          15844            15844        15844

                                  Panel B: Time Series

                                                   Log(Total Volatility)

                              (1) (2) (3) (4)

Log(Lagged Price)       -0.169***                         -0.136***     -0.175***
                          (0.0216)                            (0.0281)       (0.0225)
Log(Lagged Size)                        -0.138***         -0.0413**
                                           (0.0211)           (0.0205)
Year-Month FE            Yes            Yes              Yes          Yes
Stock FE                 Yes            Yes              Yes          Yes
Size Category FE         No           No             No         Yes
R^2                     0.324           0.316            0.324         0.327
Observations            15844          15844            15844        15844

                                    13
                                      Table IV
              Baseline Results: Idiosyncratic Volatility and Market Beta

In this table we use idiosyncratic volatility and market beta as our dependent variable, and conduct
the same tests as in Table III panel A. The variables are the same as we have defined them in Tables
I and III. Double-clustering of the standard errors is conducted based on the stock and the
year-month. *, **, and *** represents statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% level.

                               Panel A: Idiosyncratic Volatility

                                                  Log(Idiosyncratic Volatility)

                              (1) (2) (3) (4)

Log(Lagged Price)       -0.198***                         -0.103***     -0.114***
                          (0.0136)                            (0.0152)       (0.0133)
Log(Lagged Size)                       -0.105***        -0.0768***
                                         (0.00696)         (0.00835)
Year-Month FE            Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes
Size Category FE         No           No            No         Yes
R^2                     0.336           0.378            0.406         0.418
Observations            15844          15844           15844        15844

                                 Panel B: Market Beta

                                               Log(|Market Beta|)

                              (1) (2) (3) (4)

Log(Lagged Price)       -0.107***                        -0.0956***    -0.0957***
                          (0.0146)                            (0.0184)       (0.0165)
Log(Lagged Size)                       -0.0353***        -0.00931
                                          (0.00796)          (0.0101)
Year-Month FE            Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes
Size Category FE         No           No            No         Yes
R^2                     0.100           0.096            0.101         0.102
Observations            15844          15844           15844        15844

                                    14
       Moreover, in Table V we further test whether we can find evidence indicating that the
non-proportional thinking bias exists on Nasdaq Stockholm, by including other control
variables that are expected to impact volatility. Firstly, in column (1) we run the regression
without controls, which is the same as the regression in column (1) in Panel A of Table III.
Then, in column (2), we add control variables for size by controlling for the logarithm of
market capitalization, 20 size categories, and an interaction term between these two. For the
regression in column (3) we add the logarithm of sales volatility which should measure the
underlying volatility of the company. Column (4) also includes market-to-book ratio as a
variable. Moreover, in column (5) we add liquidity measures in the form of volume turnover
and bid-ask spread percentage. Lastly, we include a leverage variable in column (6).
       For all these regressions we still find that the price of the stock is significantly
negatively correlated with the volatility of the stock. Furthermore, the regressions in Table V
also reveal that the magnitude of our lagged price variable only changes slightly when the
additional control variables are added to the model. This is the case even though most of the
control variables are significantly correlated with volatility. Accordingly, the other variables
that can be considered to correlate with volatility does not seem to drive the relationship
between price and volatility in our tests.

                                     15
                                                                 Table V
                                      Regression Results with Additional Control Variables: Total Volatility

In this table the tests that are conducted in Panel A of Table III are made, but with the usage of more control variables. We limit the sample to observations where data is
available for all variables. The variables are the same as we have defined them in Tables I and III. A few of the variables change quarterly. Double-clustering of the
standard errors is conducted based on the stock and the year-month. *, **, and *** represents statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1% level.

                                                                                     Log(Total Volatility)

                                                 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)

Log(Lagged Price)                            -0.161***           -0.105***         -0.102***         -0.110***         -0.105***         -0.105***
                                                (0.0117)             (0.0132)            (0.0128)           (0.0120)           (0.0116)           (0.0116)
Log(Lagged Sales Volatility)                                                        0.0220***        0.0187***        0.0170***         0.0173***
                                                                                      (0.00717)          (0.00626)         (0.00617)          (0.00608)
Lagged Market-to-Book                                                                            0.0635***        0.0613***        0.0606***
                                                                                                         (0.00950)         (0.00892)          (0.00927)
Lagged Volume Turnover                                                                                            0.0125***        0.0124***
                                                                                                                           (0.00469)          (0.00468)
Lagged Bid-Ask Spread Percentage                                                                                    0.0443***         0.0445***
                                                                                                                           (0.00521)          (0.00522)
Lagged Leverage                                                                                                                          -0.0192
                                                                                                                                                   (0.0711)
Log(Lagged Size)                             No               Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
Size Category FE                             No               Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
Log(Lagged Size) x Size Category FE             No               Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
Year-Month FE                               Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
R^2                                         0.348              0.400             0.403             0.425            0.435             0.435
Observations                                15844             15844            15844           15844           15844            15844

                                                              16
B. Stock Splits

       To more thoroughly examine the presence of non-proportional thinking on Nasdaq
Stockholm, we conduct an event study to investigate volatility in conjunction with stock
splits. By examining our volatility measures around the time of stock splits, we are able to
further account for omitted factors as in theory, only price changes following a split. The
model that we create to investigate the impact of a stock split on volatility is the following:
                                    6
     𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑣𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 ) = ⍺ +  ∑ β  (𝐸𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑡ℎ   = 𝑘) + τ + ν + ϵ   (6)
                                  𝑖,𝑡                            𝑘                        𝑖,𝑡                  𝑡       𝑖       𝑖,𝑡
                                    𝑘=−6
(𝐸𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑡ℎ   = 𝑘) is equal to 1 when the month t of a specific observation is k months
                      𝑖,𝑡
before or after the month of the split of a specific stock i. The βk coefficients provide the
difference in volatility between month k and month t-1, the month before the month of the
split, which in this case is the omitted category. The model is estimated based on monthly
data, and the data that we include to examine what happens when a stock split takes place, are
the six months leading up to the split, the split month, and the six months following the split.
τ in this case represents time fixed effects, which are included based on the year and month.
   𝑡
ν represents stock fixed effects.
    𝑖
        The splits that are examined in these tests are 2-for-1 splits, which are equivalent to a
price drop of 50%, and 3-for-1 splits, which are equivalent to a price drop of around 67%.
These splits should, according to non-proportional thinking, result in an instant volatility
increase following the split date. Worth noting is that Shue and Townsend (2021) examine
2-for-1 and 3-for-2 splits. However, because there are no 3-for-2 splits during the studied time
period on Nasdaq Stockholm, we have replaced them with 3-for-1 splits which we possess
more of. By comparing splits of different ratios, we can study if the volatility increases more
subsequent to 3-for-1 splits. That should be the case according to the theory of
non-proportional thinking, and would contribute to establishing causality between the price
and volatility. We acknowledge that splits are not entirely random, for example firms might
choose to split following large increases in their share price. However, firm characteristics
other than the price are unlikely to considerably change at the specific split date. As a result,
increases in volatility following a split can likely be attributed to the price drop. The analysis
is conducted on all three measures of volatility and the result for the total volatility measure is
presented in Figure 1 (2-for-1 splits) and Figure 2 (3-for-1 splits). The results of the other
measures of volatility can be found in the Appendix. The βk coefficients are plotted in the
figures for each month except the month of the split, since this month includes data before
and after the split.
       The results suggest that the positive, significant and lasting increase in volatility
following stock splits that Shue and Townsend (2021) found on the U.S. stock exchanges,
cannot to the same extent be found on Nasdaq Stockholm in our study. Our results from
Figure 1 (total volatility change after 2-for-1 split) show some signs of an increase in
volatility subsequent to a stock split, however we do not find any significant increase. We get
similar results for 2-for-1 splits for idiosyncratic volatility and market beta, visible in the
Appendix. Additionally, when examining market beta for 2-for-1 splits, we obtain positive
and significant coefficient estimates for two post-split months. Overall, while the results seem
to be in line with non-proportional thinking to some extent, they are still largely inconclusive
for 2-for-1 splits.
        With regards to the 3-for-1 splits regressions, our sample is even lower than for 2-for-1
splits, and there appears to be pre-trends and post-trends in all three regressions, as a linear
movement for the βk coefficients is visible. For total volatility in Figure 2 and idiosyncratic

                                     17
volatility in figure A.3 the linear movement for the coefficients is negative, but for market
beta in figure A.4 it is positive. Accordingly, this makes the 3-for-1 results even more
inconclusive than the 2-for-1 results. Therefore, we are unable to make any interpretations of
the results from the 3-for-1 splits regarding non-proportional thinking.
       In conclusion, we find no clear evidence that non-proportional thinking is occurring
on Nasdaq Stockholm based on the results of our event study. Additionally, some of the
values obtained for the coefficient estimates are highly unlikely in terms of direction and
magnitude, but also theoretically contradictory. We speculate that the main factor contributing
to the inconclusive results in the event study is the low size of the sample. Because we have a
very small sample, all of our standard errors become very large. Additionally, a larger degree
of randomness is added to our estimations, which accordingly may explain unreasonable
magnitudes and directions in some of our graphs. We elaborate further on the issues related to
our small sample in the Limitations section.

 Figure 1. 2-for-1 stock split event study: Total volatility
 This figure illustrates how the total volatility changes during each month six months before and six
 months after a stock has been split, in a 2-for-1 split. We conduct the analysis on monthly
 observations. The month before the split (t-1) is used as the omitted category. The dots included in
 the figure illustrate the estimates for the β  coefficients in equation (6), and the vertical lines show
                                                                                           𝑘
 95% confidence intervals. We exclude the β  coefficient from the figure because that month
                                                  0
 includes data both before and after the split. Double-clustering of the standard errors is conducted
 based on the stock and the year-month.

                                     18
 Figure 2. 3-for-1 stock split event study: Total volatility
 This figure illustrates how the total volatility changes during each month six months before and six
 months after a stock has been split, in a 3-for-1 split. We conduct the analysis on monthly
 observations. The month before the split (t-1) is used as the omitted category. The dots included in
 the figure illustrate the estimates for the β  coefficients in equation (6), and the vertical lines show
                                                                                           𝑘
 95% confidence intervals. We exclude the β  coefficient from the figure because that month
                                                  0
 includes data both before and after the split. Double-clustering of the standard errors is conducted
 based on the stock and the year-month.

       Another test that is conducted by Shue and Townsend (2021) regarding stock splits is
a difference-in-differences analysis, where they compare 2-for-1 splits with 3-for-2 splits.
They conduct this test in order to find further proof of a causal effect between price and
volatility. Since splits are not entirely random, removing the difference between the two splits
allows them to account for factors that cause a split, under the assumption that similar factors
cause a 3-for-2 and 2-for-1 split. The reason why they are able to conduct this test is because
they are able to show that 3-for-2 and 2-for-1 splits have parallel trends, which is the most
important assumption for difference-in-differences. However, based on our event study
results, there are no visible parallel trends with regards to the 2-for-1 and the 3-for-1 splits
that we are examining on Nasdaq Stockholm. Accordingly, the parallel trend assumption does
not hold, and conducting the difference-in-differences tests would result in unreliable results
(Columbia University, 2024). Additionally, the fact that our event study results barely show
any increase in volatility after the splits, implies that we are highly unlikely to find a different
result from a difference-in-differences analysis (even in a scenario with the presence of
parallel trends). For this reason, we see no point in including a difference-in-differences
analysis, as we would be unable to make any insightful conclusions based on the results.

                                     19
                  V. Interpretation of Empirical Findings

A. Limitations

A limitation of our paper is that we do not conduct all the tests Shue and Townsend (2021)
performs to examine non-proportional thinking on Nasdaq Stockholm. An important aspect of
their paper is examining how share price impacts the magnitude of return responses following
individual news events. They conduct several tests related to this, that are based on equation
(2) in Section II (Empirical Framework), which allows them to establish further evidence of
non-proportional thinking. For this reason, it would be more ideal for us to conduct these tests
as well. However, given the time limit to produce this paper, we do not include the tests
connected to specific news events.
       Additionally, an aspect that is different between this study compared to the study by
Shue and Townsend (2021) is that the sample is significantly lower. Shue and Townsend
(2021) analyze stock exchanges with a larger number of total stocks, and the time frame of
their data is also more extensive compared to the data in this study. This probably should not
be an issue in the regressions in part A of the Results section, as the sample in those
regressions is still relatively large. However, for part B (Stock Splits) of the Results section,
we hypothesize that our lower sample is an issue. During the limited time period, a very small
amount of splits of the split ratios that we are interested in and have data for occurs (21
2-for-1 splits and 17 3-for-1 splits) and hence a small sample is obtained. In Shue and
Townsend´s (2021) study, a much larger sample was used. We believe that our results from
the event study may be largely impacted by the lower sample and can explain why we do not
find a significant increase in volatility following the stock splits. In addition, the regression
results in part A indicates that non-proportional thinking is not as extensive on Nasdaq
Stockholm compared to the U.S. exchanges. This implies that the volatility increase
subsequent to a split should be lower on Nasdaq Stockholm, which can also be part of the
explanation for the results of the event study. However, it is important to note that the stock
splits test could be regarded as a way to establish causality between price and volatility, which
is how Shue and Townsend (2021) refers to the test. Therefore, given the inconclusive results
of our stock splits, our analysis of non-proportional thinking on Nasdaq Stockholm misses out
on an important component.
       Furthermore, the time frame of our data is 2000-2019, which is shorter than the time
period studied by Shue and Townsend (2021), which was 1926-2016. We justify this by
referring to Shue and Townsend (2021) who found that the magnitude of non-proportional
thinking has been stable over 1926-2016. However, it is not a guarantee that the same applies
to the Swedish stock market as well, hence our results may miss out on a potential finding
with regards to time period and non-proportional thinking on the Swedish stock market.
       Moreover, we construct the size category variable used in the analysis in a different
manner compared to Shue and Townsend (2021). They use cutoffs for the market
capitalization from the Ken French Data Library to construct the groups. However, the size
breakpoint data they use is not available for the Swedish market. Thus, we instead create 20
size categories based on the market capitalization that are all equally large. Although the
method deviates slightly compared to Shue and Townsend (2021), we believe our size
category variable serves a similar purpose.

                                     20
B. Mechanisms

       In our analysis we have provided evidence for non-proportional thinking occurring on
Nasdaq Stockholm. More precisely, our analysis indicated that θ (parameter for the amount of
non-proportional thinking), which can vary between 0 to 1 and is increasing in the level of
non-proportional thinking, is at around 0.1 for Nasdaq Stockholm. This can be contrasted with
the findings of Shue and Townsend (2021), where they found θ to be equal to roughly 0.3 for
the U.S. stock exchanges. Consequently, U.S. stock exchanges seem to display higher levels
of non-proportional thinking than Nasdaq Stockholm. In this section we propose mechanisms
that can explain the difference in the extent to which non-proportional thinking is occurring
on the exchanges.

                                        B1. Investor Skills

        We hypothesize that the skill level of investors on exchanges can explain the extent to
which non-proportional thinking is present on them. We discuss two investor skills that are
related to the risk of investors engaging in non-proportional thinking. These are math
proficiency and financial literacy.

                                    Math Proficiency

       We consider math proficiency as a skill relevant to the risk of engaging in
non-proportional thinking because math skills protects an individual from engaging in the
ratio bias. The ratio bias, as described in Section I, refers to the tendency among individuals
to place excessive focus on the numerator in fractions. In the calculation of stock returns, the
numerator is the nominal price change of the stock. Therefore, as proposed by Shue and
Townsend (2021), the ratio bias may be one explanation to why investors engage in
non-proportional thinking. We suggest that skills in mathematics prevents an individual from
being affected by the ratio bias. Hence, math proficiency should decrease the risk of engaging
in non-proportional thinking. PISA results suggest that the Swedish population is more
proficient in math. This is shown by Sweden having a significantly higher average score than
the U.S. in mathematics based on all available PISA test data (2003-2022), as shown by data
                                                          6
from the PISA Data Explorer provided by OECD. Additionally, statistics from SCB (2024)
show that the majority of the investors on Nasdaq Stockholm are Swedish and Tax Policy
Center (2020) states that most investors on the U.S. exchanges are American. However, for
both exchanges around 30-40% of investors are foreign. Hence, the data presented here is not
entirely optimal for its purpose. However, we still consider the data meaningful because it
applies to the majority of investors on the exchanges. Therefore, we can still consider the data
to be in line with our hypothesis regarding math proficiency and non-proportional thinking.

                                     Financial Literacy

       A second investor skill that we hypothesize to be related with the risk of engaging in
non-proportional thinking is financial literacy. If investors do not understand that the return of
a stock following a news event should be proportional to the initial price and instead are under
the impression that the news event is associated with a nominal price change (regardless of
share price), then the risk of engaging in non-proportional thinking increases. Standard &

6
 Sweden’s average score is 494 and the U.S. has an average score of 477. URL to PISA Data Explorer:
https://pisadataexplorer.oecd.org/ide/idepisa/

                                     21
Poor’s Ratings Services Global Financial Literacy Survey (2016) shows that 71% of adults in
Sweden are financially literate. This can be compared with the U.S. where the share of
financially literate adults is 57%. Therefore, data seem to be in line with financial literacy
being an investor skill relevant to the risk of engaging in non-proportional thinking. As
mentioned in the previous paragraph, we still find the data useful despite that not all investors
on Nasdaq Stockholm are Swedish and not all investors on the U.S. exchanges are American.
This is because the majority of the investors’ nationality on the exchanges match the country
in which the exchange is based.

                              B2. Investor Demographics

       We also hypothesize that investor demographics on a stock exchange can play a role in
explaining the level of non-proportional thinking that is present on it. We previously
discussed that investor skill level can be important for predicting the amount of
non-proportional thinking. It is also likely that among different groups of individuals that
invest on a stock exchange, investor skill level varies. Examples of investor groups could be
institutional investors, retail investors, and groups by level of educational attainment. If a
stock exchange has a larger proportion of a certain investor group compared to another
exchange (keeping everything else constant), then the skill level of that investor group might
determine which exchange exhibits more non-proportional thinking. This theory is based on a
finding made by Shue and Townsend (2021) in which they showed that the price-volatility
relation declines with institutional ownership, likely because institutional investors are more
skilled than other investors. A theoretical implication of this is that an exchange that has a
larger proportion of institutional ownership (keeping everything else constant) should exhibit
less non-proportional thinking among investors. Hence, a possible explanation for the
magnitude of non-proportional thinking on the exchanges is that the Swedish stock market
might have a higher proportion of institutional ownership compared to the U.S. stock market.
The reasoning is analogous for other investor groups of certain skill levels. However, we do
not analyze data ourselves with regards to this theory, but rather welcome future research to
investigate it.

                            VI. Conclusion

       We investigate if non-proportional thinking is present on Nasdaq Stockholm. Our
results provide evidence for investors on the exchange engaging in the bias. Therefore, it is
most likely not unique to U.S. exchanges. In line with the theory of non-proportional thinking,
our results show that volatility in terms of total volatility, idiosyncratic volatility and market
beta is significantly higher for stocks with a lower share price. Specifically, a doubling in
share price is associated with a decline of around 10% in all the three measures of volatility
examined. This can be contrasted with the equivalent result for the U.S. stock exchanges,
which was a 20-30% decline in volatility following a doubling of the share price.
Consequently, investors seem to engage in less non-proportional thinking on Nasdaq
Stockholm compared to U.S. exchanges.
       We hypothesize regarding mechanisms that determine the amount of non-proportional
thinking on exchanges. Firstly, proficiency in mathematics and financial literacy are
speculated as two investor skills influencing the likelihood of investors engaging in the bias.
Data suggests that the U.S. population exhibits lower levels of mathematical proficiency and
financial literacy compared to the Swedish population. Therefore, this may to an extent
account for the observed differences in the prevalence of non-proportional thinking on the
respective exchanges of the countries. Secondly, we speculate that proportions of different

                                     22
investor groups that have varying skill levels, can also play a role in explaining the extent to
which the bias is present on exchanges. Finally, we encourage future research to empirically
analyze our proposed mechanisms in order to more thoroughly understand what determines
the amount of non-proportional thinking exchanges exhibit. We consider this as a natural
progression in the non-proportional thinking literature.

                                     23
                   REFERENCES

Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2008, All that glitters: the effect of attention and news
on the buying behavior of individual and institutional investors, Review of Financial Studies
21, 785–818.

Birru, Justin, and Baolian Wang, 2016, Nominal price illusion, Journal of Financial
Economics 119, 578–598.

Black, Fischer, 1976, Studies of stock price volatility changes, Proceedings of the Business
and Economics Section of the American Statistical Association 1, 177–181.

Bourjade, Sylvain, Annalisa Fraccaro, Debrah Meloso, Roman Skripnik, and David Stolin,
2022, Non-proportional thinking in IPOs, Applied Economics 55, 146-154.

Columbia University, 2024, Difference-in-Difference Estimation. URL:
https://www.publichealth.columbia.edu/research/population-health-methods/difference-differe
nce-estimation

Dimson, Elroy, 1979, Risk Measurement When Shares are Subject to Infrequent Trading,
Journal of Financial Economics 7, 197-226.

Giglio, Stefano, and Kelly Shue, 2014, No news is news: do markets underreact to nothing?,
Review of Financial Studies 27, 3389–3440.

Grullon, Gustavo, Yamil Kaba, and Alexander Nuñez-Torres, 2023, Does Non-Proportional
Thinking Affect Financial Markets?, Rice University - Jesse H. Jones Graduate School of
Business and CUNY Lehman College.
URL: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4487814

Hirshleifer, David, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2003, Limited attention, information disclosure, and
financial reporting, Journal of Accounting and Economics 36, 337–386.

Klapper, Leora, Annamaria Lusardi, and Peter van Oudheusden, 2016, Financial Literacy
Around the World: Insights From the Standard & Poor's Rating Services Global Financial
Literacy Survey 1-29, GFLEC.
URL: https://gflec.org/initiatives/sp-global-finlit-survey/

Lewellen, Jonathan, and Stefan Nagel, 2006, The Conditional CAPM Does Not Explain
Asset-Pricing Anomalies, Journal of Financial Economics 82, 289-314.

Miller, Dale T., William Turnbull, and Cathy McFarland, 1989, When a coincidence is
suspicious: the role of mental simulation, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 57,
581–589.

Nikko, Tobias, 2021, Non-proportional Thinking in the Finnish Stock Market, Aalto
University School of Business.
URL: https://aaltodoc.aalto.fi/items/5e11b35c-0675-4902-9b4f-ec9d31c1a36f

                                     24
Ohlson, James A., and Stephen H. Penman, 1984, Volatility Increases Subsequent to Stock
Splits, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 251-266.

Roger, Tristan, Patrick Roger, and Alain Schatt, 2018, Behavioral bias in number processing:
evidence from analysts' expectations, Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 149,
315–331.

Rosenthal, M. Stephen, and Theo Burke, 2020, Who Owns US Stock? Foreigners and Rich
Americans., Tax Policy Center, October 20. URL:
https://www.taxpolicycenter.org/taxvox/who-owns-us-stock-foreigners-and-rich-americans

SCB, Ägarandelar av aktier i bolag noterade på svensk marknadsplats, 2024. URL:
https://www.scb.se/hitta-statistik/statistik-efter-amne/finansmarknad/aktieagarstatistik/aktieag
arstatistik/pong/tabell-och-diagram/agarandelar-av-aktier-i-bolag-noterade-pa-svensk-markna
dsplats/

Shue, Kelly, and Richard R. Townsend, 2021, Can the Market Multiply and Divide?
Non-Proportional Thinking in Financial Markets, Journal of Finance 76, 2307-2357.

Svedsäter, Henrik, Amelie Gamble, and Tommy Gärling, 2007, Money illusion in intuitive
financial judgments: influences of nominal representation of share prices, Journal of
Socio-Economics 36, 698–712.

Yamagishi, Kimihiko, 1997, When a 12.86% mortality is more dangerous than 24.14%:
implications for risk communication, Applied Cognitive Psychology: The Official Journal of
the Society for Applied Research in Memory and Cognition 11, 495–506.

                                     25
                          Appendix

Figure A.1. 2-for-1 stock split event study: Idiosyncratic volatility
This figure illustrates how the idiosyncratic volatility changes during each month six months before
and six months after a stock has been split, in a 2-for-1 split. We conduct the analysis on monthly
observations. The month before the split (t-1) is used as the omitted category. The dots included in
the figure illustrate the estimates for the β  coefficients in equation (6), and the vertical lines show
                                                                                        𝑘
95% confidence intervals. We exclude the β  coefficient from the figure because that month
                                                 0
includes data both before and after the split. Double-clustering of the standard errors is conducted
based on the stock and the year-month.

                                    26
Figure A.2. 2-for-1 stock split event study: Market beta
This figure illustrates how the Market Beta changes during each month six months before and six
months after a stock has been split, in a 2-for-1 split. We conduct the analysis on monthly
observations. The month before the split (t-1) is used as the omitted category. The dots included in
the figure illustrate the estimates for the β  coefficients in equation (6), and the vertical lines show
                                                                                        𝑘
95% confidence intervals. We exclude the β  coefficient from the figure because that month
                                                 0
includes data both before and after the split. Double-clustering of the standard errors is conducted
based on the stock and the year-month.

                                    27
Figure A.3. 3-for-1 stock split event study: Idiosyncratic volatility
This figure illustrates how the idiosyncratic volatility changes during each month six months before
and six months after a stock has been split, in a 3-for-1 split. We conduct the analysis on monthly
observations. The month before the split (t-1) is used as the omitted category. The dots included in
the figure illustrate the estimates for the β  coefficients in equation (6), and the vertical lines show
                                                                                        𝑘
95% confidence intervals. We exclude the β  coefficient from the figure because that month
                                                 0
includes data both before and after the split. Double-clustering of the standard errors is conducted
based on the stock and the year-month.

                                    28
 Figure A.4. 3-for-1 stock split event study: Market beta
 This figure illustrates how the market beta changes during each month six months before and six
 months after a stock has been split in a 3-for-1 split. We conduct the analysis on monthly
 observations. The month before the split (t-1) is used as the omitted category. The dots included in
 the figure illustrate the estimates for the β  coefficients in equation (6), and the vertical lines show
                                                                                           𝑘
 95% confidence intervals. We exclude the β  coefficient from the figure because that month
                                                  0
 includes data both before and after the split. Double-clustering of the standard errors is conducted
 based on the stock and the year-month.

AI Disclosure: This thesis has received assistance from OpenAI's ChatGPT4 in coding and
language improvements in a few sentences.

                                     29