HEDGING THE FUTURE

DIVERSIFICATION BENEFITS OF CARBON
CREDITS

CARL BROMAN
LUDVIG KARLBERG

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2024
Hedging The Future: Diversification Benefits of Carbon Credits

Abstract:

Our study assesses the diversification benefits of EUA futures from 2008 to 2024,
revealing modest market betas and high idiosyncratic risk, which can be mit-
igated through December futures contracts. By transferring risk to diversified
investors, firms can gain large diversification benefits associated with carbon
credits. Our analysis shows mostly positive beta values for EUA futures against
the European markets, various industries, and commodities. We find that beta
values are not tied to carbon intensity but rather to sector-specific demand
cycles. Energy commodities linked to production also show higher beta val-
ues, indicating a stronger connection to EUA futures. The Beta’s peaks during
events such as the 2008 crisis and the 2020 pandemic highlight the sensitivity
of EUA futures to market shocks, although the impact varies with different
economic disruptions with negative demand shocks found to have the largest
impact.

Keywords:

   Carbon Credits, Diversification, Trading Strategies, Hedging

Authors:

   Carl Broman (25228)
   Ludvig Karlberg (25223)

Tutor:

   Mehran Ebrahimian, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance, SSE

Examiner:

   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance, SSE

Acknowledgement:

   We extend our deepest appreciation to Mehran Ebrahimian for his dedicated
   involvement and invaluable counsel throughout the entire course of our
    research.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor of Science in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Carl Broman and Ludvig Karlberg, 2024

                                                              i
1 Introduction

The consensus among scientists and policymakers is that the significant increase
in greenhouse gases (GHG) in our atmosphere over the past century is due to
human activities (Stern 2007). The growing recognition of global warming’s
threat to ecosystems, economies, and human well-being has resulted in interna-
tional agreements such as the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC), which entered into force in 1994. This convention was op-
erationalized by the Kyoto Protocol, which committed countries and economies
in transition to limit and reduce GHG emissions according to agreed individual
targets. In 2005, the provisions of the Kyoto Protocol were the basis for the
launch of the world’s largest organized emissions trading system, the European
Union Emissions Trading Scheme (EU ETS). This system aims to reduce green-
house gas emissions while limiting the negative economic effects of the green
transition as much as possible (Witkowski, Adamczyk, and Franek 2021).
   In the EU ETS, emissions are capped, priced, and traded. The introduction
of a new financial asset, the European Union Allowance (EUA), gives the holder
the right to emit one ton of CO2. Through auctions and free allocation, the
EU distributes a limited amount of EUAs to industries covered by the scheme
each year. These are then allocated to companies through trading. The carbon
emissions scheme encourages companies with high emissions to either buy emis-
sion rights to cover their needs or invest in low-carbon technologies to reduce
their emissions (Clean Energy Wire 2024). By 2024, the EU ETS has cemented
its position as the cornerstone of the global carbon market, constituting 87% of
the world’s carbon emission market (Twidale 2024), and is expected to reach a
market value of $2 trillion by 2030 (Technavio 2024). This expansion of carbon
markets has occurred largely together with the participation of various investors,
such as hedge funds, pension funds, carbon funds, foundations, and other plan
sponsors. This new market has allowed firms covered by the scheme to buy and
sell futures to hedge against the risk of holding EUAs. Participants who are not
covered by the scheme participate in the carbon markets to broaden their invest-
ment opportunities through diversification. During the past 10 years, carbon
markets have attracted significant attention from both researchers and practi-
tioners, evident by the surge of new empirical studies exploring the implications
of carbon assets for risk management (Afonin et al. 2018).
   However, the grasp of the potential diversification advantages that carbon
investments have for investors remains limited. Although the potential of EUA
futures as tools for diversification and hedging has been established (Ahmad,
Sadorsky, and A. Sharma 2018; Narayan and S. S. Sharma 2015; Jiang and Ma
2022), research on their benefits is fragmented and inconsistent (Luo and Wu
2016; Tian et al. 2016; Oberndorfer 2009; Zhang, Liu, and Yu 2017; Kumar,
Managi, and Matsuda 2012). Most research on the benefits of EUA diversi-
fication uses portfolio optimization techniques, and results vary considerably.
Some claim the EUAs have a positive beta to the market, while others claim a
negative. Certain studies show that EUAs provide diversification benefits, while
others show nearly none.

                                  1
   In this paper, we contribute to this body of literature by studying the sys-
tematic risk profile of EUA futures. Using updated data, we calculate the EUA
future to instrument beta estimates for the European stock market index, 10
sub-sector indexes, and both energy and non-energy commodities. We provide
an in-depth exploration of the systematic risk structure of EUA futures, by clas-
sifying each instrument as either having high or low carbon intensity and high
or low demand cyclicality. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to
approach EUAs as a financial asset in this way. Finally, we analyze how these
betas have behaved during the implementation phases of the EU ETS. We find
that EUA to instrument betas are in general modestly non-zero, dependent on
the instrument’s economic demand cyclicality, and event-driven.
   These results were reached by performing significance tests for the EUA to
instrument betas and calculating them for a variation different of periods. To
study the change over time, we used rolling window estimation of betas with
varying window sizes. This was done to see if some industries and commodities
have continually higher betas, but also to see if they have trends, changes over
time, and seem to be affected by events.
   This study confirms the diversification benefits of EUA futures. We find a
statistically significant but modest non-zero positive beta of EUA futures with
respect to all sectors and commodities except gold, which displayed a significant
but small negative beta. Although these betas are statistically significant, their
modest magnitude suggests that the systematic risk is limited. The high kurto-
sis and standard deviation of EUA futures suggest substantial idiosyncratic risk
held by holders. This combination indicates a substantial diversification benefit
for individual companies selling EUA futures to diversified investor portfolios.
Firms that hold carbon credits can reduce their risk by selling futures. This
strategy transfers the risk to investors who are more able to diversify the id-
iosyncratic risk.
   This diversification benefit is not the same for all instruments. Our sector-
specific calculations show variability across sectors without a systematic pattern
that correlates carbon intensity to EUA to sector beta values. High-beta sectors
as financial services do not align with high carbon emissions, and some high-
emission sectors such as utilities exhibit very low betas. Commodities with
high carbon intensity, such as Brent Crude Oil and Natural Gas, display higher
betas compared to non-energy commodities. However, we cannot definitively
attribute this to a causal relationship between carbon intensity and commodity
beta, as other factors may also be influencing this result.
   Instead, our findings uniquely demonstrate that betas are influenced by the
instrument’s sensitivity to economic cyclicality, rather than by the instrument’s
carbon intensity. The high-cyclical sectors show the highest EUA future-to-
sector beta values and the low-cyclical sectors show the lowest beta. High
cyclicality commodities display the same results. We see beta fluctuations over
time, with distinct peaks during major economic events such as the 2008 finan-
cial crisis, the 2015 oil price crash, and the COVID-19 market crash of 2020,
suggesting that different economic disruptions strongly and temporarily affect
the beta relationship.

                                  2
2 Related Literature

Since the inception of the EU ETS, EUAs as a financial asset have received
significant attention. The strand of this literature that is most relevant to
our study links financial markets to carbon markets, and carbon credits as
hedging and diversification tools. The seminal work by Mansanet-Bataller and
Pardo (2011) and Chevallier (2009) illustrated that carbon’s weak association
with some macroeconomic factors and other financial assets positions it as a
potentially effective diversification and hedging instrument.
   The results on the portfolio performance of carbon have been inconsistent.
Zhang, Liu, and Yu (2017) argues that the incorporation of carbon credits into
stock portfolios can reduce overall risk because the relative independence of the
carbon market from financial assets provides diversification. In contrast, Afonin
et al. (2018) presents evidence that European carbon emissions only provided
diversification benefits during Phase I (2005–2007), with these advantages disap-
pearing in Phases II (2008–2012) and III (2013–2020). Witkowski, Adamczyk,
and Franek (2021) study the potential existence of a ’carbon premium’, an ex-
cess return emitting firms gain for taking on additional climate risk by emitting,
by diversifying green and brown portfolios with EUAs. They find that brown
portfolios gain marginally higher diversification benefits than green portfolios,
but also recognize limits in their methodology as they only included 7 firms
in each portfolio. We further their investigation by not only analyzing how the
beta may be affected by the instruments’ carbon intensity but also testing an al-
ternative theory that the beta depends on the instrument’s economic cyclicality.
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to test this.
    Our current understanding of the diversification benefits of investing in car-
bon assets remains limited. Ahmad, Sadorsky, and A. Sharma (2018) and Jiang
and Ma (2022) find that carbon allowances can be employed as hedge tools for
energy stocks, the largest sector covered by the EU ETS. Tan et al. (2020) note
that there should exist hedging and diversification benefits for equity investors
in other industries, but research into such industries has produced significant
disagreement. Some studies have found diversification benefits by establishing
positive betas between EUAs and equities and commodities (Luo and Wu 2016;
Tian et al. 2016), whereas others have found negative betas (Oberndorfer 2009;
Zhang, Liu, and Yu 2017). Others still claim such diversification benefits do not
exist (Kumar, Managi, and Matsuda 2012). We extend this strand of literature
by looking at a wider spectrum of assets, and by using data from the whole
existence of the EU ETS.
   In the paper most close to ours, Demiralay, Gencer, and Bayraci (2022)
studies the viability of using carbon futures to hedge and diversify stock portfo-
lios. Using dynamic conditional correlation (DCC) models, the study calculates
time-varying optimal hedge ratios, weights, and returns for portfolios, compar-
ing these metrics with those obtained from commodity futures. The findings
suggest that even incorporating a small allocation of carbon futures into a stock
portfolio can offer diversification benefits and reduce risk without compromising
expected returns. We are the first to estimate not just for different markets, but

                                  3
across different industries: specifically, 10 distinct industries that comprise the
European market. We build on their research by not just looking at the market
portfolio, but intra-market differences.
   Finally, we contribute by using updated data up to the end of March 2024,
thus including the start of Phase IV of the EU ETS and the beginning of the
transition Phase into the CBAM (see the Background on EU ETS section). This
is especially relevant because data on the carbon credit system has only existed
since 2005.

3 Contextual Framework

3.1 The EU ETS in Brief
The EU ETS has been implemented through four distinct phases, each reflecting
the lessons learned and the adjustments made to improve the efficiency and
scope of the system (European Commission n.d.[b]). The transition from one
Phase to the next happens overnight at the end of the last year of the Phase,
meaning that the first day of each new Phase is January 1st of that year.
    Phase I, which started with the scheme’s introduction in 2005 and lasted until
2007, served primarily as a trial and learning period. This initial stage marked
the emergence of the EU ETS as the largest carbon market worldwide, a status
it maintains to this day. However, the initial allocation of allowances during
this Phase was overly optimistic about market needs, leading to an oversupply
that caused allowance prices to plummet to zero by the Phase’s conclusion. As
a result, the banking of permits from Phase I to Phase II was banned, and new
assets were created for the start of Phase II, according to the EIB (2024).
   Phase II of the EU ETS, covering the years 2008 to 2012, saw the expansion
of the scheme to include new participating countries, namely, Iceland, Norway,
and Liechtenstein, along with a strategic reduction in the number of emissions
allowances that were distributed. It also saw the incorporation of the aviation
sector starting in 2012. The global economic downturn during this period led
to a decrease in emissions and, consequently, a decreased demand for emission
allowances, resulting in another surplus of allowances during this period. This
time banking was allowed, and companies could transfer their Phase II credits
to Phase III (European Commission 2023).
   Phase III, which lasted from 2013 to 2020, welcomed Croatia into the fold
of the participating countries. The most notable change during this period was
the implementation of an overarching EU-wide emissions cap, marking a shift
from the previous practice of freely distributing allowances towards a system
where allowances were primarily auctioned. This transition aimed to improve
the efficiency and market responsiveness of the EU ETS (European Commission
2024).
   Phase IV started in 2021 and is scheduled to continue until 2030. Notable
policy changes have been an acceleration in the reduction of the emissions cap
to 2.2%, from 1.7%, and the exclusion of the UK from the EU ETS after its

                                  4
exit from the EU. Moreover, to push industries towards more significant emis-
sions reductions, Phase IV involves tighter benchmarks for the allocation of free
allowances (European Commission 2023).
   Though not formally part of the EU ETS regulation, the implementation of
Phase IV has coincided with numerous other policy changes. First, the Carbon
Border Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM) transition Phase was implemented in
2023. This is a tool for the EU to put a fair price on carbon emitted during the
production of carbon-intense products entering the EU from non-EU countries.
This effectively means that companies in the EU will be accountable for carbon
released in off-shore production. The transition Phase lasts from 2023 to 2026
and coincides with the gradual Phase-out of free allocations of permits in the EU
ETS (European Commission n.d). Furthermore, in 2021, the EU adopted the
EU Green Deal, committing member states to reduce carbon emissions in the
EU by at least 55% by 2030, compared to 1990 levels (European Commission
n.d.[a]).
   Today, the EU Emissions Trading Scheme (EU ETS) encompasses approxi-
mately 45% of emissions in the European Union. Since the commencement of
Phase IV, which coincided with events such as the COVID-19 pandemic and the
Ukraine war, the price of EUAs has nearly tripled. The reason for the sharp
increase in market size and trading volume is subject to debate but underscores
the increasing total risk for the companies in the economy to hold these in-
struments and the EUA’s enhanced potential to serve as assets in a portfolio.
(Carbon Market Watch 2024).

3.2 Conceptual framework
We study the diversification benefits of EUA futures by analyzing the beta
between EUA futures and a wide range of markets, industries, and commodities.
EUA futures are crucial financial instruments within the EU ETS, allowing
entities to trade risk for price movements in carbon emissions allowances. They
are also traded in considerably higher volumes than the EUA spot (ICIS 2020).

3.2.1 Why is the EUA Beta important? What does it depend on?
By calculating the beta of EUA futures in relation to various instruments such as
sector indices and commodities, we can understand the extent to which changes
in the prices of these instruments influence carbon prices. A high beta indi-
cates a strong relationship, where movements in stock and commodity prices
significantly affect the EUAs, while a low beta suggests a weaker relationship,
offering a larger potential for diversification of idiosyncratic risk for individual
firms. Firms covered by the EU ETS can use EUA futures to hedge against the
volatility of carbon prices, as shown by Schopp and Neuhoff (2013). By using
futures contracts, they effectively lock in prices for carbon allowances, mitigat-
ing the risk of price changes in the spot market and stabilizing compliance costs.
This strategic use of futures contracts helps in financial planning and budgeting

                                  5
by reducing exposure to price fluctuations and helps make sure they don’t take
on risks they are not compensated for.
   Our research seeks to build a clearer picture of the contexts in which EUAs
could provide diversification benefits. By investigating the beta values of EUAs
with specific industries, and commodities, we identify where EUAs offer hedging
benefits and reveal how susceptible they are to industry stock and commodity
returns.
   This analysis aims to provide companies and investors involved with the
EU ETS with strategic insights into the use of EUA futures for effective risk
management.
   We believe that the beta of EUAs will be positive with most assets and
industries. Higher demand in the economy leads to higher stock and commodity
prices, which would in turn lead to higher demand to emit carbon emissions,
pushing up prices of emission rights. This would also have public policy benefits
as the price of emissions is higher in good states and lower in bad states, which
would be along with the EUA system’s intention of achieving the green transition
in the most cost-effective way possible (Erbach, H¨oflmayr, and Foukalov´a 2022).
Based on the inconsistent beta found in the literature, we expect it to be close to
0. This would imply that carbon emission rights hold mostly an idiosyncratic
risk. If this is the case, it supports that it would be greatly beneficial for
individual companies exposed to sell these rights as future contracts to remove
this idiosyncratic risk and sell it to an investor who is more diversified.
   To understand how this benefit differs from instrument to instrument, we
study whether the beta is different with respect to different sectors of the stock
market and between commodities. This is important, as the idiosyncratic risk
of holding EUAs may vary depending on which industry you are in, which
would impact the risk management strategy. We considered two non-exclusive
explanations for why such differences may exist.
   The beta with regard to instruments may be influenced by the carbon inten-
sity of the instrument, which serves as a moderating factor. This is illustrated
in Figure 1. This idea was studied by Witkowski, Adamczyk, and Franek (2021)
in relation to what they called a carbon premium, in which more emitting firms
should be compensated for the climate risk they take on by emitting. To con-
tribute to their research, we study the impact that carbon intensity may have
on EUA future betas. In this area we further theorize that in periods of high de-
mand, carbon-intensive industries and commodities would increase the demand
for carbon allowances, also contributing to a positive beta. However, since high
carbon allowance prices should also increase the costs for high-carbon sectors,
the effect is unclear, making it even more interesting to study. Relating this to
the purpose of the EUAs, a good public policy system would likely have a dis-
proportionately high beta compared to high-carbon industries and high-carbon
commodities. This is because it would hurt carbon-intensive firms dispropor-
tionately more in good states and disproportionately less in bad states, giving
it even more relevance.

                                  6
Figure 1: How the EUA future to instrument beta may be impacted by the
carbon-intensity.

   A second explanation relates to the cyclical nature of the sector and the
commodity, illustrated in Figure 2. In the event of an economic shock, more
firms that are more sensitive to demand cycles would see their stock price dis-
proportionately affected. Similarly, the demand shock could lead to EUA prices
moving the same, as the economic uplift or downlift can greatly affect their
price. As seen in Phase I, when the carbon allowance price plummeted to zero.
For our analysis, we would therefore see a greater EUA beta with sectors that
exhibit more economic cyclicality, while less economic cyclical sectors would
have lower betas.

Figure 2: How the cyclicality of the instrument may impact the EUA future to
instrument beta.

   To understand how and why different sectors and commodities show different
betas, we examine the instruments in the context of their carbon intensity and
instrument to economic cyclicality.

                                  7
3.2.2 Is the Beta Constant over Time? Do Phase-Changes Matter?
It is crucial to understand how the beta values that we calculate have changed
over time, due to the conflicting results in prior research, and the large-scale
changes to the EU ETS in recent years. This has serious implications for how
investors and firms approach diversification with EUAs in the future.
   To do this, we first check for trends in the beta estimates. Although we
believe the underlying economics controlling how EUA future betas behave have
been similar across time, the change in the system that has occurred could have
altered the beta to the different instruments, making it possible to observe a
trend over time as well as lasting changes across the different phases.
    Moreover, we believe that different events likely could cause large temporary
changes to the beta and thus the diversification benefit of the EUA rights. Given
EUA and the Instrument’s likely common relationship to demand, we expect
the Beta to be affected by sudden shocks to the economy. Since the demand
shock would cause both instruments to move in the same direction, it would
here act as a confounding variable, increasing the correlation between the two.

4 Data & Methodology

4.1 Data Description
4.1.1 EUA Futures and Risk-Free Rate
We strive to produce as holistic a view as possible and approach the diversifica-
tion benefits of EUA futures with respect to a wide set of markets, industries,
and commodities. Examining the market will allow us to get a general overview
of hedging and diversification benefits in a fully diversified portfolio while look-
ing at specific industries and commodities allowing us to better understand
which parts of the market these assets may be more or less exposed to.
   Our study considers the price of EUA futures spanning from the start of the
second Phase on the 4th of February 2008 of the EU ETS until the 28th of March
2024. We use the ICE EUA Futures December contracts, as they are traded in
the largest volume. This is due to the EU ETS requiring firms to cover their
emissions by the end of the year, as explained by Millischer, Evdokimova, and
Fernandez (2022). Consequently, December contracts are the most relevant for
companies looking to sell or buy carbon futures to hedge the price for year-end
compliance.
   These contracts are provided by ICE Endex, guaranteed by the CME Group,
and the data is sourced from Barchart (2024). We do not use future data from
Phase I because of an over-allocation of emission rights, the price of EUAs
dropped to zero toward the end of that Phase. Following the existing literature,
this period is emitted for clearer and more robust results and conclusions (Ah-
mad, Sadorsky, and A. Sharma 2018; Tan et al. 2020; Dutta, Bouri, and Noor
2018).

                                  8
    For the risk-free rate, we used the risk-free rate data available at the Kenneth
R. French Data Library (French n.d.) available online.

4.1.2 Commodity Futures
We look at the most traded individual commodities, as well as an index for non-
energy commodities. Details on these can be found in Table 1. By looking at
both individual commodities and indices, we incorporate both the hedging ben-
efits of carbon emission rights to investors of the various frequently traded com-
modities and the general impact of energy versus non-energy commodities. We
chose these specific commodities primarily based on the trading value, but also
the type. We chose the three commodities most traded in Europe according to
Lewis (2023); Crude Oil Brent, Gold, and Natural Gas. We also complemented
them with wheat, an agricultural commodity, as agricultural products make up
a large share of the commodity market. We chose wheat specifically because of
its large European production compared to the main alternative to soybeans.
All commodities used are traded on a CME Group subsidiary exchange and are
guaranteed by the CME Group.
   We have opted for December futures contracts for individual commodities to
align with the EUA futures data. This synchronization of periods is crucial as
it ensures that we are examining price behavior and potential hedging benefits
over identical time frames, thereby enhancing the accuracy of our analysis and
the validity of our interpretations.
   For the same reason, we chose the Dow Jones-UBS Ex Energy (DJAIGXE)
commodity index for non-energy commodity futures expiring at the end of the
year, following the methodology of Afonin et al. (2018). We downloaded this
data from Factset (2021) This is in opposition to the use of the S&P GSCI
Non-energy Index by Tan et al. (2020). Because the S&P GSCI indices are
traded with contracts continuously throughout the year, they are not suitable
for our analysis. We have had difficulty finding an energy commodity index
with futures traded at the end of the year with data back to 2008, so we only
look at the energy commodities themselves, again like Afonin et al. (2018).
   Consistent with our conceptual framework, we have classified each commod-
ity as having a high or low carbon intensity and whether they exhibit a high
or low cyclicality, using information gathered from Commodity.com (2022) and
research by Ge and Ke (2020), respectively.
   We employ data from the same provider for all commodities, Barchart
(2024), ensuring consistency and reliability. Variations in methodologies or data
sources between different providers could lead to discrepancies in the analysis.
Using a single provider, we minimize potential data inconsistencies, enabling a
more robust comparison across the selected commodities and indices.

                                  9
                       Table 1: Commodity Details

Name Carbon-intensity Cyclicality Type Exchange Data Source
Crude Oil Financial Brent High High Individual Commodity NYMEX Barchart
Gold 100-oz Low Low Individual Commodity COMEX Barchart
Natural Gas High High Individual Commodity NYMEX Barchart
Chicago Soft Red Winter Wheat Low Low Individual Commodity CBOT Barchart
 Dow Jones UBS ExEnergy Low Low Commodity Index n/a Factset
 tab:Table1}

4.1.3 Stocks
We study the European market portfolio, as proxied by the MSCI Europe index.
The approach of using European stock indexes is well established in the liter-
ature (Demiralay, Gencer, and Bayraci 2022; Afonin et al. 2018; Monasterolo
and Angelis 2020; Tan et al. 2020). The use of the MSCI Europe index also
allows us to break the market index into 10 distinct industries that are pro-
vided by MSCI (n.d.). This breakdown allows us to study industry differences
in the same market without overlapping companies. Although some studies use
French excess market return instead of a stock index (Hengge, Panizza, and
Varghese 2023), our approach allows us to obtain a clear understanding of the
industry-specific that investments into EUA in EUAs bring. The 11th industry,
real estate, was removed due to missing data for a significant portion of the
period and substantial changes in its composition over time.
   For the return of the indexes, we use the Total Gross Unhedged return,
which includes income from dividends, and assumes that no taxes are withheld
at the source from such payments. This metric provides a complete picture of
investment returns without the impact of hedging strategies. This is to give the
best estimation of the diversification benefits for these European industries.
   We do this only for the European market, as only European companies and
industries are covered by and exposed to the EU ETS, they are the companies to
which the diversification benefits are relevant. The reason we use only the MSCI
indexes is that they ensure that each industry index is exclusive and together
they make up 100% of the market, with no overlap. Moreover, for further
studies or additional reading, MSCI provides comprehensive documentation for
both the general index and the specific industry index compositions, which are
available on their website.
   In their paper, Hengge, Panizza, and Varghese (2023) calculates the relative
scope 1 and 2 of carbon emissions of sectors in Europe. Based on their work,
together with MSCI (n.d.)’s extensive documentation on the specific industries
included in each sub-index, we have been able to classify each of the sub-indexes
as having either high or low carbon intensity. Factset (2021) has compiled
information on the cyclicality of each sector, which we used to classify each as
having high or low cyclicality. Table 2 shows which indices have been used, what
the index covers, where we have sourced the data, and our binary classification
of high or low carbon intensity and cyclicality. The details of each index are
provided in the MSCI website documentation.

                                  10
                        Table 2: Stock Index Details

Index Carbon-intensity Cyclicality Coverage Data Source
MSCI Europe n/a n/a European Stocks Factset
MSCI Europe Energy High High Integrated Oil & Gas Factset
MSCI European Materials High High Chemicals, Metals & Mining, Construction Materials Factset
MSCI European Utilities High Low Electric utilities, Power traders Factset
MSCI Europe Communications Services Low Low Telecom, Entertainment, Advertisement Factset
MSCI Europe Consumer Discretionary Low High Consumer goods Factset
MSCI Europe Consumer Stables High Low Packaged Food & Meats, Personal Care Factset
MSCI Europe Financials Low High Banks, Insurance, Financial Services Factset
MSCI European Health Care Low Low Pharmaceuticals, Health Care suppliers Factset
MSCI European Industrials High High Defense, Electrical Components, Machinery Factset
MSCI European Information Technology Low Low Semi-conductors, Application Software Factset

4.2 Empirical Strategy
In this section, we outline our empirical strategy. We begin by calculating
summary statistics to understand the properties and risks of each instrument.
We then estimate and study betas to assess the diversification benefits of carbon
credits.

4.2.1 Summary Statistics calculation
We start by providing a summary statistics part to better understand each
instrument, its properties, and risk. All of these statistics are calculated using
daily return data, with the same dataset as the rest of the study. Where relevant
we report the statistics in annual terms to give easier interpretation for the
reader.
   First, we report the annualized return and the annualized standard deviation
for each instrument. The annualized return represents the average annual gain
or loss of instrument i over the entire period, providing a quick overview of its
historical performance on an annual basis. The annualized standard deviation
measures the volatility and associated risk of these returns, indicating the degree
of variation in the instrument’s daily returns.
                       252              1 X
                                                             n
     Annualized Returni = (1 + ¯ri)   − 1, where r¯i =      t = 1 ri,t
                                           n
                        r
                 √      1 X
                                                         n         2
        Annualized StdDevi =   252 ×           t = 1 (ri,t − r¯i)
                                 n − 1
   Here, ri,t represents the daily return of instrument i at time t, where we use
252 since it is the average number of trading days in a year.

   We then look at the Sharpe ratio which evaluates how much excess return is
received for the extra volatility endured by holding the riskier asset i over the
entire period. Giving a general historical return to volatility overview.
                                Annualized Returni − rf
                 Sharpe Ratioi =
                                          Annualized StdDevi
After this, we check the skewness of each instrument’s daily returns, which
assesses the asymmetry of the return distribution for instrument (i) over the

                                  11
entire data period. This is also important to understand the return distribution
and risk of each instrument.
   After this, we examine the skewness and kurtosis of each instrument’s daily
returns to gain a better understanding of the return distribution and associated
risks for each instrument.
                                         3
                          1 X        ri,t − r¯i
                                       n
                   Skewnessi =      t = 1
                               n            StdDevi

                                        4
                          1 X        ri,t − r¯i
                                       n
                   Kurtosisi =      t = 1
                              n            StdDevi

   Lastly, we simply count the data points used in the calculations for instru-
ment i, providing a base for the statistical significance and reliability of the
other measures. This also helps with replication and shows the differences in
data points caused by the date matching.

4.2.2 Beta Estimation
To assess the diversification benefits of carbon credits, we focus on βi, which
represents the beta of the EUA futures with respect to the returns of other in-
struments. The beta coefficient measures the sensitivity of EUA futures returns
to the returns of another instrument, providing insight into systematic risk.
   The beta of EUA futures against various instruments is calculated using
daily returns as follows:

                                        Cov(ri, rj )
                            βi =
                                       Var(rj )
where:

   • ri is the daily return of EUA futures

   • rj is the daily return of the instrument being compared to EUA futures

    • Cov(ri, rj ) is the covariance between the daily returns of EUA futures and
     the other instrument

   • Var(rj ) is the variance of the daily returns of the other instrument

    To ensure the accuracy and reliability of the beta calculations, it was crucial
to properly align the returns data based on their timestamps. We created a
list of all unique timestamps present in both the EUA futures and the other
instrument’s data series. For each common timestamp, we then extracted the
corresponding daily returns for both EUA futures and the other instrument. In
cases where data was missing for either EUA futures or the other instrument at
a given timestamp, we excluded those instances from the beta estimation.

                                  12
   To support the beta interpretation estimation, we also calculate the R-
squared
                     Pn              2
                               (REUA,i − RˆEUA,i)
                        2          i=1
              R = 1 − Pn
                              (R    − R¯   )2
                                  i=1   EUA,i     EUA
where:
   • REUA,i are the observed returns of EUA futures,
   • RˆEUA,i are the predicted returns of EUA futures from the regression
     model,
   • R¯EUA is the mean of the observed returns of EUA futures,

   Additionally, we create a correlation matrix to examine the pairwise corre-
lations between EUA futures returns and the returns of various instruments.
This matrix provides an overview of the strength and direction of the linear
relationships among the variables, which helps in understanding the Betas.

4.2.3 P-Testing
To understand the statistical significance of our result we commit P-testing.
   Here we use and report the standard error SE(βi) of the beta coefficient
derived from the variance of the residuals in the regression model.
                s
                                        σ2
                    SE(βi) =  Pn
                                      (x − x¯)2
                                            t=1   t

where:

       2
   • σ  is the variance of the residuals, calculated as follows:
                         Pn       2
                                2      t=1(yt − yˆt)
                     σ =
                                n − p
      Here, yt are the observed values, ˆyt are the predicted values from the
     regression, n is the number of observations, and p is the number of pa-
      rameters estimated (including the intercept).

   • xt is the observations of the independent variable, and ¯x is the mean of
      these observations.
   The 95% confidence interval (CI) for βi can be calculated using the critical
value from the normal distribution (1.96 for a 95% CI):

                      95% CI = βi ± 1.96 × SE(βi)

   The t-statistic which is also provided for each index for testing the null
hypothesis H0 : βi = 0 is computed as:
                                          βi
                           t =
                                   SE(βi)

                                  13
   To calculate the P-value, we use the normal distribution due to the large
sample size:
                    P-value = 2 × (1 − CDFnormal(|t|))

4.2.4 Time-varying Beta
To study the beta of time we compare it for the different phases and study the
plots of the rolling windows.
   To study the changes in the beta for other periods (βi) of EUA futures
against various instruments using both Phase-specific data and a rolling window
approach, we define the betas as follows:
   For Phase-specific data:

                                        Phase  Phase
                   Phase      Cov(ri , rj ; t, t + W )
                    βi (t) =          Phase
                               Var(rj ; t, t + W )

   For the rolling window approach:

                            W   W
                     rolling      Cov(ri, rj ; t −  2 , t +  2 )
                  βi (t) =            W     W
                                Var(rj ; t − 2 , t + 2 )

   In the rolling window approach, the window is centered around time t with
half of the window before t and half of the window after t. Specifically, the
               W     W
window spans from t − 2 to t + 2 , where W is the width of the window.
This method ensures that the rolling window captures the data symmetrically
around the time t, allowing for an equal representation of past and future data
points within the window. where:

   • ri and rj are the returns of EUA futures and various other instruments,
      respectively.

        P hase       P hase
   • ri and rj refer to returns restricted to a specific regulatory Phase.

   • W is the size of the rolling window (e.g., 30 days, 90 days).

   • t is the starting time of each window.

                                          P hase   P hase
   • Cov(ri, rj ; t, t + W ) and Cov(ri , rj ; t, t + W ) are the covariances
      calculated over the window for general and Phase-specific returns, respec-
       tively.

                                      P hase
   • Var(rj ; t, t + W ) and Var(rj ; t, t + W ) are the variances for the same
      periods.

   For the rolling windows, we include a rough 95% CI for better analyses and
robustness in the plot. To calculate the 95% confidence interval for βi, we use:
                    s          
                                        1      Var(ri)
                      SE(βi) =                 2
                                n − 1  Var(rj )

                                  14
where n is the number of observations within each window W . The critical
value from the normal distribution (1.96 for a 95% confidence interval) is used
to establish:

                      95% CI = βi ± 1.96 × SE(βi)

   We use the 95% confidence interval because it offers a balance between pre-
cision and confidence and is suitable for our visual analyses.
   We use rolling windows to create plots, which serve as the main tool for an-
alyzing the time variability of EUA betas. By visually inspecting these rolling
window plots with various window sizes, we can identify overall upward or down-
ward trends in EUA betas over time. There is a trade-off between estimation
error and capturing short-term impacts; hence, we use 30-day, 252-day, and
756-day windows. This approach allows us to observe both short-term shocks
and more permanent changes.
   The rolling window plots further enable us to compare the behavior of EUA
betas across different phases of the EU ETS, namely Phase II, Phase III, and
Phase IV. By examining the plots with each Phase, we can identify distinct
patterns or shifts in beta values that may be associated with these phases. To
provide extra robustness, we also do the beta simulation on a Phase level to
enable a comparison of the differences.
   Additionally, we use rolling window plots to detect event-driven changes in
EUA betas. If we observe that the beta values for multiple instruments move
in the same direction simultaneously, it suggests the presence of a common
underlying factor or event influencing the relationship between EUA futures
and those instruments. Such events could include regulatory announcements,
significant market developments, or other external shocks affecting the carbon
market and related financial markets.

4.2.5 Carbon Intensity and Economic Cycle Sensitivity
To determine whether the beta difference between industries and commodities
is driven by differences in carbon intensity, we first use external sources to assess
the carbon intensity of various industries. We then divide these industries into
two groups: the top 50% with the highest carbon intensity and the bottom 50%
with the lowest carbon intensity. To compare the beta estimates for these two
groups over the entire period, we calculate the average beta for each group.
   To obtain more robust results, we also examined and calculated these beta
differences across different phases of the EU ETS and used rolling window es-
timates to plot the beta values of the two groups over time. This helps us
determine if there is any visible difference, such as one group consistently ex-
hibiting higher beta values, different trends, or differing responses to events
related to carbon intensity.
   To examine sensitivity to economic cycles, we divide industries and com-
modities into two groups based on their economic cyclicality: one group con-
taining the 50% most cyclical industries/commodities and another group con-
taining the 50% least cyclical industries/commodities. We then compare the

                                  15
beta estimates for these two groups over the entire period and within different
phases.
   We also calculated the average for the period and for the phases and then
rolling-window estimates to plot the beta values of the two groups, allowing us
to visually assess any differences in behavior. Unlike the prior method, we pay
particular attention to the response of the two groups to economic shocks or
significant events that may impact the broader economy. Specifically, we exam-
ine whether the beta values of the two groups diverge or behave significantly
differently during and after periods of economic stress or major economic events.

5 Empirical Results

In this section, we present and analyze our findings. We begin by providing
and discussing descriptive statistics, including summary statistics, a look at the
cumulative return of EUAs since the start of Phase II, and correlation matrices
between each of the instruments. This is followed by our main analysis of the
beta estimates and, finally, the analysis of beta-variance over time.

5.1 Descriptive Statistics
This section presents descriptive statistics for each of the instruments tested in
this analysis. The summary statistics are presented in Table 3. A graph of the
cumulative return of EUA futures and the European stock index is shown in
Figure 3, and a correlation matrix for the instruments is shown in Figure 4,

5.1.1 Summary Statistics
Table 3 shows the summary statistics for each of the commodities and indices,
including EUA futures, showing its annualized return mean, standard deviation,
Sharpe ratio, skewness, kurtosis, and number of observations. These values were
calculated based on the entire sample period using the same data as the rest of
the report. For Phase-specific numbers, see Appendix A.
   Among the instruments analyzed, EUA futures exhibit an exceptionally high
mean return of 0.2265, significantly outperforming the next highest instrument,
Natural Gas, which has a mean return of 0.1407. All instruments analyzed have
shown positive performance on average, although the non-energy commodity
index has the lowest mean annualized return at only 0.0286.
   The returns of EUA futures also exhibit high volatility, as indicated by
their high standard deviation of 0.5213 percentage points. This is the second
highest, with only natural gas slightly exceeding it with a standard deviation
of 0.5476. Generally, energy commodities like natural gas and crude oil Brent
display much higher volatility, while most stock and non-energy commodities
have similar volatility.
   This relationship between volatility and excess return is exemplified in the
Sharpe ratio. Although EUA futures have a high standard deviation, their

                                  16
 Table 3: Annualized Return Statistics for Various Commodities and Indices

Commodity/Index Mean StdDev Sharpe Skewness Kurtosis Observations
EUA Futures 0.2265 0.5213 0.4346 -1.8969 39.5627 3645
Crude Oil Brent 0.1368 0.4293 0.3186 2.7788 79.0337 3497
Natural Gas 0.1407 0.5476 0.2570 0.0451 18.0967 3477
Dow Jones UBS ExEnergy 0.0286 0.1511 0.1894 -0.1779 9.4391 3473
Gold 0.0854 0.1830 0.4666 0.5967 14.1430 3477
Wheat 0.0518 0.3431 0.1511 0.0376 7.1788 3477
Europe Index 0.0833 0.1876 0.4439 -0.2944 13.8568 3645
Europe Financial Services Index 0.0475 0.2974 0.1596 -0.2611 19.9201 3645
Europe Industrials Index 0.1142 0.2243 0.5090 -0.2415 13.0124 3645
Europe Health Care Index 0.1139 0.1647 0.6917 -0.0125 10.1398 3645
Europe Consumer Discretionary Index 0.1237 0.2295 0.5390 0.8096 21.3801 3645
Europe Consumer Staples Index 0.0893 0.1518 0.5880 -0.1239 10.3883 3645
Europe Information Technology Index 0.1270 0.2443 0.5198 -0.0592 9.6184 3645
Europe Materials Index 0.0901 0.2625 0.3430 -0.0824 13.3304 3645
Europe Energy Index 0.1016 0.2717 0.3740 0.6773 24.0724 3645
Europe Utilities Index 0.0598 0.2002 0.2988 -0.5577 26.1692 3645
Europe Communication Services Index 0.0453 0.1831 0.2473 -0.1748 12.7044 3645

substantial return during the period results in a Sharpe ratio that is considerably
higher than that of the energy commodities and is second only to gold. However,
stock indices generally show better performance in terms of the Sharpe ratio
than commodities, with four out of the five instruments with the highest Sharpe
ratios being stock subindices.
   A particularly notable aspect of EUA futures is their exceptionally negative
skewness and high kurtosis. The high negative skewness of -1.8969 indicates
a left-skewed distribution, suggesting frequent smaller occurrences of returns
below the average and more extreme cases of returns above the average. Con-
versely, the high positive kurtosis of 39.5627 signifies that the distribution’s tails
are heavier than those of a normal distribution. This leptokurtic distribution
implies a higher probability of both severe losses and unusually high returns.
   This, in combination with the high standard deviation, is indicative of the
large idiosyncratic risk exposure of EUA futures. If individual companies are
unable to diversify away from this risk, and the asset is low beta, it means that
they take very high risk for low-risk compensation.
   Lastly, note that the variation in the number of observations is influenced
by the markets in which these commodities and indices are traded. The EUA
futures dates align well with the European stock indices since both are traded on
European markets, resulting in a consistent number of observations. However,
because commodities are traded on American markets, some data points are
missing, which affects the continuity of observations.

                                  17
5.1.2 Cumulative Return
Figure 3 illustrates the trajectory of cumulative returns for the EUA futures
throughout the various stages of implementation of the EU ETS. Associated
with these returns is the performance of the MSCI Europe index, provided as a
comparative benchmark. The phases of the EU ETS, Phase II, Phase III, and
Phase IV, are demarcated on the graph, allowing an assessment of returns over
different regulatory periods.

Figure 3: Cumulative Returns of EUA Futures (green) and MSCI European
Stock Index (blue).

   Figure 3 highlights some key aspects of EUA futures as an instrument. First,
it shows the high variability in returns since the start of the second phase of
the EU ETS and the introduction of future contracts tracking these emission
rights. For most years, they perform poorly, while in some years, there is a rapid
price increase. Following the initial rise in returns, we observe a dip in demand
after the 2008 financial crisis at the end of Phase II, causing EUA futures to
lose almost all their value. Although they remained steady throughout most
of Phase III, the graph shows a steep increase in cumulative return over the
last six years, particularly since the start of Phase IV. However, since 2023, the
cumulative return of EUA futures has plummeted.
    This is in clear contrast to the consistent return of the European stock index,
which, apart from the 2008 crash and the minor dip in 2020 due to the COVID-
19 pandemic, has shown quite little variation. Although, for most of Phase IV,
EUA futures have outperformed stocks, their cumulative returns are close to
the same value.
   The cumulative return for all tested instruments is found in Appendix B.

                                  18
5.1.3 Correlations
Figure 4 shows the correlation matrix of the stock indices and the commodities,
respectively.

        (a) Correlation of Stocks (b) Correlation of Commodities

Figure 4: Correlation between the instruments, EUA futures being represented
among a) stock indices and b) commodities.

   The observed high correlation among stock industries is not seen as sur-
prising, given interconnected market dynamics and that they are all European.
However, it’s noteworthy that EUA futures consistently exhibit lower corre-
lations with some stock sectors than others. Among the industries, financial
services, industrials, materials, and energy show the highest correlations with
EUA futures. This suggests that sectors with direct exposure to economic cycles
and regulatory changes are more influenced by the dynamics of EUA futures.
In contrast, sectors like Health Care, Consumer Staples, and Utilities are the
least correlated, indicating their relative insulation from the immediate impacts
of fluctuations in EUA futures, possibly due to their less cyclical nature and
more stable demand patterns. We do not observe an obvious pattern that
EUA futures are more correlated with high-carbon-intense industries, as utili-
ties and consumer staples, both high-carbon sectors, show low correlation, and
low-carbon sectors like financial services show high correlation.
   On the commodities front, EUA futures correlate most with crude oil Brent.
However, they also show a clear positive correlation with natural gas, wheat, and
the Dow Jones UBS ExEnergy index. Interestingly, they are the only commodity
that shows a negative correlation with gold, which is also negative to the stock
market. This might be a similar pattern in the stock correlation matrix, in that
oil and stocks are more demand-cyclical, with the other commodities being in
between, and gold is the opposite of the reserves, as also seen with the negative
correlation with the stock market. Crude oil Brent and natural gas are also more
carbon-intense than the other commodities, indicating that carbon intensity
may impact these betas.
   The results show that EUA futures have significant correlations with both
stocks and energy commodities. The fact that the correlation is only moderately
high suggests that it moves reliably but still quite independently from the other
instruments. A lot of the correlation also seems to be related to economic cycli-

                                  19
cality. As commodities and industries with a greater economic demand cyclical-
ity has a higher correlation. This insight is crucial for companies, investors, and
policymakers, as it underscores the need for industry-tailored strategies when
incorporating EUA futures into broader financial and investment frameworks.

5.2 Instrument Betas
This section presents the calculated EUA future to instrument betas. Table 4
shows the regression results for EUA futures for each instrument throughout
the sample period. For Phase-specific numbers, see Appendix C.

Table 4: EUA Futures to Instrument Beta Regression Statistics for Each Com-
modity and Indices

                     Regression Equation: ReturnEUA Futures = α + β · ReturnInstrument + ϵ

                                                                                                                                                    2
Commodity/Index Carbon Intensity Cyclicality Beta Standard Error t-value p-value R
 Crude Oil Brent High High 0.1732 0.0135 12.8145 0.0000 0.0449
 Natural Gas High High 0.1269 0.0175 7.2319 0.0000 0.0148
Non-Energy Commodity Index Low Low 0.0496 0.0048 10.3208 0.0000 0.0298
Gold Low Low -0.0184 0.0059 -3.1124 0.0019 0.0028
Wheat Low Low 0.0511 0.0110 4.6270 0.0000 0.0061
 Europe Stock Index n/a n/a 0.0760 0.0058 13.0519 0.0000 0.0447
 Europe Materials Index High High 0.1153 0.0081 14.1889 0.0000 0.0524
 Europe Energy Index High High 0.1089 0.0084 12.9018 0.0000 0.0437
Europe Utilities Index High Low 0.0212 0.0064 3.3262 0.0009 0.0030
Europe Financial Services Index Low High 0.1310 0.0092 14.2389 0.0000 0.0527
 Europe Industrials Index High High 0.0924 0.0070 13.2676 0.0000 0.0461
Europe Health Care Index Low Low 0.0177 0.0052 3.3898 0.0007 0.0031
Europe Consumer Discretionary Index Low High 0.0723 0.0072 10.0432 0.0000 0.0269
Europe Consumer Staples Index High Low 0.0191 0.0048 3.9737 0.0001 0.0043
Europe Information Technology Index Low Low 0.0778 0.0077 10.1595 0.0000 0.0276
Europe Communication Services Index Low Low 0.0494 0.0058 8.5680 0.0000 0.0543

   The beta regression between EUA futures and each of the instruments tested
yielded low, but statistically significant betas. Apart from Gold, they are all
positive.
   There exists a large difference in the beta between EUA futures and com-
modities with high carbon intensity versus low carbon intensity. Highly carbon-
intense commodities show consistently higher beta with EUA futures than low
carbon-intense commodities. The non-energy commodity index and wheat pro-
duce betas that are among the lowest out of any of the instruments tested.
While Gold has a negative beta, it is closer to zero than any other instrument.
Crude oil Brent produces the highest beta out of all assets at 0.1732, and natural
gas has the second highest at 0.1269. The standard errors associated with these
beta estimates vary, with crude oil Brent and natural gas showing relatively
higher figures (0.0135 and 0.0175, respectively). The t-value of crude oil Brent
is exceptionally high at 12.8145, underscoring very strong statistical support for
its beta estimate, far exceeding that of other commodities like wheat, which has
a t-value of 4.6270.
   The Europe Stock Index, representing the broader market, shows a beta
of 0.0760, indicating a modest overall sensitivity to EUA futures. This mild
responsiveness serves as a baseline for comparing the more pronounced reactions
observed in specific industry sectors.

                                  20
   These results do not show any evidence that high-carbon-intense industries
have a higher EUA future than industry betas. Although Energy and Materials
do show some of the highest betas with 0.1089 and 0.1153, respectively, financial
services produce the highest beta out of any sector of 0.1310 despite being a
significantly low carbon-intense sector. Furthermore, utilities, another high-
emitting sector, have a beta with EUA futures of only 0.0212, lower even than
the non-energy commodity index. Although multiple low-carbon industries also
show low betas, it cannot be stated that the carbon intensity of the sector
systematically affects EUA’s future to sector beta. Instead, the beta difference
between industries and commodities seems to be more closely related to their
cyclically based on economic demand. Instruments that are more sensitive to
high economic cyclicality show the highest betas.

5.3 Time-Varying Betas
In this section, we first present the EUA future to stock betas of the market
portfolio and its variation over time. We then break down the market into
industry-specific stocks and their variation over time. We highlight the differ-
ence in beta between industries with high and low carbon intensity and high
and low cyclicality before moving on to commodities and doing the same. The
graphs of the time-varying betas, as well as the residual betas for each instru-
ment, can be found in Appendix D.

5.3.1 Beta with the Market
Figure 5 shows the beta of the 30-day rolling window of EUA futures to the Eu-
ropean Total Gross Unhedged Stock index from 2010 to 2022, with a confidence
interval of 95%. To see how the result varies based on the length of the rolling
window, see Appendix E.

                                  21
Figure 5: 30-day Rolling window Beta from EUA Futures to European Total
Gross Unhedged Stock index with 95% confidence interval.

   The beta between EUA futures and the European stock index has displayed
occasional fluctuations throughout the various phases of the EU ETS, typically
oscillating between slightly negative and slightly positive values. In particular,
beta values reached sharp peaks in 2008, 2015, and 2020.
   During Phase II of the EU ETS, the beta was particularly high and volatile,
reaching its peak of just over 1.0 in 2008. In contrast, Phase III saw a relatively
stable beta, except for a notable peak in 2015. As Phase IV commenced, it
was a new spike at the beginning of 2020, after which the beta again showed
stability, maintaining values close to zero.
   This pattern suggests that, while the overall relationship between EUA fu-
tures and the European stock index has remained relatively quiet, events during
these peak years likely influenced the beta significantly. In other words, there
seem to be event-driven changes in the beta of EUA’s to the market.
   It should be noted that the flat part at the end of 2012, where the EUA
switch for Phase II to III occurs, is due to missing data. This occurred because
future price data with a December end date for that period were lacking.

5.3.2 Sector-Specific Betas
Figure 6 shows the 252-day rolling window EUA future to stock beta for each of
the sub-industries, colored by their carbon intensity and cyclicality, respectively.
For each index separately, see Appendix F.

                                  22
Figure 6: 252-day rolling window EUA future to stock beta for each index,
colored by their carbon intensity in panel a) (brown for high, green for low),
and cyclicality in panel b) (blue for high, red for low).

   In panel a), the high and low-carbon-intense industries are color-coded to
give a visual representation of how they relate to one another. It is not clear
from the graph that these industries produce different betas depending on their
carbon intensity. There is also no such relationship seen in the Phase-specific
average betas for each group. Consistently, the average beta of high-carbon
sectors and low-carbon industries remain very similar. In Phase II, the average
beta of high-carbon sectors is 0.12022, while low-carbon industries are 0.13282.
In Phase III, the numbers are 0.0464 and 0.0410, and in Phase IV, they are
0.0918 and 0.0663. It can not be concluded that there is a considerable difference
between high and low-carbon-intense industries.
   In panel b), high and low cyclicality sectors are colored blue and red re-
spectively, it is clear that there is a systematic difference between the groups,
both visually, and in the averages. It can be seen from the graph that high-
cyclicality sectors constantly produce higher betas than low-cyclicality sectors.
The average beta for high cyclicality sectors in Phase II is 0.1475 compared to
the low of 0.1031. In Phase III it was 0.0627 and 0.0248 and in Phase IV it
was 0.1112 and 0.041. This difference is large and significantly higher compared
to the groups based on carbon intensity, indicating that cyclicality is a better
indicator of EUA futures to sector beta.
    In general, the betas exhibit a substantial decrease at the end of Phase II, a
minor peak in the middle of Phase III, and a notable increase at the beginning
of Phase IV. This consistent pattern across sectors is particularly intriguing,
given that the regressed industries do not share the same companies, suggesting
that the beta of EUA futures might be influenced by broad economic factors.

                                  23
The relative beta between sectors seems consistent, as each beta seems to scale
accordingly with the rest. Additionally, the order of the sector beta from high
to low remains almost unchanged.
   All stock indices go up and down at the same time, but they do so at
different magnitudes. During some periods they are all nearly zero; then they
increase and decrease at the same time but with different magnitudes. Again
this points towards an event-driven beta change. Where the event affects EUA’s
and industries but where the industry’s effect is of a very different magnitude.
   Overall, the fluctuations in the EUA future to stock betas are evident with
peak values reaching only around 0.6 or just over 0.5. Note that this graph uses
a 252-day rolling window which means that while the magnitude of the change
in beta is lower compared to Figure 5, the effect is of the same magnitude. To
see how the size of the rolling windows affects beta estimates, see Appendix E.
However, there is no clear increasing or decreasing trend for any of the Betas to
the instruments through the implementation phases of the EU ETS.

5.3.3 Commodity Betas
Figure 7 presents the EUA futures relative to each of the commodity instruments
over the entire sample period. To offer a comparative perspective, the graph
includes a 756-day rolling window beta of EUA futures against the European
stock index. The higher period is due to higher evaluation error, see graphs with
the shorter window in Appendix E. This graph’s inclusion allows for a clearer
understanding of how commodity betas compare and relate to the stock beta
over time.

Figure 7: 3-year rolling window beta between EUA Futures and all commodities,
including the European Stock index.

                                  24
   The beta of EUA futures exhibits considerable variation depending on the
type of commodity. For non-energy commodities, there is a significant variation
over time and among the commodities tested. Specifically, the non-energy in-
dex experiences fluctuations between positive and negative values, mirroring a
pattern somewhat similar to that of the European Stock Index. Gold, in con-
trast, maintains a consistently negative beta throughout Phase III of the EU
ETS, indicating a divergent response from other commodities. Wheat, mean-
while, shows relatively stable beta values, oscillating between slightly positive
and slightly negative throughout the sample period.
   Energy commodities, however, demonstrate a different behavior. Both Crude
Oil Brent and Natural Gas exhibit a stable positive beta across various phases
of the EU ETS, suggesting a more consistent relationship with EUA futures
than observed in nonenergy commodities.
   An interesting aspect of the analysis is the similar movement of the Crude
Oil Brent Beta with the European Stock Index Beta, particularly noted during
the dips in 2014 and 2016. The mirror image occurs with Gold.
   These observations are somewhat tentative due to the 3-year rolling win-
dow used for beta calculation chosen due to high estimation error, though the
robustness of our results is clear from the graphs of the other rolling window
lengths, found in Appendix E. They generally suggest that when the beta of
EUA futures to the stock market declines, the beta to Crude Oil Brent tends
to follow a similar downward trajectory. Whereas gold has the opposite un-
til the recent year when it has been around 0. Again, there seem to be clear
event-driven changes that affect the different betas simultaneously.

6 Discussion

We have set out to study the diversification benefits of EUA futures and in doing
so, examined the beta with this asset against a series of instruments. In this
section, we derive the implications of our results in the context of our conceptual
framework and the original questions asked. We also discuss some limitations
of our study.

6.1 Instrument Betas
First and foremost, we found statistically significant nonzero EUA Future in-
strument betas, each at a 1% significance level. Except for Gold, all instruments
exhibit positive betas in each of the phases. These results are consistent with
our expectations. Higher demand in the economy should mean that companies
produce more and buy more commodities, and therefore emitting, more. This
would in turn lead to increases in prices of both the stock of the company and
of EUA futures. We see this as the EUA to Stock index and EUA to section
index betas are positive.
   The Europe market beta, while statically significant, is modest in magnitude
at 0.076. This low systematic risk profile indicates that well-diversified investors

                                  25
can diversify their portfolios using EUA futures without taking on a lot of
additional risk. We previously showed the high kurtosis and standard deviation
of EUA futures, indicating the high idiosyncratic risk to which investors of
these assets are prone. Together with the generally low betas, this indicates
the diversification value of EUA futures. Since emitting firms are the original
holders of all carbon credits, they, without futures, will hold a large amount of
risk that is uncompensated due to the vast majority of it being idiosyncratic
and not dependent on the market.
   We have demonstrated that firms can unlock value by selling EUA future
contracts, thereby transferring their idiosyncratic risk to well-diversified in-
vestors who are less affected by this risk. These firms benefit from EUA futures
as they provide a hedge against potential price fluctuations that they would
otherwise face by holding EUAs. Since EUAs are distributed throughout the
year, but compliance requires emitting firms to hold them only at the year’s end,
issuing future contracts enables firms to secure the price of compliance early,
by reducing this exposure to price fluctuations helps make sure they don’t they
risk’s they are not compensated for. It is therefore evident that EUA futures
offer significant diversification benefits for them. The investors also benefit as
they have one more asset to diversify with.
   This benefit varies but does not vary a lot between sector-specific betas.
When breaking down the stock market index into 10 sub-sectoral indices, we
find that different sectors have different betas with respect to EUA futures.
Although each is positive the highest being financial Services, materials, and
energy, with betas of 0.1310, 0.1153, and 0.1080, respectively. The lowest sectors
are health care, consumer staples, and Utilities, with 0.0171, 0.0191, and 0.0212,
respectively.
    This has significant implications for entities aiming to capitalize on the di-
versification benefits of EUAs. Firms in certain sectors or investors with specific
exposure to a certain sector or group of commodities will benefit differently from
trading EUA futures, depending on the magnitude of that beta. Understand-
ing the reasons behind the high or low beta values of certain instruments, is,
therefore, a crucial aspect of our study.
   There is no clear evidence that these differences are determined by the car-
bon intensity of the instrument. When grouped according to their relative car-
bon intensity, high- and low-carbon average and mean betas are roughly equal.
When grouped by color, there is no clear visible distinction between the groups.
Some of the high-emitting sectors have the lowest beta, and some low-carbon
sectors are among the highest beta-wise. Thus, we find no support that more
carbon-intense sectors have higher EUA-to-sector beta and correlation. Relat-
ing to the work by Witkowski, Adamczyk, and Franek (2021), there seems to
be no additional compensation for the carbon risk that emitting firms take on,
and as such, no larger beta for high-carbon instruments. The carbon intensity
does not appear to mediate the beta.
   We find evidence for the theory that EUA future beta differences between
instruments are dependent on the economic cyclicality of the instrument. The
highly cyclical sectors, financial services, energy, and materials, show the highest

                                  26
beta, and the low cyclicality sectors, utilities, health care, and consumer staples,
show the lowest beta. This became visible when the data was grouped and
graphed according to color. This means that investors with higher exposure
to economically cyclical sectors like financial services or energy could expect a
higher exposure with EUA future prices, and firms in these sectors would be
more impacted in the good and the bad state.
   Each commodity we studied produces a positive beta except for Gold, and
like the sectors, the different commodities have different EUA Future betas. The
energy commodities, Crude Oil Brent and Natural Gas show significantly higher
beta (0.1732 and 0.1269, respectively) compared to the non-energy commodity
index (0.0496) and the individual non-energy commodities Wheat (0.0511) and
Gold (-0.0184). It is difficult to conclude whether the intensity or cyclicality of
carbon matters more from these numbers, as in the case of commodities, these
groups are the same. However, with the evidence from the market and the
sectors, we speculate that commodities, too, are primarily impacted by their
cyclicality and not their carbon intensity.

6.2 Time-Varying Beta
We can see that the betas have changed over time when looking at our rolling
window beta estimate plots. During the implementation phases, it is apparent
that every beta of the instrument has changed. Notably, the industries nearly
always move together, as seen in Figure 6. The same conclusion can be drawn
when looking at the commodity movement in Figure 7, though these do not
always move together.
   We find no evidence that the individual phases have impacted the magni-
tude of the betas. No instrument has seen a clear systematic change because
of a phase change, instead varying consistently within phases. We first looked
for trends over time, and we timed the beta for each phase; there were no clear
structural differences when comparing the tables. Combined with Figure 6, we
cannot conclude that the phases themselves had an impact on the betas. This
could be explained by the fact that, although the actual phase transition hap-
pens overnight, information about the change has already been widely diffused
into the market. To get a fairer picture of the phase-to-phase differences, one
might have to study the dates on which new information was released, rather
than the actual date of transition. Nevertheless, this implies that regulatory
changes to the EU ETS system have not clearly impacted the diversification
benefits of EUA futures.
   There is also no clear trend in the data. While there are shorter peaks and
troughs, there seems to be no clear permanent upward or downward movement
in the betas. However more research should be done, as it cannot be concluded
that there is a general trend for the development of the EUA Beta for instru-
ments in general or for a subset of them. Overall, this means that the beta
should not be expected to change lastingly in the future.
   We observe that some changes in beta seem to be event-driven, both for betas
with industries and commodities. In Figure 5 we note several peaks in the beta

                                  27
of the EUA to the stock index, speculatively in 2008, 2015, and 2020. These
dates coincide with three important demand shocks: the economic demand shift
following the financial crises in 2008, the oil price crash in 2015, as identified by
the World Bank (2018), and the stock market crash due to COVID-19 in 2020.
Notably, there is no such dip in 2022, following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine,
in which European imports of energy commodities were suddenly halted. This
seems to indicate that negative demand shocks, in general, lead to a very large
increase in Beta, rather than supply chocks. We notice the pattern in fig 6,
which uses a longer rolling window. The sectors all move together, both in large
and small movements, with extreme economic changes affecting all sectors in the
same way. Despite being made up of entirely separate companies, the industry
indices beta estimates move together at certain points in time, with different
magnitudes.
   Similarly, for commodities, where Gold is an asset with a negative bend that
on average increases with an economic slowdown. In the graph, it has the exact
opposite effect of oil and the stock market. Energy-related commodities display
higher betas than non-energy commodities, suggesting a closer connection to
EUA futures. This pattern implies that commodities involved in energy pro-
duction and consumption react more strongly to fluctuations in EUA prices.
This is strong additional evidence that the cyclical demand is what drives EUA
Future beta and supports our finding from the beta estimates and correlation
matrix.
   Overall means that the non-demand shock beta estimates are lower, closer to
zero, thus making them seven less systematic risk even higher in normal states.
But importantly, it means that the systematicity risk of the asset increases in
bad times for the companies and the investor, when a negative demand shock
hits. This variability affects the risk profile of the asset, making it more stable
in good times but more volatile and riskier in bad times for both companies and
investors.
   Thus, companies that own and sell these assets will incur losses when their
overall business suffers, particularly during periods of low market cyclicality.
Conversely, companies that need to purchase these assets at the end of the
year will face difficulties during periods of high market cyclicality. High-carbon
companies are typically buyers of these assets, while low-carbon companies are
sellers. Since the beta is roughly the same for both high- and low-carbon com-
panies, the overall effect is ambiguous for them and varies depending on the
industry’s cyclicality.

7 Conclusion

Our research explored the diversification benefits of EUA futures by analyzing
their beta relationship with various financial instruments.
   Our study shows that EUA futures are subject to significant idiosyncratic
risk, as evidenced by a modest future-to-market beta, and high kurtosis and
standard deviation of EUA futures. For firms holding carbon credits, engaging

                                  28
in futures contracts for December redemption can significantly mitigate this risk
by transferring it to more diversified investors who are more able to diversify
the idiosyncratic risk.
   Our Beta estimates of EUA future to instrument betas for a European mar-
ket proxy, sub-sector indices, and commodities, with data from 2008 to 2024,
reveal statistically significant, albeit modest, nonzero positive betas for the mar-
ket aswell as all other instruments tested, with a notable exception, Gold, dis-
playing a negative beta. From this we find statistically significant, albeit mod-
est, nonzero positive betas for all instruments tested, with a notable exception
displaying a negative beta. This supports the theory that increased economic
demand leads to higher production and emissions, which in turn influence the
price of company stocks and EUA futures.
   We found no evidence that carbon intensity impacts EUA beta. High-beta
sectors do not consistently align with high carbon emissions; some high-emission
instruments have low betas. Instead, we find that sectors’ demand cyclicality has
a greater impact on the EUA beta with that sector, as high-cyclicality sectors
produce the largest beta values. Energy-related commodities exhibit higher
betas compared to non-energy commodities, indicating a stronger linkage to
EUA futures. This trend suggests that commodities directly related to energy
production and consumption may have a more pronounced reaction to changes
in EUA prices.
   Peaks in EUA futures’ beta values during demand shocks suggest that these
betas may be driven by specific events. These peaks are most pronounced dur-
ing significant economic events such as the 2008 financial crisis, the 2015 oil
price crash, and the 2020 COVID-19 market crash, indicating a strong correla-
tion between market turbulence and increased systematic risk in EUA futures.
However, these peaks are not uniformly observed in 2022 following geopolitical
events that affect energy imports, suggesting that different types of economic
disruptions may uniquely influence the beta relationship. This variability high-
lights the complex interplay between market dynamics and regulatory impacts
on EUA futures, emphasizing the need for nuanced strategies that account for
both sector-specific and broader economic factors when considering the risk.
   In summary, for both emitting firms and investors, EUA futures offer diver-
sification benefits, allowing undiversified firms to transfer the high idiosyncratic
risk to more diversified investors. However, the risk associated with EUAs does
not affect all firms and instruments equally. Instruments that are more sensitive
to economic cyclicality show higher betas, and during times of demand shocks,
these instruments and firms are more affected. However, the changing regula-
tions under each new phase of the EU ETS have not clearly impacted the EUA
futures-to-instrument beta, nor has there been any overall trend in beta since
the beginning of Phase II. This indicates that while EUA futures can provide
long-term, stable diversification benefits for investors and companies, they may
suffer large increases in systematic risk during short-term demand shocks.

                                  29
AI-Disclosure
The authors acknowledge the assistance provided by OpenAI’s ChatGPT and
Anthropic’s Claude AI technologies. These tools were instrumental in man-
aging the data and facilitating the implementation of the R and LaTeX code,
significantly improving the efficiency and precision of our research process.

                                  30
References

Literature
Afonin, Alexander et al. (2018). “Carbon Portfolio Management”. In: Interna-
   tional Journal of Finance & Economics 23.4, pp. 349–361.
Ahmad, Wasim, Perry Sadorsky, and Amit Sharma (2018). “Optimal hedge
   ratios for clean energy equities”. In: Economic Modelling 72, pp. 278–295.
Chevallier, Julien (2009). “Energy risk management with carbon assets : Energy,
   risk and uncertainty”. In: International Journal of Global Energy Issues 32.4,
   pp. 328–349.
Demiralay, Sercan, Hatice G. Gencer, and Selcuk Bayraci (2022). “Carbon credit
   futures as an emerging asset: Hedging, diversification and downside risks”.
   In: Energy Economics 113, pp. 106–196.
Dutta, Anupam, Elie Bouri, and Hasib Noor (2018). “Return and volatility
   linkages between CO2 emission and clean energy stock prices”. In: Energy
   (Oxford) 164, pp. 803–810.
Ge, Yiqing and Tang Ke (2020). “Commodity prices and GDP growth”. In:
   International Review of Financial Analysis 71.
Hengge, Martina, Ugo Panizza, and Richard Varghese (2023). “Carbon Policy
   Surprises and Stock Returns: Signals from Financial Markets”. In: Interna-
   tional Monetrary Fund Working Paper Series 13.
Jiang, Qichuan and Xuejiao Ma (2022). “Risk transmission between old and new
   energy markets from a multi-scale perspective: the role of the EU emissions
   trading system”. In: Applied Economics 52.26, pp. 2949–2968.
Kumar, Surender, Shunsuke Managi, and Akimi Matsuda (2012). “Stock prices
   of clean energy firms, oil and carbon markets: a vector autoregressive anal-
   ysis”. In: Energy Economics 34.1, pp. 215–226.
Luo, Cuicui and Densheng Wu (2016). “Environment and economic risk: An
   analysis of carbon emission market and portfolio management”. In: Envi-
   ronmental Research 149, pp. 297–301.
Mansanet-Bataller, Maria and Angel Pardo (2011). “CO2 prices and portfolio
   management”. In: International Journal of Global Energy Issues 35, pp. 158–
   177.
Millischer, Laurent, Tatiana Evdokimova, and Oscar; Fernandez (2022). “The
   Carrot and the Stock: In Search of Stock-Market Incentives for Decarboniza-
   tion”. In: International Monetary Fund Working Paper Series 231.
Monasterolo, Irene and Luca de Angelis (2020). “Blind to carbon risk? An anal-
   ysis of stock market reaction to the Paris Agreement”. In: Ecological Eco-
   nomics 170.
Narayan, Paresh K. and Susan S. Sharma (2015). “Is carbon emissions trading
   profitable?” In: Economic Modelling 47, pp. 84–92.
Oberndorfer, Ulrich (2009). “EU Emission Allowances and the stock market: Ev-
   idence from the electricity industry”. In: Ecological Economics 68.4, pp. 1116–
   1126.

                                  31
Stern, Nicholas (2007). “The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review”.
    In.
Tan, Xueping et al. (2020). “How connected is the carbon market to energy
   and financial markets? A systematic analysis of spillovers and dynamics”.
   In: Energy Economics 90.
Tian, Yuan et al. (2016). “Does the carbon market help or hurt the stock price
   of electricity companies? Further evidence from the European context”. In:
   Journal of Cleaner Production 112, pp. 1619–1626.
Witkowski, Pawel, Adam Adamczyk, and Slawomirv Franek (2021). “Does Car-
   bon Risk Matter? Evidence of Carbon Premium in EU energy-intensive com-
   panies”. In: Energies (Basel) 14.7, p. 1855.
Zhang, Yinpeng, Zhixin Liu, and Xueying Yu (2017). “The Diversification Ben-
   efits of Including Carbon Assets in Financial Portfolios”. In: Sustainability
   9.3, pp. 437–450.

Electronic Sources
Barchart (2024). ICE EUA Futures Dec ’24 (CKZ24) Historic Data. https:
   //www.barchart.com/futures/quotes/CKZ24/overview. Accessed: 11-05-
   2024.
Carbon Market Watch (2024). FAQ: What is the EU Emissions Trading System
   (EU ETS). https://carbonmarketwatch.org/2024/02/29/faq- what-
   is-the-eu-emissions-trading-system-eu-ets/. Accessed: 11-05-2024.
Clean Energy Wire (2024). Understanding the European Union’s Emissions
   Trading Systems (EU ETS). https://www.cleanenergywire.org/factsheets/
   understanding - european - unions - emissions - trading - system. Ac-
   cessed: 11-05-2024.
Commodity.com (2022). ”What Are Energy Commodities? (And How to Start
   Trading Them in 2024)”. https : / / commodity . com / energy/. Accessed
   February 14, 2024.
EIB (2024). European Investment Bank Investment Report 2023/2024 Trans-
   forming for competitiveness. Tech. rep. European Investment Bank.
Erbach, Gregor, Martin H¨oflmayr, and Nela Foukalov´a (2022). Economic im-
   pacts of the green transition. Tech. rep. European Parlament.
European Commission (2023). EPORT FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE
   EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL on the functioning of
   the European carbon market in 2022 pursuant to Articles 10(5) and 21(2)
   of Directive 2003/87/EC. Tech. rep. European Commission.
— (2024). Allocation to modernise the energy sector. https://climate.ec.
   europa.eu/eu- action/eu- emissions- trading- system- eu- ets/free-
   allocation/allocation- modernise- energy- sector_en.. Accessed: 11-
   05-2024.
— (n.d). Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism. https://taxation-customs.
   ec.europa.eu/carbon-border-adjustment-mechanism_en. Accessed: 24-
   03-2024.

                                  32
European Commission (n.d.[a]). The European Green Deal: Striving to be the
   first climate-neutral continent. https://commission.europa.eu/strategy-
   and-policy/priorities-2019-2024/european-green-deal_en. Accessed
   March 17, 2024.
— (n.d.[b]). What is the EU ETS? https://climate.ec.europa.eu/eu-
    action / eu - emissions - trading - system - eu - ets / what - eu - ets _ en.
   Accessed March 1st, 2024.
Factset (2021). CYCLICAL VS. DEFENSIVE: WHAT WE LEARNED FROM
   2020. https://insight.factset.com/cyclical-vs.-defensive-what-
   we-learned-from-2020. Accessed: 11-05-2024.
French, Kennet (n.d.). Kenneth R. French - Data Library. https://mba.tuck.
   dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html. Ac-
   cessed: 11-05-2024.
ICIS (2020). The EUA Market Characteristics, future drivers and the impact of
   withholding allowances from the market. Tech. rep. Independent Commodity
    Intelligence Services.
Lewis, Sharon (2023). Top 9 Commodities by Traded Volume 2023. https :
   //hmarkets.com/top- commodities- by- traded- volume/. Accessed: 07-
   05-2024.
MSCI (n.d.). MSCI Europe Index (USD) Factsheet. https://www.msci.com/
   documents/10199/db217f4c- cc8c- 4e21- 9fac- 60eb6a47faf0. Accessed:
   11-05-2024.
Schopp, Anne and Karsten Neuhoff (2013). The Role of Hedging in Carbon
   Markets. Tech. rep. Deutsches Institut f¨ur Wirtschaftsforschung.
Technavio (2024). Carbon Credit Market Analysis Europe, Asia, North America,
   Rest of World (ROW) - US, Germany, UK, Italy, China - Size and Fore-
   cast 2024-2028. https://www.technavio.com/report/carbon- credit-
   market-analysis. Accessed February 14, 2024.
Twidale, Susanna (2024). Global carbon markets value hit record $949 bln last
   year - LSEG. https://www.reuters.com/markets/commodities/global-
   carbon-markets-value-hit-record-949-bln-last-year-lseg-2024-
   02-12. Accessed March 1st, 2024.
World Bank (2018). Global Economic Prospects: Broad-Based Upturn, But For
   How Long? Tech. rep. World Bank Group.

                                  33
8 Appendix

Appendix A
In the following three tables, the summary statistics for each instrument and
Phase are calculated.

Table A.1: Annualized Return Statistics for Various Commodities and Indices
Phase II

Commodity/Index Mean StdDev Sharpe Skewness Kurtosis Observations
EUA Futures -0.1089 0.4821 -0.2259 -4.9371 88.6798 1049
Crude Oil Brent 0.1073 0.3920 0.2737 0.0490 5.9823 1021
Natural Gas 0.0681 0.6105 0.1115 -0.0100 30.8172 1001
Dow Jones UBS ExEnergy 0.0479 0.2096 0.2286 -0.4381 6.1613 999
Gold 0.1547 0.2288 0.6759 0.9546 13.0179 1001
Wheat 0.0889 0.4235 0.2098 -0.1153 6.4499 1001
Europe Index 0.0303 0.2445 0.1238 0.0394 9.6812 1049
Europe Financial Services Index -0.0889 0.4279 -0.2078 -0.0264 12.6906 1049
Europe Industrials Index 0.0553 0.2974 0.1859 -0.0976 9.4109 1049
Europe Health Care Index 0.1091 0.1846 0.5909 0.2590 12.3942 1049
Europe Consumer Discretionary Index 0.1135 0.2794 0.4063 1.6158 24.5027 1049
Europe Consumer Staples Index 0.1164 0.1799 0.6471 -0.1073 9.4199 1049
Europe Information Technology Index -0.0013 0.2833 -0.0044 -0.3073 7.8569 1049
Europe Materials Index 0.0630 0.3719 0.1693 0.0126 8.6411 1049
Europe Energy Index 0.0775 0.2862 0.2708 0.4537 10.4291 1049
Return Europe Utilities Index -0.0403 0.2512 -0.1603 0.1343 21.9529 1049
Return Europe Communication Services Index 0.0114 0.2237 0.0510 0.1580 10.5158 1049

Table A.2: Annualized Return Statistics for Various Commodities and Indices
Phase III

Commodity/Index Mean StdDev Sharpe Skewness Kurtosis Observations
EUA Futures 0.3561 0.5655 0.6296 -1.5072 26.9876 1821
Crude Oil Brent 0.0457 0.4585 0.0998 4.0163 114.0050 1743
Natural Gas 0.1328 0.4434 0.2996 0.1060 11.0929 1743
Dow Jones UBS ExEnergy -0.0269 0.1071 -0.2508 -0.0715 5.7432 1741
Gold 0.0442 0.1680 0.2628 0.1568 12.8496 1743
Wheat 0.0167 0.2714 0.0615 -0.0408 7.1269 1743
Europe Index 0.0938 0.1668 0.5622 -0.8664 17.2715 1821
Europe Financial Services Index 0.0950 0.2342 0.4057 -0.8475 20.984 1821
Europe Industrials Index 0.1303 0.1928 0.6757 -0.4908 15.8235 1821
Europe Health Care Index 0.1190 0.1631 0.7296 -0.2853 8.4712 1821
Europe Consumer Discretionary Index 0.1255 0.2012 0.6238 -0.2186 16.0591 1821
Europe Consumer Staples Index 0.0980 0.1461 0.6709 -0.1886 10.4560 1821
Europe Information Technology Index 0.1695 0.2100 0.8073 -0.1849 11.4147 1821
Europe Materials Index 0.0891 0.2066 0.4311 -0.6520 13.4460 1821
Europe Energy Index 0.0323 0.2598 0.1242 -0.1862 26.3941 1821
Europe Utilities Index 0.1245 0.1826 0.6820 -0.9031 26.3195 1821
Europe Communication Services Index 0.0542 0.1794 0.3021 -0.5467 14.2509 1821

                                  34
Table A.3: Annualized Return Statistics for Various Commodities and Indices
Phase IV

Commodity/Index Mean StdDev Sharpe Skewness Kurtosis Observations
Crude Oil Brent 0.3944 0.4067 0.9698 1.8819 23.7794 733
Natural Gas 0.2586 0.6684 0.3868 0.0470 4.3222 733
Dow Jones UBS ExEnergy 0.1340 0.1449 0.9252 0.8062 11.9612 733
Gold 0.0888 0.1422 0.6245 -0.1588 4.7240 733
Wheat 0.0848 0.3723 0.2277 0.3822 5.0513 733
Carbon 0.3763 0.4603 0.8175 1.2330 16.4132 775
Return Carbon Futures 0.3763 0.4603 0.8175 1.2330 16.4132 775
Return Europe Index 0.1303 0.1388 0.9386 0.0110 6.8982 775
Return Europe Financial Services Index 0.1204 0.1984 0.6067 0.0948 6.1893 775
Return Europe Industrials Index 0.1561 0.1726 0.9045 -0.0515 4.7340 775
Return Europe Health Care Index 0.1085 0.1378 0.7878 0.1688 4.2726 775
Return Europe Consumer Discretionary Index 0.1333 0.2171 0.6141 0.2596 7.0077 775
Return Europe Consumer Staples Index 0.0319 0.1202 0.2652 0.0209 6.8320 775
Return Europe Information Technology Index 0.2006 0.2617 0.7663 0.5727 8.5626 775
Return Europe Materials Index 0.1290 0.1919 0.6723 0.8964 12.4193 775
Return Europe Energy Index 0.2972 0.2786 1.0666 2.6332 39.3624 775
Return Europe Utilities Index 0.0511 0.1623 0.3147 0.0173 4.5594 775
Return Europe Communication Services Index 0.0789 0.1280 0.6161 0.0604 6.0484 775

                                  35
Appendix B
Below are the cumulative returns for each instrument tested, first for stocks,
then commodities.

Figure B.1: Cumulative returns for each stock tested over the entire sample
period.

Figure B.2: Cumulative returns for each commodity tested over the entire sam-
ple period.

                                  36
Appendix C
All EUAfuture-to-sector betas are on the same graph.

              Figure C.1: All EUA future to sector beta tested.

Appendix D
In the following three tables, the EUA Future to Instrument beta regression
results are shown for each specific Phase.

Table D.1: EUA Futures to Instrument Beta Regression Statistics for Each
Commodity and Indices Phase II

                     Regression Equation: ReturnEUA Futures = α + β · ReturnInstrument + ϵ

                                                                                                                                                   2
Commodity/Index Carbon Intensity Cyclicality Beta Standard Error t-value p-value R
Crude Oil Brent High High 0.1966 0.0245 8.0203 0.0000 0.0594
Natural Gas High High 0.3563 0.0380 9.3649 0.0000 0.0807
Dow Jones-UBS ExEnergy Low Low 0.1336 0.0130 10.2763 0.0000 0.0958
Gold Low Low -0.0382 0.0148 -2.5800 0.0099 0.0066
Wheat Low Low 0.2122 0.0267 7.9477 0.0000 0.0595
Europe Index n/a n/a 0.1552 0.0149 10.3870 0.0000 0.0937
Europe Financial Services Index Low High 0.3189 0.0256 12.4402 0.0000 0.1291
Europe Industrials Index High High 0.2026 0.0180 11.2398 0.0000 0.1079
Europe Health Care Index Low Low 0.0275 0.0118 2.3287 0.0200 0.0052
Europe Consumer Discretionary Index Low High 0.0978 0.0177 5.5345 0.0000 0.0285
Europe Consumer Staples Index High Low 0.0538 0.0114 4.7107 0.0000 0.0208
Europe Information Technology Index Low Low 0.1673 0.0174 9.5947 0.0000 0.0810
Europe Materials Index High High 0.2501 0.0226 11.0721 0.0000 0.1051
Europe Energy Index High High 0.1180 0.0180 6.6105 0.0000 0.0402
Europe Utilities Index High Low 0.1792 0.0153 11.6919 0.0000 0.1158
Europe Communication Services Index Low Low 0.0876 0.0141 6.2341 0.0000 0.0359

                                  37
Table D.2: EUA Futures to Instrument Beta Regression Statistics for Each
Commodity and Indices Phase III

                    Regression Equation: ReturnEUA Futures = α + β · ReturnInstrument + ϵ

                                                                                                                                                   2
Commodity/Index Carbon Intensity Cyclicality Beta Standard Error t-value p-value R
Crude Oil Brent High High 0.1569 0.0189 8.2879 0.0000 0.0380
Natural Gas High High 0.0606 0.0186 3.2570 0.0011 0.0061
Dow Jones-UBS ExEnergy Low Low 0.0156 0.0045 3.4751 0.0005 0.0069
Gold Low Low -0.0145 0.0071 -2.0566 0.0398 0.0024
Wheat Low Low 0.0189 0.0114 1.6552 0.0980 0.0016
Europe Stock Index n/a n/a 0.0430 0.0068 6.2909 0.0000 0.0213
Europe Financial Services Index Low High 0.0633 0.0096 6.6010 0.0000 0.0234
Europe Industrials Index High High 0.0557 0.0079 7.0648 0.0000 0.0267
Europe Health Care Index Low Low 0.0134 0.0068 1.9885 0.0468 0.0022
Europe Consumer Discretionary Index Low High 0.0546 0.0082 6.6275 0.0000 0.0236
Europe Consumer Staples Index High Low 0.0032 0.0061 0.5257 0.5992 0.0002
Europe Information Technology Index Low Low 0.0426 0.0087 4.9209 0.0000 0.0131
Europe Materials Index High High 0.0620 0.0084 7.3355 0.0000 0.0287
Europe Energy Index High High 0.0777 0.0106 7.3115 0.0000 0.0286
Europe Utilities Index High Low 0.0335 0.0073 4.5653 0.0000 0.0113
Europe Communication Services Index Low Low 0.0311 0.0073 4.2355 0.0000 0.0098

Table D.3: EUA Futures to Instrument Beta Regression Statistics for Each
Commodity and Indices Phase IV

                    Regression Equation: ReturnEUA Futures = α + β · ReturnInstrument + ϵ

                                                                                                                                                   2
Commodity/Index Carbon Intensity Cyclicality Beta Standard Error t-value p-value R
Crude Oil Brent High High 0.2063 0.0338 6.1088 0.0000 0.0526
Natural Gas High High -0.0116 0.0558 -0.2071 0.8360 0.0001
Dow Jones-UBS ExEnergy Low Low 0.0471 0.0122 3.8480 0.0001 0.0216
Gold Low Low -0.0009 0.0120 -0.0711 0.9433 0.0000
Wheat Low Low -0.0887 0.0314 -2.8297 0.0047 0.0118
Europe Index n/a n/a 0.0753 0.0105 7.1653 0.0000 0.0623
Europe Financial Services Index Low High 0.0908 0.0152 5.9888 0.0000 0.0443
Europe Industrials Index High High 0.0584 0.0133 4.3839 0.0000 0.0243
Europe Health Care Index Low Low 0.0183 0.0107 1.7067 0.0880 0.0038
Europe Consumer Discretionary Index Low High 0.0970 0.0166 5.8426 0.0000 0.0423
Europe Consumer Staples Index High Low 0.0246 0.0094 2.6294 0.0086 0.0089
Europe Information Technology Index Low Low 0.0686 0.0203 3.3802 0.0007 0.0146
Europe Materials Index High High 0.1043 0.0145 7.1833 0.0000 0.0626
Europe Energy Index High High 0.2051 0.0205 10.0143 0.0000 0.1148
Europe Utilities Index High Low 0.0666 0.0125 5.3286 0.0000 0.0354
Europe Communication Services Index Low Low 0.0572 0.0097 5.9160 0.0000 0.0433

                                  38
Appendix E

  (a) EU Stocks, 30 days. (b) EU Stocks, 252 days. (c) EU Stocks, 756 days.

 (d) All Sectors, 30 days. (e) All Sectors, 252 days. (f) All Sectors, 756 days.

 (g) All Commodities, 30 (h) All Commodities, 252 (i) All commodities, 756
 days.                       days.                       days.

Figure E.1: Beta of EUA Futures to each of the instruments tested, with varying
rolling windows of 1 month (30 days), 1 year (252 days,) and 3 years (756 days).

                                  39
Appendix F
Below, the time-varying beta of EUA futures to each of the instruments tested
is shown.

     (a) Crude Oil Brent. (b) Natural Gas. (c) Gold.

(d) Europe Communica-       (e) Europe Consumer (f) European Energy In-
tion Services.                    Discretionary Index.      dex.

   (g) European Financial (h) Europe Health Care (i) EuropeIndustrialss In-
   Services Index.           Index.                    dex.

   (j) Europe Information (k) Europe Materials In-
   Technology Index.        dex. (l) Europe Utilities Index.

              (m) Dow Jones-UBS Ex-
               Energy. (n) Consumer Staples.

Figure F.1: Beta of EUA Futures to each of the instruments tested. Each is
calculated with a rolling window of 756 days across the entire sample period
with 95% confidence intervals.

                                  40