Stockholm School of Economics
Department of Economics
BE551 Degree Project in Economics
Spring 2024

     The Effects of Political Connections on Firms’
           Abnormal Returns in Thailand

        WILLY SEIFERT (25340) ETHAN GARVEY (25338)

Abstract: Developing economies experience significant political instability. Thai-
land, which has experienced 21 coup d’états since 1932, exemplifies this turbulence,
particularly with the 2006 and 2014 coup d’états against the siblings Thaksin and Yin-
gluck Shinawatra under the pretext of alleged nepotism. We exploit this unique his-
toric incidence of two coups against prime ministers of the same family to investigate
to what extent politically connected firms experienced abnormal high/low returns in
periods ex ante and ex post the coups. We therefore combined the financial data, in-
cluding firm characteristics and daily stock returns of approximately 450 Thai firms
for each coup, and categorized them based on political connections, identified through
an extensive manual-compiled dataset of politicians and their families. We find that
in the majority of periods surrounding the events of 2006 and 2014, the effect of polit-
ical connection remains insignificant. However, we suggest that political connections
might exhibit periodic effects, particularly in times of drastic political instability, since
politically connected firms experienced solely significantly higher negative abnormal
returns than unconnected firms in the direct aftermath of these events. Therefore,
our research contributes to understanding the dynamics of political connections in
developing economies and the firm-level impacts of drastic political events.

Keywords: Political Connections; Abnormal Returns; Coup d’états; Thailand; Political
            Instability; Shinawatra

JEL: D72; D53; G14; H89; O53

Supervisor: Professor Abhijeet Singh
Date submitted: 13/05/2024
Date examined: 22/05/2024
Discussants: Elis Hodzic and Lexi Tånneryd
Examiner: Professor Johanna Wallenius
Acknowledgements

We would like to thank our supervisor Abhijeet Singh for his valuable support and
guidance throughout the process of writing this thesis. Your input has been of great
value in shaping this paper. We also thank our families and friends for the support
and discussions throughout this project.

                                                               i
Contents

1 Introduction 1

2 Historical Perspectives on Politics in Thailand 4

   2.1 From the Siamese revolution of 1932 to the Millenium . . . . . . . . . . . 4

   2.2 Premierships of Thaksin Shinawatra (2001-2006) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

   2.3 Inter-Shinawatra period (2006-2011) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

   2.4 Premiership of Yingluck Shinawatra (2011-2014) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

3 Literature Review 7

   3.1 Political Connections and their Effects on Firms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

   3.2 Political Events and its Effects on Economies and Markets . . . . . . . . . 9

4 Motivation 10

5 Data 12

   5.1 Procurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

   5.2 Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

   5.3 Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

6 Empirical Strategy 21

   6.1 Univariate Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

   6.2 OLS Regressions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22

   6.3 Robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24

7 Results 25

   7.1 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25

   7.2 2014 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

8 Discussion 34

                                                              ii
   8.1 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34

   8.2 Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38

9 Conclusion 40

10 Bibliography 43

11 Appendix 49

   11.1 Coup d’états and Historic Exogeneity Assessments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49

   11.2 Remainder Firm Characteristics Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57

   11.3 Robust Industry Distribution Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59

   11.4 Overview POLCON Firms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60

   11.5 Rules for Determining Kinship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62

   11.6 Family Umbrellas 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65

   11.7 Family Umbrellas 2014 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71

   11.8 Use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in our Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78

                                                              iii
List of Figures

   1 Determining Kinship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64

List of Tables

   1 Summary Statistics Family Trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

   2 Family Umbrellas Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

   3 Robust Industry Distribution Sample Firms 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

   4 Industry Distribution Sample Firms 2014 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

   5 Firm Characteristics 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

   6 Event Segmentation Intervals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

   7 Robust Univariate Abnormal Returns 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26

   8 Univariate Abnormal Returns 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26

   9 Initial Regression Results 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

   10 Robust Regression Results 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30

   11 Univariate Abnormal Returns 2014 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

   12 Robust Univariate Abnormal Returns 2014 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

   13 Initial Regression Results 2014 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33

   14 Robust Regression Results 2014 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34

   15 Robust Firm Characteristics 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57

   16 Firm Characteristics 2014 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58

   17 Robust Firm Characteristics 2014 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58

   18 Robust Industry Distribution Sample Firms 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59

   19 Robust Industry Distribution Sample Firms 2014 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59

   20 POLCON Firms in 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60

   21 POLCON Firms in 2014 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61

   22 Politicians without Associated Surnames 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65

                                            iv
23 Family Umbrellas Single Associated Name 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66

24 Family Umbrellas 2, 3 or 4 Associated Surnames 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . 67

25 Family Umbrellas 5+ Associated Surnames 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68

26 Largest Family Umbrella 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69

27 Family Umbrella Shinawatra 2006 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70

28 Politicians without Associated Surnames 2014 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71

29 Family Umbrellas Single Associated Surname 2014 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72

30 Family Umbrellas 2 Associated Surnames 2014 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73

31 Family Umbrellas 3 and 4 Associated Surnames 2014 . . . . . . . . . . . . 74

32 Family Umbrellas 5+ Associated Surnames 2014 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75

33 Largest Family Umbrella 2014 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76

34 Family Umbrella Shinawatra 2014 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77

                                v
1 Introduction

                                                       1
Since 1950 there have been 446 coup d’état attempts  in developing economies, where
half of the coup d’états were successful and therefore constitute a sudden change of
government (Powell and Thyne, 2011). However, regardless of whether a coup can be
considered successful or not, coup d’états create significant political instability with se-
vere consequences for the political landscape and companies as a whole. Putsches re-
duce economic growth (Alesina et al., 1996) with substantial negative effects on other
growth-related objectives, like investments, education, or health (Meyersson, 2016),
raise the cost of capital (Balima, 2020), lead to drastic stock price volatilities (Ahmed,
2017) and a reduction in foreign aid (Masaki, 2016).

With 21 coup d’états since 1932, Thailand has been especially impacted by political
turmoil and military governments. In particular, the 2006 and 2014 coup d’états are
a unique occurrence in Thailand’s modern political landscape after the 1997 consti-
tution attempted to strengthen Thai democracy and institutions: Under the pretext of
protecting Thailand from nepotism, both coups were staged against prime ministers
belonging to the same family, siblings Thaksin and Yingluck Shinawatra. The Shi-
nawatras have been an influential Thai business family that achieved their wealth by
conducting business within the telecommunication sector during the mid-1990s and
early 2000s. Although historians have evaluated various causes that led to each coup,
a commonly shared criticism of each Shinawatra government has been their alleged
proximity to businesses through shareholdership and board of director positions, thus
creating a conflict of interest through potential personal gains. Therefore, this paper
investigates to what extent politically connected firms experienced particularly high
                                 2
or low abnormal stock returns  in periods prior to and after the 2006 and 2014 coup
                                                                                3
d’états, as well as the removal of Yingluck Shinawatra from office.

To shed light on this issue, we combined the financial data of approximately 450 Thai
firms, including metrics such as profitability, size, and leverage, among others, with
their respective daily stock returns, while the daily stock returns served as the basis
                                                4
for calculating their abnormal stock returns.  However, more importantly, to isolate
the effect of political connections on abnormal returns, we determined whether each
firm in our data set is politically connected or not. We conduct this classification on
the basis of shareholder and board composition data purchased from the Thai stock
exchange, which we combined with our extensive manually compiled data set of ap-
proximately forty government members and their approximately 370 respective fam-
ily members for each year. We thereby leverage the uniqueness of family names in
Thailand required by law and define a political connection if certain thresholds (see
5.2.2 and 6.3) of shareholdership and board composition are met. These data sets sub-
sequently provide the foundation to test in two ways whether politically connected

1
  Considering Europe as well, the total number is 457 coup d’états since 1950.
2
  Abnormal returns may be perceived as consequence of such proximity, thus serving as a proxy for polit-
   ical favors etc., see in more detail in section 4.
3
  Yingluck Shinawatra was removed fifteen days prior to the 2014 coup d’état on May 7th, 2014.
4
  Note that the true Thai market portfolio has more companies, see section 5.3.

                                    1
firms experienced in periods around the 2006 and 2014 coup d’état abnormal high re-
turns: First, we conduct univariate tests between both groups of firms during these
periods to identify whether they differ significantly. Second, we run a set of regres-
sions for these time periods in which we control for the aforementioned firm charac-
                                                                     5
teristics, industry membership, and political connection.

In contrast to the majority of political connection literature, we find that, to a large ex-
tent, political connections have no significant impact on the abnormal returns of Thai
firms in the periods under scrutiny around the coup d’état in 2006 and 2014 for both
the univariate tests and our regressions. The initial univariate tests for 2006 (Table
8) show only significant differences between politically connected and unconnected
firms in two of the six periods, namely in the immediate four-day and two-week after-
math of the coup d’état. In these periods, politically connected firms experienced sig-
nificantly higher negative abnormal returns than their counterparts (approximately 2
                         6
to 4 percentage points).  The univariate tests for 2014 (Table 11) yield similar results:
Only after Yingluck Shinawatra’s removal did politically connected firms experience
significantly higher negative abnormal returns of approximately 1 percentage point
more than unconnected firms. The set of regressions for 2006 and 2014 highlight the
tarnished effect of political connections even further. In particular, for 2014 (Table
13), in periods under scrutiny, we find that political connection cannot significantly
explain any variation in abnormal returns. Meanwhile, for 2006 (Table 9), we find
similar significant abnormal returns for political connections in the same periods as
in the 2006 univariate tests (the two periods after the coup d’état), but with lower sig-
nificance levels.

Second, defining political definitions more conservatively to test the robustness of our
results, we find that the results of the robust univariate tests for 2006 (Table 7) are
consistent with the same periods in the initial results, yet at a lower significance level.
Meanwhile, in the 2006 robust regression (Table 10) only political connection in the
four-day period after the coup d’état remains significant. However, for the robust 2014
univariate tests (Table 12), we identified stronger significant results in three time peri-
ods where it should be noted that politically connected companies experienced higher
positive abnormal returns in the period prior to the removal of Yingluck Shinawatra
in 2014 of approximately 11 percentage points. In contrast to the initial regressions,
the robust regressions for 2014 (Table 14) show a significant high positive abnormal
return for the political connections estimator during the period prior to the removal
of Yingluck Shinawatra.

Therefore, we can draw two conclusions. First, we assert that political connections
have a negligible impact on a firm’s abnormal returns. This is surprising given the
extensive political connections exhibited by firms in Thailand, which we were able to
attribute through our extensive background research on politicians and their fami-
lies. However, secondly, given our results, particularly the univariate tests, it appears

5
  To address the issue of endogeneity of these coup d’états that would bias our estimates, we conduct a
  detailed historical assessment of the causes for each coup d’état as well as Yingluck Shinawatra’s removal,
   see sections 11.1.2 and 11.1.3.
6
  Significant at the 1% and 5% level respectively.

                                    2
that the coup d’état in 2006 and the removal of Yingluck Shinawatra in 2014, have had
a greater negative impact on the abnormal returns of politically connected firms com-
pared to unconnected firms. Political connections thus might exhibit periodic specific
effects on abnormal returns, especially in times when the political landscape is dras-
tically shaken, such as when it is the removal of the prime minister or a coup d’état.

Our findings contribute to two strands of existing economic literature. First, our re-
search on Thailand sheds light on the effects of political connections in the context
of developing countries, particularly in South East Asia. Second, we provide further
insights into the effects of drastic political events on a firm-level. Bunkanwanicha and
Wiwattanakantang (2009) also examine the effects of political connections in Thailand
on abnormal returns in light of the election of Thaksin Shinawatra in 2001, and find,
contrary to our research, that politically connected firms experienced particularly in
a two and three year period after Shinawatra’s election strong significant abnormal
returns. For Indonesia, Fisman (2001) shows that the stock returns of companies that
had a stronger political affiliation to the former President Suharto experienced lower
stock returns if the President was allegedly sick. Meanwhile, Ahmed (2017) examines
the effects of three political events on stock volatilities in light of Egypt’s presidential
elections in 2012 and 2014 as well as the coup d’état in 2013, finding that these events
cause significant volatilities in stock prices.

However, the existing literature has so far neglected the political events in Thailand,
namely the coup d’états as well as Yingluck Shinawatra’s removal. These events pro-
vide, given that the governments were led by brother and sister respectively, the unique
opportunity to study twice an almost similar set of companies that can be regarded as
politically connected: In fact, we find that our sample of politically connected firms
has a 45% overlap for the initial definition and a 50% overlap for the robust defini-
tion between 2006 and 2014. Moreover, while our approach of determining politi-
cal connections through family names is not novel, our extensive compiled data on
politicians and their family members in these respective periods is unique concern-
ing research in Thailand and enables us to confidently attribute political connection,
exceeding both quantitatively and qualitatively previous papers from a data point of
view. Lastly, our findings are relevant not only from an economic point of view but
also from a historical point of view: The common perception is that the coups against
the Shinawatra governments were staged due to their allegedly nepotistic nature and
close ties to businesses. However, this appears to be just a pretext for the coups if un-
usually high returns are considered a proxy for personal gains. Instead, our findings
align with historical arguments that the actual causes were more political and ideo-
logical, rooted in an ongoing intra-elite struggle between Shinawatra supporters and
                                                                                 7
conservative elites (Hewison, 2008; McCargo, 2015, among others).

7
  A thorough explanation of these historical arguments is provided in the appendix, see sections 11.1.2 and
   11.1.3.

                                    3
2 Historical Perspectives on Politics in Thailand

2.1 From the Siamese revolution of 1932 to the Millenium

The Siamese revolution of 1932 ended Thailand’s century-long absolute monarchy and
resulted in the establishment of the constitutional monarchy that still exists today
(de Lapomarede, 1934). However, Thailand’s political landscape during the twentieth
century was particularly characterized by great instability. In the subsequent sixty
years, nineteen unconstitutional attempts occurred to topple the government of which
thirteen were successful, parallel to twenty prime ministers that headed 48 govern-
ments. Most governments were led by the military or military surrogates, whereas
only sixteen governments were civilian; during that time also fifteen constitutions
were promulgated (Neher, 1992). Plagued from over 60 years of corruption, political
inefficiency, and military rule, as well as the bloody suppression of protests in May
1992, the new government under the Democratic Party paved the way for the “Com-
mittee for Democratic Development” in 1994 which aimed to create a new democratic
constitution (Klein, 1998b).

Therefore, in 1997 a new democratic constitution was enacted, which included as
major reform a party-list system for the House of Representatives: 400 MPs were
elected in their respective constituencies, while the remaining 100 MPs were selected
through party lists. With this system, these MPs would serve a four-year term, while
the prime minister was obliged to be an MP (Uwanno and Burns, 1998). The first consti-
tutional election was held on January 6th, 2001 (Bunkanwanicha and Wiwattanakan-
tang, 2009).

2.2 Premierships of Thaksin Shinawatra (2001-2006)

Founded in 1998 by business tycoons, the Thai Rak Thai Party (TRT) won 248 of 500
seats in the 2001 election, significantly supported by rural voters from northern provin-
ces (Phatharathananunth, 2008; Hewison, 2008). With the absorbance of a few smaller
parties, the TRT achieved the absolute majority (Jotikut, 2016). As a result, Thaksin
Shinawatra, the leader of the TRT, assumed the role of Prime Minister of Thailand
on February 9th, 2001, with a cabinet composed largely of prominent business fig-
ures and individuals connected to the broader business community’s familial net-
works (Bunkanwanicha and Wiwattanakantang, 2009). However, Shinawatra’s first
six months in office were tarnished due to a conviction of deliberately concealing as-
sets as a MP. Although he successfully appealed and won the subsequent court ruling
closely with an 8-7 majority in August 2001 (Connors, 2008), his initial conviction set
the tone for later allegations of corruption.

                                    4
Once in office, Pye and Schaffar (2008) argue that Shinawatra implemented populist
policies, catering to the masses, while simultaneously pushing forward his neoliberal
agenda that aimed to restructure the Thai economy to the benefit of large corpora-
tions and Thailand’s competitiveness globally. For instance, Thaksin Shinawatra im-
plemented a public health care scheme, particularly for the rural population, while
also promoting the ”medical hub project”, which attracted foreign patients but in-
advertently caused a brain drain from public hospitals to better paying private hos-
pitals (Pachanee and Wibulpolprasert, 2006). Second, Thaksin’s rural development
initiatives, including debt restructuring and credit programs, spurred a shift toward
more capital-intensive agriculture. However, this shift predominantly benefited large
corporations and their monoculture-focused contract farmers, often leaving smaller
farmers unable to compete effectively. (Connors, 2008). Third, Shinawatra aggres-
sively pursued free trade agreements (FTA) with countries such as Australia and China
in 2003 to boost agricultural exports (Pye and Schaffar, 2008). However, small-farmer
protests claimed that these FTAs were detrimental, alleging that they were primar-
ily aimed at liberalizing the telecommunications sector, benefiting Shinawatra’s own
Shin Corporation (Moxham, 2004). Alongside these policies, allegedly suppressed the
media through the acquisition of iTV, and pursued in the separatist southern provinces,
culturally closer to Malaysia, a “war on drugs” through draconian military operations
(Connors, 2008).

Shinawatra’s effective management of the aftermath of the December 2004 tsunami
contributed to his landslide victory in the 2005 election (Jotikut, 2016). Historically,
this victory was not unique in its magnitude, as the TRT won 375 of 500 seats in the
House of Representatives, but also because Shinawatra led thus the first government
to complete a whole legislative term since the Siamese revolution in 1932 (Bunkan-
wanicha and Wiwattanakantang, 2009).

However, the anti-Thaksin movement arose during 2005. The movement arguably
began when the Shinawatra-critical broadcast show “Thailand Weekly” by Sondhi
Limthongkul, a former Shinawatra ally and media mogul, was cut off and moved to
Lumpini Park where his speeches attracted over 30,000 spectators (Pye and Schaffar,
2008). Allegedly, Limthongkul and Shinawatra diverged over not providing preferen-
tial business opportunities for Limthongkul’s businesses (Tejapira, 2006). However,
arguably the tipping point for the anti-Thaksin demonstration was the announcement
of the tax-free sale of his Shin Corporation to a Singaporean investment company. The
sale was carried out quickly after the new Thai telecommunication act became effec-
tive on January 23rd, 2006, which raised the maximum of foreign holdings in the sector
to 49% - the exact shareholdership of Shinawatra. In response, Limthongkul accused
Shinawatra of corruption and not respecting the King (Hewison, 2008). On February
4th, Limthongkul formed with broad public support the People’s Alliance for Democ-
racy (PAD). The PAD consisted of more than 40 civil organizations and organized mass

                                    5
demonstrations throughout February and March with between 50,000 and 300,000
protesters (Connors, 2008), wherein the protests attracted particularly the urban mid-
dle class (Jotikut, 2016). The main objective of the PAD was Shinawatra’s resignation,
while Limthongkul also called for a royal intervention (Pye and Schaffar, 2008).

Amid significant political unrest and protests, Shinawatra called for reelections in
April 2006, which were boycotted by the opposition and thus later annulled by the
constitutional court (Connors, 2008). During the summer, Limthongkul’s ally, former
prime minister and monarchist General Prem Tinsulanonda, toured Thailand’s mil-
itary academies, advocating military loyalty to the King, while his affiliate General
Sonthi Boonyaratglin, later head of the 2006 coup d’état, became the new commander
in chief. The coup d’état was staged on September 19th, 2006, when Shinawatra was
in New York (Ockey, 2007).

2.3 Inter-Shinawatra period (2006-2011)

The period after the coup d’état in 2006 was marked by further political instability
through protests, as the interim government under Surayud Chulanont, which was
closely aligned with the military, revoked the majority of policies implemented under
Shinawatra, such as his health scheme. Subsequently, during the 2008 political crisis,
Thailand had three short premierships, namely under Samak Sundaravej and Som-
chai Wongsawat (Liu, 2014). The political crisis of 2008, resulted in a new premiership
by the opposition leader Abhisit Vejjajiva. He targeted the ongoing economic struggle
for the last two years with two stimulus packages, addressing primarily the poorer
households and large infrastructure projects to obtain popular support, particularly
from regions in the North. However, the harsh measures during the antigovernment
protests in 2010 that favored Shinawatra, as well as the lack of popular vote, resulted
in defeat against Yingluck Shinawatra during the election in July 2011 (Jotikut, 2016).

2.4 Premiership of Yingluck Shinawatra (2011-2014)

Following the elections on July 3rd, 2011, Yingluck Shinawatra assumed her premier-
ship on August 5th, 2011, with the Pheu Thai Party, arguably the successor of and
proxy for Thaksin Shinawatra’s TRT and formed a coalition with a few smaller parties
(Jotikut, 2016). Following the poor management of the 2011 flood and other instances
of internal friction, Shinawatra reshuffled her cabinet four times to strengthen inter-
nal support. Similarly to her brother, she pursued economic policies that emphasized
economic growth, particularly for the development of poorer and rural constituen-
cies in the Northern provinces that were her main electorate. She introduced a sub-
sidy program for approximately seventeen million rice farmers, increased the mini-
mum wage to 10 USD per day, and established a 64 USD billion infrastructure scheme

                                    6
(Liu, 2014). Moreover, she also advocated for an equivalent of the EU common mar-
ket with other ASEAN countries through reduced border controls (Mellor and Suwan-
nakij, 2013). Through these targeted policies on the rural population, her policies were
perceived to be highly populistic and addressed through public protests.

However, the tipping point in protests arose when Shinawatra introduced during the
2013 summer an amnesty bill that would have pardoned all protestors, protest lead-
ers, army leaders as well as former TRT politicians, including her brother Thaksin
Shinawatra, going back until 2004, starting the 2013/14 political crisis. In particular,
opposition leader Suthep Thaugsuban of the Democratic Party organized these rallies
and claimed that the bill was meant to allow Thaksin Shinawatra to return to Thai-
land. (Baker, 2016). Although the bill was passed on November 1st, 2013, and the
senate subsequently annulled it on November 11th, the protests intensified due to a
proposed constitutional amendment that initiated making the senate a fully elected
chamber, quickly rejected by the constitutional court on November 20th (Kongkirati,
2016). Due to the protests and the impediments, Shinawatra dissolved the House of
Representatives on December 9th, 2013, and scheduled new elections for February
2nd, 2014.

Although another victory for Shinawatra’s ruling Pheu Thai Party was predicted, due
to protest disruption, the election was annulled on March 21st by the constitutional
court (Liu, 2014). However, Shinawatra also faced an alleged constitutional miscon-
duct as she transferred, after assuming her premiership in 2011, a senior official to the
prime minister’s office. Thus, on May 7th the constitutional court removed Yingluck
Shinawatra from office with nine other cabinet members, as this transfer involved
a conflict of interest (Jotikut, 2016). Subsequently, amid further political instability
due to extensive protests, the army declared martial law on May 20th, and the army
leader, General Prayut Chan-o-cha, who previously publicly stated to remain neutral,
declared the coup d’état on May 22nd after the protest leaders and the government
could not reach an agreement (McCargo, 2015).

3 Literature Review

3.1 Political Connections and their Effects on Firms

Various papers examined the influence of political connections. Arguably, the politi-
cal scientist Roberts (1990) pioneered in this field when he utilized the sudden death
of Senator Henry Jackson in 1983 to investigate its effect on stock prices of companies
that were affiliated with Jackson. The event study found that the stock prices of the af-
filiated companies dropped, while the stock prices of the firms related to his successor
increased significantly.

                                    7
In subsequent research, empirical evidence has been found that political connections
of firms are associated with lower stock price crash risk in Indonesia (Harymawan
et al., 2019), lower equity cost (Boubakri et al., 2012), greater access to bank loans
(Infante and Piazza, 2014; Faccio, 2010) or a better chance of obtaining government
concessions, in the form of subsidies (Zhang et al., 2014), or government contracts
(Tahoun, 2014). Among others, Lehne et al. (2018) also showcased that political con-
nections affect the probability of road constructions in India, while Ahmad et al. (2022)
highlighted the nuanced distinction between the different types of political connec-
tions necessary. They show that firms in Pakistan that are connected to civil servants,
including the government, pay significantly higher audit fees than unconnected com-
panies because they find evidence of higher associated business and audit risk. How-
ever, companies connected to the military pay significantly lower audit fees than un-
connected companies, as the military provides a “stable political platform”.

Arguably, there are multiple facets to why politically connected firms exhibit superior
firm performance than politically unconnected firms (Saeed et al., 2019), reasoned,
for example, by the derived competitive advantage firms have through access to more
government resources affecting ultimately their profitability (Chang and Wong, 2004;
Faccio, 2010). Therefore, the most dominant issue under scrutiny concerns the effects
of political connections on either firm performance or stock price returns, as seen in
a comprehensive overview compiled by Wong and Hooy (2018). They identify that the
majority of research is case study based on countries and focuses on one specific type
of political connections, wherein the specific types are categorized as follows:

   1. Political connection is given as the firm is a state enterprise, thus government-
     linked.

  2. Political connection is given through former or current government members on
     a firm’s board.

   3. Political connection is given through the proximity of business owners to politi-
     cians in government.

  4. Political connections are given through government official’s family members
     who are either shareholders or on the firm’s board.

Using this approach to investigate political connections on firm performance in Malay-
sia over multiple years, Wong and Hooy (2018) find that state enterprises and firms
that are politically connected through politicians on their board exhibit a better firm
performance. Meanwhile, they cannot assert a better firm performance if a firm is
politically connected through family members or the proximity of business owners to
government members.

However, we want to highlight two papers, notably the paper published by Fisman

                                    8
(2001) as well as Bunkanwanicha and Wiwattanakantang (2009) because their geo-
graphical focus, methodology, and insights provide the basis for our research. Fis-
man (2001) focuses on the macro perspective with his case study on firms that were
politically connected to President Suharto in Indonesia. By establishing a political con-
nection as a continuous variable, he could discern the extent of political exposure and
differentiate between the gravity of rumors surrounding President Suharto’s health is-
sues. He showed that as the severity of rumors concerning President Suharto’s health
increased, more politically connected firms exhibited significantly lower stock returns
compared to companies that were not politically related to President Suharto’s regime.

Meanwhile, the research by Bunkanwanicha and Wiwattanakantang (2009) is unique
because it not only examines in depth the reasons for Thaksin Shinawatra and fel-
low business owners with their Thai Rak Thai (TRT) to run for office in the 2001 gen-
eral election, but also shows the effect of political power on market evaluation: They
find that the dependency of businesses on concessionary income through government
contracts is a significant factor in deciding to run for political office, while businesses
connected to politicians in Thaksin Shinawatra’s government achieved significant ab-
normally high returns after 36 months in office. In addition, they also investigated the
mechanisms used to channel political favors, documenting that politically connected
businesses do not benefit positively from preferential access to debt financing. How-
ever, they detect that the implementation of beneficiary public policies led to “aston-
ishingly” high abnormal returns for politically connected firms. Lastly, these firms
also displaced unconnected competitors, ultimately achieving higher market shares
during Thaksin Shinawatra’s premiership.

3.2 Political Events and its Effects on Economies and Markets

Alesina et al. (1996) explored the relationship between political instability and eco-
nomic growth across 113 countries from 1950 to 1982, defining political instability as
the likelihood of government collapse. Their findings not only suggest that political
instability reduces economic growth but also distinguish between the types of change
that lead to instability: In particular, unconstitutional executive changes, like coup
d’états, as well as significant changes in ideologies through government transitions
contribute to lower economic growth, whereas the political instability caused by reg-
ular government turnovers in industrial democracies exhibits weak effects on growth.
It is important to highlight that Alesina et al. (1996) also find that a low economic
growth rate increases the probability of government turnovers, like coup d’états, while
they also show that the occurrence of government changes increases the likelihood of
subsequent changes, manifesting political instability.

Meanwhile, the question of whether political risk impacts stock returns has, for exam-
ple, been studied by Diamonte et al. (1996) wherein political risk is attributed to sev-

                                    9
eral factors, including political leadership, corruption in the government, or military
in politics, among others. They find statistically significant evidence that increases in
political risk have larger effects on returns in emerging markets than in developed
countries, underlining that emerging markets exhibit more volatility.

The research of Alesina et al. (1996) and Diamonte et al. (1996) serves as a basis for
further investigating the practical effects of political instability, especially embodied
by coup d’etats. Using a panel data set covering 134 countries, Balima (2020) finds
that putsches significantly increase the cost of debt, while they also increase the likeli-
hood of experiencing sovereign default, where more pronounced effects in autocratic
countries are observable. Meanwhile, Meyersson (2016) documents substantial nega-
tive effects on multiple growth-related objectives, such as investment, education, and
health as a consequence of coup d’etats, while new leaders fail to advance economic
reforms and end political instability. He also highlights that coup d’états are especially
detrimental to a country’s economy when its government was democratically elected
before the coup. Lastly, Masaki (2016) finds evidence that in response to the coup
d’états, foreign aid was significantly reduced when evaluating a panel data set from
1960 to 2012.

While these previous studies highlight the effects of coup d’états in various countries
from a cross-country macro-perspective over time, other studies investigate the effects
of specific political events on financial markets, such as presidential elections. For
example, Ahmed (2017) examined the effects of three political events on market prices
and stock volatilities, using Egypt as a case study considering the presidential election
in 2012, the military-led coup d’état in 2013 and the presidential election in 2014. He
shows that political uncertainty has a significant impact on prices and thus volatilities,
wherein the basic consumer goods industry is less affected than the financial industry.
Moreover, of all three events, the military coup had the most severe consequences on
the market due to its high political uncertainty. Other examples include the research
by Rigobon and Sack (2005) that assessed the impact of the US invasion in Iraq on the
US financial market, finding that war-related news prompted high declines in equity
prices and Treasury yields, or the paper by Nikkinen and Vähämaa (2010) showing
a substantial negative stock market sentiment following the terrorist attacks in New
York (2001), Madrid (2004), and London (2005).

4 Motivation

From the coup d’états to the removal of Yingluck Shinawatra, most previous economic
research has largely overlooked the political events in Modern Thailand. Through our
analysis, we have discovered a 45% and 50% overlap between the politically connected
firms in 2006 to the ones in 2014 respectively. Given that the governments were led

                                   10
by brother and sister, respectively, this gives the unique opportunity to study a similar
group of connected firms across two different time periods.

Furthermore, Fisman (2001) noted in his case study in Indonesia that the impact of
political connections on stock returns would ideally not have been studied based on
the rumors surrounding President Suharto’s health, but through an abrupt change in
government structures. The unique prevalence of the two coup d’états in 2006 and
2014 as well as the centralized political system of Thailand, whose importance was
stressed by Fisman (2001), means that the political landscape of Thailand provides
the ”ideal scenario”. Meanwhile, Bunkanwanicha and Wiwattanakantang (2009) fo-
cused exclusively on the impact of political connections on stock returns at the onset
of Shinawatra’s premiership in 2001, leaving a significant research gap.

Consequently, motivated by the diverse literature that highlights the effects of political
connections in various aspects, the distinctive circumstances of coups in Thailand, and
Bunkanwanicha and Wiwattanakantang (2009) sole focus on the onset of Shinawatra’s
first premiership, we define the following research questions:

  1. To what extent do the stock returns of politically connected companies outper-
     form non-politically connected companies when the government is still in office?

  2. To what extent does a sudden change of government, seen in the 2006 and 2014
     coup d’état as well as the removal of Yingluck Shinawatra, impact the returns of
     politically connected companies compared to non-politically connected compa-
     nies?

We will address these research questions through the following hypotheses:

   • H1: Politically connected firms have abnormally high returns in the years prior
     to the coup d’état 2006 as investors assume such companies can leverage their
     political connections.

    • H2: Politically connected firms have abnormally low returns after the coup d’état
     2006 within the three time periods assessed due a loss of investor confidence.

   • H3: Politically connected firms have abnormally high returns prior to the coup
     d’état 2014 as investors assume such companies can leverage their political con-
     nections.

   • H4: Politically connected firms have abnormal low returns after to removal of
     Yingluck Shinawatra and/or the coup d’état 2014 due a loss of investor confi-
     dence.

It is crucial to note that although abnormal returns may not directly indicate politi-
cal favors, conflicts of interest, or nepotism, there is still the potential for the public,

                                   11
including investors, to interpret them as such, even if these factors were not actually
involved. This perception is thus the basis for our hypotheses.

5 Data

5.1 Procurement

5.1.1 Financials and Stock Returns

Stock prices and annual fundamentals for listed companies are collected from the
Wharton Research Data Service (WRDS). For the 2006 coup, daily stock prices were
used to calculate abnormal returns. We followed two methods, using Buy-and-Hold
Abnormal Returns (BHAR) and Cumulative Abnormal Returns (CAR) to calculate both
long- and short-term abnormal returns between the periods of February 2005 and
March 2007. A more in-depth explanation of both methods will be found later, in sec-
tion 5.2.1. To reduce bias and ensure precision, we used company fundamental data
from the closing balance of 2005 (opening balance of 2006) to calculate control vari-
ables, such as profitability and leverage ratios. For events in 2014, we implemented
the same methods with stock data 2013-2014 and annual fundamentals from the clos-
ing balance of 2013 (opening balance of 2014).

5.1.2 Shareholder and Board of Directors

We purchased an extract of the SETSMART dataset on major shareholders and board of
directors of Thai firms from the Stock Exchange Thailand (SET) information obtained
from annual reports (Thai form: FM 56-1) and mandatory to disclose to SET: For each
company, the largest ten shareholders, any shareholder with at least 0.5%, as well as
members of the board, must be reported and, if changes occur, immediately updated
(Thai law). Therefore, since the data could be purchased on a customized annual ba-
sis, we requested the data for a one-year time frame that cumulated, respectively, in
the coup d’états, capturing the major shareholder and board names relevant for our
investigation: For the 2006 coup d’état, the data ranges from September 20th, 2005, to
September 19th, 2006, while for the 2014 coup d’état, the data ranges from May 23rd,
2013, to May 22nd, 2014. The data of the major shareholders was in Thai, while the
board data was in English, thus romanized.

                                   12
5.1.3 Politicians and their Families

As the premise of our research is the distinguishing factor between politically con-
nected and unconnected Thai firms, we manually compiled our own data set con-
taining all relevant politicians and their extended family members. A politician was
relevant when they held a cabinet position within the Thaksin Shinawatra II govern-
ment (Cabinet 55) or in the Yingluck Shinawatra government (Cabinet 60), by being
the prime minister, deputy prime minister, minister of a certain ressort, or deputy
                                8
minister of a certain ressort.  However, due to the scope of our research and be-
cause Yingluck Shinawatra reshuffled her cabinet four times, we only consider rel-
evant politicians from the 60th cabinet, if they held their position until the coup d’état
on May 22nd, 2014, or lost their position in the last reshuffle taking place on June 30th,
2013. To obtain all relevant cabinet members, we relied on official government web-
sites that were only accessible by using Way Back Machine, an archiving website that
allows access to websites that have already been deleted.

Meanwhile, we augmented the cabinet members’ data set by reconstructing their ex-
tended family through manually researching their publicly known relatives. Funda-
mentally, we took the Thai, the English and the German versions of a relevant politi-
cian’s Wikipedia page and collected family member names that were, respectively,
mentioned. If a family member had their own Wikipedia page, this page was used
again to collect further names of relatives. This procedure was iterated until the in-
formation on names was exhausted, and a name reached a dead-end by having no
Wikipedia page on their own. We gather both the Romanised and the Thai versions
of each person’s full name and cross-checked all individual Thai names by searching
them online in various Thai newspapers; the correct spelling was detrimental to the
matching of the SETSMART data during the determination of political connections.
Therefore, our complete data set contains a detailed list of all relevant politicians and
                                      9
their extended family members , wherein we assign to each family member also their
respective distance (grade of kinship) to the relevant politician. Our extensive method-
ological approach and rules for incorporating and defining a grade of a person are
visible, respectively, in Table 22 to Table 34 in the appendix. It is important to note
that we do not claim a family tree to be exhaustive due to the fact that not all family
members are publicly disclosed but argue that the data set provides a comprehen-
sive overview on politicians and their relatives that is sufficient for the scope of our
research, see the description of data structure in the following section.

8
  From a hierarchical point of view the deputy prime ministers and the ministers of different ressorts are
  the same level. Therefore, within our data set we assign to all affected politicians the same level (M),
  while the Prime Minister holds level PM and deputy ministers hold level DM.
9
  The manual research of relatives led in two instances to direct members of the Thai Royal Family. Due to
  the strict rules outlined in Section 112 of the Thai Criminal Code surrounding lèse-majesté, we discontin-
  ued our research in these two instances when it was certain that the subsequent person belonged to the
  Royal Family. However, certain names, such as Kitiyakara that belong to the Thai aristocracy and thus
  the extended Royal Family, were included.

                                   13
5.1.4 Wealthy Families

Acemoglu et al. (2005) state that wealth can serve as a motivation for obtaining de jure
political power to gain economic benefits. While Bunkanwanicha and Wiwattanakan-
tang (2009) find specific evidence that this is accurate for Thailand, they argue more
nuanced that wealth can also be seen as a proxy for high social status and having
access to networks, including politicians. Therefore, we also incorporate the latest
Forbes Magazine annual ranking of the wealthiest Thai families and persons before
each coup d’état occurred. These rankings were published in June 2006 and 2013, re-
spectively, whereas the 2006 edition featured forty and the 2013 edition fifty families
or persons.

While the theoretical argument of their relevance is established above, we will elab-
orate further in subsection 5.2.2 on how the relation between wealth and politician
families is established in our research.

5.2 Construction

5.2.1 Calculating Abnormal Returns

Following the approach by Bunkanwanicha and Wiwattanakantang (2009), we take as
the main measurement of outperformance in stock returns the Buy-and-hold abnor-
mal returns (BHAR) which was first introduced by Barber and Lyon (1997). First, BHAR
permits us to encapsulate the accumulation of market value during the Shinawatra
premierships. Second, the BHAR can approximate the value of the political power
Shinawatra obtained during his premierships conditional on all information that is
slowly revealed over time. Although the BHAR methodology may also divulge infor-
mation beyond the value of political connections, thus affecting the outlook of firms,
we argue that the aforementioned benefits outweigh this shortcoming. To calculate
the BHAR, we therefore rely on the following formula as specified by Bunkanwanicha
and Wiwattanakantang (2009):

                            [          ]  [          ]
                   ∏T        ∏T
                   BHARiT =    (1 + Rit) −    (1 + Rmt)                  (1)
                                        t=1                t=1

BHAR is calculated for firm i over the total number of periods T (total number of
months), whereas t represents the specific time period (month) under scrutiny. Mean-
while, Rmt constitutes the return of the value-weighted index of the market, defined
by the daily stock price data of all Thai firms from Compustat.

However, since BHAR is used primarily to understand abnormal returns over a pro-

                                   14
longed period, we employ the CAR as a way to assess the immediate market response
to the coups (including Yingluck’s removal), following the approach of Larcker et al.
(1980). The investigation into the event windows spans four days (-1, +2 days). We
have chosen this time window to account for any changes in stock returns on the day
of the coup. In some time periods, such as 2006, where the event occurred in the late
evening and the stock exchange was closed, most investors would not have been able
to react directly. However, with such drastic political shifts, we wanted to account
for potential information leakages that could have affected investors decisions. To
accomplish this, the CARs are calculated using the following formula:

                            ∑Tn
                              CAR(T1, Tn) =     ARt (2)
                                                   t=T1

Wherein T1 and Tn represent the start and end points of each time window.

5.2.2 Determining Political Connections

One key aspect of distinguishing the effect of political connection on abnormal returns
is to determine which Thai firms are politically connected and which are not. Follow-
ing the approach of Bunkanwanicha and Wiwattanakantang (2009), we can leverage
the uniqueness of family names that is required by law in Thailand. For example, any
person with the surname “Shinawatra” within the data set of the major shareholders
and board members provided by SET will thus belong to the “Shinawatra family um-
brella”, regardless of whether an individual’s first name is listed in our handpicked
family tree data set. Furthermore, in a successive paper, Bunkanwanicha et al. (2013)
find evidence in Thailand that network marriages can be a potential source of value
gains for families and their businesses, solidifying our claim that associated new fam-
ily names acquired through our manual research of family trees can be considered
to “belong” to the same relevant family name of politicians. In the case of ”Shinawa-
tra”, this means that ”Na Pompet”, the maiden name of Thaksin Shinawatra’s ex-wife,
is added to the “Shinawatra family umbrella”, consisting of the associated surnames
due to their interconnection.

To establish political connections subsequently, the comprehensive list provided by
Wong and Hooy (2018) and our literature review show that the majority of research
defines political connections simply by considering whether any politician or any of
their family members possesses any shareholdership or is represented on the board
of directors. This definition emanates from the assumption that major shareholders
receive significant benefits from better firm performance even if they do not have
controlling rights (Lazonick and O’sullivan, 2000). Meanwhile, the board’s primary
obligation is to protect the interests of shareholders (Davies, 2000), and other stud-

                                   15
ies also find evidence to influence firms’ performance, see Klein (1998a), Vafeas and
Theodorou (1998), among others.

Therefore, although the Thai Stock Exchange demands the public disclosure of at least
0.5% shareholdership to transparently highlight major shareholders, we increase the
threshold of political connection to a minimum of 1% shareholdership to more confi-
dently attribute a political connection. However, Bunkanwanicha and Wiwattanakan-
tang (2009) as well as Acemoglu et al. (2005) also emphasize that wealth might be a
proxy for social status, and thus access to political networks and connections. To in-
corporate this notion, we allow a wealthy family and a politician’s family umbrella to
cumulatively achieve the 1% threshold. Second, for the board of directors, we adopt
the standard approach in the literature on political connections and also argue that a
political connection is given if a firm has at least one board of directors member that
belongs to the family umbrella of any politician.

Furthermore, it is important to note that when matching the SET and WRDS data, we
do not classify the parent or subsidiaries of a politically connected company as also
politically connected.

5.3 Description

5.3.1 Financial Data

Between 2005 and 2007, WRDS contained daily stock data on 531 unique companies
while the annual fundamental data had 502 unique companies. Quarterly fundamen-
tals and monthly stock data contained fewer overall companies and were not imple-
mented. In total, excluding any occurrences of missing values, we identified 478 total
matching companies across the two data sets. Given the large amount of observa-
tions, and to avoid any bias related to imputation or prediction, all NA values from
the annual fundamental data were removed. This resulted in us having 430/531 max-
imum companies in our sample. The remaining 101 companies were used as part of a
benchmark portfolio by which to calculate abnormal returns. The same method was
applied for 2014, but the data sets contained more missing values. Of the 576 potential
companies, only 464 companies remained after cleaning the data.

However, not all lost observations within the regression are attributable to the re-
moval of NA values in the initial matching process. When calculating stock returns,
we compare the price of the stock at the current time period with the price at the previ-
ous time period. If the daily stock data is missing enough values within a time period,
then we cannot generate a return. This is not an issue over the long term, but when
calculating short term abnormal returns insufficient data from WRDS results in fewer
companies. This difference is represented in the regression tables, where the number

                                   16
of observations varies slightly between time periods.

5.3.2 Initial Politicians Families

In this subsection, we want to highlight the main characteristics of our self-collected
data on the families of relevant politicians and why we argue that the scope is suffi-
cient for our research.

                     Table 1: Summary Statistics Family Trees

                                                     2006 2014
         Raw Data
           Number of Relevant Politicians 42 47
           Number of Politicians Relatives 367 386
           Total Number of People 409 433
            Average of Relatives per Politician 8.7 8.2
           Median of Relatives per Politician 4 4
            Average Kinship Degrees Relatives* 2.5 2.7
           Median Kinship Degrees Relatives* 2 2
           Max Kinship Degrees Relatives 7 9
          Cleaned Data
           Number of Associated Surnames 145 151
           Total Amount of Family Surnames 187 198
           Amount of Family Umbrellas 39 42
            Average of Associated Surnames per Politician 3.5 3.2
           Median of Associated Surnames per Politician 1 1
            Average Kinship Degrees Umbrellas* 4.7 3.6
           Median Kinship Degrees Umbrellas* 3 3
           Max of Kinship Degrees Umbrellas 7 9
                                Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

                       10
As evident in Table 1,  we were able to retrieve a notable amount of family names
and thus family umbrellas from our collected data sample by investigating the rela-
tives of all relevant politicians. In both years, we were able to trace more than 400
relatives, reaching a maximum at the 7th degree of kinship in 2006, and at the 9th
degree in 2014, while we found on average 8.7 relatives in 2006 and 8.2 relatives per
relevant politician in 2014. In both years, the median number of relatives per politi-
cian was lower (four relatives), which is explicable through the fact that the majority
of politicians had a more dim online presence than others, for example, the Shinawa-
tras. However, the cleaned family data highlights that extensive research was crucial
as in both years at the maximum degree of kinship, an additional relevant surname
was found; key to developing the family umbrellas for the politicians, which are based
on a total of 182 in 2006 and 198 associated surnames in 2014. Similarly to the average

10
  In Table 1, certain statistics are marked with (*). Note that the average and median of the kinship degree
  statistics are skewed upward because these calculations exclude degree 0, omitting all politicians without
  associated relatives or surnames, thereby introducing a bias that inflates the measures.

                                   17
and median of the relatives, the median with one associated surname per politician is
lower than the averages, respectively, due to the same reasoning: In 2006, for exam-
ple, the Shinawatra family had 21 associated family names, whereas we did not find
any associated surnames for 18 politicians. Ultimately, we were able to determine 39
family umbrellas for 2006 and 42 family umbrellas for 2014. The lower number of
family umbrellas is attributable to the fact that our research of relatives highlighted
the interconnectedness between families of relevant politicians, especially as we con-
ducted the research across two cabinets. By far the largest unified family umbrella
is the family of the 2006 politicians Sathirathai, Maleenont, Vejjajiva, and Isarangkun
Na Ayutthaya, which belong essentially to the same family, proven through our family
tree data. In addition, Yingluck Shinawatra’s cabinet included Vejjajiva a second time,
as well as two other politicians, namely Sasiprapha and Hongsakul, who were proven
to belong to this extensive family of politicians, too. Spanning thus over two cabinets,
this extraordinary family umbrella of fundamentally seven politicians gathers in to-
tal 49 associated surnames, seen, respectively, for each year in Table 26 and Table 33
in the appendix. All other family umbrellas are displayed as well in the appendix,
ranging from Table 22 to Table 34. Table 2 is an exemplified extract.

                       Table 2: Family Umbrellas Example

          Family Umbrella Associated Surnames

        Liptapanlop (ลิปตพัลลภ), M Phitthanukorn (พหิทธานุกร), MF1

        Klinprathum (กลิ่นประทุม), M Anderson (แอนเดอร์สัน), MF2

                                          Chotichaicharin (โชติชัยชรินทร์), MF3

         Thienthong (เทียนทอง), M Tosaksit (โตศักดิ์สิทธิ์), MF2

                                       Yutthaworn (ยุวถาวร), MF3

                                      Thongpanich (ธงพานิช), MF1

                                       Chokdamrongsuk (โชคดํารงสุข), MF4

                                Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

On the left side, the relevant politicians’ names are displayed as well as their respective
level; in this extract, all three politicians exhibit associated surnames. For example, we
were able to attribute to the politician Thienthong the surname Tosakit in the second
degree.

                                   18
5.3.3 Politically Connected Companies (POLCON)

              Table 3: Robust Industry Distribution Sample Firms 2006

    Industry NON POLCON % POLCON % Total
    Communication Serv. 24 5.62 6 11.76 30
    Consumer Discret. 70 16.39 5 9.80 75
    Consumer Staples 47 11.01 4 7.84 51
    Financials 48 11.24 7 13.73 55
    Health Care 16 3.75 1 1.96 17
    Industrials 69 16.16 6 11.76 75
    Information Tech. 28 6.56 3 5.88 31
    Materials 63 14.75 7 13.73 70
    Real Estate 34 7.96 9 17.65 43
    Utilities 13 3.04 2 3.92 15
    Other 15 3.51 1 1.96 16
    Total 427 100.00 51 100.00 478
                                Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

                 Table 4: Industry Distribution Sample Firms 2014

    Industry NON POLCON % POLCON % Total
    Communication Serv. 29 5.66 6 9.38 35
    Consumer Discret. 69 13.48 10 15.62 79
    Consumer Staples 48 9.38 4 6.25 52
    Financials 58 11.33 6 9.38 64
    Health Care 18 3.52 3 4.69 21
    Industrials 99 19.34 7 10.94 106
    Information Tech. 30 5.86 3 4.69 33
    Materials 63 12.30 8 12.50 71
    Real Estate 67 13.09 12 18.75 79
    Utilities 15 2.93 3 4.69 18
    Other 16 3.12 2 3.12 18
    Total 512 100.00 64 100.00 576
                                Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

                                                                               11
Tables 3 and 4 show the distribution of political and unconnected firms.   In 2006,
there were 51/478 companies with political connections, compared to 64/576 in 2014.
The more robust categorizations for political connectdetermine in appendix 11.2), cat-
egorize fewer firms, resulting in 24/478 in 2006 and 26/576 in 2014 respectively. How-
ever, even despite these stricter criteria, our paper still obtains a higher number of
political observations than Bunkanwanicha and Wiwattanakantang (2009). Further-
more, there is a 45% overlap between the initial sample of politically connected firms
in 2006 and the most recent sample in 2014. This share increases to 50% when we look
at the robust categorization of ptherefore render thisirms.

Industries are defined using the GICS classification system, divided into 10 categories

11
  The names of all POLCON firms can be found under appendix 11.4.

                                   19
with one ”other” variable created for missing values. The division of firms based on
industry not only controls for unobserved heterogeneity, but also provides valuable
information for the differences between the two groups. In particular, in 2006, we
see that a strong majority of politically connected companies 9/51 (17.65%) are within
the real estate industry, compared to only 2/51 (3. 92%) within utilities. Based on the
percentages within Table 3 in both years, we can see that the two groups have a similar
division between industries, except the real estate industry, which has a slightly higher
distribution of POLCON firms compared to unconnected firms. While the relationship
between industries, political connection and abnormal returns will be expanded on
later (see discussion section 8.1), it is relevant to explore how firm characteristics differ
between politically connected groups.

                         Table 5: Firm Characteristics 2006

                                POLIC NON-POLIC Difference
                            Mean (1) Median (1) Mean (0) Median (0) (t-test) (z-test)
 Market-to-book ratio (MB) 3.455 1.874 3.345 1.466 -0.132 -0.687
 Industry-adj MB 0.156 -0.930 -0.019 -1.101 -0.209 -1.463
 Profit Margin (PM) 0.052 0.080 -0.012 0.085 -0.632 -1.995
 Industry-adj PM 0.060 -0.004 -0.007 0.041 -0.66 -2.718
 Return on assets (ROA) 0.054 0.060 0.071 0.077 1.155 -2.616
 Industry-adj ROA -0.012 -0.008 0.001 0.004 0.87 -2.358
 Leverage 0.158 0.127 0.129 0.051 -1.142 -0.235*
 Industry-adj leverage 0.014 -0.032 -0.002 -0.057 -0.638 -0.934
 Total assets (log) 8.017 7.790 8.017 7.690 0.004 -0.73
 Fixed assets/total assets 0.317 0.276 0.352 0.331 0.98 -2.871
 Growth on assets 12.512 9.872 16.488 8.186 0.871 -2.501
 Net sales (M USD) 4644.257 1635.192 11132.941 1881.831 2.359** -1.21

This table reports the summary statistics of the sample firms in 2014. ’*’, ’**’ and ’***’ denote statistical significance at the
10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. Profit Margin is the ratio of EBIT to total sales, Return on assets is the ratio of EBIT to
total assets and Leverage is the ratio of total debt to total assets. The statistical significance in Net Sales is not sufficient to
indicate there are fundamental differences between the two groups.
                                Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

Therefore, similarly to Bunkanwanicha and Wiwattanakantang (2009), we carry out
a test on the firm characteristics between the group of politically connected firms and
the group of unconnected firms seen in Table 5. For the analysis, both a t-test and
a two-sided U Mann test are used to compare the differences between each group.
From the results of this test we do not find enough statistical significance in the dif-
ference between the characteristics. Therefore, we can determine that the main fac-
tor of differentiation between the two groups is their degree of political connection.
Furthermore, while Table 5 displays only the overview for 2006, we also did not find
quantitatively relevant statistical significant differences for 2014 or in the robustness
                                       12
tables (see Tables 15, 16 and 17).

In addition, it should be reiterated that there exist variations in the available daily

12
  In Table 5 only one significant difference is found for ”Net Sales” which is not incorporated as control in
  the OLS regressions. We therefore render this irrelevant, similarly to the other results seen in Tables 15,
  16 and 17.

                                   20
stock data for all companies. This is more consequential in shorter time periods, mean-
ing some politically connected as well as non-politically connected companies will not
appear in exactly the same number across the entire year. For example, in 2006 while
we have 51/51 politically connected firms for three out of the six regression time peri-
ods, the average number of political companies in each regression is 49/51. A similar
thing occurs in 2014 with an average of 53/56 in all regressions.

6 Empirical Strategy

6.1 Univariate Tests

Similarly to Bunkanwanicha and Wiwattanakantang (2009), the first empirical strat-
egy employed is to investigate whether the abnormal returns of politically connected
firms differ significantly from the abnormal returns of politically unconnected com-
panies, using univariate tests through the U Mann test, throughout the following time
intervals, as seen in Table 6:

                       Table 6: Event Segmentation Intervals

 2006 Time Intervals 2014 Time Intervals
 Ex ante Coup Ex ante Removal
 February 2005 to August 2005 (BHAR) January 2013 to June 2013 (BHAR)
 August 2005 to February 2006 (BHAR) June 2013 to December 2013 (BHAR)
 February 2006 to September 18th, 2006 (BHAR) January 2014 - 6th May, 2014 (BHAR)
 Ex post Coup Ex post Removal
 18th to 21st September 2006 (CAR) 6th to 9th May (CAR)
 19th September to 3rd October 2006 (BHAR) 7th to 19th May (BHAR)
 19th September, 2006 to March 2007 (BHAR)
                                       Ex post Coup
                                                22nd to 25th May 2014 (CAR)
                                               22nd May to 5th June 2014 (BHAR)
                                             22nd May to 22nd November 2014 (BHAR)

We rely on the closing stock price and hence it is crucial to determine these periods
precisely to capture the effects on the markets accordingly. The final interval before
the coup 2006 ends on September 18th to mitigate any potential events that hinted at
the coup on September 19th. Meanwhile, for the periods after the coup d’état in 2006,
we chose September 19th as the starting point to calculate BHAR. For 2014, we chose
to incorporate May 7th as the constitutional court announced their decision before
the stock exchange closed, while the ex post removal BHAR calculations range until
May 19th as the military imposed on May 20th nationwide martial law from 3:00 am
onward. Although the imposition of martial law and subsequent negotiations did not
exhibit the coup d’état, we argue that the imposition of martial law could already have

                                   21
hinted at a further military intervention. Therefore, we exclude May 20th until May
22nd and treat it as if it was the coup d’état itself. Since the coup d’état 2014 was pro-
claimed after the stock exchange closed on May 22nd, we chose it as our starting point
to calculate the ex post coup BHAR. Although this event-based segmentation allows
us to understand the market responses to each event distinctly, we also acknowledge
the complex interaction between impeachment and coup d’état and therefore address
this complexity when discussing our results in 8.1.

6.2 OLS Regressions

Our second empirical strategy constitutes several Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) re-
gressions that we run for specific periods that have also been segmented according to
the periods we already used for the univariate tests for 2006 and 2014 respectively.

                       Yit = β1P OLCONit + β2Xit + δk + εit (3)

wherein

    • Yit denotes the abnormal returns for firm i in period t wherein t refers to the
     specified periods prior and after each coup

    • P OLCONit is a dummy variable, taking value of 1 for politically connected firms
     given our conditions and 0 otherwise

   • Xit represents a vector of firm characteristic control variables

    • δk denotes the industry fixed effect for Industryk, wherein Industryitk is a dummy
     variable, taking a value of 1 if the observation corresponds to Industryk and 0
     otherwise

    • εit is a random, idiosyncratic error term

One threat to obtaining unbiased estimators and being able to interpret their effect
accurately is that each coup d’etat is in itself endogenous (Meyersson, 2016), corre-
lated with specific returns and therefore ultimately abnormal returns of specific firms.
For example, this could be true if the causes of each coup were of economic nature:
Alesina et al. (1996) indicate that a significant factor behind coups is often linked to
periods of low economic growth. If the coups in 2006 and 2014 were motivated by
economic conditions, and we examine the abnormal stock returns of individual firms
in the Thai economy, it is conceivable that the coups themselves were triggered by
the underperformance of companies’ stock returns. However, more importantly, en-
dogeneity could especially be given if each coup d’état was anticipated, and thus the

                                   22
abnormal returns of the politically connected firm reflected such anticipation prior
to each coup or political connection was the determining factor for each coup. The
coup exogeneity is thus crucial to attribute the variation in stock returns of politically
connected versus unconnected firms to the coups themselves.

We address the threat of coup exogeneity with various measures in our empirical
model. First, based on our detailed historical analysis of Thailand’s political landscape
leading up to the 2006 and 2014 coup d’états (see 11.1.2 and ??), we argue that the
coups were not driven by economic factors, including the performance or returns of
politically connected companies, nor was each coup anticipated despite previous po-
litical instability. For 2006, we suggest that the main factor leading up to the coup was
an intra-elite conflict between the Shinawatra government and the monarchy over
ideological and political discrepancies (Hewison, 2008) as well as an intra-military
power struggle (Ockey, 2007). Despite the previous political instability, marked by
widespread mass protests, we contend that the annual military reshuffle proposed by
Shinawatra ten days prior to the coup - which would have replaced the eventual coup
leader - renders the 2006 coup d’état unanticipated, as the documents were undis-
closed to the public. For 2014, we argue that the underlying causes for the coup d’état
were a continuation of the ideological and political struggle between the Shinawatra’s
and the established elites, including the monarchy, while the coup d’état was not an-
ticipatable until the army imposed martial law on May 20th, 2014 (McCargo, 2015).
However, the removal of Yingluck Shinawatra by the constitutional court on May 7th,
2014, might have been anticipated. To what extent this affected our results, will be
examined in the discussion of our results in section 8.1.

Second, to ensure that the results are not driven by industry-specific membership, we
incorporated ten industry dummy variables as industry fixed effects δk through Least
Squares Dummy Variables (LSDV) based on the GICS standard. These industry fixed
effects account for specific shocks that might have affected specific industries, such as
industry-specific policy changes or other macroeconomic shocks that might have oc-
curred in either period, yet affected certain industries distinctly. The industry-fixed
effects also control for overperformance in a particular industry: For example, during
the early 2000s, firms in the telecommunications sector might have experienced exor-
bitant high stock returns due to the rampant technological development, thus being
the decisive factor for abnormal returns.

Third, based on the paper by Bunkanwanicha and Wiwattanakantang (2009) and Wong
and Hooy (2018), among others, we introduced a set of other characteristic control
variables of the firm, embodied by the vector Xit that reflect firm performance, and
thus also stock returns. The size of the firm is measured as the logarithm of the total
assets. Leverage is constituted by the ratio of total debt to total assets. The asset tan-
gibility effect is represented by the ratio of fixed assets to total assets. As a profitabil-
ity metric, we incorporate return on assets (ROA). Asset growth captures the annual

                                   23
growth rate of the total assets. By controlling for these abnormal returns, we can dif-
ferentiate whether the abnormal returns are the result of firm-specific attributes or
their political connection.

Fourth, a firm’s political connection is controlled with a binary dummy variable that
allows us to encapsulate the effect of political connections on abnormal returns (P OL−
CONit). Therefore, the accuracy of the political connections estimator will be im-
proved, as the controls allow us to understand the variation in the abnormal returns
that cannot be attributed to a firm’s political connection. As indicated in section 5.3.3,
the preliminary test that was conducted to see whether the controlled firm charac-
teristics differ systematically between politically connected and unconnected firms
showed no significant difference between these firm characteristics. Therefore, we
can ascertain that the firms studied should in fact only differ in their political connec-
tion, respectively.

Lastly, all standard errors are clustered at the firm level to estimate all models. There-
fore, the clustered error term’s t-statistics is adjusted for heteroskedasticity and robust
to inherent correlations in the abnormal returns within a cluster.

6.3 Robustness

To test the robustness of our results, we refined the variable of political connection
with a more stringent and conservative definition. While we focused initially purely
on obtaining benefits from a shareholder perspective and contemplated the board of
director’s role to protect such interest, our robust definition of political connection
stems from exercising active control over a firm through shareholderships or board
of directors, possessing the ability to influence decisions, and hence also performance
significantly.

La Porta et al. (1999) describe exercising significant control over a firm when a share-
holder has at least 10% of voting rights. Therefore, in consideration of the threshold
by La Porta et al. (1999) and recognizing the impact and duty of the board members,
we have devised three stricter criteria that assert substantial shareholder and board
influence within a company. If this influence is held by politicians and their extended
family, a company is ergo considered to be politically connected if it meets one of the
following criteria:

  1. A cumulative ownership of at least 10% of voting rights by family umbrellas and
     wealthy families, with the absence or presence of any board member bearing a
     name from a family umbrella or wealthy family.

  2. A cumulative ownership of at least 5% of voting rights by family umbrella and
     wealthy families, with the presence of at least one board member bearing a name

                                   24
     from family umbrellas.

  3. A cumulative ownership of at least 1% of voting rights by family umbrellas and
     wealthy families, along with a board composition in which at least 50% of its
     members bear names from family umbrellas and wealthy families.

Note that we again increased the threshold for voting rights from 0. 5% to 1% in the
final criterion to exceed the minimum requirement set by the SET and adjusted the
demand for the number of board members present, respectively. This adjustment
not only corresponds to the stricter criteria specified by La Porta et al. (1999) with
respect to voting rights. But it also resonates with the approach of Bunkanwanicha
and Wiwattanakantang (2009), which focuses solely on the cash flow rights of at least
10%, which are typically lower for large shareholders (Wang et al., 2010), enabling us
to confidently assert a political connection. We also adapted the criteria with wealthy
families to account for their social status as explained earlier.

7 Results

7.1 2006

7.1.1 Univariate Tests Results

Across both initial and robust univariate tests, we cannot observe any significant dif-
ferences in the abnormal returns between the portfolios of politically connected and
unconnected firms prior to the 2006 coup. However, we observed significant differ-
ences in the aftermath of the 2006 coup d’état. Specifically, in our initial univariate
tests, the portfolio of politically connected companies showed significantly higher neg-
ative abnormal returns of about 2.4 percentage points at the 1% significance level.
The robust univariate tests similarly indicated significant higher negative abnormal
returns of about 2.7 percentage points for politically connected firms at the 5% signif-
icance level.

In contrast, in both sets of univariate tests, in the two-week BHAR after the coup
d’état 2006, the portfolio of politically connected firms consistently showed signifi-
cantly higher negative mean abnormal returns of approximately 4 percentage points
at the 5% significance level compared to the portfolio of unconnected firms. However,
the six-month post-coup interval did not yield significant results in either the initial
or robust univariate tests.

                                   25
                Table 7: Robust Univariate Abnormal Returns 2006

Time Periods POLCON NON-POLCON Difference (U-Mann Test)
Ex ante Coup
Feb 2005 to Aug 2005 (BHAR) -0.15972 -0.10187 -0.05785
Aug 2005 to Feb 2006 (BHAR) 0.00907 -0.00418 0.01389
Feb 2006 to Sep 2006 (BHAR) 0.16929 0.10388 0.06535
Ex post Coup
18th-21st Sept 2006 (CAR) -0.03969 -0.01218 -0.02778**
19th-3rd Oct 2006 (BHAR) -0.03530 0.00388 -0.03918**
Sep 2006 to Mar 2007 (BHAR) 0.16929 0.10388 0.06535

This table reports the mean buy-and-hold abnormal returns (BHARs) and cumulative abnormal returns between politi-
cally and non-politically connected firms. POLCON is a dummy variable that takes on a value of 1 if the firm is politically
connected. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Statistical significance
is derived from the U-Mann Test between each groups abnormal returns.
                                Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

                   Table 8: Univariate Abnormal Returns 2006

Time Periods POLCON NON-POLCON Difference (U-Mann Test)
Ex ante Coup
Feb 2005 to Aug 2005 (BHAR) -0.15555 -0.09842 -0.05713
Aug 2005 to Feb 2006 (BHAR) 0.11941 -0.01958 0.13899
Feb 2006 to Sep 2006 (BHAR) 0.11239 0.10670 0.00569
Ex post Coup
18th-21st Sept 2006 (CAR) -0.03518 -0.01069 -0.02417***
19th-3rd Oct 2006 (BHAR) -0.03297 0.00617 -0.03914**
Sep 2006 to Mar 2007 (BHAR) 0.11239 0.10670 0.00569

This table reports the mean buy-and-hold abnormal returns (BHARs) and cumulative abnormal returns between politi-
cally and non-politically connected firms. POLCON is a dummy variable that takes on a value of 1 if the firm is politically
connected. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Statistical significance
is derived from the U-Mann Test between each groups abnormal returns.
                                Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

                                   26
7.1.2 OLS Regression Results

Tables 9 and Table 10 present the results of our initial and robust regression for 2006.
We find that the estimated coefficient on our political connection dummy variable
(POLCON) is in both cases strongly significant at the 5% level for the four-day CAR
window representing the immediate aftermath of the coup d’état in 2006: The port-
folio of politically connected firms experienced on average higher negative abnormal
returns of 1.9 percentage points in the initial and of 2.6 percentage points in the robust
regressions than its counterparts, holding all other variables constant. Furthermore,
in the initial regressions, we find that the coefficient estimator of political connection
is significant at the 10% level for the two-week period after the coup d’état occurred
where firms with political connections experienced on average higher negative ab-
normal returns of about 2.6 percentage points compared to politically unconnected
parts. Lastly, we observe that the magnitude for the firm-level clustered standard er-
rors for the significant political connections coefficients is very low, suggesting a high
precision of the coefficients.

However, both the initial and robust regressions also highlight that in all other peri-
ods, the variation of abnormal returns cannot be explained by political connections
because it lacks significance. Meanwhile, we also find that in the majority of periods,
firm characteristics cannot explain significant variations in abnormal stock returns,
with a few exceptions. However, in a few instances, we observe that certain firm char-
acteristics, such as profitability (ROA) or firm size (embodied by the logarithm of total
assets) are signficant at 1% level.

Moreover, particularly in the period from August 2005 to February 2006, the industry
dummies in the initial, as well as robust regression, can significantly explain the vari-
ation in the BHAR, highlighting that industry membership is a decisive factor in ex-
plaining the abnormal returns. For example, significantly at the 1% level, firms within
communication services and utilities achieved higher positive abnormal returns, re-
spectively, of approximately 28 and 25 percentage points, respectively. Membership
in these industries also explains the higher positive abnormal returns for affiliated
firms, in two further periods, at the 5% significance level. In the period from February
2006 until the coup d’état, industry membership can also significantly explain abnor-
mal returns of firms. However, we cannot find any statistical significance for industry
membership in the immediate periods after the coup d’état occurred, but to a large ex-
tent in the six-month BHAR regressions after the coup d’état occurred.

It should also be noted that the constant in the first two time periods (February to
August 2005; August 2005 to February 2006) in the initial and robust regressions is
significant at the 1% level, where these coefficients predict, if all other estimators are
neglected, that firms experienced significant high negative abnormal returns of ap-
proximately 45 and 37 percentage points, respectively.

                                   27
                                    2
Lastly, we find that the adjusted R for all periods in the initial and robust regressions
is rather low, which suggests that our model does not quite predict the proportion of
variation in abnormal returns as the dependent variable.

                                   28
                        Table 9: Initial Regression Results 2006

                             Ex ante coup (2005-2006) Ex post coup (2006-2007)
                         Feb-Aug   Sep-Feb   Mar-Sep   18-21st Sep   19-3rd Oct   Sep-Mar
Variable
                    BHAR    BHAR    BHAR     CAR      BHAR    BHAR
                            -0.454***   -0.381***    -0.087      -0.038*       0.001       -0.087
Intercept
                               (0.123)     (0.113)     (0.121)       (0.02)         (0.03)      (0.121)
                             0.008      0.111      0.043      -0.019**      -0.026*      0.043
POLCON
                               (0.04)      (0.103)     (0.094)      (0.008)       (0.014)      (0.094)
                         0.001*       0         0          0           0          0
Asset growth
                                  (0)          (0)        (0.001)         (0)            (0)        (0.001)
                              0.021      -0.103      -1.08        0.01         0.013       -0.108
Fixed assets/total assets
                              (0.062)     (0.088)     (0.103)      (0.015)       (0.021)      (0.103)
                             -0.168*      -0.017      -0.03       -0.004        0.013       -0.03
Leverage
                              (0.094)     (0.162)     (0.124)      (0.017)        (0.03)      (0.124)
                           0.025***    0.018*      0.005       0.001        -0.003      0.005
Total assets (log)
                              (0.008)      (0.01)      (0.009)      (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.009)
                           0.906***    0.384**     0.121      0.107***     0.165**      0.121
Return on assets (ROA)
                              (0.127)      (0.17)      (0.168)      (0.029)       (0.077)      (0.168)
                              0       0.139**    0.262**      -0.002       -0.004     0.262**
Materials
                              (0.092)     (0.067)     (0.108)      (0.012)       (0.018)      (0.112)
                             0.041     0.153**    0.205**      -0.012       -0.018     0.205**
Industrials
                              (0.093)     (0.069)     (0.084)      (0.012)       (0.018)      (0.084)
                            0.143     0.247***    0.151*       0.008        0.019      0.151*
Consumer Discretionary
                              (0.092)     (0.068)     (0.082)      (0.011)       (0.018)      (0.082)
                           0.194**    0.228***   0.209**      0.013        0.028      0.209**
Consumer Staples
                              (0.097)     (0.086)     (0.088)      (0.012)       (0.019)      (0.088)
                           0.264***   0.421***   0.531***      0.014        0.045     0.531***
Health Care
                              (0.099)     (0.094)     (0.146)      (0.017)       (0.035)      (0.146)
                             0.022      0.133      0.044       0.019        -0.004      0.044
Financials
                              (0.096)     (0.083)     (0.087)      (0.012)       (0.021)      (0.087)
                             0.046     0.278***    0.224**      -0.002        0.005      0.224**
Information Technology
                              (0.104)     (0.076)     (0.101)      (0.013)        (0.02)      (0.101)
                             0.049     0.247***    0.199**      0.013        -0.019     0.199**
Communication Services
                                (0.1)       (0.084)     (0.095)      (0.015)       (0.032)      (0.095)
                             0.039      0.502*      0.104       0.003        -0.009      0.104
Utilities
                              (0.117)     (0.276)     (0.097)      (0.016)       (0.032)      (0.097)
                             0.028     0.402***     0.055       -0.006       -0.009      0.055
Real Estate
                              (0.095)     (0.085)     (0.091)      (0.014)       (0.025)      (0.091)
Adjusted R2 0.194 0.080 0.022 0.076 0.073 0.022
N Obs (POLCON = 1) 49 51 51 46 47 51
N Observations 386 410 419 381 395 419

This table reports the coefficient estimates of OLS regression models. For each regression, the dependent variables are
either buy-and-hold abnormal returns (BHARs) or cumulative abnormal returns (CARS). The numbers in parentheses con-
stitute t-statistics, from heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors with clustering at the firm level. POLCON is a dummy
variable that takes on a value of 1 if the firm is politically connected. ’*’, ’**’ and ’***’ denote statistical significance at the
10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.
                                Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

                                   29
                     Table 10: Robust Regression Results 2006

                             Ex ante coup (2005-2006) Ex post coup (2006-2007)
                         Feb-Aug   Sep-Feb   Mar-Sep   18-21st Sep   19-3rd Oct   Sep-Mar
Variable
                    BHAR    BHAR    BHAR     CAR      BHAR    BHAR
                             -0.45***   -0.362***     -0.09       -0.039*       -0.001       -0.09
Intercept
                              (0.123)     (0.115)     (0.122)       (0.02)        (0.031)      (0.122)
                            -0.016      0.014      0.103      -0.026**       -0.028       0.103
POLCON
                              (0.049)     (0.054)     (0.177)      (0.012)        (0.02)      (0.177)
                         0.001*       0         0          0           0          0
Asset growth
                                  (0)          (0)        (0.001)         (0)            (0)        (0.001)
                             0.022      -0.104      -0.115       0.011        0.015       -0.115
Fixed assets/total assets
                              (0.062)     (0.089)     (0.105)      (0.015)       (0.021)      (0.105)
                             -0.167*     -0.004      -0.028       -0.005         0.01       -0.028
Leverage
                              (0.094)     (0.156)     (0.127)      (0.017)        (0.03)      (0.127)
                           0.025***    0.017*      0.005       0.002        -0.002      0.005
Total assets (log)
                              (0.008)      (0.01)      (0.009)      (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.009)
                           0.901***    0.35**      0.126      0.107***     0.168**      0.126
Return on assets (ROA)
                              (0.126)     (0.176)     (0.166)      (0.031)       (0.079)      (0.166)
                              0       0.139**    0.266**      -0.003       -0.005     0.266**
Materials
                              (0.092)     (0.061)     (0.112)      (0.012)       (0.018)      (0.112)
                             0.04      0.153**    0.213**      -0.013        -0.019     0.213**
Industrials
                              (0.092)     (0.063)     (0.087)      (0.012)       (0.019)      (0.087)
                            0.142    0.244***    0.155*       0.008        0.018      0.155*
Consumer Discretionary
                              (0.092)     (0.063)     (0.085)      (0.012)       (0.018)      (0.085)
                           0.192**   0.227***   0.217**      0.011        0.027      0.217**
Consumer Staples
                              (0.097)     (0.082)      (0.09)       (0.012)        (0.02)       (0.09)
                          0.263***   0.416***   0.534***      0.014        0.045     0.534***
Health Care
                              (0.098)     (0.091)     (0.148)      (0.017)       (0.035)      (0.148)
                            0.022      0.135*      0.045       0.018        -0.005      0.045
Financials
                              (0.096)     (0.078)     (0.088)      (0.012)       (0.021)      (0.088)
                            0.045     0.281***    0.229**      -0.004        0.003      0.229**
Information Technology
                              (0.104)      (0.07)      (0.103)      (0.013)        (0.02)      (0.103)
                             0.05     0.257***    0.198**      0.012        -0.021     0.198**
Communication Services
                              (0.099)     (0.076)     (0.096)      (0.015)       (0.032)      (0.096)
                            0.039      0.504*      0.108       0.002        -0.01       0.108
Utilities
                              (0.116)     (0.281)     (0.097)      (0.017)       (0.033)      (0.097)
                             0.03     0.428***     0.061        -0.01        -0.015       0.061
Real Estate
                              (0.094)     (0.071)      (0.09)       (0.014)       (0.025)      (0.09)
Adjusted R2 0.194 0.069 0.025 0.075 0.069 0.025
N Obs (POLCON = 1) 24 24 24 22 22 24
N Observations 386 410 419 381 395 419

This table reports the coefficient estimates of OLS regression models. For each regression, the dependent variables are
either buy-and-hold abnormal returns (BHARs) or cumulative abnormal returns (CARS). The numbers in parentheses con-
stitute t-statistics, from heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors with clustering at the firm level. POLCON is a dummy
variable that takes on a value of 1 if the firm is politically connected. ’*’, ’**’ and ’***’ denote statistical significance at the
10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.
                                Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

                                   30
7.2 2014

7.2.1 Univariate Tests Results

                   Table 11: Univariate Abnormal Returns 2014

Time Periods POLCON NON-POLCON Difference (U-Mann Test)
Ex ante removal
Jan to June 2013 (BHAR) 0.01185 0.00833 0.00352
July to Dec 2013 (BHAR) 0.06285 0.07360 -0.01075
Jan to May 2014 (BHAR) 0.04870 0.00734 0.04136
Ex post removal
6th-9th May 2014 (CAR) -0.00919 0.00188 -0.01107***
7th-19th May 2014 (BHAR) -0.01210 -0.01190 -0.00020
Ex post coup
22nd-25th May 2014 (CAR) -0.00007 0.00237 -0.00244*
22nd-5th June 2014 (BHAR) 0.01543 0.01011 0.00533
May to Nov 2014 (BHAR) 0.21563 0.10667 0.10897

This table reports the mean buy-and-hold abnormal returns (BHARs) and cumulative abnormal returns between politi-
cally and non-politically connected firms. POLCON is a dummy variable that takes on a value of 1 if the firm is politically
connected. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Statistical significance
is derived from the U-Mann Test between each groups abnormal returns.
                                Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

               Table 12: Robust Univariate Abnormal Returns 2014

Time Periods POLCON NON-POLCON Difference (U-Mann Test)
Ex ante removal
Jan to June 2013 (BHAR) 0.031 0.0707 0.02339
July to Dec 2013 (BHAR) 0.0775 0.0707 0.00542
Jan to May 2014 (BHAR) 0.1228 0.0065 0.1163**
Ex post removal
6th-9th May 2014 (CAR) -0.0145 0.0019 -0.0164***
7th-19th May 2014 (BHAR) -0.0349 -0.0108 -0.02416
Ex post coup
22nd-25th May 2014 CAR) 0.0058 0.0019 0.00390
22nd-5th June 2014 (BHAR) 0.0311 0.0097 0.02146**
May to Nov 2014 (BHAR) -0.0137 0.1255 -0.13926

This table reports the mean buy-and-hold abnormal returns (BHARs) and cumulative abnormal returns between politi-
cally and non-politically connected firms. POLCON is a dummy variable that takes on a value of 1 if the firm is politically
connected. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Statistical significance
is derived from the U-Mann Test between each groups abnormal returns.
                                Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

Within the first three time intervals analyzed, only the robust univariate tests from
January coefficients:he removal of Yingluck Shinawatra indicate statistical significance
at the 5% level, with politically connected firms outperforming their unconnected
counterparts by approximately 12 percentage points. Furthermore, these companies
exhibited significantly higher negative abnormal returns at the 1% levapproximately
both initial and robust univariate tests during the immediate aftermath of the re-

                                   31
moval of Yingluck Shinawatra, where politically connected companies experienced
on average higher negative abnormal returns of approximately 1.4 percentage points
                                   13
compared to unconnected firms.   Unexpectedly, no significant differences were ob-
served in mean abnormal returns immediately following the 2014 coup d’état, except
for higher negative abnormal returns of about 0.002 percentage points, which is rather
marginal. Contrary to our initial assumptions, the subsequent two weeks saw abnor-
mal returns that were significantly different at 5% level. During this period, politically
connected firms actually outperformed their counterparts by approximately 2.1 per-
centage points in robust univariate tests.

7.2.2 OLS Regression Results

Tables 13 and 14 present the results of our initial and robust regressions for 2014.
We do not find significance in abnormal returns that can be attributed to political
connections in the set of the initial regressions, whereas in the robust regressions we
observe only in one period, January 2014 until the removal of Yingluck Shinawatra, a
significant coefficient for political connection at the 10% level: Politically connected
firms experienced higher positive abnormal returns of approximately 12.5 percentage
points than unconnected firms. In all other periods across the robust results, no signif-
icantly lower or higher abnormal returns are observable. However, we also observe
that the standard error for this coefficient is rather high (almost half of the coefficient),
casting doubt on the precision of the coefficient.

Considering the firm characteristics in both sets of regressions, we observe that the
majority also does not exhibit significant effects on abnormal returns, except in a few
instances. Particularly in the six-month BHAR model after the coup d’etat 2014, we see
strong significant results at the 1% level for example in profitability (ROA), firm size
(logarithm of total asset) and asset tangibility (ratio of fixed assets over total assets).

Similarly to 2006, in two periods (January to Shinawatra’s removal 2014; two-week
BHAR 2014 after the coup d’état 2014), we find that half of industry dummies show sta-
tistical significance, while in the two-week BHAR period after the coup d’état, three co-
efficients are significant. In the remainder of periods, we observe only in two periods
a single significant coefficient: In the two-week BHAR regression after Shinawatra’s
removal, the negative abnormal returns of the healthcare sector were significantly
higher by approximately 6.1 percentage points, while in the CAR regressions after the
coup d’état, the real estate sector experienced significantly higher negative abnormal
returns of about 2.4 percentage points, both statistically significant at the 5% level.

Similarly to the 2006 regressions, we also identify that in one instance the constant
was highly significant at the 1% level. Therefore, if all other estimators are neglected,

13
  Initial and robust results averaged.

                                   32
                       Table 13: Initial Regression Results 2014

                      Ex ante removal (2013-2014) Ex post removal (2014) Ex post coup (2014)
                      Jan-June   July-Dec   Jan-May   6-9 May    7-19 May    22-25 May   22-05 June   May-Nov
Variable
                  BHAR    BHAR    BHAR     CAR      BHAR      CAR      BHAR     BHAR
                          -0.076      0.258      -0.041      0.002        -0.02         0.012        -0.032      0.753***
Intercept
                           (0.184)      (0.183)     (0.074)     (0.018)       (0.032)        (0.011)        (0.023)       (0.206)
                          0.025      -0.013      0.057       -0.01        0.006           0          0.006        -0.05
POLCON
                           (0.059)      (0.049)     (0.038)     (0.007)       (0.024)        (0.004)        (0.011)       (0.112)
                        0**         0         0         0         0***          0          0***         0
Asset growth
                                (0)           (0)          (0)          (0)            (0)             (0)             (0)          (0.001)
                          -0.067      -0.036      -0.054      0.004        -0.001         0.001          0        -0.374***
Fixed / total assets
                           (0.013)      (0.075)      (0.056)     (0.016)       (0.023)         (0.07)         (0.02)        (0.137)
                          -0.008      -0.183*      0.059      -0.035       -0.046         0.012        0.071*       0.069
Leverage
                           (0.086)      (0.11)      (0.136)     (0.023)       (0.046)        (0.014)        (0.037)       (0.281)
                         0.006        0        0.001      0.001        0.001         0.001        -0.001      -0.069***
Total assets (log)
                            (0.086)       (0.1)       (0.07)      (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.001)        (0.002)       (0.016)
                          0.206       0.038       0.07      -0.089**      -0.017         0.003        -0.063      -1.012***
ROA
                           (0.212)      (0.242)      (0.09)       (0.04)        (0.053)        (0.006)        (0.046)       (0.339)
                          -0.003      -0.11      0.102**       0         -0.002         0.001       0.067***      0.148
Materials
                            (0.132)      (0.116)      (0.049)      (0.01)        (0.025)        (0.008)        (0.015)        (0.1)
                          0.005      -0.147      0.053*        0         -0.006        -0.007       0.058***      0.201*
Industrials
                           (0.132)      (0.116)     (0.029)     (0.008)       (0.015)        (0.006)        (0.014)       (0.104)
                          -0.002      -0.118     0.067**      0.01        -0.003         0.003        0.022*       0.019
Consumer Discret
                           (0.132)      (0.114)      (0.03)      (0.009)       (0.006)        (0.006)        (0.013)       (0.087)
                          -0.079       -0.1      0.087***     0.004        0.021         0.003        0.03**        0.017
Consumer Staples
                           (0.137)      (0.115)      (0.031)     (0.008)       (0.017)        (0.006)        (0.013)        (0.08)
                          0.125      -0.055      0.085      0.009       0.062**        0.01         0.034        0.152
Health Care
                           (0.142)      (0.113)      (0.08)      (0.011)       (0.029)        (0.008)        (0.026)       (0.104)
                          0.038      -0.148      0.024      -0.004        0.01         -0.003       0.058***      0.192*
Financials
                            (0.15)      (0.114)      (0.058)      (0.01)        (0.024)        (0.007)        (0.018)       (0.111)
                           0.169      -0.085      0.066      -0.023       -0.036         -0.01         0.017        -0.086
Information Tech
                           (0.144)      (0.129)     (0.041)     (0.019)       (0.023)        (0.006)        (0.013)       (0.101)
                           0.018      -0.155     0.107**     -0.003       -0.012        -0.011        0.019        -0.15
Communication Serv
                           (0.141)      (0.118)     (0.047)     (0.008)       (0.017)        (0.007)        (0.014)       (0.112)
                          0.093       0.02       0.099      0.025        0.054         0.002       0.061**     0.667***
Utilities
                           (0.172)      (0.157)      (0.071)     (0.018)       (0.037)        (0.011)        (0.029)        (0.21)
                          -0.051      0.268      -0.031      0.035*       0.079        -0.024**       0.016        3.052
Real Estate
                           (0.266)      (0.253)     (0.048)     (0.019)       (0.058)        (0.009)        (0.025)       (1.914)
Adjusted R2 0.003 0.010 -0.013 0.026 0.003 0.008 0.089 0.217
N Obs (POLCON = 1) 61 62 63 60 60 61 61 63
N Observations 420 430 437 429 430 424 426 448

This table reports the coefficient estimates of OLS regression models. For each regression, the dependent variables are
either buy-and-hold abnormal returns (BHARs) or cumulative abnormal returns (CARS). The numbers in parentheses con-
stitute t-statistics, from heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors with clustering at the firm level. POLCON is a dummy
variable that takes on a value of 1 if the firm is politically connected. ’*’, ’**’ and ’***’ denote statistical significance at the
10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. Fixed / total assets = Fixed assets/total assets, Consumer Discret = Consumer Discre-
tionary, Information Tech = Information Technology, and Communication Serv = Communication Services.
                                Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

the firms achieved positive abnormal returns of about 75 percentage points.

                                                    2
Lastly, similar to 2006, we find that the adjusted R across all periods in the initial and
robust regressions is rather low, and thus suggests that the proportion of variation in
the abnormal returns as the dependent variable is not quite predictable by our model.

                                   33
                     Table 14: Robust Regression Results 2014

                      Ex ante removal (2013-2014) Ex post removal (2014) Ex post coup (2014)
                      Jan-June   July-Dec   Jan-May   6-9 May    7-19 May    22-25 May   22-05 June   May-Nov
Variable
                  BHAR    BHAR    BHAR     CAR      BHAR      CAR      BHAR     BHAR
                          -0.072      0.256      -0.037      0.001        -0.019         0.012        -0.031      0.749***
Intercept
                           (0.183)      (0.184)     (0.074)     (0.018)       (0.032)        (0.011)        (0.023)       (0.205)
                          0.111       0.041      0.125*      -0.013       -0.024         0.006         0.015        -0.093
POLCON
                           (0.109)      (0.088)     (0.064)     (0.012)       (0.055)        (0.008)        (0.015)       (0.068)
                        **0        0         0         0         0***          0           0           0
Asset growth
                               (0)          (0)          (0)          (0)            (0)             (0)          (0.002)       (0.001)
                         -0.071      -0.037      -0.057      0.004          0           0.001          0        -0.371***
Fixed / total assets
                            (0.13)      (0.075)      (0.056)     (0.016)       (0.024)        (0.007)        (0.002)       (0.136)
                          -0.011      -0.188*      0.057      -0.035       -0.043         0.012        0.071*       0.069
Leverage
                           (0.086)      (0.11)      (0.135)     (0.023)       (0.046)        (0.014)        (0.037)       (0.276)
                         0.007      -0.006      -0.001        0          0.001        -0.001          0        -0.069***
Total assets (log)
                           (0.013)      (0.01)      (0.007)     (0.001)       (0.003)        (0.001)        (0.002)       (0.016)
                          0.199       0.039       0.059     -0.087**      -0.018         0.003        -0.065      -1.002***
ROA
                           (0.211)      (0.242)      (0.091)      (0.04)        (0.054)        (0.015)        (0.046)       (0.342)
                         -0.011      -0.113      0.093*      0.001          0           0.001       0.066***      0.155
Materials
                           (0.132)      (0.115)      (0.05)       (0.01)        (0.023)        (0.008)        (0.015)       (0.101)
                          0.001      -0.147      0.047*      0.001        -0.006        -0.007       0.057***     0.205**
Industrials
                           (0.131)      (0.117)     (0.029)     (0.007)       (0.015)        (0.006)        (0.014)       (0.104)
                          -0.008      -0.121     0.061**     0.011        0.003         -0.004        0.021*       0.023
Consumer Discret
                           (0.132)      (0.114)      (0.03)      (0.009)        (0.02)         (0.006)        (0.013)       (0.087)
                          -0.082      -0.101     0.082***     0.005        0.022         -0.003        0.03**        0.021
Consumer Staples
                           (0.136)      (0.116)      (0.03)      (0.007)       (0.017)        (0.006)        (0.013)        (0.08)
                          0.124      -0.054      0.084       0.01       0.061**        0.01         0.034        0.153
Health Care
                           (0.141)      (0.114)      (0.079)      (0.01)        (0.029)        (0.008)        (0.026)       (0.104)
                          0.024      -0.152       0.01       -0.002        0.012         -0.003       0.056***      0.201*
Financials
                           (0.149)      (0.115)      (0.059)      (0.01)        (0.025)        (0.007)        (0.018)       (0.112)
                           0.166      -0.084      0.062      -0.022       -0.036         -0.01         0.016        -0.083
Information Tech
                           (0.144)      (0.13)      (0.041)     (0.019)       (0.023)        (0.006)        (0.013)       (0.101)
                           0.005      -0.161     0.094**     -0.002       -0.009        -0.011        0.017        -0.141
Communication Serv
                            (0.14)       (0.12)      (0.047)     (0.008)       (0.018)        (0.008)        (0.014)       (0.113)
                          0.086      0.019      0.091      0.026        0.055         0.002        0.06**      0.673***
Utilities
                           (0.173)      (0.152)     (0.064)     (0.018)       (0.038)        (0.011)        (0.029)       (0.207)
                          -0.051      0.265      -0.024      0.034*        0.08        -0.024**       0.017        3.045
Real Estate
                            (0.27)      (0.254)      (0.049)      (0.02)        (0.057)        (0.009)        (0.024)       (1.912)
Adjusted R2 0.006 0.011 -0.005 0.026 0.005 0.010 0.090 0.218
N Obs (POLCON = 1) 25 26 26 24 24 24 25 26
N Observations 420 430 437 429 430 424 426 448

This table reports the coefficient estimates of OLS regression models. For each regression, the dependent variables are
either buy-and-hold abnormal returns (BHARs) or cumulative abnormal returns (CARS). The numbers in parentheses con-
stitute t-statistics, from heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors with clustering at the firm level. POLCON is a dummy
variable that takes on a value of 1 if the firm is politically connected. ’*’, ’**’ and ’***’ denote statistical significance at the
10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. Fixed / total assets = Fixed assets/total assets, Consumer Discret = Consumer Discre-
tionary, Information Tech = Information Technology, and Communication Serv = Communication Services.
                                Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

8 Discussion

8.1 Results

8.1.1 Political Connections

The question we attempt to answer with our research is two-fold. First, we investigate
whether political connection has a significant effect on abnormal returns. Second, we
consider abnormal returns in light of the sudden change of government, seen in the
coup d’états as well as the removal of Yingluck Shinawatra.

For the time periods in 2006, only considering the difference in abnormal returns be-

                                   34
tween politically connected and unconnected firms, we find that politically connected
firms experienced in the immediate aftermath of the coup d’état 2006 significantly
lower abnormal returns in the initial and robust univariate tests. However, this find-
ing is tarnished if we compare these results to the set of regressions in which we could
only identify that the political connection explained significant negative abnormal re-
turns in the four-day CAR regressions that followed the coup d’état in 2006 but not in
the subsequent two weeks. Although we argued that the coup d’état was not antici-
pated by the public, and therefore these results hint at the conclusion that politically
connected firms were affected in particular by the coup d’état, drawing a solid causal
inference would be inadequate since our study does not incorporate a counterfactual
of how the abnormal returns of politically connected firms would have developed if
the coup d’état of 2006 had not happened. In this context, we emphasize that the ma-
                                                                               14
jority of the univariate tests (four out of six) and regressions (five out of six)  show no
significance in both the difference between politically connected firms as well as in the
political connection dummy variable, suggesting that an existing political connection
has no notable effect on abnormal returns.

As mentioned above, the results of the political events in 2014 are similar to the re-
sults in 2006, yet suggest that the actual coup d’état in 2014 (“the more detrimental
political event”) might have been the removal of Yingluck Shinawatra: After removal,
the results of the univariate tests are strongly significant at the 1% level for politi-
cally connected firms, while the absence of significant differences between politically
connected and unconnected firms after the coup d’état 2014 is observable. However,
in light of the set of regressions, the effect of political connections on abnormal re-
turns becomes questionable: Although the initial regressions show only insignificant
results for political connections, we find only one significant result in the robust re-
gressions. In one period (January 2014 until the removal of Yingluck Shinawatra),
political connections explained positive abnormal returns of approximately 12.5 per-
centage points. However, the large extent of insignificant findings thus underscore
that political connections have a low explanatory value for a firm’s abnormal returns.

Although we identify in the robust univariate test for the period prior to Shinawatra’s
removal as well as in the one period in the initial regressions significant positive ab-
normal returns for politically connected firms, the remaining significant results, both
in the univariate tests as well as the two-week period after the coup d’état 2014 in the
initial regression, cast doubt to what extent the events were perceived as detrimental
news for politically connected firms: Particularly, after the coup we found a signif-
icant difference of higher positive abnormal returns for politically connected firms
which misaligns with our initial expectation that politically connected firms would
suffocate as consequence for the sudden change of government. Given also that the
majority of univariate tests and the coefficients for political connections are insignif-

14
   This is the case in for the robust, but not for the initial OLS regressions: In the initial OLS regressions we
  observed in four out of six periods insignificant results.

                                   35
icant, we suggest furthermore that political connections as we defined them in our
research cannot explain eventual abnormal returns for Thai companies.

Moreover, we want to highlight that the robust definition of political connection ap-
pears to alter both the consistency in significance and the magnitude of the observed
impact of political connections on abnormal returns. In detail, the robust univari-
ate tests for 2014 exhibit more significant results than the initial ones, whereas for
2006 the opposite occurs. Meanwhile, in regressions of 2006, we observe that in the
two-week BHAR regressions the coefficient becomes insignificant in the robust model,
while significance remains consistent in the four-day CAR regression with a more pro-
nounced effect on abnormal returns. In the 2014 regressions across the periods, the
significance of the coefficient of the political connection dummy variable is inconsis-
tent as well. However, note that in the majority of periods, in the univariate tests as
well as in the regressions, political connections remain insignificant regarding their
effect on abnormal returns, underscoring that potentially other factors might explain
the variation in abnormal returns more appropriately.

Furthermore, the distribution of significant results in all time periods casts doubt on
to what extent any political events, such as the mass protests before each coup d’état,
affected politically connected firms more pronounced than unconnected firms. How-
ever, the results of the 2006 univariate tests, the 2006 regressions, and the 2014 uni-
variate tests show significantly higher negative abnormal returns for politically con-
nected firms. This not only confirms our initial expectation, but also suggests that
political connections might exhibit period-specific effects. These effects seem particu-
larly pronounced in response to drastic political shifts, such as coups or the removal
of the prime minister.

Considering our findings, we can reject our hypotheses to a large extent that politi-
cal connections can significantly explain abnormally high or abnormally low returns
of firms in Thailand within these respective periods, as the public might have as-
sumed. These findings stand in contrast to the implications of the evidence provided
by Bunkanwanicha and Wiwattanakantang (2009). However, assuming that our def-
inition accurately captures political connections, our findings agree with historical
assessments of the causes for the coup d’états, particularly Hewison (2008),Connors
(2008), Ockey (2007), and McCargo (2015) among others. Although we cannot com-
pletely exclude whether in particular instances nepotism, conflict of interests, or per-
sonal gains from the Shinawatras or their government members occurred, our find-
ings underscore that the impact of political connections on abnormal returns is neg-
ligible. Instead, the coup d’états as well as the removal of Yingluck Shinawatra ap-
peared to be a consequence of the ongoing political power struggle between these
governments and the conservative established elites affiliated with the monarchy.

                                   36
8.1.2 Industries

Bunkanwanicha and Wiwattanakantang (2009) highlighted that possibly membership
in a particular industry might explain abnormal returns of companies as certain in-
dustries could have experienced beneficial policies, certain macroeconomic shocks
or were in a particular period “vogue”, such as the rise of telecommunications in the
early 2000s. While we find in the majority of periods that either none or the major-
ity industry dummies are significant, we thus focus on the instances when only one
or two industries yield significant coefficients, implying that the abnormal returns of
firms within a particular industry were discretely affected compared to others. This
is the case for the health care sector in the two-week BHAR regression after Shinawa-
tra’s removal, and for the real estate sector in the CAR regressions after the coup d’état
2014. However, based on the historical assessment, we are unable to assert these par-
ticular results to any specific policies or events in the broad political landscape that
might have had a pronounced impact on these industries.

8.1.3 Constants

In both the 2006 and 2014 regressions, we observed in multiple periods that the co-
efficient of the constant was significant at the 1% level, causing significant abnormal
high/low returns if all other estimators were removed from the model. These results
suggest that our benchmark portfolio that was derived from the returns of firms in our
sample does not adequately reflect the actual Thai market in these particular periods,
which might be reasoned with the construction of our data: A prerequisite for to be
in our sample was to have financial data accessible, which is often true for particular
big corporations, thus potentially excluding smaller, yet listed firms. Therefore, these
per se abnormal returns for firms in our sample might be explainable with research
that shows that the returns between smaller and bigger firms differ (Chan et al., 1991).

8.1.4 Firm Characteristics and Model Fit

Moreover, considering the firm characteristics, we find inconsistent significant results
when comparing 2006 and 2014. For example, ROA in 2006 shows across four peri-
ods significant results, affecting abnormal returns positively, and thus suggesting that
profitability might be a decisive factor for achieving abnormal stock returns. How-
ever, ROA is insignificant for all periods. Meanwhile, we identified leverage to explain
positive abnormal returns significantly in two periods prior to Shinawatras removal
in 2014; yet, in 2006, leverage has exhibited negative effects on abnormal returns in
one period, while remaining insignificant in the other periods. Given these inconsis-
tencies as well as the fact that the majority of firm characteristics remain insignificant

                                   37
across the periods of 2006 and 2014, which is also true for the industry controls, we
must assert that our model can only explain to a limited extent the variation in ab-
                                                                    2
normal returns at a firm level, evident from the low adjusted R values. Therefore,
abnormal returns of firms must be attributed to unobserved predictors that we did
not incorporate into our model.

8.1.5 External Validity

Our results stand in contrast to the extensive literature that can assert significant
effects of political connections on various variables, in particular abnormal returns
(Bunkanwanicha and Wiwattanakantang, 2009), and therefore question the impor-
tance of the effect of political connections for firms. Despite this surprising result, we
argue that these findings from the Thai perspective provide the basis for further re-
search in other South East Asian countries, as these have similar societal structures
and share many other macroeconomic characteristics.

8.2 Limitations

Although we still find our results insightful for understanding the effects of political
connections, we have identified several limitations to our investigation, both from a
data point of view and in our empirical strategy.

First, we segment the data into the aforementioned time periods to understand whether
politically connected firms exhibited higher or lower abnormal returns within these
intervals. However, while our classification allows us to differentiate between the
effect of political connection, we are unable to confidently draw a causal inference
between the events, namely the coup d’états as well as the removal of Yingluck Shi-
nawatra, and their effects on abnormal returns of firms in general. This issue could
have been addressed by introducing counterfactual abnormal returns to each event,
for each group of firms; To confidently attribute any effect of each event period, on ab-
normal returns, a synthetic control (Abadie et al., 2010) could have been established
that allows us to trace how abnormal returns would have developed in a hypothetical
scenario in which each event did not occur.

Second, with our historical assessments, we provide a detailed argument on why each
coup d’état as well as the removal of Yingluck Shinawatra, are exogenous. However,
this assumption of exogeneity is in particular vulnerable from an anticipation point
of view, due to the political instability Thailand experienced during the respective
2005/06 and 2013/14 political crises. Potentially, the abnormal returns of the firms
were affected differently depending on their political connection, thus adulterating
our findings. Using an adjusted empirical model with the introduction of an instru-

                                   38
mental variable that correlates with the endogenous explanatory variable, such as the
coup d’état, but not with the error term, could have mitigated these exogeneity issues
more effectively.

Third, despite using CAR to observe the immediate response of abnormal returns af-
ter each event, we employed BHARs as key measurements of abnormal returns over
the long term. However, it is crucial to mention that the BHAR can suffer from po-
tential skewness biases if conducted over too long periods. This potential distortion
could have been caused by the asymmetry in the distribution of stock returns, since
the BHAR assumes a symmetric distribution and thus leads to biased estimates bar-
ber1997detecting (barber1997detecting).For example, this skewness bias could have
been addressed through block-bootstrapped skewness-adjusted t-statistics as it was
conducted by Bunkanwanicha and Wiwattanakantang (2009) and introduced by Bar-
ber and Lyon (1997). However, we attempt to mitigate such skewness bias by intro-
ducing the six-month time intervals ex ante and ex post to each coup d’état

Fourth, while our key variable of interest, political connection, captures the effect of
political connections on abnormal returns of a company, it does not necessarily indi-
cate the political dependency of a firm, and vice versa. A company might deliberately
establish political connections through their board of directors, or with offerings of
shareholdership to politicians in order to mitigate their dependence on institutions,
seen in revenue from government contracts, etc., while firms can also be politically
connected but not dependent on current governments. Therefore, while in the first
scenario the political connection could have been an adequate proxy for political de-
pendency, the sole political dependency of firms without any political connections
might have a differential effect on abnormal returns, as such companies might be
more sensitive to the political landscape; Once identified by the market, investors
might perceive politically dependent but unconnected firms as more volatile, and
thus this perception of this sensitivity would be, in anticipation of higher volatility,
reflected in a firm’s stock price. While Bunkanwanicha and Wiwattanakantang (2009)
controlled for political dependency through the ratio of concessional income to rev-
enue, a similar approach was beyond the feasibility of our investigation as no central
data on concessional income was available for Thai firms.

Fifth, while we can profoundly attribute political connections to firms through our
detailed research on politicians and their families, it should also be noted that the re-
sulting relationships between institutions and firms are complex and dynamic in their
nature (Tian et al., 2019) and not as steady as we defined them in our research. They
may be subject to change over time even if institutions remain arguably stable, while
they may also differ in their strength, introducing further variation and thus affect-
ing abnormal returns distinctly. Meanwhile, Wong and Hooy (2018) also show that
the type of connections, seen in the difference between politicians and their families,
might have different effects on the outcome variables. Therefore, a more differentiat-

                                   39
ing approach to defining political connections might be appropriate. For instance, it
might be important to not only trace government members for determining political
connections, but also incorporate other public officials, like military leaders, MPs, sen-
ate members or party affiliates, and to distinguish between proximity between firms
and institutions. Therefore, a refined and in-depth classification could potentially cre-
ate a continuous political connection variable that captures more nuances of political
connections, similar to Fisman (2001).

Lastly, we attempt to attribute in our regressions the effect of political connection
on abnormal returns, and thus also conducted preliminary tests, seen in Tables 5,
15, 16 17, in which we find that by a large extent firm characteristics are not sig-
nificantly different between politically connected and unconnected firms. Although
our findings are also supported by Bunkanwanicha and Wiwattanakantang (2009),
other research points out that politically connected firms might benefit from lower
equity cost (Boubakri et al., 2012) and greater accessibility to bank loans (Infante
and Piazza, 2014), suggesting that firm characteristic can indeed differ between these
groups. Therefore, for example, if political connection influences firm behavior, seen
in the extent of taking loans, the mediation of leverage of political connections might
have an amplifying or attenuating effect on abnormal returns. Moreover, even if
we do not find significant differences in firm characteristics in the preliminary tests,
the effect of political connections on abnormal returns might be more pronounced
in larger firms or with higher leverage due to a potential interaction between these
variables.

9 Conclusion

Our investigation aimed to understand to what extent political connections of Thai
firms can explain low or high abnormal returns in periods before and after coup
d’états of 2006 and 2014, as well as Yingluck Shinawatra’s removal as prime minis-
ter.

Contrary to the majority of existing literature, see Bunkanwanicha and Wiwattanakan-
tang (2009), Fisman (2001), among others, we find that to a large extent political con-
nections have no significant impact on the abnormal returns of Thai companies in the
periods under scrutiny around the coup d’état in 2006 and 2014 for both univariate
tests and our regressions. In detail, for the univariate tests, we find that particularly in
the periods after the coup d’etat 2006 and the period after Yingluck Shinawatra expe-
rienced significantly higher negative abnormal returns than politically unconnected
firms. However, the majority of the remaining periods exhibit no significant differ-
ences in abnormal returns in both years, both for the robust and initial univariate

                                   40
      15
tests.

The results of the regressions underscore that politically connected firms did not expe-
rience significant abnormal returns. In 2006 (Table 9 and Table 10), across the initial
and robust regressions, only in the four day period after the coup d’etat, politically
                                                                              16
connected firms experienced higher negative abnormal returns.

Meanwhile, in the initial 2014 regression (Table 13) we do not observe any significance
for political connection. For 2014, within the robust regression set, we only find in the
period prior to Yingluck Shinawatra’s removal that politically connected companies
exhibit significant positive abnormal returns (Table 14).

Based on these results, we come to the following two conclusions. First, the results
cast doubt that political connections in the larger context have significant effects on
abnormal returns. Instead, given that in particular political connections exhibit sig-
nificant effects in the immediate aftermath of the coup d’état 2006 and the removal
of Yingluck Shinawatra, political connections appear to have period-specific effects
on firms’ abnormal returns, particularly in times when drastic political instability be-
comes apparent.

However, we also identified several limitations to our research. First, the segmenta-
tion of the data builds the foundation for understanding in which periods politically
connected firms exhibited significant abnormal returns. However, since we do not es-
tablish a counterfactual of how abnormal returns would have developed if the events
had not happened, a solid causal inference between the effects of the events on ab-
normal returns cannot be drawn. Second, while we provide a profound historical
analysis to argue for the exogeneity of the events, a potential anticipation of these
might have biased our results. Third, political connection does not per se imply politi-
cal dependency, and thus abnormal returns might be more pronounced for politically
dependent firms, as they presumably are more sensitive in the political environment.
Fourth, while we can confidently attribute political connections based on our exten-
sive research on politicians and their family members, political connections are com-
plex and dynamic in their nature. They might vary in strength and even within short
time periods, thus biasing our results. Fifth, running BHAR over longer periods of
time might bias abnormal returns as BHAR can suffer from potential skewness biases,
caused by the asymmetry in the distribution of stock returns. Lastly, while we did not
observe significant differences in firm characteristics between politically connected
and unconnected firms, one limitation might be that the true effect of political connec-
tions on abnormal returns might derive from an interaction between political connec-

15
  Note, however, within the robust univariate tests for 2014 (Table 12) in the period prior to the removal of
  Yingluck Shinawatra, that politically connected firms experienced significantly higher positive returns
  of approximately 11%.
16
  Note, however, that in the initial 2006 regressions (see Table 9), the two-week period after the coup d’état
  showed that politically connected firms exhibit higher negative abnormal returns, which renders to be
  insignificant in the robust regression.

                                   41
tion and any firm characteristic, while political connection might also influence firm
behavior.

Future research may build on our findings and address the limitations mentioned
above to strengthen particularly internal validity. In detail, implementing counterfac-
tuals for abnormal returns that capture hypothetical abnormal returns of politically
connected and unconnected firms if the events had not happened would allow for
the asserting of a more solid causal inference between the events and the abnormal
returns of firms. This causal inference could also be solidified through an empirical
model that incorporates an instrumental variable that correlates with the endogenous
explanatory variable, such as the coup d’état, to address the potential problem of exo-
geneity that can arise particularly due to the complex political situation in developing
countries, and in our case Thailand.

Moreover, to improve the variable of political connections and capture their complex
nature, future research may introduce a continuous variable, similar to Fisman (2001),
which reflects political connections more nuanced than our binary classification. For
example, this could be achieved through the incorporation of members of parliament
and party officials that account for the various strengths political connections may
exhibit.

Lastly, future research may not solely focus on specific countries, but potentially on re-
gions that share characteristics of institutions and other cultural features, seen, for ex-
ample, in the larger South East Asian sphere. Such cross-country examinations would
provide deeper insight into to what extent political connections affect certain firm
characteristics, like abnormal returns or firm performance, and thus allow, as a con-
sequence, the broader comparison of business environments.

Ultimately, the implications of our findings showcase that such particular economic re-
search extends across other scholarly disciplines. In our case, we arguably supported
the historical argument that the causes for the coup d’etats were rather of political
and ideological, thus underscoring that the alleged nepotism through the Shinawatra
governments might have been rather pretextual. Therefore, it is worthwhile to con-
duct further research in the area of political connections and the impacts of political
events generally to explore other potential ramifications.

                                   42
10 Bibliography

[1] Abadie, A., Diamond, A., and Hainmueller, J. (2010). Synthetic control methods
   for comparative case studies: Estimating the effect of california’s tobacco control
  program. Journal of the American statistical Association, 105(490):493–505.

[2] Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., and Robinson, J. A. (2005). Institutions as a fundamental
  cause of long-run growth. Handbook of economic growth, 1:385–472.

[3] Ahmad, F., Bradbury, M., and Habib, A. (2022). Political connections, political un-
   certainty and audit fees: evidence from pakistan. Managerial Auditing Journal,
   37(2):255–282.

[4] Ahmed, W. M. (2017). The impact of political regime changes on stock prices: the
   case of egypt. International Journal of Emerging Markets, 12(3):508–531.

[5] Alesina, A., Özler, S., Roubini, N., and Swagel, P. (1996). Political instability and
  economic growth. Journal of Economic growth, 1:189–211.

[6] Baker, C. (2016). The 2014 thai coup and some roots of authoritarianism. Journal
   of Contemporary Asia, 46(3):388–404.

[7] Balima, H. W. (2020). Coups d’état and the cost of debt. Journal of Comparative
  Economics, 48(3):509–528.

[8] Barber, B. M. and Lyon, J. D. (1997). Detecting long-run abnormal stock returns: The
   empirical power and specification of test statistics. Journal of financial economics,
   43(3):341–372.

[9] Belkin, A. and Schofer, E. (2005). Coup risk, counterbalancing, and international
   conflict. Security Studies, 14(1):140–177.

[10] Biddle, S. and Zirkle, R. (1996). Technology, civil-military relations, and warfare
   in the developing world. The Journal of Strategic Studies, 19(2):171–212.

[11] Boubakri, N., Guedhami, O., Mishra, D., and Saffar, W. (2012). Political connections
   and the cost of equity capital. Journal of corporate finance, 18(3):541–559.

[12] Bunkanwanicha, P., Fan, J. P., and Wiwattanakantang, Y. (2013). The value of
   marriage to family firms. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 48(2):611–
   636.

[13] Bunkanwanicha, P. and Wiwattanakantang, Y. (2009). Big business owners in
   politics. The Review of Financial Studies, 22(6):2133–2168.

[14] Chan, L. K., Hamao, Y., and Lakonishok, J. (1991). Fundamentals and stock returns
   in japan. The journal of finance, 46(5):1739–1764.

                                   43
[15] Chang, E. C. and Wong, S. M. (2004). Political control and performance in china’s
   listed firms. Journal of Comparative Economics, 32(4):617–636.

[16] CNN (2006). Thailand’s king gives blessing to coup. https://edition.cnn.com/
  2006/WORLD/asiapcf/09/20/thailand.coup.king/. Accessed: date-of-access.

[17] Collier, P. and Hoeffler, A. (2005). Resource rents, governance, and conflict. Journal
   of conflict resolution, 49(4):625–633.

[18] Collier, P. and Hoeffler, A. (2007a). Military spending and the risks of coups d’etats.

[19] Collier, P. and Hoeffler, A. (2007b). Unintended consequences: does aid promote
   arms races? Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 69(1):1–27.

[20] Connors, M. K. (2008). Article of faith: The failure of royal liberalism in thailand.
   Journal of contemporary Asia, 38(1):143–165.

[21] Connors, M. K. and Hewison, K. (2008). Introduction: Thailand and the “good
   coup”. Journal of Contemporary Asia, 38(1):1–10.

[22] Davies, P. L. (2000). The board of directors: composition, structure, duties and
  powers. Paper on Company Law Reform in OECD Countries: A Comparative Outlook
   of Current Trends.

[23] de Lapomarede, B. (1934). The setting of the siamese révolution. Pacific Affairs,
   7(3):251–259.

[24] Diamonte, R. L., Liew, J. M., and Stevens, R. L. (1996). Political risk in emerging
   and developed markets. Financial Analysts Journal, 52(3):71–76.

[25] Faccio, M. (2010). Differences between politically connected and nonconnected
  firms: A cross-country analysis. Financial management, 39(3):905–928.

[26] Feaver, P. D. (1999). Civil-military relations. Annual review of political science,
   2(1):211–241.

[27] Finer, S. (1988). The man on horseback: The role of the military in politics (boul-
   der.

[28] Fisman, R. (2001). Estimating the value of political connections. American eco-
  nomic review, 91(4):1095–1102.

[29] Fuller, T. (2014). Court orders thai leader removed from office. New York Times.
   Accessed: 2024-05-07.

[30] Harymawan, I., Lam, B., Nasih, M., and Rumayya, R. (2019). Political connections
   and stock price crash risk: Empirical evidence from the fall of suharto. International
   Journal of Financial Studies, 7(3):49.

                                   44
[31] Hewison, K. (2008). A book, the king and the 2006 coup. Journal of Contemporary
   Asia, 38(1):190–211.

[32] Hookway, J. and Chomchuen, W. (2014). Thai court removes yingluck shinawatra
   from office. The Wall Street Journal. Accessed: 2024-05-08.

[33] Huntington, S. P. (1991). Democracy’s third wave. J. Democracy, 2:12.

[34] Infante, L. and Piazza, M. (2014). Political connections and preferential lending
   at local level: Some evidence from the italian credit market. Journal of Corporate
  Finance, 29:246–262.

[35] Jenkins, J. C. and Kposowa, A. J. (1992). The political origins of african military
   coups: Ethnic competition, military centrality, and the struggle over the postcolo-
   nial state. International Studies Quarterly, 36(3):271–291.

[36] Johnson, T. H., Slater, R. O., and McGowan, P. (1983). Explaining african military
   coups d’etat, 1960-1982. American Political Science Review, 78(3):622–640.

[37] Jotikut, R. (2016). A brief history of protest politics in thailand (2001–2014). Polit-
   ical Science and Public Administration Journal, 7(2):79–117.

[38] Klein, A. (1998a). Firm performance and board committee structure. The journal
   of law and Economics, 41(1):275–304.

[39] Klein, J. R. (1998b). The Constitution of the Kingdom of Thailand, 1997: a blueprint
  for participatory democracy. Asia Foundation Bangkok.

[40] Kongkirati, P. (2016). Evolving power of provincial political families in thailand:
   Dynastic power, party machine and ideological politics. South East Asia Research,
   24(3):386–406.

[41] La Porta, R., Lopez-de Silanes, F., and Shleifer, A. (1999). Corporate ownership
   around the world. The journal of finance, 54(2):471–517.

[42] Larcker, D. F., Gordon, L. A., and Pinches, G. E. (1980). Testing for market effi-
  ciency: a comparison of the cumulative average residual methodology and inter-
   vention analysis. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 15(2):267–287.

[43] Lazonick, W. and O’sullivan, M. (2000). Maximizing shareholder value: a new
   ideology for corporate governance. Economy and society, 29(1):13–35.

[44] Lehne, J., Shapiro, J. N., and Eynde, O. V. (2018). Building connections: Politi-
   cal corruption and road construction in india. Journal of Development Economics,
  131:62–78.

[45] Leon, G. (2014). Loyalty for sale? military spending and coups d’etat. Public
  Choice, 159:363–383.

                                   45
[46] Lichbach, M. I. (1995). The 5% rule. Rationality and Society, 7(1):126–128.

[47] Liu, L. (2014). Anti-government protests in thailand: A political sociology of elite
   and class conflict. Retrieved February, 12:2014.

[48] Londregan, J. B. and Poole, K. T. (1990). Poverty, the coup trap, and the seizure of
   executive power. World politics, 42(2):151–183.

[49] Masaki, T. (2016). Coups d’état and foreign aid. World Development, 79:51–68.

[50] McCargo, D. (2005). Network monarchy and legitimacy crises in thailand. The
   Pacific Review, 18(4):499–519.

[51] McCargo, D. (2015). Thailand in 2014: The trouble with magic swords. Southeast
   Asian Affairs, 2015(1):335–358.

[52] Mellor and Suwannakij (2013). Thailand’s rural boom yields mercedes
  and 6,000 jacuzzis. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2013-10-28/
  thailand-s-rural-boom-yields-mercedes-and-6-000-jacuzzis. Accessed: 2023-05-
   10.

[53] Meyersson, E. (2016). Political man on horseback: coups and development. Stock-
   holm Institute for Transition Economics (SITE), 5.

[54] Moxham, B. (2004). Milking thailand: The thai-australia free trade agreement.

[55] Neher, C. D. (1992). Political succession in thailand. Asian Survey, 32(7):585–605.

[56] Nikkinen, J. and Vähämaa, S. (2010). Terrorism and stock market sentiment. Fi-
   nancial Review, 45(2):263–275.

[57] Ockey, J. (2007). Thailand’s’ professional soldiers’ and coup-making: The coup
   of 2006. Crossroads: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Southeast Asian Studies, pages
  95–127.

[58] Ouyyanont, P. (2008). The crown property bureau in thailand and the crisis of
   1997. Journal of Contemporary Asia, 38(1):166–189.

[59] Pachanee, C.-a. and Wibulpolprasert, S. (2006). Incoherent policies on universal
  coverage of health insurance and promotion of international trade in health ser-
   vices in thailand. Health Policy and Planning, 21(4):310–318.

[60] Pathmanand, U. (2008). A different coup d’état? Journal of Contemporary Asia,
   38(1):124–142.

[61] Peck, G. and Wedel, J. (2014). Thailand deploys 20,000 soldiers and police as thou-
   sands of anti-government protesters gather for bangkok ’shutdown’. National Post.
   Via: Liu, 2014.

                                   46
[62] Phatharathananunth, S. (2008). The thai rak thai party and elections in north-
   eastern thailand. Journal of Contemporary Asia, 38(1):106–123.

[63] Pilster, U. and Böhmelt, T. (2011). Coup-proofing and military effectiveness in
   interstate wars, 1967–99. Conflict Management and Peace Science, 28(4):331–350.

[64] Powell, J. (2012). Determinants of the attempting and outcome of coups d’état.
   Journal of Conflict resolution, 56(6):1017–1040.

[65] Powell, J. M. and Thyne, C. L. (2011). Global instances of coups from 1950 to 2010:
   A new dataset. Journal of Peace Research, 48(2):249–259.

[66] Pye, O. and Schaffar, W. (2008). The 2006 anti-thaksin movement in thailand: An
   analysis. Journal of Contemporary Asia, 38(1):38–61.

[67] Rigobon, R. and Sack, B. (2005). The effects of war risk on us financial markets.
   Journal of banking & finance, 29(7):1769–1789.

[68] Roberts, B. E. (1990). A dead senator tells no lies: Seniority and the distribution
   of federal benefits. american Journal of Political science, pages 31–58.

[69] Saeed, A., Belghitar, Y., and Clark, E. (2019). Political connections and corporate
  performance: Evidence from pakistan. Economics of Transition and Institutional
  Change, 27(4):863–889.

[70] Tahoun, A. (2014). The role of stock ownership by us members of congress on the
   market for political favors. Journal of Financial Economics, 111(1):86–110.

[71] Tejapira, K. (2006). Toppling thaksin. New Left Review, 39:5–37.

[72] Thompson, W. R. (1973). The grievances of military coup-makers. Number 47. Sage
   Publications (CA).

[73] Thyne, C. L. (2010). Supporter of stability or agent of agitation? the effect of
   us foreign policy on coups in latin america, 1960—99. Journal of Peace Research,
   47(4):449–461.

[74] Tian, Y., Wang, Y., Xie, X., Jiao, J., and Jiao, H. (2019). The impact of business-
  government relations on firms’ innovation: Evidence from chinese manufacturing
   industry. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 143:1–8.

[75] Uwanno, B. and Burns, W. D. (1998). The thai constitution of 1997: Sources and
   process. U. Brit. Colum. L. Rev., 32:227.

[76] Vafeas, N. and Theodorou, E. (1998). The relationship between board structure
   and firm performance in the uk. The British Accounting Review, 30(4):383–407.

[77] Walker, A. (2008). The rural constitution and the everyday politics of elections in
   northern thailand. Journal of Contemporary Asia, 38(1):84–105.

                                   47
[78] Wang, G. Y. et al. (2010). The impacts of free cash flows and agency costs on firm
  performance. Journal of service science and management, 3(04):408.

[79] Wong, W.-Y. and Hooy, C.-W. (2018). Do types of political connection affect firm
   performance differently? Pacific-Basin Finance Journal, 51:297–317.

[80] Zhang, H., Li, L., Zhou, D., and Zhou, P. (2014). Political connections, government
  subsidies and firm financial performance: Evidence from renewable energy man-
  ufacturing in china. Renewable Energy, 63:330–336.

                                   48
11 Appendix

11.1 Coup d’états and Historic Exogeneity Assessments

11.1.1 Literature Review: Causes of Coup d’états and their Mitigation

An aspect of our research is the argument for the exogeneity of the 2006, and 2014
coup d’état (including the removal of Yingluck Shinawatra from office). Although the
main purpose of our investigation is to understand the effect of political connections
in light of sudden changes in governments on abnormal returns, and our focus lies
solely on Thailand, this review of the literature allows us to understand the causes
of coup d’ètats, the motives of the military, and how leaders try to avoid them em-
pirically. Therefore, this review of the literature served as the basis for the historical
evaluation of the causes that led to each coup d’état in Thailand, and hence our argu-
ment of exogeneity.

The majority of scholars apply a rational framework to the decision of whether the mil-
itary will overthrow the government; see Lichbach (1995) or Thyne (2010). Although
militaries might overthrow the government due to misalignment with their interests
Thompson, 1973, conspirators also carefully examine the chances of their maneuver:
They will ultimately only proceed if the expected payoffs of a potential victory offset
the risky consequences of a potential failure. This is especially highlighted by Finer
(1988) who emphasizes the importance of opportunity: While elites may have the dis-
position to displace the government, they do not necessarily do so.

In reality, when it comes to determining the factors of coup d’états, Powell (2012) finds
this window of opportunity and thus resulting in coup activity in higher political in-
stability, seen in national crises, demonstrations, etc. Meanwhile, Londregan and
Poole (1990) find an inverse relationship between coup d’états and income, arguing
that coups are 21 times more likely to occur in poorer countries when evaluating data
from 1950 to 1982. Moreover, in agreement with research by Alesina et al. (1996),
Finer (1988), Johnson et al. (Johnson et al., 1983), among others, they show that “once
the ice is broken” with a successful coup d’état, the propensity to experience another
coup increases drastically over the next six years.

Similarly, Collier and Hoeffler (2005) emphasize that economic weakness, seen in low
income and a lack of growth, increases the likelihood of coup d’états. However, they
also subsequently assess the connection between coup risk and military spending Col-
lier and Hoeffler (2007a). By focusing specifically on African countries, they find evi-
dence that African governments that consider the coup risk to be high increase their
military spending, and vice versa, while similar behaviors are not visible in other re-

                                   49
gions. Moreover, analyzing developing aid and coup risk, they found that foreign aid
leads to an increase in coup risk as the increase in military spending consequently em-
powers the military: In a previous paper Collier and Hoeffler (2007b) already showed
that about 40% of the military spending in Africa is derived from foreign aid.

Jenkins and Kposowa (1992) offer another explanation for coup activity wherein they
found intra-military conflict, rooted in the cohort rivalry in military schools, to be a
decisive factor for coup activity.

Meanwhile, the relationship between military spending and coup risk serves as a hint
to the extensive literature on mitigating coup risk from a government perspective be-
cause, as Feaver (1999) emphasizes, military can become [the institution’s] greatest
threat. Leon (2014) supports this argument empirically, showing that coup d’états
are generally more likely when military spending as part of GDP is relatively low.
Therefore, aligned with Collier and Hoeffler (2007a), Huntington (1991) suggests that
governments should appease the military through “toys”, such as increased salaries
and benefits. Powell (2012) supports their findings, as he also shows empirically that
greater military funds undermine its capacity and willingness to undertake a coup.
Moreover, Powell (2012) documents further factors deteriorating coup attempts as
well as their success: Synchronous paramilitary activity and their strength, and mil-
itary size. An increase in military size leads to shrinking cohesion and coordination
challenges, enabling effective mitigation of coup risk.

Additionally, Belkin and Schofer (2005) employed two empirical tests to document that
the threat of military coups leads leaders to counterbalance their militaries through
division of military branches, while also finding support that leaders engage in in-
ternational conflict to warrant internal conflict within the military, thus encouraging
internal distrust to prevent a unified military. This involvement in international con-
flict to mitigate coup risk is shown by Biddle and Zirkle (1996), Pilster and Böhmelt
(2011), among others.

11.1.2 Detailed Historic Assessment of the 2006 Coup d’état Causes

The Journal on Contemporary Asia dedicated in 2008 a whole edition on Thailand and
the surrounding events of the 2006 coup d’état, which serves with its various historic
articles as the basis for the assessment and argumentation of exogeneity (Connors and
Hewison, 2008). In addition to augmenting their historical account with the paper of
Ockey (2007), we argue that the main drivers of the coup d’état were two reasons:
First, Thailand’s intra-elite conflict, which is mainly eminent from opposing ideolog-
ical and political views between Shinawatra and the Palace, as well as royalists, em-
bodied by General Prem Tinsulanonda and media tycoon Sondhi Limthongkul (Path-
manand, 2008; Connors, 2008; Hewison, 2008). Second, Ockey (2007) suggests that

                                   50
factionalism within the military played a major role wherein Shinawatra undermined
the “professionalism” of Thailand’s military, which had been particularly emphasized
by the ideas of General Tinsulanonda. Although both arguments underscore the dis-
crepancies between Shinawatra and General Tinsulanonda, they diverge on the na-
ture of their conflict. However, their common thread, as emphasized in the argument
of Finer (1988) about seizing opportunities, is ultimately the military’s exploitation of
the 2005-2006 political crisis with the aim of solving the conflict through the military
coup.

Hewison’s argument of the the Intra-Elite Conflict

In his historic account, Hewison (2008) underscores the importance of the intra-elite
conflict as a pivotal cause that led to the coup d’état of 2006. Although the struggle was
based on a complex interplay of economic, ideological, and political discrepancies be-
tween the Palace and Shinawatra, Hewison (2008) points out that the underlying issues
were rather political and ideological in their nature and thus outweigh the economic
factors, discussed by Pathmanand (2008) and Ouyyanont (2008).

In fact, one of the arguments is that the economic power Shinawatra obtained through
political favoritism in the form of his post-neoliberal policies (Bunkanwanicha and
Wiwattanakantang, 2009); Pye and Schaffar, 2008) led to his discrepancy with the
monarchy and the associated capitalist of the monarchy: As Hewison (2008) argued,
“[he] neglected the general interests of the domestic capitalist class in favor of his own
wealth ”, evident especially through the sale of Shinawatra’s Shin Corporation in 2006
(Pathmanand, 2008). Meanwhile, Shinawatra used his governmental power against
companies that had close ties to the monarchy and the royalist General Prem Tinsu-
lanonda. For example, he blocked the stock listing of Charoen Sirivadhanabhakd’s
beverage firm in 2005, while he aggressively restructured the debt-plagued TPI Group,
Thailand’s largest petroleum and chemicals conglomerate. Connors (2008) suggests
that these examples are factors in the establishment of loose capitalist groups that
wanted Shinawatra out of office. However, more importantly, the economic friction
between Shinawatra and the monarch arguably stemmed from his economic influ-
ence posed to the interests of the Crown Property Bureau (CPB), the investment arm
of the Palace (Pathmanand, 2008; Ouyyanont, 2008), as the Shin Corporation and the
CPD were in fact closely intertwined. Ouyyanont (2008) emphasized that the CBP pre-
ferred to maintain the integrity and honor of the crown in their business activities,
while Shinawatra prioritized quick profits and challenged the special status of the CPB
(Hewison, 2008). If this economic argument were indeed significant, the coup would
arguably be endogenous.

However, the argument falls short for a variety of reasons. First, albeit the friction may
be true regarding the narrative of discrepancy in management approaches, from a
factual point of view, Ouyyanont (2008) clearly underlines that the CPB’s income, thus

                                   51
the Palace’s economic power, was not threatened by Shinawatra’s economic policies:
Plagued from an under diversification and the 1997 financial crisis, the CPB achieved
through internal restructuring and leverage rom, almost three times the income in the
mid-2000s than pre-1997. Second, Hewison (2008) suggests the friction between the
Palace and Shinawatra was derived mainly from political and ideological competition,
which undermined the authority of the monarchy.

In his description, McCargo (2005) described the Palace’s institutionalism as “network
monarchy” which Tejapira (2006) confirms as more than 6000 individuals within gov-
ernment structures and police as well as civilians since the mid-1970s, particularly
embodied by General Tinsulanonda and the “Privy Council”. Hewison (2008) argues
that this close alignment between the military and the King arguably derived from the
King’s fear of communism and anti-royal sentiment during the 20th century. More-
over, he underpins that exactly this “network monarchy” posed a threat to Shinawa-
tra’s power, which he systematically attempted to replace with supporters of the TRT.
Not only did the King express his personal dislike for Shinawatra, but he also saw this
reorganization within the bureaucracy as challenging the monarchy’s authority. How-
ever, more importantly, Hewison (2008) highlights that friction arose with the “battle
for the masses”, seen especially in the extensive support for Thaksin from the rural
population for his policies in spite of the anti-Thaksin protests: Pye and Schaffar (2008)
described the large protests in favor of Shinawatra in 2006 as a “Caravan of the Poor”.
This rural support was based on Shinawatra’s policies, such as health reforms and
development projects, which shifted popularity toward Shinawatra (Hewison, 2008).
Meanwhile, they also stood in direct contrast to the King’s public image as “savior of
the poor” through his arguably unsuccessful development projects after 1997 as well
as his different concept of welfare. This friction between the Palace and Shinawatra
came to light and was vocalized by Anti-Thaksin protest leader Sondhi Limthongkul,
who declared to protect the monarchy. Faced with the imminent likelihood that Shi-
nawatra would further consolidate his public support by winning the scheduled Octo-
ber 2006 election - following the annulment of the April elections - the royalist elite (to
which the military leaders belonged as well) arguably orchestrated the coup d’état on
September 19th, 2006, when Shinawatra was at the United Nations in New York. This
decisive action was taken not only to counter Shinawatra’s tactics of vote-buying, but
to prevent a significant shift in power that threatened their authority (Walker, 2008).
Before the coup, Hewison (2008) suggests that the speeches by General Tinsulanonda
criticizing Shinawatra heavily underlined the Palace’s interest in removing Thaskin,
while publicly the King remained neutral with his refusal to install a new prime min-
ister in April 2006. However, in the aftermath of the coup, the King even blessed the
coup (CNN, 2006).

Therefore, we can argue that the coup d’état can be considered exogenous because
political and ideological factors were the rather decisive factor in committing the coup,

                                   52
while claims of economic friction can be neglected.

Ockey’s argument of the Professional Soldiers

The second argument brought forward by Ockey (2007) concerns the intra-military
power struggle derived from the concept of military professionalism. Throughout
the Cold War, the class sizes of the Royal Thai Army Academy (today Chulachomk-
lao Royal Military Academy) increased drastically, seen especially in the exorbitant
jump from about 59 officers in 1952 to 148 officers in 1953 (Class 5), thereafter con-
tinuously growing. This rapid increase not only meant escalated competition among
officers for high-ranking positions but also culminated in increased factionism based
on political ideologies: “Class 5”, the “Young Turks” (mainly from Class 7), as well as
the “Democratic Soldiers” wherein especially a fourth group, the informally organized
“Professional Soldiers” faction emerged of which General Prem Tinsulanonda was the
focal point once he became also Prime Minister in 1980, lasting until 1988, with close
ties to the monarchy. According to Huntington (1991), military professionalism em-
anates from three pillars: expertise, responsibility to a client (the institutions), and
corporateness, whereas Ockey (2007) highlights that the faction of the “Professional
Soldiers” shared the ambition of democratization, protecting the monarchy, as well as
political stability. Their ambitions were particularly manifested in the Prime Minis-
terial Order 66/2523 through the notion of domestic counterinsurgency that intended
to end Thailand’s extensive history of political turmoil, especially in the 1970s, as this
Prime Ministerial Order incorporated democratic values into military operations, thus
serving Huntington’s “client”, Thailand. The dominance of the “Professional Soldiers”
was especially evident in thwarting the attempted coup in 1981 by the “Young Turks”
as well as in removing “Class 5” through mass protests after they committed a coup in
1991.

However, as Ockey (2007) argues, this dominance was challenged once Shinawatra, a
Class 21 member, assumed his premiership in 2001 through a shift towards harsher
military means, evident particularly in his approach to the conflict-ridden southern
provinces. The “Professional Soldiers” claimed that their methods exacerbated the in-
surgency rather than containing it, suggesting that, for example, community engage-
ment would be more suitable to address the complex dynamics in the South. More-
over, the division became more evident as well in the rapid promotion of fellow of-
ficers from Class 21 who were affiliated with Shinawatra, despite a lack of qualifica-
tion, to gain further support within the military. In particular, Shinawatra’s brothers
Chaisit and Uthai were promoted to general and undersecretary of defense, despite
having any experience commanding field troops. Consequently, the military faced
discrepancy derived from the pillars of military professionalism in which Class 21
not only lacked expertise but defined its client orientation towards Shinawatra and
his policies, not the institution that was embodied by the monarchy. General Tin-
sulanonda even underscored loyalty to the crown in July 2006 when he delivered a

                                   53
speech at the military academy, describing the soldiers as “horses” and the govern-
ment as “jockeys”. While the “jockeys” can change, the “horses” shall be reminded
that they always belong to the King (Pathmanand, 2008).

Ultimately, the cumbersome appointment of General Sonthi Boonyaratglin, the later
coup leader, as new commander-in-chief and somewhat ally of General Tinsulanonda’s
aides laid arguably the foundation for the 2006 coup d’état. Although Shinawatra pre-
ferred another candidate (General Rattanavanich) who had similarly no combat expe-
rience, multiple generals within the Thai military leadership organ (the “Privy Coun-
cil”), including General Tinsulanonda, withheld the annual promotion list until Shi-
nawatra approved Boonyaratglin as the new commander-in-chief following the Octo-
ber 2005 reshuffle. In July 2006, General Boonyaratglin already transferred key mem-
bers of Class 21 to rural, insignificant posts, alluding to an internal division and ar-
guably preparing the coup. However, Pathmanand (2008pathmanand2008different)
highlights a fundamental lack of foresight and planning by the military, evident from
no clear policies to protect the monarchy post-coup, which points to an immediate
decision to commit the coup. In fact, this aligns with the argument of Ockey (2007)
that the decisive factor for the coup was rather that General Boonyaratglin feared ru-
mors amidst the protests that Shinawatra would attempt to replace him during the
October 2006 reshuffle to reestablish his own allies in command: Just ten days before
the coup, Shinawatra submitted the draft of proposed promotions ten days before the
King. Quickly after general Boonyaratglin committed the coup d’état on September
19th, 2006. During the direct aftermath, the junta increased constitutionally drastic
military spending (according to the literature of Collier and Hoeffler (2007a), Hunt-
ington (1991), among others) as the “Professional Soldiers” lamented the decrease in
military spending under Shinawatra and enforced stricter rules around lèse majesté
to protect the reputation of the monarchy, thus laying the foundation for military pro-
fessionalism again.

Therefore, based on the argument of Ockey (2007), the coup qualifies as exogenous,
as it was arguably driven by the intra-military struggle between Shinawatra support-
ers, embodied in Class 21, and the faction of “Professional Soldiers” to which General
Boonyaratglin was affiliated, which arguably urged a potential loss of power.

11.1.3 Detailed Historic Assessment of the 2014 Coup d’état Causes

The assessment of the causes of the 2014 coup d’état is more difficult than the 2006
coup d’état due to two factors. First, there is only a handful of literature that examines
the events, and second, the political crisis in 2013/14 certainly exceeded the magnitude
of the 2005/06 political crisis, seen in the extensive seizure of government buildings
and violent protests that resulted in the deaths of dozens of protestors (Baker, 2016;
McCargo, 2015; Kongkirati, 2016, among others), making its assessment more com-

                                   54
plex. We argue that the underlying causes for the coup d’état were a continuation of
the ideological and political struggle between the Shinawatras and established elites,
including the monarchy, while the coup d’état was not anticipated until May 20th,
2014.

Regarding the anticipation of the coup d’état McCargo (2015) provides clarity into the
events between May 20th, and proclamation of the coup on May 22nd. He argues that
the decision to seize power must have occurred at a very late stage. After the imposi-
tion of martial law on May 20th, General Prayut Chan-o-cha’s installation of the Peace
and Order Maintaining Command (POMC), the POMC ordered government politicians
and protest leaders to find a resolution. General Chan-o-cha also publicly emphasized
that the military had no intention of seizing power but to find an agreement between
the parties to end the political crisis. However, on May 22nd, due to failed negotia-
tions, General Chan-o-cha proclaimed a coup d’état and detained all negotiators. Al-
legedly, participants from both sides thought that he was joking. Therefore, we argue
that both the reactions of the participants as well as the set-up of the POMC to find
a resolution show that the coup d’état occurred to be rather spontaneous, where the
markets could have anticipated an eventual coup starting from May 20th despite the
previous assurances from General Chan-o-cha to not stage a coup d’état.

However, it is also crucial to assess the anti-Shinawatra movement in more detail, as it
highlights that the protest, and thus arguably the coup itself, was rather a continuation
between ideological and political struggle between the Shinawatras and established
conservative elites, including the Thai monarchy (Kongkirati, 2016; Baker, 2016). Simi-
larly to Hewison (2008), Liu (2014) points out that Thai society is split between two elite
factions: The loyal monarchy faction consists of conservative and traditional elites,
namely wealthy business owners from the South, the judiciary, and the army, while
the second group is the reformist group of business owners from northern Thailand
around Shinawatra, described as ”New Money” that attempted to change Thailand’s
political system. Liu (2014) highlights that the former had a particular affiliation to
the Democratic Party whose leader, Suthep Thaugsuban, was the leading figure of the
organized mass protests, namely the People’s Democratic Reform Committee (PDRC).
The continuous objective of the protests was to remove Yingluck Shinawatra from her
office (Peck and Wedel, 2014) took various forms, reaching their peak amid the snap
election in February 2014: Through violent protests that prevented the registration
of voters, voting and vote counting (Kongkirati, 2016), Thaugsuban was able to sabo-
tage the predicted victory of Shinawatra (Liu, 2014) as due to the thus misconducted
elections, the constitutional court annulled the elections on March 21st, 2014. Parallel
to the April 2006 election, we argue that the obstruction of the elections represented
the ideological and political conflict of these two groups over the popular vote. Al-
though not as successful as Thaksin Shinawatra, the policies of Yingluck Shinawatra
were widely popular among the rural and poor population (Baker, 2016). However,

                                   55
what differentiated the 2014 protest movement from 2006 was the enormous violence
that occurred, intensifying the divisions between the factions, leading to the military
intervention on May 20th. Therefore, we argue that conflict over ideological and polit-
ical factors was the decisive factor for the military’s intervention to establish law and
order again.

Nevertheless, the removal of Yingluck Shinawatra on May 7th must also be examined
closely, and we argue that the removal was political in its nature due to two rea-
sons, whereas the removal itself is ambiguous regarding its potential anticipation.
First, Shinawatra’s action to install Thaksin Shinawatra’s former brother-in-law in
a high-ranking police position is politically motivated in itself. Second, the senator
who brought the complaint in March 2014 to the constitutional court was Paiboon
Nititawan, a politician from the oppositional People’s Reform Party who was closely
aligned with the monarchy and the military (Jotikut, 2016) This affiliation is the basis
for arguing that the complaint itself was political in nature. However, whether the
removal could have been anticipated is double-edged: On the one hand, Liu (2014)
highlights the bias of the judiciary, which was to a large extent staffed with support-
ers of traditionalists. The New York Times (Fuller, 2014) and the Wall Street Journal
(Hookway and Chomchuen, 2014) underscore that the court’s decision was of political
nature due to an extraordinary quick decision that occurred just a day after Shinawa-
tra submitted her defense. Therefore, due to this political affiliation, the removal could
have been anticipated. However, the removal might not have been anticipated for two
reasons: First, in a similar concern, yet in hindsight, the former prime minister Ab-
hisit Vejjajiva was acquitted of any malpractice from the constitutional court. Second,
in the first jurisdictional instance with the administration court, Shinawatra’s action
was declared to be legal. Therefore, the contrary decision by the constitutional court,
compared to Vejjajiva’s case, as well as the previous decision of the administration
court, allows arguing that the decision was not anticipated.

Based on these aforementioned arguments, we assert that the coup d’état is exoge-
nous for two reasons. First, the clear ideological and political frictions highlight that
the coup was not driven by worsening economic factors or market expectations that
could have affected the stock returns of firms, particularly politically connected firms.
Second, despite the heavy protest, the coup was not anticipated at least until May 20th,
2014, which was shortly before the coup d´état. Moreover, the actions of Yingluck Shi-
nawatra, as well as the complaint against her, can be regarded as inherently political
without any ties to economic factors that could have affected the stock returns of com-
panies. However, we identify a two-sided argumentation regarding the anticipation
of the removal and thus incorporate this into the discussion of our results.

                                   56
11.2 Remainder Firm Characteristics Overview

                     Table 15: Robust Firm Characteristics 2006

                                POLIC NON-POLIC Difference
                            Mean (1) Median (1) Mean (0) Median (0) (t-test) (z-test)
 Market-to-book ratio (MB) 4.223 2.087 3.315 1.497 -0.719 0.418
 Industry-adj MB 0.824 -0.091 -0.040 -1.102 -0.695 0.381
 Profit Margin (PM) 0.120 0.073 -0.011 0.085 -1.48 -0.486
 Industry-adj PM 0.076 -0.009 -0.004 0.041 -0.773 -1.946
 Return on assets (ROA) 0.063 0.057 0.070 0.076 0.4 -1.377
 Industry-adj ROA -0.001 -0.009 0.000 0.004 0.066 -1.125
 Leverage 0.143 0.132 0.132 0.056 -0.349 -0.641
 Industry-adj leverage 0.003 -0.032 0.000 -0.053 -0.123 -0.481
 Total assets (log) 8.075 8.100 8.015 7.691 -0.219 0.277
 Fixed assets/total assets 0.336 0.360 0.349 0.322 0.238 -0.863
 Growth on assets 14.124 5.932 16.132 8.598 0.251 -1.435
 Net sales (M USD) 3979.486 2613.332 10745.590 1812.068 2.602** 0.047

This table reports the summary statistics of the sample firms in 2014. ’*’, ’**’ and ’***’ denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. Profit Margin is the ratio of
EBIT to total sales, Return on assets is the ratio of EBIT to total assets and Leverage is the ratio
of total debt to total assets.
                                Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

                                   57
                         Table 16: Firm Characteristics 2014

                                POLIC NON-POLIC Difference
                            Mean (1) Median (1) Mean (0) Median (0) (t-test) (z-test)
 Market-to-book ratio (MB) 2.645 1.320 1.408 0.982 -1.197 -1.197***
 Industry-adj MB 1.010 -0.097 -0.143 -0.373 -1.585 -1.257***
 Profit Margin (PM) -0.294 0.075 0.110 0.086 1.148 -3.104
 Industry-adj PM -0.348 0.014 0.045 0.020 1.167 -3.387
 Return on assets (ROA) 0.045 0.051 0.059 0.061 0.821 -2.451
 Industry-adj ROA -0.013 -0.004 0.002 0.002 0.865 -2.509
 Leverage 0.130 0.071 0.096 0.029 -1.679* -1.799*
 Industry-adj leverage 0.021 -0.020 -0.003 -0.050 -1.225 -1.772*
 Total assets (log) 8.491 8.367 8.342 8.045 -0.783 -0.448
 Fixed assets/total assets 0.324 0.345 0.315 0.280 -0.260 -5.729
 Growth on assets 39.802 9.817 18.432 6.687 -1.730* 0.075**
 Net sales (M USD) 8895.142 2568.191 19991.927 2188.333 1.776* -1.240

This table reports the summary statistics of the sample firms in 2014. ’*’, ’**’ and ’***’ denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. Profit Margin is the ratio of
EBIT to total sales, Return on assets is the ratio of EBIT to total assets and Leverage is the ratio
of total debt to total assets.
                                Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

                     Table 17: Robust Firm Characteristics 2014

                              POLIC NON-POLIC Difference
                          Mean (1) Median (1) Mean (0) Median (0) t-(t-test) (z-test)
 Market-to-book (MB) 2.074 1.199 1.535 1.004 -1.038 -0.154
 Industry-adj MB 0.516 -0.247 -0.026 -0.353 -1.087 -0.423
 Profit Margin (PM) 0.087 0.063 0.063 0.086 -0.411 -1.398
 Industry-adjusted PM 0.016 -0.023 -0.001 0.020 -0.239 -1.876
 Return on assets 0.058 0.041 0.057 0.058 -0.008 -1.825
 Industry-adj ROA -0.002 -0.015 0.000 0.002 0.075 -1.903
 Leverage 0.127 0.061 0.099 0.030 -0.906 -0.423
 Industry-adj leverage 0.019 -0.029 -0.001 -0.050 -0.664 -0.306
 Total assets (log) 8.661 8.367 8.346 8.064 -0.997 0.756
 Fixed assets/total assets 0.351 0.374 0.314 0.281 -0.546 -3.054
 Growth on assets 21.464 6.100 20.886 7.455 -0.035 -1.101
 Net sales (M USD) 6849.102 4017.648 19236.187 2189.704 2.216** 0.338

This table reports the summary statistics of the sample firms in 2014. ’*’, ’**’ and ’***’ denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. Profit Margin is the ratio of
EBIT to total sales, Return on assets is the ratio of EBIT to total assets and Leverage is the ratio
of total debt to total assets.
                                Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

                                   58
11.3 Robust Industry Distribution Overview

             Table 18: Robust Industry Distribution Sample Firms 2006

    Industry NON POLCON % POLCON % Total
    Communication Serv. 26 5.73 4 16.67 30
    Consumer Discret. 72 15.86 3 12.50 75
    Consumer Staples 50 11.01 1 4.17 51
    Financials 51 11.23 4 16.67 55
    Health Care 16 3.52 1 4.17 17
    Industrials 74 16.30 1 4.17 75
    Information Tech. 30 6.61 1 4.17 31
    Materials 66 14.54 4 16.67 70
    Real Estate 40 8.81 3 12.50 43
    Utilities 14 3.08 1 4.17 15
    Other 15 3.30 1 4.17 16
    Total 454 100.00 24 100.00 478
                                Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

             Table 19: Robust Industry Distribution Sample Firms 2014

    Industry NON POLCON % POLCON % Total
    Communication Serv. 31 5.64 4 15.38 35
    Consumer Discret. 75 13.64 4 15.38 79
    Consumer Staples 51 9.27 1 3.85 52
    Financials 61 11.09 3 11.54 64
    Health Care 20 3.64 1 3.85 21
    Industrials 104 18.91 2 7.69 106
    Information Tech. 33 6.00 0 0.00 33
    Materials 66 12.00 5 19.23 71
    Real Estate 74 13.45 5 19.23 79
    Utilities 17 3.09 1 3.85 18
    Other 18 3.27 0 0.00 18
    Total 550 100.00 26 100.00 576
                                Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

                                   59
11.4 Overview POLCON Firms

11.4.1 POLCON Firms in 2006

                       Table 20: POLCON Firms in 2006

    No. 2006 Robust 2006

     1 AEON THANA SINSAP PCL (THAILAND) AIRA FACTORING PCL
     2 AGRIPURE HOLDINGS PCL AMATA CORP PCL
     3 AIRA FACTORING PCL BANGKOK DUSIT MEDICAL SVCS
     4 AKS CORPORATION PCL BANGKOK POST PCL
     5 AMATA CORP PCL BEC WORLD PCL
     6 AP (THAILAND) PCL BIG CAMERA CORPORATION PCL
     7 BANGKOK DUSIT MEDICAL SVCS CAPITAL ENGINEERING NETWORK PCL
     8 BANGKOK POST PCL CENTRAL PATTANA PCL
     9 BEC WORLD PCL CENTRAL PLAZA HOTEL PCL
     10 BIG CAMERA CORPORATION PCL FINANSIA SYRUS SECS PCL
     11 CAPITAL ENGINEERING NETWORK PCL INDARA INS PUBLIC
     12 CENTRAL PATTANA PCL INTL RESEARCH CORP
     13 CENTRAL PLAZA HOTEL PCL MALEE GROUP PCL
     14 CHARN ISSARA DEVELOPMENT PCL NATION GROUP (THAILAND)
     15 DCON PRODUCTS PCL PICNIC CORP PCL
     16 FINANSIA SYRUS SECS PCL POSCO THAINOX PCL
     17 FNS HOLDINGS PCL SAFARI WORLD PCL
     18 G STEEL PCL SAMAGGI INSURANCE PCL
     19 INDARA INS PCL SC ASSET CORP PCL
     20 INTERNATIONAL ENGINEERING PCL SEVEN UTILITIES AND POWER PCL
     21 INTL RESEARCH CORP THAI FUTURE INCORPORATION PCL
     22 KWI PCL THAI O P P PCL
     23 MALEE GROUP PCL UNION MOSAIC INDUSTRY PCL
     24 NATION GROUP PCL (THAILAND) WAVE EXPONENTIAL PCL
     25 NAVA NAKORN PCL
      26 PICNIC CORP PCL
     27 POSCO THAINOX PCL
      28 PP PRIME PCL
     29 PROFESSIONAL WASTE TECH PCL
     30 QUALITY HOUSES PCL
     31 ROBINSON PCL
     32 ROCKWORTH PCL
     33 SAFARI WORLD PCL
     34 SAHAMIT MACHINERY PCL
     35 SAMAGGI INSURANCE PCL
     36 SAMART CORP PCL
     37 SAMART DIGITAL PCL
     38 SAMMAKORN PCL
      39 SC ASSET CORP PCL
      40 SEVEN UTILITIES AND POWER PCL
     41 SIAM FOOD PRODUCTS PCL
      42 SIAM SPORT SYNDICATE PCL
     43 SINO-THAI ENGR AND CONSTR PCL
     44 THAI FUTURE INCORPORATION PCL
      45 THAI O P P PCL
     46 THAI PLASTIC AND CHEMICAL PCL
      47 THREE SIXTY FIVE PCL
     48 TRITON HOLDING PCL
      49 TTL INDUSTRIES PCL
     50 UNION MOSAIC INDUSTRY PCL
     51 WAVE EXPONENTIAL PCL
                                Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

                                   60
11.4.2 POLCON Firms in 2014

                       Table 21: POLCON Firms in 2014

    No. 2014 Robust 2014

      1 AMATA CORP PCL AP PCL (THAILAND)
      2 AP PCL (THAILAND) BANGKOK DEC-CON PCL
      3 ASIA SERMKIJ LEASING PCL BANGKOK INSURANCE PCL
      4 BANGKOK DEC-CON PCL BANGKOK POST PCL
      5 BANGKOK INSURANCE PCL BEC WORLD PCL
      6 BANGKOK POST PCL BIO GREEN ENERGY TECH PCL
      7 BANPU PCL CENTRAL PATTANA PCL
      8 BEC WORLD PCL CENTRAL PLAZA HOTEL PCL
      9 BIG C SUPERCENTER PCL COL PCL
      10 BIO GREEN ENERGY TECH PCL ERAWAN GROUP PCL (THAILAND)
      11 BLISS INTELLIGENCE PCL EVERLAND PCL
      12 BOUND AND BEYOND PCL FINANSIA SYRUS SECS PCL
      13 BUMRUNGRAD HOSPITAL PCL KIATNAKIN PHATRA BANK PCL
      14 CAPITAL ENGINEERING NETWORK PCL MALEE GROUP PCL
      15 CENTRAL PATTANA PCL MATICHON PCL
      16 CENTRAL PLAZA HOTEL PCL NAVA NAKORN PUBLIC PCL
      17 CHOW STEEL INDUSTRIES PCL NEP REALTY AND INDUSTRY PCL
      18 COL PUBLIC PCL POSCO THAINOX PCL
      19 COUNTRY GROUP DEV PCL PRINCIPAL CAPITAL PCL
      20 DCON PRODUCTS PCL SC ASSET CORP
      21 DEMCO PUBLIC PCL SRITHAI SUPERWARE PCL
      22 ERAWAN GROUP PCL (THAILAND) SUPER ENERGY CORPORATION PCL
      23 EVERLAND PCL THAI FUTURE INCORPORATION PCL
      24 FINANSIA SYRUS SECS PCL THAI O P P PCL
      25 GREEN TECH VENTURES PCL UNION MOSAIC INDUSTRY PCL
      26 INDARA INS PCL WAVE EXPONENTIAL PCL
      27 INTER FAR EAST ENERGY CORP XSPRING CAPITAL PCL
      28 KCE ELECTRONICS PCL
      29 KIATNAKIN PHATRA BANK PCL
      30 MALEE GROUP PCL
      31 MATICHON PCL
      32 MC GROUP PUBLIC PCL
      33 MINOR INTERNATIONAL PCL
      34 NAVA NAKORN PCL
      35 NEP REALTY AND INDUSTRY PCL
      36 NEWS NETWORK CORP PCL
      37 NOBLE DEVELOPMENT PCL
      38 NOK AIRLINES PCL
      39 NUSASIRI PCL
      40 OISHI GROUP PUBLIC PCL
      41 PACE DEVELOPMENT CORP PCL
      42 PAE THAILAND PCL
      43 POSCO THAINOX PCL
      44 PRINCIPAL CAPITAL PCL
      45 PTG ENERGY PUBLIC PCL
      46 RABBIT HOLDINGS PCL
      47 ROBINSON PCL
      48 S.KHONKAEN FOODS PCL
      49 SAHAMIT MACHINERY PCL
      50 SAMAGGI INSURANCE PCL
      51 SAMART CORP PCL
      52 SAMART DIGITAL PCL
      53 SAMMAKORN PCL
      54 SC ASSET CORP PCL
      55 SEVEN UTILITIES AND POWER PCL
      56 SIAM FOOD PRODUCTS PCL
      57 SIAM SPORT SYNDICATE PCL
      58 SIAMGAS AND PETROCHEM PCL
      59 SIKARIN PCL
      60 SRITHAI SUPERWARE PCL
      61 SUPER ENERGY CORPORATION PCL
      62 THAI FUTURE INCORPORATION PCL
      63 THAI O P P PCL
      64 THREE SIXTY FIVE PCL
                                Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024
                                   61
11.5 Rules for Determining Kinship

General

  1. The prime minister receives level PM, and their family members receive PMFX,
     wherein X stands for a relative respective degree to the politician.

  2. Deputy prime ministers receive level M, and their family members receive MFX,
     wherein X stands for a relative respective degree to the politician.

  3. Ministers receive level M, and their family members receive MFX, wherein X
      stands for a relative respective degree to the politician.

  4. Deputy Minister receives level DM, and their family members receive DMFX,
     wherein X stands for a relative respective degree to the politician.

   5. If a politician holds various levels at the same time, then the higher level will be
     attributed.

Households

  1. Each relative who can potentially establish their own household receives an-
     other grade, while spouses are assumed to be in the same household.

   2. Children thus will receive an additional family degree.

Marriages

  1. Birth names are assumed current unless stated otherwise (e.g., through mar-
      riage).

  2. If a wife shares her husband’s family name, her maiden name is assumed missing
     and labeled as n/a.

  3. Marriages must precede each coup to be considered relevant; otherwise, they
     are excluded.

   4. Spouses are labeled as F1, adjusting the family degree of in-law relatives by one
     to accommodate ”another family.”

Divorces

   1. Persons who got divorced from the initial family are disregarded, if no children
     exist and divorce was before the coup.

                                   62
2. In case of divorce with children, ex-spouses married into the family receive FX+1,
   reflecting changes in household composition.

3. This rule doesn’t apply to politicians’ spouses, as they’re already classified as F1;
   divorce does not affect their degree.

                                 63
Figure 1: Determining Kinship

 Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

            64
11.6 Family Umbrellas 2006

              Table 22: Politicians without Associated Surnames 2006

M-Level Politicians DM-Level Politicians
Bodharamik, M Charoensiri, DM
(โพธารามิก) (เจริญศิริ)

Charoenrattanakul, M Kaewdaeng, DM
(เจริญรัตนกุล) (แก้วแดง)

Chuphiban, M Laohapongchana, DM
(จูภิบาล) (เลาหพงศ์ชนะ)

Jarusombat, M Lapvisutthisin, DM
(จารุสมบัติ) (ลาภวิสุทธิสิน)

Khunkitti, M Lertsuriyadet, DM
(คุณกิตติ) (เลิศสุริย์เดช)

Pittaya, M Phiengket, DM
(พิทยะ) (เพียรเกตุ)

Rattanapian, M Rattanakorn, DM
(รัตนเพียร) (รัตนากร)

Rattanapongpaisarn, M Wechayachai, DM
(รักตพงศ์ไพศาล) (เวชยชัย)

Vatana, M
(วันทนา)

Wannasathit, M
(วรรณสถิตย์)

                                Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

                                   65
             Table 23: Family Umbrellas Single Associated Name 2006

Family Umbrella Associated Families
Chidchob, M Supha, MF1
(ชิดชอบ) (ชิดชอบ)

Keyuraphan, M Leelapanyalert, MF1
(เกยุราพันธุ์) (ลีลาปัญญาเลิศ)

Liptapanlop, M Phitthanukorn, MF1
(ลิปตพัลลภ) (พหิทธานุกร)

Suphamongkol, M Atthakrawee Sunthon, MF1
(ศุภมงคล) (อรรถกระวีสุนทร)

Thepsuthin, M Phukprasert, MF1
(เทพสุทิน) (พุกประเสริฐ)

Tiyaphairat, M Worrapattananan, MF2
(ติยะไพรัช) (วรพัฒนานันน์)

Charnvirakul, DM Wattanawarangkun, DMF1
(ชาญวีรกูล) (วัฒนวรางกูร)

Piangkaset, DM Pinsamrid, DMF1
(เพียงเกษ) (พินสําริด)

Sunthornwat, DM Thammarat, DMF3
(สุนทรวัฒน์) (ธรรมรัตน์)

                                Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

                                   66
                                                                                                                         )

      Fourth Degree                                                              Chokdamrongsuk, MF4โชคดํารงสุข(




                                                                                         )
                                                                    )         )
                                                )                                                    )

       Third Degree                      Boonrat, MF3บุญรัตน์(     Opilan, MF3โอปิลันธน์(     Wongngamnit, MF3วงศ์งามนิจ(     Chotichaicharin, MF3โชติชัยชรินทร์(                      Yutthaworn, MF3ยุวถาวร(




                                                                     )
                                                                                             )
                                             )
                 )                                                                                                                                      )
                                                                                                    )

      Second DegreeBunyakida, MF2บุณยกิดา(                             Rungruangkit, MF2รุ่งเรืองกิจ(                     Anderson, MF2แอนเดอร์สัน(    Nilrat, MF2นิลรัตน์(             Tosaksit, MF2โตศักดิ์สิทธิ์(                     Hongthong, DMF2หงษ์ทอง(
                                                                                                                     Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024





                                                )                                                                                             )
Table 24: Family Umbrellas 2, 3 or 4 Associated Surnames 2006)
                                )                                                      )                          )
            )
                                                                                                              )          )                              )

      First DegreePiamkamon, MF1เปี่ยมกมล(     Boonyaleepan, MF1บุญยะลีพรรณ(     Phingkarawat, MF1ภิงคารวัฒน์(     Praneeprachon, MF1ปราณีประชาชน(                                      Siratharanon, MF1ศิรธรานนท์(     Warapa, MF1เครืองาม(     Thongpanich, MF1ธงพานิช(     Phingkarawat, MF1ภิงคารวัฒน์(     Praneeprachon, MF1ปราณีประชาชน(     Amatawong, DMF1อมตวงศ์(






           )
                                                )                          )
                                                                                         )
                                                       )               )
                 )

      Family UmbrellaChaisaeng, Mฉายแสง(    Jatusripitak, Mจาตุศรีพิทักษ์(                    Juangroongruangkit, Mจึงรุ่งเรืองกิจ(                    Klinprathum, Mกลิ่นประทุม(    Krea-ngam, Mเครืองาม(            Thienthong, Mเทียนทอง(                    Pongpanich, DMพงษ์พานิช(

                                            67
                                                                               )
                                                )                    )                                                             )
                                                          )                                                   )
                 )          )                                                                                            )
                                      )                                                   )                                                             )
                                                                                                    )                                         )

      Other DegreesAdireksarn, MF4อดิเรกสาร(    Chitrawat, MF4จิตราวัฒน์(    Winitchai, MF4วินิจฉัย(    Hongsaprapas, MF5หงสประภาส(    Pahitthanukorn, MF5พหิทธานุกร(    Ariyavararom, MF5อริยวรารมย์(    Chearavanont Ross, MF5เจียรวนนท์ รอสส์(    Mahaphant, MF5มหพันธ์(    Ross, MF5รอสส์(    Promphan, DMF4พร้อมพันธุ์(    Niyomtham, DMF5นิยมธรรม(    Thaugsuban, DMF5เทือกสุบรรณ(    Chaiyakul, DMF6ไชยกูล(    Phakamon, DMF7ภากมล(






                      )
              )                       )
             )                )
                                      )                                                                                  )

       Third DegreeChiewsakul, MF3เชี่ยวสกุล(     Saliratwiphak, MF3สาลีรัฐวิภาค(     Sophot, MF3โสพจน์(     Sriyanont, MF3ศรียานนท์(     Wattanalikhit, MF3วัฒนลิขิต(                                       Chutanupong, DMF3ชุตานุพงษ์(     Thuanlin, DMF3ธุวนลิน(





                                      )
             )
                 )                    )

      Second DegreeChoonhavan, MF2ชุณหะวัณ(    Chumpairoj, MF2ชุ่มไพโรจน์(    Mahagitsiri, MF2มหากิจศิริ(    Rathornhiranrat, MF2ราธรหิรัญรัฐ(
                                                                                                                             Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024




Table 25: Family Umbrellas 5+ Associated Surnames 2006
                                                   )
                             )
                 )

      First DegreeThaworntarn, MF1ถาวรธาร(                                      Chearavanont, MF1เจียรวนนท์(                             Techapaiboon, DMF1เตชะไพบูลย์(



                                                                                     )
              )
                                                      )

      Family UmbrellaDabbaransi, Mทัพพะรังสี(                                   Muangsook, Mเมืองสุข(                            Sasomsap, DMสะสมทรัพย์(

                                               68
                                                                                                                   )
                 )                                                                       )        )        )                 )
                          )                                                                                                          )
                                                                                                                                              )
      Fourth DegreeSakuntaphai, MF4ศกุนตาภัย(   Watcharasindhu, MF4วัชรสินธุ(                                            Sasiprapha, MFXศศิประภา(   Sawatdiwat, MFXสวัสดิวัตน์(   Sukanthawanich, MFXสุคันธวณิช(   Wannapruek, MFXวรรณพฤกษ์(   Wittayawethin, MFXวิทยะเวทิน(   Yodmanee, MFXยอดมณี(   Yut, MFXยุทธ(








                     )
                                                                                         )
             )                                                      )                    )
                                                                             )       )                       )
                                )                                                                                      )

      Third DegreeJarusathien, MF3จารุเสถียร(   Laohapongchana, MF3เลาหะพงศ์ชนะ(   Phumphichai, MF3ภูมิพิชัย(                                      Na Songkhla, MFXณ สงขลา(   Norrapanlop, MFXนรพัลลภ(   Pamornmontri, MFXภมรมนตรี(   Panprasit, MFXปานประสิทธิ์(   Penchat, MFXเพ็ญชาติ(   Phanthumsen, MFXพันธุมเสน(   Sarasin, MFXสารสิน(






               )                                      )
                                    )                                                           )       )
                                   )                 )
                       )          )               )                                     )
                                                                                 )               )

      Second DegreeForester, MF2ฟอเรสเตอร์(   Kitiyakara, MF2กิติยากร(   Ladawan, MF2ลดาวัลย์(   Nipatakusol, MF2นิพัทธกุศล(   Sathanapong, MF2สธนพงศ์(   Sukhonthayak, MF2สุคนธวยัคฆ์(               Isarangkun, MFXอิศรางกูร(   Jirapong, MFXจิรพงศ์(   Kittikachorn, MFXกิตติขจร(   Kotchaseni, MFXคชเสนี(   Limotibun, MFXลิ่มอติบูลย์(   Mongkolkitti, MFXมงคลกิตติ(   Na Lampang, MFXณ ลําปาง(
                                                                                                             Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

Table 26: Largest Family Umbrella 2006




                                                                                 )
                                                                                                       )
                                            )             )
              )       )
                    )
                                                                               )              )                     )

       First DegreeNa Ayutthaya, MF1ณ อยุธยา(   Kichothan, MF1กิจโอธาน(   Sawat-Chuto, MF1สวัสดิ์-ชูโต(                                       Chotikasathien, MFXโชติกเสถียร(   Chupinij, MFXชูพินิจ(   Danphattharakun, MFXด่านภัทรกุล(   Diskul, MFXดิศกุล(   Diskul Na Ayutthaya, MFXดิศกุล ณ อยุธยา(   Euawattanasakul, MFXเอื้อวัฒนะสกุล(   Hongsakul, MFXหงสกุล(

               )



                                                   )
                                                      )                           )
              )       )                                                     )                                    )
                                 )
                                                                                                                   )        )

      Family UmbrellaSathirathai, Mเสถียรไทย(   Vejjajiva, Mเวชชาชีวะ(   Isarangkun Na Ayutthaya,M อิศรางกูร ณ อยุธยา(   Maleenont, Mมาลีนนท์(                            Amatyakul, MFXอมาตยกุล(   Attanan, MFXอัตตะนันทน์(   Boonyapana, MFXบุญยะปาณะ(   Boonyarat, MFXบุญรัตน์(   Chayangkun, MFXชยางกูร(   Chirathivat, MFXจิราธิวัฒน์(   Chitnatham, MFXจิตณาธรรม(

                                         69
                            )          )

                 )

      Other DegreesSuksapha, PMF4สุขสภา(    Rattanasuwanchat, PMF4รัตนสุวรรณชาติ(    Towijakchaikul, PMFXโตวิจักษณ์ชัยกุล(





                                                                                                    )
                        )       )                                )
                )         )                           )        )
                                                                                )

      Third DegreeManeenet, PMF3มณีเนตร(     Promchana, PMF3พรหมชนะ(     Hiranpruk, PMF3หิรัญพฤกษ์(     Osathaphan, PMF3โอสถาพันธุ์(     Tantives, PMF3ตันติเวสส(     Kongprayoon, PMF3คงประยูร(     Meephanich, PMF3มีพานิช(     Charoensawat, PMF3เจริญสวัสดิ์(     Wongnapachant, PMF3วงศ์นภาจันทร์(





               )
              )        )

                                              )
                                       )

      Second DegreeLimphattanachat, PMF2ลิ้มพัฒนาชาติ(    Kovitcharoenkul, PMF2โกวิทเจริญกุล(    Klongkhanakarn, PMF2คล่องคํานวณการ(    Nakwichit, PMF2นักวิช(    Amornchat, PMF2อมรฉัตร(
                                                                               Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

Table 27: Family Umbrella Shinawatra 2006



              )
                     )         )
                                       )

      First DegreeNa Pombejra, PMF1ณ ป้อมเพชร(     Damapong, PMF1ดามาพงศ์(     Ramingwong, PMF1ระมิงวงศ์(     Wongsawat, PMF2วงศ์สวัสดิ์(




              )

      Family UmbrellaShinawatra, PMชินวัตร(

                              70
11.7 Family Umbrellas 2014

              Table 28: Politicians without Associated Surnames 2014

M Level Politicians DM Level Politicians
Boonchaisuk, M Chantararuangthong, DM
(บุญชัยสุข) (จันทรรวงทอง)

Kasemthongsri, M Kuldilok, DM
(เกษมทองศรี) (กุลดิลก)

Nakpong, M Lek-uthai, DM
(นาคพงศ์) (เล็กอุทัย)

Nitisiri, M Louicharoen, DM
(นิติสิริ) (หลุยเจริญ)

Palusuk, M Phuangrach, DM
(พาลุสุข) (พวงราช)

Phurisisak, M
(ภูรีศรีศักดิ์)

Raktaphongpaisarn, M
(รักตพงศ์ไพศาล)

Rattanakorn, M
(รัตนากร)

Rengsomboonsuk, M
(เร่งสมบูรณ์สุข)

Sinthwanarong, M
(สินธวณรงค์)

                                Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

                                   71
            Table 29: Family Umbrellas Single Associated Surname 2014

Family Umbrella Associated Families
Boonsongpaisan, M Sukumarn, MF1
(บุญทรงไพศาล) (สุขุมาลย์)

Nakornthap, M Nana, MF1
(นาครทรรพ) (นานา)

Na-Ranong, M Thanaphum, MF1
(ณ ระนอง) (ธนะภูมิ)

Promphat, M Thongthaem, MF1
(พร้อมพัฒน์) (ทองแถม)

Teriyapirom, M Santiphanarak, MF1
(เตริยาภิรมย์) (สันติพนารักษ์)

Prasobdee, DM Thandamrong, DMF2
(ประสพดี) (ธารดํารงค์)

Srikaew, DM Bamrungphong, DMF1
(ศรีแก้ว) (บํารุงพงษ์)

Techatheerawat, DM Amornwiwat, DMF1
(เตชะธีราวัฒน์) (อมรวิวัฒน์)

                                Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

                                   72
          Table 30: Family Umbrellas 2 Associated Surnames 2014

      Family Umbrella Associated Families

Auapinyakul (เอื้ออภิญกุล), M Kanthatham (กันทาธรรม), MF1

                                          Serirak (เสรีรักษ์), MF2

Chaisaeng (ฉายแสง), M Piamkamon (เปี่ยมกมล), MF1

                                     Bunyakida (บุณยกิดา), MF2

Ruangsuwan (เรืองสุวรรณ), M Neil (นีล), MF1

                                  Pathomthanaphong (ปฐมธนพงศ์), MF1

Suwannathat (สุวรรณทัต), M / DM Plikanont (พลิกานนท์), MF1

                                     Lertwisetpanya (เลิศวิเศษปัญญา), DMF1

Yubamrung (อยู่บํารุง), M Phakranikorn (ภักรนิกร), MF2

                                         Ungsrisawat (อึงศรีสวัสดิ์), MF2

Kachornprasart (ขจรประศาสน์), DM Anchananan (อัญชนานันท์), DMF1

                                     Wongyai (วงศ์ใหญ่), DMF1

Pongpanich (พงษ์พานิช), DM Amatawong (อมตวงศ์), DMF1

                                   Hongthong (หงษ์ทอง), DMF2

Saikua (ใสยเกื้อ), DM Saisa-at (ใสสะอาด), DMF1

                                   Nakkaew (นาคแก้ว), DMF2

                           Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

                                73
     Table 31: Family Umbrellas 3 and 4 Associated Surnames 2014

    Family Umbrella Associated Families
Thienthong (เทียนทอง), DM Thongpanich (ธงพานิช), DMF1

                                  Yutthaworn (ยุวถาวร), DMF1

                                 Chokdamrongsuk (โชคดํารงสุข), DMF2

                                       Tosaksit (โตศักดิ์สิทธิ์), DMF2

Khunpluem (คุณปลื้ม), M Khonjam (โขนแจ่ม), MF1

                                 Saencharoen (แสนเจริญ), MF1

                                  Chatikawanich (จาติกวณิช), MF2

Limlaemthong (ลิ้มแหลมทอง), M Lim (หลิน), MF1

                               Norodom (นโรดม), MF1

                                        Sittisuk (สิทธิสุข), MF1

Promnok (พรหมนอก), M Bamrungsawat (บํารุงสวัสดิ์), MF1

                               Phetphanomporn (เพชรพนมพร), MF1

                                  Sriworakhan (ศรีวรขาน), MF1

Sittipunt (สิทธิพันธุ์), M Asavarittipoom (อัศวฤทธิภูมิ), MF1

                                    Kullawanit (กุลละวณิชย์), MF1

                                       Sitthiphan Ferry (สิทธิพันธุ์), MF2

Thepkanjana (เทพกาญจนา), M Wattanavekin (วัธนเวคิน), MF1

                                    Angubolkul (อังอุบลกุล), MF3

                                Wannamethee (วรรณเมธี), MF3

                         Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

                              74
                                      )
                 )         )                              )                    )
                                                                                          )
                                                 )                    )

      Other DegreesChutanupong, MF4ชุตานุพงษ์(    Promphan, MF5พร้อมพันธุ์(    Thaugsuban, MF5เทือกสุบรรณ(    Chaiyakul, MF6ไชยกูล(    Niyomtham, MF7นิยมธรรม(    Phakamon, MF7ภากมล(    Chusanwet, MF5ชุษณเวทย์(    Wongwanich, MF5วงศ์วานิช(




                                                                                                    )         )         )
                                                              )

      Third Degree                                       Raiwin, MF3ไรวินท์(             Chinapodok, MF3ชินะโปดก(     Laksanasai, MF3ลักษณาศัย(     Srisomwong, MF3ศรีสมวงศ์(





              )
                                                                              )
                     )
                                                                               )

      Second DegreeTechapaiboon, MF2เตชะไพบูลย์(    Thuanlin, MF2ธุวนลิน(                                     Lekwat, MF2เลขวัต(            Thipwichai, MF2ทิพย์วิชัย(
                                                                                              Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024






Table 32: Family Umbrellas 5+ Associated Surnames 2014
                                                                               )                              )
                                                                              )
                                                                                              )

                                                                      )

       First Degree                                         Chiarasawatwattana, MF1เจียรสวัสดิ์วัฒนา(     Sae Bae, MF1แซ่เบ๊(     Anukarnopakit, MF1งอนุการนพกิจ(     Prachasaraisoradet, MF1ประชาศรัยสรเดช(     Vanikanan, MF1วณิกนันทน์(




              )
                                                              )
                                                                              )

      Family UmbrellaSasomsap, Mสะสมทรัพย์(                                            Silpa-archa, Mศิลปอาชา(            Suraswadi, Mสุรัสวดี(

                                    75
                                                                                                                                                      )

                 )                )                                                                                                                                    )
                                           )                          )        )
                         )                                                                                                                                    )
                                                    )        )

      Other DegreesBoonyapana, MF7บุญยะปาณะ(   Na Songkhla, MF7ณ สงขลา(   Wannapruek, MF7วรรณพฤกษ์(   Limotibun, MF8ลิ่มอติบูลย์(   Diskul, MF9 / DMF4ดิศกุล(   Chupinij, DMF7ชูพินิจ(   Phanthumsen, DMF7พันธุมเสน(   Sukanthawanich, DMF7สุคันธวณิช(                                               Isarangkun Na Ayutthaya,DMFXอิศรางกูร ณ อยุธยา(   Isarangkun, DMFXอิศรางกูร(   Sukhonthayak, DMFXสุคนธวยัคฆ์(








                   )                                                                            )
                            )                      )                                                                          )      )
                           )
              )                      )       )                     )

       Sixth DegreeBoonyarat, MF6บุญรัตน์(   Chotikasathien, MF6โชติกเสถียร(   Wittayawethin, MF6วิทยะเวทิน(   Jirapong, DMF6จิรพงศ์(   Kotchaseni, DMF6คชเสนี(   Pamornmontri, DMF6ภมรมนตรี(   Penchat, DMF6เพ็ญชาติ(   Yodmanee, DMF6ยอดมณี(                                                    Sathirathai, MFXเสถียรไทย(   Sawat-Chuto, MFXสวัสดิ์-ชูโต(   Forester, DMFXฟอเรสเตอร์(






                                           )
                                                       )
                          )                                 )
                      )                            )                     )                              )
            )
                      )                            )                            )                                                    )
                                                                                                         )                                                     )
                                                                                                                          )
      Fourth/Fifth DegreesAmatyakul, MF4อมาตยกุล(   Chayangkun, MF4ชยางกูร(   Chitnatham, MF4จิตณาธรรม(   Diskul Na Ayutthaya, DMF4ดิศกุล ณ อยุธยา(   Sakuntaphai, DMF4ศกุนตาภัย(   Watcharasindhu, DMF4วัชรสินธุ(   Euawattanasakul, MF5เอื้อวัฒนะสกุล(   Danphattharakun, MF5ด่านภัทรกุล(   Mongkolkitti, MF5มงคลกิตติ(   Norrapanlop, MF5นรพัลลภ(   Sarasin, MF5สารสิน(   Sawatdiwat, MF5สวัสดิวัตน์(   Yut, DMF5ยุทธ(               Nipatakusol, MFXนิพัทธกุศล(   Phumphichai, MFXภูมิพิชัย(   Sathanapong, MFXสธนพงศ์(
                                                                                                                               Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

Table 33: Largest Family Umbrella 2014





                                      )
              )
             )       )      )                     )                                                      )
                         )                                            )                                                                                        )        )

       First to Third DegreesChirathivat, MF3จิราธิวัฒน์(   Kitiyakara, MF3กิติยากร(   Jarusathien, DMF1จารุเสถียร(   Na Ayutthaya, DMF1ณ อยุธยา(   Panprasit, DMF2ปานประสิทธิ์(   Attanan, DMF3อัตตะนันทน์(   Kittikachorn, DMF3กิตติขจร(   Na Lampang, DMF3ณ ลําปาง(                                                     Kichothan, MFXกิจโอธาน(   Ladawan, MFXลดาวัลย์(   Maleenont, MFXมาลีนนท์(





                    )       )
              )

      Family UmbrellaHongsakul, Mหงสกุล(   Sasiprapha, DMศศิประภา(   Vejjajiva, DM / MF4เวชชาชีวะ(

                                                76
                           )

                 )

      Fourth DegreeSuksapha, PMF4สุขสภา(    Rattanasuwanchat, PMF4รัตนสุวรรณชาติ(





                                                                                                                                                        )
                )                   )                  )                                    )        )
                         )                                                                                         )        )
                                                )                              )
                                                                                          )
                                                                      )                                                  )

      Third Degree ColumnCharoensawat, PMF3เจริญสวัสดิ์(     Damapong, PMF3ดามาพงศ์(     Hiranpruk, PMF3หิรัญพฤกษ์(     Kongprayoon, PMF3คงประยูร(     Kunakornwong, PMF3คุณากรวงศ์(     Linal, PMF3ลีนาล(     Maneenet, PMF3มณีเนตร(     Meephanich, PMF3มีพานิช(     Na Pombejra, PMF3ณ ป้อมเพชร(     Osathaphan, PMF3โอสถาพันธุ์(     Preechom, PMF3ปรีชม(     Promchana, PMF3พรหมชนะ(     Tantives, PMF3ตันติเวสส(     Wongnapachant, PMF3วงศ์นภาจันทร์(





       )
                      )         )
                                              )
                                      )

      Second DegreeKlongkhanakarn, PMF2คล่องคํานวณการ(    Kovitcharoenkul, PMF2โกวิทเจริญกุล(    Limphattanachat, PMF2ลิ้มพัฒนาชาติ(    Nakwichit, PMF2นักวิช(    Wongsawat, PMF2วงศ์สวัสดิ์(
                                                                                                                     Source: Garvey and Seifert, 2024

Table 34: Family Umbrella Shinawatra 2014




              )
                 )

      First DegreeAmornchat, PMF1อมรฉัตร(    Ramingwong, PMF1ระมิงวงศ์(



                           )

              )

      Family UmbrellaShinawatra, PMชินวัตร(    Towijakchaikul, Mโตวิจักษณ์ชัยกุล(

                                            77
11.8 Use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in our Research

What AI tools have been used and how?

We used Chat GPT-4 in our research for coding in Latex as well as for our empirical
models in R. Moreover, we consulted ChatGPT-4 additionally to receive recommenda-
tions regarding the clarity of certain parts of our texts and how ideas might be more
effectively conveyed. We also used DeepL Write to identify opportunities to improve
the wording.

In what ways have these tools contributed to increasing the quality of the the-
sis?

In particular, Chat GPT-4 increased the quality of our work, as it provided significant
insights into what commands need to be formulated within Latex or R to achieve the
desired outcome, like tables. The tool drastically increased the production of qualita-
tive and aesthetically pleasing tables.

What potential risks were found using AI and what measures were taken to
reduce these risks?

Chat GPT-4 is known to hallucinate in its answers as it uses simple vectors to identify
the next most probable word in its responses. Therefore, we did not use Chat GPT-4 to
generate any texts or summarize any scientific articles, as such answers are not only
generic but might be untrue.

What are the insights gained from using AI tools in the thesis writing process?

AI can significantly contribute to the decrease in repetitive tasks and can quickly pro-
vide solutions to incorrectly specified strands of code. That said, it is crucial to write
detailed prompts as otherwise Chat GPT-4 will deliver answers that do not solve even-
tual coding problems but eventually prolong the actual process of finding an adequate
solution to coding issues.

                                   78