GENDER AT THE DEAL TABLE

A STUDY OF DIRECTOR GENDER IMPACT IN MERGERS AND
ACQUISITIONS

ALVA HARDEBERG

ISABELLA LEJDSTRÖM

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2024
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

Gender  at the Deal Table : A Study of Director Gender  Impact in Mergers  and
Acquisitions

Abstract:

Does  CEO  gender  help  to  explain  merger  and  acquisition  decisions?  We  examine  the
financial  and  investment  strategies  of  female  CEOs  compared  to  male  CEOs  in  the  Nordic
region   by   analysing   both  public  and  private  M&A  transactions.  Female  CEOs  are
significantly  inclined  to  acquire  targets  with  lower  EV/EBITDA  multiples.  However,  there  is
no  significant  difference  between  male  and  female  CEOs  concerning  target  leverage,
book-value   size   ratio,   and  bid  premium.  These  findings  suggest  that  in  a  relatively
gender-equal  environment  like  the  Nordics,  discrepancies  in  M&A  decisions  between  male
and  female  CEOs  are  not  prominent.

Key words:

Mergers  and  Acquisitions,  CEO  Gender,  EV/EBITDA,  Investment  Strategies

Authors:
Alva  Hardeberg  (25315)

Isabella  Lejdström  (25520)

Tutor:
Mehran  Ebrahimian,  Assistant  Professor,  Department  of  Finance

Examiner:
Adrien  D’Avernas,  Assistant  Professor,  Department  of  Finance

Acknowledgements:
We  would  like  to  express  our  sincerest  gratitude  to  Mehran  Ebrahimian  for  active
engagement  and  valuable  insights  throughout  the  research  process.

Bachelor  Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm  School  of  Economics
© Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström, 2024

                                     1
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

1.  Introduction

Historically  the  representation  of  women  in  senior  management  positions  have  been
underrepresented  but  has  in  recent  years  seen  an  increase.  The  number  was  measured  by
Forbes  (2023)  of  women  comprising  10%  of  the  top  U.S.  corporations,  an  increase  from  1.5%
in  2005  and  0.5%  in  1994  according  to  Huang  and  Kisgen  (2013).  The  European  Institute  for
Gender  Equality  (EIGE)  composes  gender  diversity  reports  for  the  largest  listed  Nordic  firms,
reporting  an  average  CEO  percentage  of  women  to  be  10.8%  (excl.  Iceland)  in  2023.  Sweden
is  in  the  top  with  15.4%,  followed  by  Norway  at  15.0%,  Denmark  at  8.3%  and  Finland  at
4.3%.  The  European  average  was  measured  to  be  8%,  making  it  the  continent  with  the
highest  female  CEO  representation  worldwide.
       The  CEO  of  a  firm  plays  a  critical  role,  and  few  would  argue  that  Tesla  would  be  the
same  company  without  Elon  Musk  or  Microsoft  without  Bill  Gates.  Previous  research  has
emphasised  the  significance  of  executive  characteristics,  such  as  age,  nationality,  ethnicity,
tenure,  education,  and  gender,  on  corporate  decision  making  (Graham,  Harvey  and  Puri,
2012;  Huang  and  Kisgen,  2013;  Levi,  Li  and  Zhang,  2014)  and  demonstrates  that  manager
fixed  effects  matter  for  several  corporate  decisions  (Bertrand  and  Schoar,  2003).  CEOs  bear
primary  responsibility  for  critical  corporate  actions,  including  mergers  and  acquisitions
(M&A)  as  well  as  capital  structure  decisions  (Graham  et  al.,  2012).  They  offer  insights  into
how  CEOs'  behavioural  traits,  such  as  optimism  and  managerial  risk  aversion,  are  linked  to
corporate  financial  policies.
       The  gender  influence  in  corporate  decisions  and  its  impact  on  firm  performance  has
been  extensively  researched  (Huang  and  Kisgen,  2013;  Adams  and  Ferreira,  2009;  Croson
and  Gneezy,  2009;  Barber  and  Odean,  2001;  Bernile,  Bhagwat  and  Scott,  2018).  The
relevance  of  this  stems  from  gender  differences  in  behavioural  biases  and  attitudes  such  as
overconfidence  and  risk  aversion,  which  are  more  prominent  in  this  context.  However,
limited  research  has  been  applied  within  the  M&A  domain  taking  the  Nordic  perspective.
Examining  this  question  is  important  because  it  offers  more  insights  into  corporate  decision
making  and  behavioural  traits  involved,  in  the  era  of  rising  female  representation  in
higher-ranking  executive  positions.  The  setup  in  Huang  and  Kisgen  (2013),  as  well  as  most  of
the  prior  literature  and  research  on  this  topic  is  centred  around  corporate  financial  and
investment  decisions  based  on  U.S.  data.  In  our  paper,  we  examine  whether  firms  with  female
CEOs  make  different  M&A  decisions  compared  to  firms  with  male  CEOs  focusing  on  the
Nordics.  We  believe  that  the  Nordics  is  an  interesting  case  because  of  the  rising  number  of
female  representation,  shown  by  the  Global  Gender  Gap  Index  report  where  Nordic  countries
make  up  four  out  of  five  of  the  most  gender  equal  countries  in  the  world  meanwhile  the  U.S.
is  ranked  43rd  (World  Economic  Forum,  2023).  Differences  in  institutional  arrangements
regarding  gender  equality  between  the  Nordic  region  and  the  U.S.  raise  questions  about  the
applicability  of  previous  findings.
       In  the  domain  of  M&A,  prevailing  literature  has  mainly  examined  public  companies,
despite  the  common  occurrence  of  transactions  involving  privately-held  entities.  As  a
consequence  the  private  segment  of  the  M&A  market  remains  largely  unexplored  (Ang  and
Kohers,  2001),  leaving  space  for  further  research.
       Considering  these  gaps  in  prior  literature  and  building  on  Huang  and  Kisgen’s  (2013)
research  indicating  gender  differences  in  corporate  financial  and  investment  decisions  as  well
as  behavioural  traits  involved,  we  aim  to  answer  the  following  question:  Does  CEO  gender
                                                                                                                          1
influence  decision-making  in  M&A  transactions  of  public  and  private  firms  in  the  Nordics?

1
 Important  note:  From  now  on  the  paper  excludes  the  Nordic  country  Iceland  as  there  is  a  lack  of  data
availability  for  CEOs.

                                     2
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

       To  answer  this  question  we  look  into  a  data  set  of  Nordic  M&A  transactions  from
2010-2023  retrieved  from  Refinitiv  Eikon.  We  observe  the  gender  of  the  appointed  CEO  of
the  acquirer  during  the  announcement  and  by  running  an  OLS  regression,  we  focus  on  the
relationship  of  the  acquirer  CEO's  gender  with  specific  characteristics  of  the  target  firm.  We
examine  four  variables:  the  EV/EBITDA  multiple,  target  leverage,  book-value  size  ratio  and
bid  premium.
       Our  results  reveal  slight  differences  in  M&A  outcomes  between  female  CEO’s  and
male  CEO’s.  There  is  a  significant  difference  between  female  and  male  CEOs  in  valuation  of
the  target  in  M&A  based  on  the  EV/EBITDA  multiple.  Female  CEOs  generate  lower
EV/EBITDA  multiples  compared  with  their  male  counterparts.  We  do  not,  however,  find
significant  differences  in  the  target  firm  acquired  by  female  CEOs  in  terms  of  the  other  three
variables:  leverage,  book-value  size  ratio  and  bid  premium.
       For  robustness  and  treating  the  endogeneity  issue  that  female  executives  are  not
randomly  assigned  to  a  firm  we  conduct  propensity  score  matching.  We  match  observations
based  on  a  probit  regression  of  a  female  dummy  variable  on  control  variables.  We  then  use
propensity  scores  for  nearest  neighbour  matching.  Finally,  we  conduct  univariate  regressions
to  explore  gender  differences  in  corporate  decisions.  The  findings  of  our  main  regression
remains  robust  with  the  propensity  score  matching,  supporting  that  female  CEOs  generate
lower  EV/EBITDA  multiples  compared  with  their  male  counterparts.
       We  conduct  an  additional  test  to  investigate  whether  differences  in  executive  gender
influence  the  performance  of  acquisitions.  We  analyse  the  market  adjusted  cumulative
abnormal  return  (CAR)  of  acquisitions  to  determine  if  the  deal  adds  or  destroys  shareholder
value.  However,  we  find  no  significant  difference  in  announcement  returns  based  on
executive  gender.  Based  on  this  test,  we  cannot  find  evidence  supporting  the  influence  of
executive  gender  differences  on  acquisition  performance.

                                     3
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

2.  Related  Literature

The  effect  of  director  gender  within  corporate  decision  making  has  been  researched  in  studies
before  with  different  aspects  taken  into  account  for  each  study  (Huang  and  Kisgen,  2013;
Adams  and  Ferreira,  2009;  Levi  et  al.,  2014;  Ahern  and  Dittmar,  2012;  Chen,  Crossland  and
Huang,  2016;  Bernile  et  al.,  2018).  Our  paper  mainly  builds  upon  the  paper  written  by  Huang
and  Kisgen  (2013),  investigating  gender  disparities  in  corporate  financial  and  investment
decision-making.
       As  societal  focus  on  gender  equality  increases,  a  rise  is  observed  in  research  and
literature  addressing  gender  diversity  within  various  domains.  Gender  has  been  thoroughly
researched  in  other  business  settings  encompassing  trading  behaviour  in  the  stock  market
(Barber  and  Odean,  2001),  start-up  companies  (Verheul  and  Thurik,  2001),  mutual  funds
(Atkinson,  Baird,  and  Frye,  2003)  and  laboratory  competitive  environments  (Niederle  and
Versterlund,  2007).  Huang  and  Kisgen  (2013)  show  that  while  alternative  explanations  such
as  female  risk  aversion  offer  some  consistency  with  certain  findings,  the  prevalence  of
overconfidence  among  male  executives  emerges  as  the  most  compelling  explanation  for  the
gender  differences  within  the  corporate  setting.
       Our  contribution  to  the  field  of  gender  differences  is  to  focus  on  the  M&A  domain,
analysing  whether  there  are  any  differences  in  M&A  decision-making  between  male  and
female  CEOs  in  the  Nordics.
       More  generally,  our  paper  contributes  to  the  M&A  domain  explaining  alternative
measures  connected  to  gender  behavioural  biases  such  as  premiums,  target  leverage  and
relative  book  value  size  of  the  target  firm  to  the  acquirer.  Previous  studies  made  on  the  topic
have  primarily  focused  on  the  shareholder  value  or  the  number  of  acquisitions  undertaken  by
female  versus  male  executives  (Huang  and  Kisgen,  2013).  Levi  et  al.  (2014)  look  at  both
acquisition  frequency  and  premiums  paid,  showing  that  female  directors  are  less  likely  to
make  acquisitions  and  if  they  do,  pay  lower  bid  premiums.  Chen  et  al.  (2016)  adds  the
dimension  of  acquisition  size.  For  companies  involved  in  acquisitions,  the  presence  of  female
representation  on  the  board  correlates  with  smaller  target  sizes,  measured  as  a  percentage
relative  to  the  acquiring  firm's  size.  Huang  and  Kisgen  (2013)  analyse  leverage  of  the
acquiring  firm  and  find  no  difference  between  gender  and  leverage  overall.
       Our  paper  adds  to  the  M&A  domain  by  expanding  the  research  scope,  analysing  both
private  and  public  target  firms.  This  addresses  the  gap  in  the  existing  literature,  which
previously  has  overlooked  the  acquisition  of  private  companies.  To  analyse  premiums  paid
for  private  firms,  the  EV/EBITDA  multiple  is  a  commonly  used  metric  for  assessing  the
value  of  a  firm  (Bianconi  and  Tan,  2019).  It  considers  the  inclusion  of  debt,  which  the
acquirer  will  need  to  take  on,  while  also  removing  the  potential  impact  of  inflation  and  tax
policy.  The  EV/EBITDA  multiple  is  preferred  over  other  ratios  like  the  P/E  ratio  because  it  is
normalised  for  differences  between  companies,  for  example  of  different  industries  or  capital
structure.

                                     4
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

3. Conceptual frameworks

We  investigate  the  relationship  between  the  gender  of  the  CEO  to  M&A  outcomes  looking  at
the  EV/EBITDA  multiple,  target  leverage,  book-value  size  ratio  and  bid  premium  paid  for  the
target.  Examining  gender  is  important  due  to  underlying  differences  in  behavioural  attitudes
and  biases.

3.1  Behavioural  gender  differences

3.1.1  Overconfidence

Prior  studies  in  finance  and  psychology  have  indicated  that  men  tend  to  exhibit  higher  levels
of  overconfidence  compared  to  women.  Overconfidence,  rooted  in  an  individual's  tendency  to
overestimate   their   knowledge   and   abilities,   even   in   situations   where   they   possess
considerable  expertise  (Lichtenstein  and  Fischhoff,  1977),  significantly  influences  corporate
decision-making.  Roll  (1986)  was  the  first  to  connect  an  individual's  overestimation  of  their
abilities  and  the  potential  benefits  of  corporate  takeovers  to  negative  M&A  outcomes.  This
overestimation,  termed  "hubris,"  frequently  leads  to  errors  in  evaluating  firms,  such  as
overestimating  synergies  or  disregarding  potential  risks.  Hayward  and  Hambrick  (1997)
define  hubris  as  exaggerated  self-confidence,  i.e.  overconfidence,  which  can  explain  the  large
premiums  paid  for  acquisitions.  Malmendier  and  Tate  (2007)  suggest  that  overconfident
managers  often  overestimate  their  ability  to  create  value,  leading  to  inflated  expectations  for
returns  in  both  their  own  company  and  potential  acquisitions.  Huang  and  Kisgen  (2013)
expound  overconfidence  in  the  context  of  corporate  financial  decisions.  A  manager  is
overconfident  if  it  overestimates  its  own  ability  to  affect  the  return  of  an  investment.  This
refers  to  the  concept  of  better-than-average-effect  as  seen  in  studies  like  Svensson  (1981)
showing  confidence  in  driving  ability  among  men  and  Lundeberg,  Fox  and  Punccohar  (1994)
in  exam  answers.  Overconfidence  within  a  manager  could  also  be  its  belief  of  a  more
accurate  estimation  of  the  investment  return,  implying  an  underestimation  of  the  discount
rate.  This  is  the  effect  of  a  narrow  confidence  interval  as  found  in  Larwood  and  Whittaker
(1997).  Puri  and  Robinson  (2007)  propose  that  an  optimistic  agent  is  one  with  positive
expectations  for  future  events,  but  not  directly  due  to  its  own  skill  but  rather  changes  in  the
market  or  the  economy.  This  would  also  lead  to  overestimation  of  the  return  as  in  the
better-than-average  effect.  While  some  papers  distinguish  between  overconfidence  and
optimism  by  defining  overconfidence  only  as  bias  on  the  discount  rate  (e.g.,  Ben-David,
Graham,  and  Harvey,  2010),  we  align  with  Huang  and  Kisgen  (2013)  and  Malmendier  and
Tate  (2005),  and  consider  overconfidence  to  encompass  both  overconfidence  and  optimism.
This  follows  the  reasoning  that  when  a  CEO  exhibits  overconfidence,  it  implies  a  belief  that
they  can  better  predict  outcomes,  even  those  that  are  exogenous.
       Huang  and  Kisgen  (2013)  highlight  that  male  executives  undertake  more  acquisitions
and  make  more  significant  decisions  than  female  executives,  holding  other  factors  constant
except  for  overconfidence.  As  overconfident  men  overestimate  the  net  present  values
(NPVs),  due  to  overestimations  in  returns  and  underestimation  of  the  discount  rate,  they  have
a  larger  pool  of  acceptable  transactions  including  some  deals  that  are  in  reality  NPV  negative.
       This   overconfidence   and  its  impact  are  reflected  in  various  financial  metrics,
including  the  EV/EBITDA  multiple.  Overconfident  CEOs  may  be  willing  to  pay  higher
premiums  for  acquisitions,  leading  to  an  inflated  EV/EBITDA  multiple.  When  overconfident
CEOs  overpay  for  acquisitions,  they  often  justify  these  high  premiums  by  overestimating
their  impact  and  predictions  of  future  earnings,  growth  potential  and  synergies  (Petersen,
Plenborg  and  Scøler,  2006;  Malmendier  and  Tate,  2007).  This  leads  to  a  greater  enterprise

                                     5
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

value  by  increasing  future  free  cash  flows  or  decreasing  the  cost  of  capital.  McKinsey  &
Company,  Copeland,  Koller  and  Murrin  (2000)  explain  enterprise  value  in  a  valuation  setting
as  the  sum  of  discounted  future  cash  flows  (see  Appendix  B).
       Another  way  to  measure  premiums  paid  for  targets  is  by  looking  at  the  bid  premium
(Levi  et  al.,  2014),  although  only  applicable  for  public  targets.
       Overconfidence  can  also  lead  to  executives  undertaking  relatively  larger  acquisitions
(Chen  et  al.,  2016).  The  association  between  overconfidence  and  larger  transactions  lies  in
their  pronounced  impact  on  a  firm's  long-term  viability.  Larger  acquisitions  come  with  more
material  impact  and  complex  integration  challenges  (Ellis,  Reus,  Lamont  and  Ranft,  2011)
which  an  overconfident  manager  tends  to  overestimate  their  ability  to  manage.  Malmendier
and  Tate  (2007)  recognize  the  ambiguity  between  the  net  effect  of  overconfidence  and
acquisition  frequency.  Despite  the  overestimation  about  potential  synergies,  overconfident
managers  also  tend  to  overestimate  the  stand-alone  value  of  their  company.  This  results  in  a
perception  of  higher  financing  costs,  as  potential  lenders  and  shareholders  demand  more
favourable  terms  than  the  CEO  anticipates.  Consequently,  the  CEO  may  decide  to  forgo
otherwise  value-creating  transactions  that  are  deemed  too  costly  to  finance.  This  may  have  an
impact  on  acquisition  size  as  larger  deals  require  more  financing  leading  overconfident
managers  to  potentially  engage  in  smaller  transactions  due  to  the  lack  of  internal  funds.
       If  males  are  relatively  overconfident  to  females,  we  expect  female  CEOs  to  generate
lower  EV/EBITDA  multiples,  bid  premium  and  potentially  smaller  book-value  size  ratio.

3.1.2  Risk-aversion

Overconfidence  is  not  the  only  behavioural  difference  between  female  and  male  executives,
with  another  explaining  factor  tied  to  risk  aversion  (Huang  and  Kisgen,  2013).  This  could  be
shown  in  how  women  are  less  acquisitive  and  translating  to  womens’  willingness  to  make
crucial  decisions  such  as  acquisitions.  Gender  disparities  in  risk-taking  behaviour  may  stem
from  emotional  responses  to  risky  situations,  with  women  generally  experiencing  stronger
emotions  than  men  (Charness  and  Gneezy,  2012).  Consequently,  women  may  be  more
inclined  to  avoid  excessive  risk-taking,  potentially  reflected  in  their  approach  to  M&A
decision-making.
       Distinguishing  between  managerial  overconfidence  and  risk-aversion  is  challenging,
as  gender-based  discrepancies  in  risk  aversion  may  stem  from  differences  in  overconfidence.
Croson  and  Gneezy  (2009)  provide  compelling  evidence  demonstrating  that  women  exhibit
greater  risk  aversion  compared  to  men.  They  propose  three  potential  explanations  for  this
phenomenon:  variances  in  emotional  responses  to  outcomes,  differences  in  risk  attitudes
stemming  from  confidence  levels,  and  disparities  in  the  interpretation  of  risky  situations.
Overconfidence  can  therefore  be  seen  as  an  explanation  for  risk  attitude  due  to  the  effect  of  a
narrow  confidence  interval.
       Malmendier  and  Tate  (2007)  suggest  that  overconfidence  may  create  firm  value  along
some  dimensions,  by  for  example  counteracting  risk  aversion.  Huang  and  Kisgen  (2013)
argues  that  female  risk  aversion  and  male  overconfidence  lead  to  similar  predictions.  If
women  are  relatively  risk  averse  to  men’s  overconfidence  levels  both  will  make  worse
decisions  for  the  firm.  Huang  and  Kisgen  (2013)  show  evidence  that  men  are  more  likely  to
get  fired  or  leave  their  position,  potentially  due  to  overconfidence  being  more  detrimental  to
shareholder  value  compared  to  the  impact  of  women's  risk  aversion.  Another  explanation
suggested  by  Huang  and  Kisgen  (2013)  is  that  there  is  no  difference  between  gender  risk
aversion  in  high  level  positions,  as  female  executives  have  successfully  completed  a  rigorous
selection  process.  Additional  research  suggests  that  women  need  to  be  like  men  to  break  the
glass  ceiling  and  disparities  between  the  genders  in  the  general  population  may  fade  in  the

                                     6
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

corporate  setting  (Adams  and  Funk,  2012).  Prior  literature  has  also  analysed  leverage,
concluding  it  as  a  riskier  strategic  decision,  leading  to  higher  overall  volatility  in  a  company's
earnings  and  subsequent  stock  returns  (Chava  and  Purnanandam,  2010).  High  debt  signifies
high  financial  risk  because  a  firm  may  struggle  to  meet  its  debt  obligations  during  economic
downturns  or  declining  revenues,  leading  to  potential  bankruptcy  or  financial  distress
(Hurdle,  1974).  As  leverage  is  associated  with  risk  and  there  is  potentially  no  difference
between  gender  risk  aversion  of  CEOs  we  expect  the  gender  of  a  CEO  to  not  have  an  impact
on  leverage  of  the  target  in  M&A.

                                     7
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

4. Data Description and Methodology

4.1  Data  collection

To  test  the  behaviour  of  gender  differences  in  corporate  financial  and  investment  decisions  in
the  Nordics  the  data  set  is  compiled  using  several  databases.
       The  Refinitiv  Eikon  database  is  used  to  obtain  our  major  data  set.  Refinitiv  Eikon’s
tool  deal  screener  provides  deal  information  about  global  historical  public  and  private
mergers  and  acquisitions.  We  retrieve  data  on  the  announcement  date  of  the  deal  and
characteristics  of  the  deal  as  well  as  financial  and  other  characteristics  of  the  target  and  the
acquirer.  The  data  is  collected  for  14  consecutive  years,  starting  in  2010  (until  2023),  where
both  the  target  and  acquirer  belong  to  one  of  the  Nordic  countries  Denmark,  Finland,  Norway,
or  Sweden.
       To  obtain  CEO  information  of  the  acquirer,  different  databases  were  used  depending
on  the  country  to  manually  hand-collect  the  characteristics.  For  Swedish  deals,  the  CEO
characteristics  were  obtained  using  Business  Retriever,  a  company  database  providing
information  regarding  all  Swedish  firms.  For  the  remaining  countries  we  use  Valu8,  a
company  database  providing  information  regarding  private  and  public  Nordic  companies
acquisitions  and  holdings,  key  people,  ownership  structure  and  financial  performance.  For  the
remaining  firms  not  included  in  either  database  we  manually  collected  the  information  from
the  respective  company’s  website  (i.e.  through  press  releases  and  annual  reports).  A
limitation  of  our  data  set  is  that  CEO  information  for  Norwegian  companies  is  not  possible  to
retrieve   before   2018-12-20.   We   collect   information   (name,   gender,   age   and
appointment/resigned  date)  for  the  CEO  who  was  in  position  during  the  date  of  the  deal
announcement.

4.2  Data  sample  selection

Our  data  sample  consists  of  all  disclosed  public  and  private  mergers  and  acquisitions  of
Nordic  firms  from  the  period  2010-2023  which  enables  us  to  obtain  a  cross-sectional  data  set
through  the  selected  years.  2023  financials  are  the  latest  available  and  therefore  used  for  the
study.  In  Refinitiv  Eikon  certain  filters  were  applied  as  (i)  the  acquirer  and  target  being  a
Nordic  firm,  (ii)  the  acquirer  owning  less  than  100%  before  the  acquisition  and  acquiring
majority  interest  (at  least  50%)  after  the  acquisition,  (iii)  completion  of  acquisitions  (not
aborted)  and  (iv)  disclosed  deal  value.  The  initial  sample  consists  of  1671  deals.
       The  sample  is  further  reduced  as  we  apply  the  filtering  on  available  CEO  information.
Most  importantly,  the  availability  of  gender  data  is  crucial  since  the  paper  centres  around
gender-related  impacts.  If  the  CEO  is  unidentifiable  we  drop  that  deal  from  our  sample.  This
eliminates  654  companies  from  our  sample,  reducing  the  total  number  of  deals  to  1017.  Our
final  sample  consists  of  1017  deal  observations  of  which  77  are  women  (see  Appendix  Table
A1).

                                     8
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

                  Number of Male and Female CEO-led Deals by Year

Figure  1.
Number of CEO-led Deals by Gender and Year.
This  figure  shows  a  staple  diagram  of  the  ratio  (in  %)  between  male  and  female  led  acquisitions  from  2010 to
2023.  Total deals  in absolute terms  shown on the y-axis  and year shown on the x-axis.

As  one  can  observe  in  Figure  1  the  number  of  female  CEO-led  deals  have  fluctuated  over
time  but  seen  an  increase  from  7%  in  2019  to  9%  in  2023  (Appendix  C).

              Benchmark Female CEOs in M&A vs Female CEOs Nordics

                                     9
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

Figure  2.
Number of CEO-led Deals by Gender and Year benchmarking.
This  figure  shows  a  staple  diagram  of  the  percentage  of  unique  females  in  M&A (based on the completed deal
                                                                                                           2
transactions)  compared  to a benchmark of percentage of female CEOs for Nordic firms from 2010 to 2023. The
benchmark  comprises  data  on  the  largest  listed  companies  in  the  Nordics,  focusing  on  decision-making  positions
within  the  top-ranked  nationally  registered  constituents  (max.  50)  of  the  blue-chip  index  of  the  national  stock
exchange  in  each  country  (EIGE,  2024).  Percentage  of  Female  CEOs  shown  on  the  y-axis  and  year  shown  on
the  x-axis.

Observing  the  overall  percentage  of  female  CEOs  for  the  largest  Nordic  firms  compared  to
the  percentage  of  unique  female  CEOs  in  M&A,  in  Figure  2,  we  can  conclude  this  percentage
has  increased  more  than  the  women  participating  in  M&A  since  2019.  This  is  an  illustration
of  how  female  CEOs  are  less  acquisitive  than  male  (Appendix  D).

                 Number  of  Male  and  Female  CEO-led  Deals  by  Industry

Figure  3.
Number of Male and Female CEO-led Deals by Industry.
This  figure  shows  a  staple  diagram  of  the  ratio  (in  %)  between  male  and  female  led  acquisitions  per  industry.
Total  deals  in  absolute  terms  shown  on  the  y-axis  and  industry  classification  shown  on  the  x-axis.

Figure  3  shows  that  the  share  of  female  CEO-led  deals  varies  depending  on  the  industry
belonging  (Appendix  E)  where  we  find  the  highest  number  of  female  CEO  observations  in
the  healthcare  industry  (16%),  followed  by  media  and  entertainment,  and  consumer  products
and  services  (12%).  The  industries  belonging  to  the  least  share  of  female  CEOs  are  consumer
staples,  energy  and  power,  and  government  and  agencies.  This  is  in  line  with  research  of  how
women  tend  to  possess  a  role  as  an  executive  within  healthcare,  consumer,  and  financials
while  lagging  on  the  female  representation  front  are  the  energy  and  consumer  staples  sector
(S&P  Global,  2023;  Huang  and  Kisgen,  2013;  Adams  and  Ferreira,  2009).
       The  results  also  reveal  the  share  of  female  CEOs  is  greater  for  larger  firms  (13%)
compared  to  smaller  firms  (7%)  (see  Appendix  F).  This  is  in  line  with  the  study  by  Huang

2
 Considering  the  data  availability  starting  from  2012,  we  derive  estimations  for  the  years  2010  and  2011
utilising the Compounded Annual Growth Rate (CAGR).

                                     10
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

and  Kisgen  (2013)  demonstrating  that,  on  average,  firms  that  appoint  female  executives
exhibit  a  size  approximately  50%  larger  than  that  of  firms  with  male  executives  in  the  year
preceding  the  leadership  transition.
       There  is  a  small  difference  between  the  age  of  the  CEO  for  women  where  the  mean  is
slightly  below  49  and  the  mean  for  men  is  slightly  above  50  (see  Appendix  G).  A  similar
relationship  is  shown  by  Huang  and  Kisgen  (2013)  where  they  indicate  that  female
executives  are  on  average  three  years  younger  than  male  executives.
       From  our  sample  set  we  see  that  87%  of  the  female  CEO-led  deals  and  86%  of  the
male  CEO-led  deals  are  acquisitions  of  private  companies  (see  Appendix  H)  a  similar  trend
shown  already  in  early  studies  where  acquisitions  of  privately  held  firms  make  up  a  majority
(Ang  and  Kohers,  2001).

4.3  Variables  of  Interest

4.3.1 Dependent Variables

The  first  dependent  variable  is  the  EV/EBITDA  multiple.  Enterprise  Value  (EV)  is  the  deal
value  including  the  net  debt  of  the  target.  To  compose  the  EV/EBITDA  multiple,  the  EV  is
put  in  relation  to  the  target's  earnings  before  interest,  tax,  depreciation,  and  amortisation
during  the  last  twelve  months  (EBITDA  LTM).  We  use  the  natural  logarithm  of  EV/EBITDA
to  account  for  normality.

                                                                                𝐷𝑒𝑎𝑙  𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒  𝑖𝑛𝑐.  𝑁𝑒𝑡  𝐷𝑒𝑏𝑡
                                  𝐸𝑉/𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑇𝐷𝐴   =      𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝐸𝐵𝐼𝑇𝐷𝐴 𝐿𝑇𝑀

The  second  dependent  variable  we  use  is  the  Target  Leverage.  This  is  calculated  as  total  debt
to  total  debt  plus  total  equity.

                                                                                                       𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝐷𝑒𝑏𝑡
                               𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡  𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒   =    𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝐷𝑒𝑏𝑡  +  𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑡𝑦

The  third  dependent  variable  is  the  BV  Size  Ratio.  This  is  measured  as  the  target  total  assets
last  twelve  months  to  the  acquirer's  total  assets  last  twelve  months.  We  use  the  natural
logarithm  of  BV  Size  Ratio  to  account  for  normality.

                                                                                      𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡  𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠  𝐿𝑇𝑀
                                      𝐵𝑉  𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒  𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜   =    𝐴𝑐𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑟𝑜𝑟  𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑠  𝐿𝑇𝑀

The  fourth  dependent  variable  is  the  Bid  Premium  calculated  as  a  ratio  of  the  final  offer  price
per  share  paid  by  the  acquirer  to  the  target  stock  price  four  weeks  prior  to  the  original
announcement  date  expressed  in  percentages.

                                      𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒  𝑝𝑒𝑟  𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒  𝑃𝑎𝑖𝑑  𝑏𝑦  𝐴𝑐𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑟  −  𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡  𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒  𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒  4  𝑊𝑒𝑒𝑘𝑠  𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟  𝑡𝑜  𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡
   𝐵𝑖𝑑  𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑢𝑚   =                           𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡  𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒  𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒  4  𝑊𝑒𝑒𝑘𝑠  𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟  𝑡𝑜  𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡

4.3.2  Independent  variable

The  independent  variable  for  our  research  is  the  gender  of  the  CEO.  Although  there  are  many
actors  active  in  the  transaction  process,  the  CEO  holds  the  primary  responsibility  for
corporate  decisions,  both  the  mergers  and  acquisitions  (M&A)  and  capital  structure  (Graham
et  al.  2012).  Therefore,  this  shows  that  the  behaviour  of  the  CEO  must  be  vital  for  the
characteristics  of  the  transaction  that  this  research  focuses  on.  Previous  literature  also
emphasises  the  importance  of  the  CFO  (Huang  and  Kisgen,  2013;  Bertrand  and  Schoar,  2003)

                                     11
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

and  female  board  representation  (Chen  et  al.,  2016;  Levi  et  al,  2014).  This  paper  solely
focuses  on  the  CEO  due  to  their  primary  responsibility  and  the  hierarchical  reporting
structure  where  the  CFO  reports  directly  to  the  CEO  (Graham  and  Harvey,  2001).  The  gender
of  the  CEO  is  incorporated  as  a  dummy  variable  taking  the  form  of  one  if  the  CEO  is  female
and  zero  if  the  CEO  is  male.

4.3.3  Control  variables

To  mitigate  the  influence  of  factors  other  than  CEO  gender  on  the  dependent  variables,  we
incorporate  an  extensive  array  of  control  variables  into  the  regression  analysis  based  on  the
main  reference  paper  by  Huang  and  Kisgen  (2013).  Since  our  data  and  research  strategy
slightly  differs  from  the  reference  paper  we  complement  with  control  variables  used  in  Levi
et  al.  (2014).  We  exclude  the  market-dependent  control  variables  as  we  regard  these  to  be
influenced  by  factors  beyond  the  CEO's  control  and  as  our  data  set  also  comprises  private
targets  that  are  not  subject  to  market  influences.  Any  missing  value  is  solved  by  using  the
average  value  of  the  country  of  the  deal.  We  provide  a  summary  of  all  the  variables  and  their
definition  in  Appendix  A.
       Other  than  the  independent  variable  of  the  gender  of  the  CEO  we  incorporate  director
control  variables  of  Age.  The  age  of  the  CEO  has  an  impact  on  the  transaction  as  younger
managers  tend  to  be  more  prone  to  pursuing  risky  strategies  compared  to  boards  led  by  older
managers  (Hambrick,  D.  C.,  and  Mason,  P.  A.,  1984)  and  female  executives  are  on  average
younger  (Huang  and  Kisgen,  2013).
       To  account  for  other  deal  control  variables  we  first  add  variables  for  Toehold  (the
proportion  of  the  target  firm's  shares  owned  by  the  acquirer  before  the  bid  announcement),
Tender  offer  (an  indicator  variable  taking  the  value  of  one  if  SDC  regards  the  bid  as  a  tender
offer,  and  zero  otherwise),  Hostile  (an  indicator  variable  taking  the  value  of  one  if  SDC
regards  the  deal  as  hostile,  and  zero  otherwise),  Diversifying  (an  indicator  variable  taking  the
value  of  one  if  the  acquirer  and  the  target  are  not  from  the  same  industry  and  zero  otherwise),
Acquiror  is  Public  (an  indicator  variable  taking  the  value  of  one  if  the  acquirer  is  public  and
zero  otherwise),  Target  is  Public  (an  indicator  variable  taking  the  value  of  one  if  the  target  is
public  and  zero  otherwise),  the  natural  logarithm  of  the  Deal  Value  and  a  control  variable  for
BV  Size  Ratio  in  regressions  where  it  is  not  the  dependent  variable  analysed.
       We  also  incorporate  financial  control  variables  for  both  the  target  and  the  acquirer  in
line  with  Levi  et  al.  (2014).  For  the  target  we  control  for  Leverage  (in  regressions  where  it  is
not  the  dependent  variable  analysed),  ROA,  Sales  Growth  and  Cash.  For  the  acquirer  we
                                   3
control  for  Leverage  and  Cash. We  posit  that  these  variables  exert  influence  on  the  flexibility
of  mergers  and  acquisitions  within  a  firm,  potentially  impacting  outcomes  beyond  the  gender
of  the  CEO.  By  incorporating  these  financial  variables,  we  mitigate  the  influence  of
observable  firm  characteristics  on  our  findings.  We  account  for  leverage  in  our  analysis,  as
highly  leveraged  bidders  are  less  inclined  to  pay  a  premium  for  a  company  and  typically
target  smaller  firms  to  reduce  risk  exposure  and  extra  external  financing.  Additionally,  we
consider  the  impact  of  profitability,  measured  by  return  on  assets  (ROA)  and  sales  growth,  on
the  success  of  M&A  transactions  (Adams  and  Ferreira,  2009).  Furthermore,  we  control  for
cash  holdings  in  the  acquiring  firm,  recognizing  that  firms  with  substantial  cash  reserves  are
more  inclined  to  pursue  acquisitions  due  to  their  ability  to  partially  fund  such  transactions
internally,  thereby  mitigating  perceived  risk  and  external  financing  costs.  The  availability  of

3
 Due  to  the  absence  of  historical  data  for  the  acquiring  firm  through  Refinitiv  Eikon,  we  are  unable  to  access
financials  as  sales  growth  and  Return  on  Assets  (ROA).  Consequently,  these  variables  have  been  omitted  as
control  variables  in  the  main  regression.

                                     12
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

internal  cash  may  result  in  acquiring  firms  paying  higher  acquisition  premiums,  as  observed
in  the  relationship  between  the  acquiring  firm's  cash  reserves  and  the  bid  premium  (Harford,
1999).  We  also  control  for  cash  holdings  in  the  target  firm  (Opler,  Pinkowitz  and  Stulz,  1999)
as  firms  with  more  cash  are  associated  with  riskier  activities,  smaller  sizes  and  better  growth
opportunities.  We  winsorize  our  financial  control  variables  at  the  2.5th  and  97.5th  percentile,
similar  to  Huang  and  Kisgen  (2013)  to  reduce  the  potential  impact  of  outliers.

4.4  Descriptive  statistics

Table 1.
Descriptive  Statistics.
This  table  reports  descriptive  statistics  for  the  sample.  The  table  includes  the  number  of  observations  (N),  the
number  of  women  (Women),  mean  (Mean),  median  (Median),  standard  deviation  (SD),  minimum value (Min),
the  first  quantile  (Q1),  the  third  quantile  (Q3)  and  maximum  value  (Max).  A  complete  definition  of  variables  is
available in Appendix A.

The  descriptive  statistics  show  a  total  of  1017  firm  observations  of  CEO  gender  of  which  8%
are  female  CEOs  for  Nordic  deals  2010-2023.  Out  of  these  1017  observations,  there  are
differing  numbers  in  observations  (N)  for  the  dependent  variables  and  financial  control
variables.  EV/EBITDA  is  reported  for  532  deals  (out  of  48  women,  9.0%),  190  deals  are
reported  for  Target  Leverage  (out  of  12  women,  6.3%),  and  BV  Size  Ratio  is  reported  for  689
deals  (of  which  52  women,  7.5%)  and  Bid  Premium  is  reported  for  112  deals  (out  of  8
women,  7.1%).  The  mean  value  for  Log  EV/EBITDA  is  2.12,  for  Target  Leverage  0.40  and
Log  BV  Size  Ratio  -2.59.  The  descriptive  statistics  are  summarised  in  Table  1.
       Although  we  have  a  reduced  sample  size,  Huang  and  Kisgen  (2013)  use  116  female
executive  firms  for  the  majority  of  tests  compared  to  our  main  data  set  of  77  female
executives.  The  limitation  of  our  data  is  rather  the  missing  financial  information  as  we  do  not
only  look  at  public  firms,  and  private  firms  often  have  less  public  financial  information.

                                     13
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

4.5  Research  strategy

The  dataset  we  have  compiled  for  our  research  is  cross-sectional  and  we  use  an  Ordinary
Least  Square  Regression  (OLS)  to  analyse  whether  the  gender  of  the  CEO  is  associated  with
different  variables  of  M&A.

4.6  Regression  model

To  investigate  the  potential  association  between  the  gender  of  the  CEO  and  M&A  variables
the  following  main  cross-sectional  regression  is  performed:

                  𝑌  =  α  +  β 𝑊𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑛  +  θχ  +  ε      (1)
                                      𝑖                   0             𝑖           𝑖         𝑖

       Yi  is  the  dependent  variable  of  interest  for  the  individual  deals  i.  We  will  use  Log
EV/EBITDA,  Target  Leverage,  Log  BV  Size  Ratio  and  Bid  Premium  as  dependent  variables  in
our  study.  These  measurements  are  examples  of  corporate  financial  and  investment  decisions
affected  by  the  specific  CEO.
       Our  independent  variable  is  the  dummy  variable  Womani which  takes  the  form  of  one
if  the  CEO  is  female  and  zero  if  the  CEO  is  male.
        Further,  our  main  regressions  include  other  control  variables  (Xi)  for  the  director,  deal,
and   financials   of   the   target   and   acquirer,   according  to  Huang  and  Kisgen  (2013)
complemented  by  Levi  et  al.  (2014).

4.7  Endogeneity

One  potential  constraint  of  our  study  relates  to  endogeneity  concerns  as  female  executives  are
not  randomly  assigned  to  a  firm  (Huang  and  Kisgen,  2013).  Boards  could  discriminate  based
on  gender  when  appointing  a  CEO  or  females  could  self  select  into  certain  types  of  firms.
The  first  may  be  due  to  larger  firms  being  more  visible,  therefore  their  boards  may  need  to
exercise  greater  caution  to  ensure  that  hiring  and  promotion  decisions  are  free  from
discrimination  (Huang  and  Kisgen,  2013).  The  latter  may  be  in  line  with  Bergmann’s  model
of  overcrowding  hypothesis  from  1974,  suggesting  that  the  exclusion  of  females  from
traditionally  "male"  roles  can  lead  to  an  oversupply  of  labour  in  "female"  occupations.
Moreover,  broader  economic  and  national  equality  characteristics  can  also  have  an  impact  on
firms.  Differences  in  corporate  financial  and  investment  policies  across  firms  of  varying
sizes,  industries,  or  nations  could  lead  to  results  being  attributed  to  gender  differences  when
they  are  actually  caused  by  omitted  variables.
       To  address  this  issue,  we  follow  the  specifications  of  Huang  and  Kisgen  (2013)  for
robustness.  Firstly  our  main  regression  includes  sector  fixed  effects  and  time  fixed  effects  to
address   cross-sectional   disparities,   thereby   mitigating   potential  biases  stemming  from
unobserved  omitted  variables.  We  exclude  country  fixed  effects  as  our  data  set  contains  the
Nordic  countries,  assumed  to  not  have  unobserved  country-specific  characteristics.  The
second   alternative   specification   uses   propensity   score   matching.   Initially,   we   match
observations  conducting  a  probit  regression  of  a  female  dummy  variable  on  the  control
variables  used  in  the  main  regression  for  the  respective  dependent  variables  as  well  as
industry  and  time  factors.  Subsequently,  the  propensity  scores  derived  from  this  probit
estimation  are  employed  for  nearest  neighbour  matching.  This  method  ensures  that  each
female  is  paired  with  a  male  exhibiting  statistically  similar  director,  deal  and  financial
characteristics.  Following  this  matching  process,  univariate  regressions  are  conducted  on  the
matched  sample  to  explore  gender  differences  in  corporate  decisions.

                                     14
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

4.8 Additional Test

We  conduct  an  additional  test  to  distinguish  whether  differences  in  executive  gender  decision
making  in  M&A  transactions  influence  the  performance of the acquisition. We follow Huang
and  Kisgen  (2013)  and  Malmendier  and  Tate  (2007)  to  investigate  market  reactions  to  merger
bids.  We  perform  an  OLS  regression  looking  at  cumulative  abnormal  return  to  the  acquiring
firm’s  stock  over  a  three-day  window  around  the  announcement  of  the  merger  bid,  using  the
daily  return  on  the  NASDAQ  OMX  NORDIC  120  index  as  our  proxy  for  expected  returns:

                  𝐶𝐴𝑅  =  α  +  β 𝑊𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑛  +  θχ  +  ε    (2)
                                          𝑖                  0             𝑖           𝑖         𝑖

CARi  is  the  market  adjusted  cumulative  abnormal  return  for  deal  i;  Womani  is  a  dummy
variable  for  whether  the  CEO  is  female  and  0  if  male;  and  Xi is  a  set  of  control  variables.  We
winsorize  the  dependent  variable  at  the  2.5th  and  97.5th  percentile  to  remove  the  impact  of
outliers.  Huang  and  Kisgen  (2013)  suggest  that  due  to  male  relative  overconfidence  resulting
in  value-destroying  acquisitions  the  announcement  returns  for  acquisitions  undertaken  by
male  executives  are  significantly  more  likely  to  be  negative.  We  anticipate  comparable
outcomes  if  our  sample  of  CEOs  possess  similar  gender  disparities  in  behavioural  biases.

                                     15
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

5.  Empirical  Results  and  Analysis

5.1 Main Regression

To  analyse  whether  CEO  gender  influences  the  decision  making  in  M&A  transactions  of
public  and  private  firms  in  the  Nordics  we  run  our  main  regression  conducting  four  separate
tests.  The  first  test  uses  the  Log  EV/EBITDA  as  the  dependent  variable,  the  second  test  uses
Target  Leverage  as  the  dependent  variable,  the  third  test  uses  the  Log  BV  Size  Ratio  as  the
dependent  variable  and  the  fourth  test  uses  Bid  Premium  as  the  dependent  variable.  We
present  the  results  of  our  main  regression  in  Table  2.
        In  the  first  test,  based  on  532  observations,  we  find  that  female  CEOs  have  a  negative
relationship  with  the  size  of  the  Log  EV/EBITDA  with  significance  on  the  five-percent  level.
The  second  test,  based  on  190  observations,  demonstrates  a  positive  relationship  with  female
CEOs  and  the  Target  Leverage,  however  not  significant.  In  the  third  test,  based  on  689
observations,  we  find  a  negative  relationship  with  female  CEOs  and  the  Log  BV  Size  Ratio,
however  not  significant.  In  the  fourth  test,  based  on  112  observations,  we  find  that  female
CEOs  have  a  negative  relationship  with  the  size  of  the  Bid  premium,  however  not  significant.
       The  tendency  for  female  CEOs  to  generate  lower  EV/EBITDA  multiples,  as  observed
in  test  1,  could  be  attributed  to  several  factors.  First,  female  CEOs  may  estimate  a  lower
future  payout  or  apply  a  higher  discount  rate,  possibly  due  to  perceptions  of  lower  growth
prospects  or  anticipated  synergy  gains  (Petersen  et  al.  2006;  Bianconi  and  Tan,  2019).
Second,  Malmendier  and  Tate  (2007)  argue  that  overconfident  CEOs  tend  to  overestimate
their  ability  to  create  value,  resulting  in  overpayment  for  targets,  where  males  would  be
relatively  overconfident  to  females.  A  high  EV/EBITDA  ratio  may  indicate  that  the  target
company  is  being  valued  at  a  premium  compared  to  its  earnings,  while  a  low  ratio  may
indicate  a  discount.  Since  female  CEOs  typically  exhibit  lower  levels  of  overconfidence,  as
suggested  by  Huang  and  Kisgen  (2013),  they  may  adopt  more  conservative  valuation
assessments,  leading  to  the  observed  lower  EV/EBITDA  multiples.
       Another  interesting  finding  from  test  1  is  the  significant  relationship  between  whether
the  acquirer  or  target  is  public  and  the  EV/EBITDA  multiple,  at  the  five-percent  and
one-percent  levels,  respectively.  Both  variables  are  associated  with  a  decrease  in  the
EV/EBITDA  multiple.  This  may  be  attributed  to  reduced  information  asymmetry  when  the
target  is  public,  due  to  more  extensive  mandatory  reporting  requirements.  Consequently,  the
acquirer  can  achieve  a  more  precise  valuation  (Capron  and  Shen,  2007;  Ortiz  et  al.,  2023)  by
identifying  risks,  assessing  asset  quality  and  performance,  and  normalising  abnormal
earnings.  This  comprehensive  approach  may  lead  to  a  lower  EV/EBITDA  multiple  through  a
lower,  but  more  accurate  EV.  Public  acquirers  may  also  be  subject  to  more  governance,
implying  stricter  scrutiny  and  potentially  more  conservative  valuations.
       Furthermore  test  1  provides  insights  of  the  significant  positive  relationship  of  cash
reserves  with  the  EV/EBITDA  multiple  and  the  negative  relationship  of  acquirer  leverage,  at
the  one-percent  level  and  five-percent  levels,  respectively.  This  concise  with  the  findings  of
Harford  (1999).  Larger  internal  cash  reserves  offer  greater  flexibility  for  acquirers  to  pay
greater  premiums  as  they  can  withstand  external  financing  costs  whilst  more  leverage
generates  the  opposite  effect.

                                     16
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

Table 2.
Main Regression.
This  table  reports  the  Main  Regression  for  the  dependent  variables  Log  EV/EBITDA,  Target  Leverage, Log BV
Size  Ratio  and  Bid  Premium  by  running  an  OLS  regression.  We  use  Age,  Toehold,  Tender  Offer,  Hostile,
Diversifying,  Acquiror  is  Public,  Target  is  Public,  Log  Deal  Value,  Log  BV  Size  Ratio  Control,  Acquiror  Cash,
Acquiror  Leverage,  Target  ROA,  Target  Sales  Growth,  Target  Cash  and  Target  Leverage  Control  as  control
variables.  A  complete  definition  of  variables  is  available  in  Appendix  A.  Numbers  in  parentheses  are  t-statistics
based  on  Huber-White  standard  errors.  Time  fixed  effects  and  industry  fixed  effects  are  included  in  all  tests.
Financial  control  variables  are  winsorized  at  the  2.5th  and  97.5th  percentile.  Significance  on  a  10%  (*),  5%  (**),
or  1  %  level  (***)  is  indicated.

                                     17
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

       The  insignificant  results  for  the  leverage  relationship  with  CEO  gender,  in  test  2,  is  in
line  with  Huang  and  Kisgen  (2013)  providing  evidence  that  male  and  female  CEOs  do  not
make   significantly   different   decisions   to   leverage   overall.   They   provide   a   potential
explanation  for  the  results  to  be  that  there  is  no  difference  between  gender  risk  aversion  in
high  level  positions,  as  female  executives  have  successfully  completed  a  rigorous  selection
process.  This  is  in  line  with  Adams  and  Funk  (2012)  suggesting  that  women  need  to  be  like
men  to  break  the  glass  ceiling  and  disparities  between  the  genders  in  the  general  population
may  fade  in  the  corporate  setting.
       Although  insignificant  results  reported  for  book-value  size  ratio,  in  test  3,  the  negative
relationship  between  female  CEOs  and  acquisition  size  is  in  line  with  Chen  et  al.  (2016).  We
do  see  that  Acquiror  Leverage  has  a  negative  relationship  with  the  size  ratio  with  significance
on  the  one-percent  level.  We  also  see  that  Acquiror  Cash  has  a  positive  relationship  with  the
size  ratio  with  significance  on  the  one-percent  level.  Although  we  can  not  confirm  whether
there  is  a  gender  difference  of  CEOs  on  the  book-value  size  ratio,  we  do  see  that  leverage  and
cash  have  an  impact.  A  potential  interpretation,  as  proposed  by  Malmendier  and  Tate  (2007),
is  that  overconfident  CEOs  may  reject  larger  acquisitions  because  they  perceive  the
anticipated  necessity  of  external  financing  for  larger  firms  as  too  costly.  However,  this
concern  is  mitigated  when  internal  resources  are  available.
       Comparing  our  results  for  test  4  to  previous  findings,  Levi  et  al  (2014)  report  that
women  reduce  the  bid  premium  but  the  result  becomes  insignificant  when  adding  firm  fixed
effects  potentially  explained  by  their  limited  sample  size.  Test  4  provides  similar  results,
showing  a  negative  but  insignificant  relationship.

5.2  Robustness  Analysis

Endogeneity  is  a  limitation  potentially  affecting  our  results  as  female  executives  are  not
randomly  assigned  to  companies.  To  control  for  this  we  carry  out  a  propensity  score  matching
to  check  for  robustness  in  our  results.  The  matched  observations  are  then  used  for  a  univariate
regression.
       Results  from  the  univariate  regressions  are  presented  in  Table  3.  Our  findings  are
consistent  with  the  main  regression.  For  test  1  we  analyse  96  matched  observations,  finding  a
negative  relation  between  female  CEOs  and  Log  EV/EBITDA,  with  significance  on  the
five-percent  level.  In  comparison  to  the  main  regression,  the  magnitude  of  the  negative
relationship  becomes  larger  when  holding  other  factors  than  CEO  gender  constant.  Test  2
observes  Target  Leverage  analysing  24  matched  observations,  we  see  a  positive  relation  with
female  CEOs  but  not  significant.  Test  3  reports  Log  BV  Size  Ratio  where  we  see  a  negative
relation  with  female  CEOs  analysing  104  observations,  however  not  significant.  Test  4
analyses  16  matched  observations,  finding  a  negative  relation  between  female  CEOs  and  the
Bid  Premium,  although  not  significant.  The  result  of  the  robustness  test  supports  the  findings
from  the  main  regression,  that  there  is  a  significant  negative  difference  between  female  CEOs
and  male  CEOs  in  regards  to  the  EV/EBITDA  multiple  however  we  can  not  draw  any
significant  findings  regarding  gender  differences  on  the  other  M&A  outcome  variables.

                                     18
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

Table 3.
Propensity  Score  Matching.
This  table  reports  the  univariate  regression  of  our  matched  samples  from  Propensity  Score  Matching  for  the
dependent  variables  Log  EV/EBITDA,  Target  Leverage,  Log  BV  Size  Ratio  and  Bid  Premium.  Numbers  in
parentheses  are  t-statistics  based  on  Huber-White  standard  errors.  Significance  on  a  10%  (*),  5%  (**),  or  1  %
level  (***)  is  indicated.

5.3 Additional Test

To  this  point  we  have  shown  that  CEO  gender  influences  the  size  of  the  EV/EBITDA
multiple  in  acquisitions,  however  we  can  not  provide  statistical  evidence  whether  gender
influences  the  leverage  of  the  target,  book-value  size  ratio  or  the  bid  premium.  While  these
results  can  to  some  extent  provide  indications  of  gender  differences  within  M&A  we  conduct
an  additional  test  to  distinguish  if  the  gender  differences  also  influence  the  performance  of
the  acquisition.  We  employ  one  set  of  tests  to  analyse  investors  reactions  to  the  acquisition  by
looking  at  the  market  adjusted  cumulative  abnormal  return  (CAR)  of  the  deal  over  a
three-day  window  of  the  announcement.  We  present  the  results  of  the  additional  test  in  Table
4.
       In  contrast  to  Huang  and  Kisgen  (2013)  showing  a  statistically  significant  result  that
women  have  about  2%  higher  announcement  returns  compared  with  male  executives,  our
results,  seen  in  Table  4,  show  a  negligible  negative  relationship  with  no  significance.  These
results  indicate  that  we  can  not  confirm  whether  the  market  views  acquisitions  made  by  firms
with  female  CEOs  to  be  more  value  increasing  or  decreasing  on  average  than  those  made  by
male CEOs.

                                     19
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

Table 4.
Cumulative Abnormal Return (CAR).
This  table  reports  the  market  adjusted  Cumulative  Abnormal  Return  (CAR)  in  decimal  form  of  the  deal  over a
three-day  window  of  the  announcement  by  running  an  OLS  regression.  We  use  Age,  Toehold,  Tender  Offer,
Diversifying,  Target  is  Public,  Log  Acquiror  Total  Assets  as  control  variables.  A  complete  definition  of  variables
is  available  in  Appendix  A.  Numbers  in  parentheses  are  t-statistics  based  on  Huber-White  standard  errors.  Time
fixed  effects  and  industry  fixed  effects  are  included  in  the  test.  The  dependent  variable  is  winsorized  at  the  2.5th
and  97.5th  percentile.  Significance  on  a  10%  (*),  5%  (**),  or  1  %  level  (***)  is  indicated.

                                     20
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

6.  Discussion

Despite  numerous  previous  pieces  of  literature  indicating  a  difference  between  male  and
females  in  corporate  financial  and  investment  decision  making,  we  can  not  draw  the  same
conclusions  for  our  research  on  all  aspects.
       The  insignificant  findings  of  differences  in  size,  bid  premium  and  investors’  reactions
depending  on  CEO  gender  differ  from  previous  studies  conducted  in  the  U.S.  which  found
significant  differences  between  male  and  female  executives  (Huang  and  Kisgen,  2013;  Levi
et  al.,  2014,  Chen  et  al.,  2016).  This  discrepancy  in  significant  results  is  not  surprising  due  to
the  unique  context  of  the  Nordic  region.  The  Nordic  countries  are  known  for  their  high  levels
of   gender   equality   and   progressive   corporate   cultures,   factors   that   may   diminish
gender-related  disparities  in  decision-making  among  CEOs.  In  such  a  culture,  factors  like  risk
aversion  or  overconfidence  may  play  a  less  significant  role  in  driving  M&A  outcomes
compared  to  regions  with  lower  gender  equality.
       Gender  equality  initiatives  and  cultural  shifts  towards  gender  neutrality  work  to  break
down  traditional  gender  stereotypes.  In  environments  where  gender  roles  are  less  rigidly
defined,  individuals  are  freer  to  express  themselves  and  pursue  careers  based  on  their
interests  and  abilities  rather  than  conforming  to  societal  expectations  based  on  gender,  as  seen
by  the  role  of  gender  norms  on  higher  education  attainment  (Huber  and  Paule-Paludkiewicz,
2024).  This  leads  to  a  more  diverse  pool  of  leaders  with  varying  decision-making  styles,
reducing  the  impact  of  gender  on  decision-making  outcomes.
       Further,  increased  gender  equality  is  often  accompanied  by  a  cultural  shift  towards
collaboration  and  inclusivity.  This  is  illustrated  by  Nordic  countries  scoring  relatively  lower
on  Hofstede's  individualism-collectivism  scale  compared  to  the  U.S.  (Boubakri  and  Saffar,
2016).   In   organisations   where   diverse   perspectives   are   valued   and   encouraged,
decision-making   becomes   a   collective   process   rather   than   an   individual   one.   This
collaborative   approach   to   decision-making   minimises   the   influence   of   individual
gender-related  traits  and  fosters  a  more  inclusive  and  equitable  work  environment.  Hence,  the
specific  influence  of  the  CEO  may  not  be  as  prominent  in  the  Nordics  as  it  is  in  the  U.S..
       Graham  et  al.  (2012)  exemplifies  the  difference  in  underlying  attitudes  between  U.S.
and  non-U.S.  CEOs,  finding  that  U.S.  CEOs  differ  significantly  from  non-U.S.  CEOs.  U.S.
executives  tend  to  be  more  risk-tolerant  and  more  optimistic,  i.e.  overconfident,  than
executives  of  companies  located  outside  of  the  U.S.  This  potentially  suggests  that  it  is  the
amplification  of  male  behavioural  traits,  particularly  in  the  U.S.,  that  drives  the  gender
disparities  observed  within  each  country.  Male  CEOs  in  the  U.S.  may  exhibit  more  extreme
levels  of  risk-taking  and  overconfidence  compared  to  male  CEOs  in  the  Nordics,  contributing
to  greater  differences  between  male  and  female  CEOs  within  the  U.S.  corporate  landscape.
Conversely,  CEOs  in  the  Nordic  region  may  not  manifest  these  traits  to  the  same  extent,
possibly  explaining  the  lack  of  significance  observed  in  our  findings.
       Expanding  on  the  dynamics  of  authority  and  the  extent  to  which  CEOs  delegate
responsibilities,  prior  literature  presents  a  contradictory  perspective  in  which  actors  influence
corporate  decisions.  Huang  and  Kisgen  (2013)  both  include  CEOs  and  CFOs  as  ultimate
decision  makers  while  we  only  take  into  account  the  role  of  the  CEO  as  the  actor  with  the
primary  responsibility  for  corporate  decisions  within  M&A  (Graham  et  al.  2012).  Prior
literature  also  mentions  the  role  of  boards  in  decision  making  (Adams  and  Funk,  2012;  Levi
et  al.,  2014;  Bernile  et  al.,  2018)  and  how  female  representation  within  boards  has  an  effect
on  the  decision  outcome.  Thus  one  explanation  for  our  differing  results  might  be  explained
by  the  actors  included  in  the  independent  variable.  Although  the  CEO  holds  the  primary
responsibility  for  initiating  and  promoting  the  potential  acquisitions,  our  results  reveal  that
the  CEO  solely  cannot  explain  gender  differences  within  M&A  as  we  find  no  significant

                                     21
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

relationship  for  most  of  our  tests.  A  possible  explanation  instead  could  be  that  CFOs  as  well
as  board  diversity  influence  M&A.  This  is  partly  confirmed  by  Huang  and  Kisgen  (2013),
finding  that  leverage  is  affected  by  the  particular  manager  and  that  CFOs  explain  more  of  the
variation  in  leverage  than  CEOs.  Bernile  et  al.  (2018)  emphasise  that  a  more  diverse  board
will  decrease  the  leverage,  indicating  that  the  board  has  a  significant  impact  on  a  firm's
financial  policy.  Although  the  specific  CEO  of  a  firm  may  inhibit  behavioural  attitudes  that
could  impact  M&A  decision  making,  they  may  be  restricted  by  policies  enacted  by  the  board.
Due  to  limitations  of  this  study  in  regards  to  lack  of  available  data  for  CFOs  and  board
composition,  we  do  not  perform  additional  tests  on  CFOs  nor  board  diversity  although  it
could  provide  valuable  insights  when  further  analysed.
       Another  explanation  for  our  findings  and  why  it  differs  from  previous  studies
including  the  main  reference  paper  by  Huang  and  Kisgen  (2013)  is  the  composition  of  the
data  set.  Although  the  number  of  female  CEOs  do  not  differ  significantly  (77  female  CEOs  in
the  Nordics  and  116  in  the  US)  the  whole  sample  size  differs  considerably.  While  we  aimed
to  include  a  diverse  range  of  companies  and  CEOs,  the  relatively  smaller  number  of  M&A
transactions  in  the  Nordic  region  compared  to  the  U.S.  may  have  limited  the  statistical  power
of  our  analysis.  Due  to  the  exclusion  of  a  relatively  large  share  of  our  unfiltered  sample
related  to  unidentifiable  CEOs  our  main  sample  may  be  subject  to  sample  biases.  To  analyse
potential  bias  of  our  main  sample  we  provide  descriptive  statistics  of  the  unfiltered  sample
(see  Appendix  I)  and  t-test  results  of  differences  in  the  main  sample  compared  to  the
unfiltered  sample  (see  Appendix  J).  We  do  see  a  significant  difference  for  some  of  our  control
variables  but  not  for  any  of  the  dependent  variables  except  for  the  book-value  size  ratio.  This
needs  to  be  taken  into  account  when  analysing  the  results  from  our  tests  as  the  analysis  might
be  influenced  by  the  filtering  process.  Analysing  a  wider  pool  could  therefore  yield  different
results.

                                     22
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

7.  Conclusion

To  investigate  the  impact  of  CEO  gender  on  M&A  decision  making  in  the  Nordics,  we  extend
research  by  Huang  and  Kisgen  (2013)  measuring  four  dependent  variables:  EV/EBITDA,
target  leverage,  BV  size  ratio  and  bid  premium.
       Our  primary  contribution  is  twofold:  first,  a  comprehensive  analysis  of  the  M&A
landscape,  and  second,  a  focused  examination  of  private  firms  —  an  area  where  existing
research  is  notably  sparse.  Our  results  reveal  that  female  CEOs  do  not  make  significantly
different  corporate  decisions  compared  to  male  CEOs  in  most  parts.  There  is  a  significant
difference  between  male  and  female  CEOs  in  valuation  of  the  target  in  M&A  based  on  the
EV/EBITDA  multiple.  Female  CEOs  generate  lower  EV/EBITDA  multiples  compared  with
their  male  counterparts.  We  do  not,  however,  find  significant  differences  in  the  targets
acquired  by  female  CEOs  in  terms  of  the  leverage,  book-value  size  ratio  and  bid  premium.
Our  robustness  analysis  using  propensity  score  matching  produced  consistent  results,
confirming  the  negative  relationship  between  female  CEOs  and  EV/EBITDA.  This  suggests
that  our  findings  are  robust.  In  an  additional  test,  measuring  the  market  adjusted  cumulative
abnormal  return  (CAR),  no  significant  difference  was  found  in  investors'  reactions  to
acquisition  decisions  based  on  the  gender  of  the  CEO,  hence  we  can  not  draw  any  conclusion
regarding  CEO  gender  impact  on  acquisition  performance.
       Our  research  contributes  to  the  understanding  of  CEO  gender  influences  in  the
Nordics  within  the  M&A  domain.  Firstly,  it  adds  to  the  literature  on  how  females  influence
corporate  financial  and  investment  decisions.  Secondly,  understanding  how  executive
characteristics  shape  decision-making  processes  in  mergers  and  acquisitions  offers  valuable
insights   for   practitioners   and  policymakers  seeking  to  improve  the  effectiveness  and
outcomes  of  such  transactions.  Thirdly,  our  research  contributes  to  the  ongoing  dialogue
about  diversity  and  inclusion  in  the  finance  industry  by  challenging  prevalent  gender
stereotypes  and  biases.  Bringing  together  individuals  of  different  genders  can  tap  into  a
broader  range  of  skills,  knowledge  and  adaptability  necessary  to  navigate  the  challenging
field  leading  to  more  comprehensive  and  effective  solutions.
       Nevertheless,  the  question  of  gender  impact  on  M&A  transactions  is  not  fully
resolved  and  reason  for  further  investigation  remains.  For  instance,  the  EV/EBITDA  alone
does  not  determine  whether  a  premium  is  paid  for  the  target.  Other  factors,  such  as  market
conditions,  industry  trends,  and  negotiation  strategies,  also  play  a  significant  role  in
determining  the  acquisition  price.  Therefore  we  seek  future  research  in  the  field  to  determine
what  other  factors  could  lead  to  inflated  premiums  for  the  target  in  addition  to  analysis  of
other M&A outcome variables.

                                     23
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

8.  References

8.1  Literature

Adams,  Renée  B.,  and  Ferreira,  Daniel,  2009,  Women  in  the  boardroom  and  their  impact  on
governance  and  performance,  Journal  of  Financial  Economics  94,  291-309.

Adams,  Renée  B.  and  Funk,  Patricia,  2012,  Beyond  the  Glass  Ceiling:  Does  Gender  Matter?,
Management  Science  58,  219-235.

Ahern,  Kenneth  R.  and  Dittmar,  Amy  K.,  2012,  The  Changing  of  the  Boards:  The  Impact  on
Firm  Valuation  of  Mandated  Female  Board  Representation,  The  Quarterly  Journal  of
Economics  127,  137-197.

Atkinson,  Stanley  M.,  Baird,  Samantha  B.  and  Frye,  Melissa  B.,  2003,  Do  Female  Mutual
Fund  Managers  Manage  Differently?,  The  Journal  of  Financial  Research  26,  1-18.

Ang,  James  and  Kohers,  Ninon,  2001,  The  take-over  market  for  privately  held  companies:
The  US  experience,  Cambridge  Journal  of  Economics  25,  723-748.

Barber,  Brad  M.  and  Odean,  Terrance,  2001,  Boys  will  be  Boys:  Gender,  Overconfidence,
and  Common  Stock  Investment,  The  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics  116,  261-292.

Ben-David,   Itzhak,   Graham,   John   R.   and   Harvey   Campbell   R.,   2013,   Managerial
Miscalibration,  The  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics  128,  1547-1584.

Bernile,  Gennaro,  Bhagwat,  Vineet  and  Yonker,  Scott,  2018,  Board  diversity,  firm  risk,  and
corporate  policies,  Journal  of  Financial  Economics  127,  588-612.

Bertrand,  Marianne  and  Schoar,  Antoinette,  2003,  Managing  with  Style:  The  Effect  of
Managers  on  Firm  Policies,  The  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics  118,  1169-1208.

Bianconi,  Marcelo  and  Tan,  Chih  M.,  2019,  Evaluating  the  instantaneous  and  medium-run
impact  of  mergers  and  acquisitions  on  firm  values,  International  Review  of  Economics  and
Finance  59,  71-87.

Boubakri,  Narjess  and  Saffar,  Walid,  2016,  Culture  and  externally  financed  firm  growth,
Journal  of  Corporate  Finance  41,  502-520.

Charness,  Gary  and  Gneezy,  Uri,  2012,  Strong  Evidence  for  Gender  Differences  in  Risk
Taking, Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 83, 50-58.

Chava,  Sudheer  and  Purnanandam,  Amiyatosh,  2010,  Is  Default  Risk  Negatively  Related  to
Stock  Returns?,  The  Review  of  Financial  Studies  23,  2523-2559.

Croson,  Rachel  and  Gneezy,  Uri,  2009,  Gender  Differences  in  Preferences,  Journal  of
Economic  Literature  47:2,  1-27.

Capron,  Laurence  and  Shen,  Jung-Chin  2007,  Acquisitions  of  private  vs.  public  firms:  Private
information,  target  selection,  and  acquirer  returns,  Strategic  Management  Journal  28,  891-911

                                     24
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

Chen,  Guoli,  Crossland,  Craig  and  Huang,  Sterling,  2016,  Female  Board  Representation  and
Corporate  Acquisition  Intensity,  Strategic  Management  Journal  37,  303-313.

Ellis,  Kimberly  M,  Reus,  Taco  H.,  Lamont,  Bruce  T.  and  Ranft,  Annette  L,  2011,  Transfer
Effects  in  Large  Acquisitions:  How  size  specific  experience  matters,  The  Academy  of
Management  Journal  54,  1261-1276.

Graham,  John  R.  and  Harvey,  Campbell,  2001,  The  theory  and  practice  of  corporate  finance:
evidence  from  the  field,  Journal  of  Financial  Economics  60,  187-243.

Graham,  John  R.,  Harvey,  Campbell  and  Puri,  Manju,  2012,  Managerial  attitudes  and
corporate  actions,  Journal  of  Financial  Economics  109,  103-121.

Hambrick,  Donald  C.,  and  Mason,  Phyllis  A.,  1984,  Upper  Echelons:  The  Organization  as  a
Reflection  of  Its  Top  Managers,  The  Academy  of  Management  Review  9,  193-206.

Harford,  Jarrad,  1999,  Corporate  Cash  Reserves  and  Acquisitions,  The  Journal  of  Finance  54,
1969-1997.

Hayward,  Mathew  L.A.  and  Hambrick,  Donald  C.,  1997,  Explaining  the  Premiums  Paid  for
Large  Acquisitions,  Evidence  of  CEO  Hubris,  Administrative  Science  Quarterly  42.

Huang,  Jiekun  and  Kisgen,  Darren  J.,  2013,  Gender  and  corporate  finance:  Are  male
executives  overconfident  relative  to  female  executives?,  Journal  of  Financial  Economics  108,
822-839.

Huber,  Stefanie  J.  and  Paule-Paludkiewicz,  Hannah,  2024,  Gender  norms  and  the  gender  gap
in  higher  education,  Labour  Economics  87,  102491.

Hurdle,  Gloria  J.,  1974,  Leverage,  Risk,  Market  Structure  and  Profitability,  The  Review  of
Economics  and  Statistics  56,  478-485.

Larwood,  Laurie  and  Whittaker,  William,  1977,  Managerial  myopia:  Self-serving  biases  in
organizational  planning,  Journal  of  Applied  Psychology  62(2),  194-198.

Levi,  Maurice,  Li,  Kai  and  Zhang,  Feng,  2014,  Director  gender  and  mergers  and  acquisitions,
Journal  of  Corporate  Finance  28,  185-200.

Lichtenstein,  Sarah  and  Fischhoff,  Baruch  1977,  Do  those  who  know  more  also  know  more
about  how  much  they  know?,  Organizational  Behavior  and  Human  Performance  20,  159-183.

Lundeberg,  Mary,  Fox,  P,  Punccohar,  Judith,  1994.  Highly  confident  but  wrong:  gender
differences  and  similarities  in  confidence  judgments.  Journal  of  Educational  Psychology  86,
114–121.

McKinsey  &  Company  Inc.,  Copeland, Tom,  Koller, Tim and Murrin, Jack, 2000, Valuation:
Measuring and Managing the Value of Companies

                                     25
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

Malmendier,  Ulrike  and  Tate,  Geoffrey,  2005,  Who  makes  acquisitions?  CEO  overconfidence
and  the  market’s  reaction,  Journal  of  Financial  Economics  89,  20-43.

Malmendier,  Ulrike  and  Tate,  Geoffrey,  2007,  Who  makes  acquisitions?  CEO  overconfidence
and  the  market’s  reaction,  Journal  of  Financial  Economics  89,  20-43.

Niederle,  Muriel  and  Vesterlund,  Lise,  2009,  Do  women  shy  away  from  competition?  Do
men  compete  too  much?,  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  1067-1100

Opler,  Tim,  Pinkowitz,  Lee  and  Stulz,  René,  1999,  The  determinants  and  implications  of
corporate  cash  holdings,  Journal  of  Financial  Economics  52,  3-46.

Ortiz,  Marcelo,  Caspar  David  Peter,  Francisco  Urzúa  I,  and  Paolo  F.  Volpin,  2023,  Mandatory
Financial  Disclosure  and  M&A  Activity,  The  Review  of  Financial  Studies  36,  4788-4823

Petersen,  Christian,  Plenborg,  Thomas  and  Scøler,  Finn,  2006,  Issues  in  Valuation  of  privately
Held  Firms,  The  Journal  of  Private  Equity  10,  33-48.

Puri,  Manju  and  Robinson,  David,  2007,  Optimism  and  economic  choice,  Journal  of
Financial  Economics  86,  71-99.

Roll,  Richard,  1986,  The  Hubris  Hypothesis  of  Corporate  Takeovers,  The  Journal  of  Business
59,  197-216.

Svenson,  Ola,  1981,  Are  we  all  less  risky  and  more  skillful  than  our  fellow  drivers?,  Acta
Psychologica  47,  143–148.

Verheul,  Ingrid  and  Thurik,  Roy,  2001,  Start-Up  Capital:  Does  Gender  Matter?,  Small
Business  Economics  16,  329-345.

8.2  Data  bases

Hall,  Lindsey,  Laidlaw,  Jennifer,  Almtoft,  Anders,  Dhanasarnsombat,  Sansanee  and  Ramirez,
Dario,   2024,   Women   in   leadership:   What’s   the   holdup?,   S&P   Global,  7  March,
https://www.spglobal.com/esg/insights/featured/special-editorial/women-in-leadership-what-s
-the-holdup

Liz,  Elting,  2023,  New  Year,  New  Glass  Heights:  Women  Now  Comprise  10%  Of  Top  U.S.
Corporation  CEOs,  Forbes,  27  January,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/lizelting/2023/01/27/new-year-new-glass-heights-for-the-first-ti
me-in-history-over-10-of-fortune-500-ceos-are-women/

The  European  Institute  for  Gender  Equality  (EIGE),
https://eige.europa.eu/gender-statistics/dgs

Refinitiv  Eikon  database,  https://eikon.refinitiv.com

Retriever  Research,  https://app.retriever-info.com/login

Valu8 Group,  https://www.valu8group.com

                                     26
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

World    Economic    Forum,    2023,    Global    Gender    Gap    Report,    20    June,
https://www.weforum.org/publications/global-gender-gap-report-2023/in-full/benchmarking-
gender-gaps-2023/

                                     27
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

9. Appendices

Table A1.
Female CEO-led deals.
A list of the female CEO-led deals for our sample including company name, executive name, age and the
industry  classification  extracted  from  Business  Retriever,  Valu8  and  company  filings.

 Deal #      Company name             Executive name                   Age            Industry classification

1          W5 Solutions AB           Sara Evelina Hedskog             42              High Technology

2           Fiskars Oyj Abp            Anja Nathalie Ahlström            49              Consumer Products and Services

3           Logent AB                Linda Therése, Aidanpää Baronnet     50              Industrials

             Chemgroup Scandinavia
4                                      Hanna Louise, Björklund            45               Materials
         AB

5           Hawk Infinity Software As    Marianne Michelsen               47              High Technology

6           Nodebis Applications AB     Lena Ulla-Britt, Sundsvik           55              High Technology

7           Gjensidige Forsikring Asa     Aysegül, Cin                     42               Financials

8           Rejlers Sverige AB          Jenny Sofia, Edfast                48              Consumer Products and Services

9           Aprendere Skolor AB        Claudia Mikaela, Lindström         56              Consumer Products and Services

10          Novozymes A/S            Ester Baiget Arnau                51              Healthcare

11          Novozymes A/S            Ester Baiget Arnau                51              Healthcare

12          Aprendere Skolor AB        Claudia Mikaela, Lindström         56              Consumer Products and Services

13         Vo2 Cap Holding AB        Karin Bodil, Eriksson Torp          54              High Technology

14         FDT System AB           Monica Katarina, Hökfors          49              High Technology

15          Hawk Infinity AS           Marianne Michelsen               46              Financials

16         CAG Group AB            Åsa Elisabeth, Landén Ericsson       57              High Technology

17          Humana AB              Johanna Maria, Rastad             42              Healthcare

                                        Kathrine Elisabeth Gamborg
18         Navamedic ASA                                          56              Healthcare
                                       Andreassen

19          Nordea Life Holding AB      Katja Sofia, Bergqvist              52               Financials

              Athanase  Industrial  Partner
20                                     Ulrika Marianne, Högnabba          47               Financials
         AB

21          Wulff-Yhtiot Oyj            Elina Kerttuli Rahkonen             43               Materials

22         Vo2 Cap Holding AB        Karin Bodil, Eriksson Torp          53              High Technology

            Coor Service Management
23                                    Anna-Carin Maria, Grandin          54              Consumer Products and Services
           Holding AB

24          Binero Group AB           Eva Charlotte, Darth              53              High Technology

25          AddLife AB               Eva Kristina, Willgård              56              Healthcare

             Compodium International
26                                    Charlotte Sophie, Berg             38              High Technology
         AB

                                     28
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

 Table A1 (continued)

 Deal #      Company name             Executive name                   Age            Industry classification

             ICA Fastigheter Holding
27                                    Anna Sofie, Nyberg               48              Real Estate
         AB

28          Multiconsult ASA           Grethe Bergly                    59               Industrials

            John Mattson
29                                    Siv Eleonora, Malmgren            62              Real Estate
             Fastighetsforetagen AB

30          Every Padel i Sverige AB     Eva Camilla, Godberg             51              Media and Entertainment

31         Bambuser AB             Maryam, Ghahremani             40             High Technology

32          Wulff-Yhtiot Oyj            Elina Kerttuli Rahkonen             42               Materials

                                        Kjersten Elisabeth Rasmussen
33         DNB Bank ASA                                         51             Financials
                                       Braathen

34          Corem Property Group AB    Eva Margareta, Landén            56              Real Estate

35          AdderaCare AB            K B Marianne, Nilsson Sernevi       54              Healthcare

            Coor Service Management
36                                    Anna-Carin Maria, Grandin          54              Consumer Products and Services
           Holding AB

37         Bublar Group AB           Anna Maria, Andersson Grimaldi     52              High Technology

             Schibsted Nordic
38                                    Siv Juvik Tveitnes                46              High Technology
            Marketplaces AS

39          Mandel Design Group AB     Camilla Therese, Fridén            39              Retail

40          Sanoma Media Finland Oy    Pia Kristina Kalsta                50              Media and Entertainment

41         CAG Group AB            Åsa Elisabeth, Landén Ericsson       55              High Technology

             Shearwater Geoservices
42                                      Irene Waage Basili                 53               Industrials
           Holding AS

            Coor Service Management
43                                    Anna-Carin Maria, Grandin          52              Consumer Products and Services
         AB

44         Bublar Group AB           Anna Maria, Andersson Grimaldi     51              High Technology

45          Tieto Oyj                 Satu Kristiina Kiiskinen             54               High Technology

46          Hedera Group AB          Maria Kristina, Nordin             56              Consumer Products and Services

47          Teracom Group AB         Åsa Kristina, Sundberg             60              Media and Entertainment

48          Atvexa AB                Anna Katarina, Sjögren             50              Financials

49          BillerudKorsnas AB         Petra Irene, Einarsson              51               Materials

50          Inission Boras AB          Anna Cecilia, Carlswärd            36              High Technology

51          Tele2 AB                 Allison, Kirkby                  51              Telecommunications

52          Pop House Sweden AB       Johanna Maria Katrina, Mattsson      37              Media and Entertainment

53          NGS Group AB            Ingrid Jenny Margareta, Nordlund     49              Consumer Products and Services

54          NGS Group AB            Ingrid Jenny Margareta, Nordlund     49              Consumer Products and Services

55          NGS Group AB            Ingrid Jenny Margareta, Nordlund     49              Consumer Products and Services

                                    29
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

 Table A1 (continued)

 Deal #      Company name             Executive name                   Age            Industry classification

56          Capio Narsjukvard AB       Susanne, Wellander               60              Healthcare

57          Tele2 AB                 Allison, Kirkby                  49              Telecommunications

58          Marginalen AB            Ewa Lilly Yvonne, Glennow         60              Consumer Products and Services

59          MQ Holding AB            Tove Iréne Christina, Ståhl          46              Retail

60          Ratos AB                 Susanna Margareta, Campbell        43              Financials

61          NGS Group AB            Ingrid Jenny Margareta, Nordlund     48              Consumer Products and Services

62          Karo Bio AB              Karin Maria Margareta, Sjöberg       51              Healthcare

63          Ratos AB                 Susanna Margareta, Campbell        42              Financials

64          Ratos AB                 Susanna Margareta, Campbell        42              Financials

65          Sydbank A/S              Karen Frøsig                    57              Financials

66          Ratos AB                 Susanna Margareta, Campbell        41              Financials

67          Teknopower Oy            Nina Tellervo Arvonen             39              Industrials

68          Sydbank A/S              Karen Frøsig                    55              Financials

69          Alligator Bioscience AB      Sibylle, Moltzen Lenz              52               Healthcare

70          Ratos AB                 Susanna Margareta, Campbell        40              Financials

71          Ratos AB                 Susanna Margareta, Campbell        40              Financials

72          Nets A/S                 Susanne Brønnum-Hyttel           42              Financials

73          Adoperator AB             Lena, Modirzadeh Tehrani          27              Media and Entertainment

74          United Media Sweden AB     Nina Gabriella, Wahlberg           32              Consumer Products and Services

75          Consolidated Holdings A/S    Lone Schøtt Kunøe                44              Financials

76          Bisnode AB               Anna Christina J, Freese Ingesson     47              High Technology

77         Intius AB                Anna Karin, Backman             55              High Technology

                                    30
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

Appendix A.
Variables  Definition.
This  Appendix  provides  the  definition  of  all  variables  covered  in  the  paper.  Currency  used  is  EURm.

 Variable             Definition

 Acquiror  Cash       Acquiror  cash  holdings  as  Acquiror  Cash  Last  12  Months  (Refinitv  Eikon),
                     divided  by  Acquiror  Total  Assets  Last  12  Months  (Refinitv  Eikon)

 Acquiror  is  Public     An  indicator  variable  taking  the  value  of  one  if  the  acquirer  is  public  and  zero
                      otherwise

 Acquiror  Leverage    Debt as  Acquiror Net Debt Last 12 Months  (Refinitv Eikon) plus  Acquiror
                     Cash  Last  12  Months  (Refinitv  Eikon),  divided  by  Debt  plus  Equity  as
                     Acquiror  Total  Assets  Last  12  Months  (Refinitv  Eikon)  plus  Acquiror  Total
                      Liabilities  Last  12  Months  (Refinitv  Eikon).

 Acquiror  ROA        Acquiror  EBIT  Last  12  Months  (Refinitv  Eikon):  Earnings  before  interest
                      income,  interest  expense,  non-operating  income,  taxes  and  minority  interest
                     for  the  last  12  months,  divided  by  Acquiror  Total  Assets  Last  12  Months

 Age              Age of CEO

 Bid premium        Premium Paid - 4 Weeks Prior to Announcement (Refinitv Eikon): Premium
                       of  offer  price  to  target  closing  price  4  weeks  prior  to  the  original
                     announcement  date,  expressed  as  a  percentage.

 BV  Size  Ratio        Target  Total  Assets  Last  12  Months  (Refinitv  Eikon)  divided  by  Acquirer
                     Total  Assets  Last  12  Months  (Refinitv  Eikon).

 BV  Size  Ratio        Control  variable  for  BV  Size  Ratio
 Control

 CAR                The  cumulative  abnormal  return  for  the  acquiring  firm’s  stock  over  a
                     three-day  window  around  the  announcement  of  the  merger  bid,  subtracting
                   the daily return on the NASDAQ OMX NORDIC 120 index, expressed in
                    decimal form

 CEO gender         A dummy variable taking the form of one if the CEO is female and zero if the
                   CEO is male

 Deal  Value           Deal  Value  (Refinitv  Eikon),  total  value  of  consideration  paid  by  the  acquirer

 Diversifying          An  indicator  variable  taking  the  value  of  one  if  the  acquirer  and  the  target  are
                     not  from  the  same  industry  and  zero  otherwise

 EV/EBITDA         Enterprise  value  as  Rank  Value  inc.  Net  Debt  of  Target  (Refinitiv  Eikon):
                      Rank  value  is  calculated  by  subtracting  the  value  of  any  liabilities  assumed  in
                      a  transaction  from  the  transaction  value  and  by  adding  the  target’s  net  debt.
                     Net  Debt  is  Straight  Debt  plus  Short-Term  Debt  plus  Preferred  Equity  minus
                     Cash  and  Marketable  Securities.  Enterprise  value  is  divided  by  EBITDA  Last
                      12  Months  (Refinitiv  Eikon):  Earnings  before  interest,  taxes,  depreciation  and
                       amortisation  for  the  target  in  the  last  12  months.

                                     31
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

 Appendix A. (continued)

 Variable             Definition

 Hostile              An  indicator  variable  taking  the  value  of  one  if  SDC  regards  the  deal  as
                      hostile  and  zero  otherwise

 Target  Cash         Target  cash  holdings  as  Cash  and  Marketable  Securities  Last  12  Months
                     (Refinitv  Eikon)  divided  by  Total  Assets  Last  12  Months  (Refinitv  Eikon)

 Target  is  Public       An  indicator  variable  taking  the  value  of  one  if  the  target  is  public  and  zero
                      otherwise

 Target  Leverage      Debt  as  Total  Debt  Last  12  Months  (Refinitv  Eikon),  divided  by  Total  Debt
                     plus  Equity  as  Total  Assets  Last  12  Months  (Refinitv  Eikon)  plus  Total
                      Liabilities  Last  12  Months  (Refinitv  Eikon).

 Target  Leverage      Control  variable  for  Target  Leverage
 Control

 Target  Total  Assets   Target  Total  Assets  Last  12  Months  (Refinitv  Eikon)
 LTM

 Target ROA          EBIT Last 12 Months (Refinitv Eikon) divided by Total Assets 1 year Prior
                      (Refinitv  Eikon)

 Target  Sales         Target  Net  Sales  Last  12  Months  (Refinitv  Eikon)  divided  by  Net  Sales  1
 Growth             Year Prior minus 1

 Tender  Offer         An  indicator  variable  taking  the  value  of  one  if  SDC  regards  the  bid  as  a
                      tender  offer  and  zero  otherwise

 Toehold             Toehold as Percentage of Shares Held at Announcement (Refinitv Eikon)

Appendix B.
Enterprise  Value  calculation.
This  Appendix  provides  an  equation  for  how  enterprise  value  is  calculated  in  a  valuation  setting  based  on
McKinsey & Company et al. (2000).

                                                       𝑇
                                                            𝐹𝐶𝐹                        𝐹𝐶𝐹                            1
                                                              𝑡+τ                         𝑇+1
                     𝐸𝑉 =  ∑   τ            +  (1+𝑊𝐴𝐶𝐶  )−𝑔  ×  𝑇
                                    𝑡                                                 𝑇+1
                                𝑡=1 ∏ (1+𝑊𝐴𝐶𝐶  )                          ∏ (1+𝑊𝐴𝐶𝐶  )
                                                                                          𝑡+𝑗                                                                       𝑡+𝑗
                                                    𝑗=1                                                      𝑗=1

      EV = Enterprise Value
      WACC = Weighted average cost of capital
      FCF = Free cash flow
       g  =  Growth  rate  (in  the  terminal  period)

                                     32
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

Appendix C.
Deal Summary Statistics by Gender.
This table reports the number of CEO-led deals categorised by gender (male versus female) from 2010 to 2023,
the  proportion  of  total  deals  executed  by  each  gender  (in  %),  and  the  total  number  of  deals  undertaken.

Appendix D.
Unique Female CEOs in M&A vs. Female CEOs in Nordics.
This table reports unique female CEOs in M&A (in %) from 2010-2023 and a benchmark of total female CEOs
in  the  Nordics  (in  %).

Appendix E.
Male-led  and  Female-led  Transactions  per  Industry.
This table reports information on the Acquiror Macro Industry, the percentage of male and female CEOs, and
the  total  number  of  deals  per  macro  industry.

                                     33
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

Appendix  F.
Male and Female CEOs per Size Category.
This table reports information on the Size Category  (Large, Medium, Small) and how many were not possible
to classify (NA), the percentage of male and female CEOs and the total number of acquiring companies per size
category. Categories are based on Acquirior Total Assets Last Twelve Months (LTM) in EURm where Large is
when x  > 1000, Medium is when 100 ≤ x ≤  1000, Small is when x < 100.

Appendix G.
Male and Female CEO Age.
This table reports information on the Age by Mean, Median, SD, Min and Max for male and female CEOs.

Appendix H.
Male and Female CEOs per Corporate Ownership.
This  table  reports  information  on  the  corporate  ownership  (public  versus  private)  of  both  the  Acquiring  and
Target  firms,  categorised  by  gender  of  the  CEO  (female  versus  male).

                                     34
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

Appendix  I.
Descriptive  Statistics  Unfiltered  Sample.
This  table  reports  descriptive  statistics  for  the  unfiltered  sample.  The  table  includes  the  number  of  observations
(N),  mean  (Mean),  median  (Median),  standard  deviation  (SD),  minimum  value  (Min),  the  first  quantile  (Q1),  the
third quantile (Q3)  and maximum value (Max).  A  complete definition of  variables  is  available in Appendix A.

Appendix  J.
T-Test  Results  of  Differences  in  Main  Sample  vs.  Unfiltered  Sample.
This  table  reports  the  T-Statistic  of  the  main  sample  versus  the  unfiltered  sample  and  the  p-value  for  each
variable.  A  complete  definition  of  variables  is  available  in  Appendix  A.  Significance  on  a  10%  (*),  5%  (**),  or
1  %  level  (***)  is  indicated.

                                     35
                            Alva Hardeberg & Isabella Lejdström

Appendix K.
Generative  AI.
This  Appendix  provides  insights  into  use  of  Generative  AI  in  the  paper.

In  the  process  of  this  thesis  OpenAI's  GPT-3.5  has  been  used  as  a  language  tool  for  increasing
clarity  and  coherence.  The  integration  of  AI  GPT-3.5,  has  improved  the  quality  of  the  thesis,
particularly  in  terms  of  grammatical  accuracy  and  enhancing  readability.  Additionally,  it  has
been  used  as  support  for  deriving  necessary  code  to  analyse  data.

                                     36