LEVERAGE CONSTRAINTS
AND THE BETA ANOMALY

BETTING AGAINST BETA  IN  THE SWEDISH  STOCK MARKET

FRANS AXELSSON NESSIM

LUDVIG GUSTAFSSON

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2024
Leverage Constraints and The Beta Anomaly;  Betting  Against Beta in the Swedish
Stock Market

Abstract:

     We  expand  on  prior  research  around  the beta anomaly by examining whether the
   superior performance of low-beta stocks compared to high-beta stocks persists in the
   Swedish market from 2011 to 2023. Building on the work  in  “Betting Against Beta”
   by  Frazzini and Pedersen (2014),  we  construct  a  market neutral  Betting Against Beta
   (BAB) factor and evaluate its performance. We contribute to the literature by updating
   their research with the most recent data from Sweden,  focusing on stocks listed on
   Nasdaq Stockholm, and examining the underlying economics of the beta anomaly. The
   findings reveal  how  portfolios of low-beta stocks yield higher and statistically
   significant alphas compared to high-beta stock portfolios over the sample period,
   highlighting  a  superior performance  of  low-beta assets. Consistent with Frazzini and
   Pedersen's results, we observe a significant positive alpha for a self-financing BAB
   portfolio during the tested period, suggesting a  breach of  the  assumptions underlying
   traditional  asset  pricing  models  such  as  the  CAPM.  Furthermore,  we  analyze
   ownership data  on  stocks listed on Nasdaq Stockholm  and  identify that  leverage-
   constrained investors  are  a key  factor  driving the overpricing of high-beta assets in
   Sweden. Additionally, we find that periods of tighter leverage constraints, as measured
   by a Swedish equivalent of the TED-Spread, negatively impact the short-term returns
   of a BAB portfolio while having no significant effect on long-term performance.

Keywords:

   Betting Against Beta, BAB, Leverage Constraints,  Beta Anomaly, Sweden

Authors:

   Frans Axelsson Nessim  (25339)
   Ludvig Gustafsson  (25335)

Tutor:

   Alvin Chen,  Assistant  Professor, Department of  Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien D’Avernas,  Assistant  Professor, Department of  Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in  Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Frans Axelsson Nessim and Ludvig Gustafsson, 2024

                                   1
                                I.  Introduction

   One of the most fundamental assumptions of contemporary finance is  the  Efficient
Markets Hypothesis, imposing that all available information is incorporated in the pricing
of assets.  Under this belief,  consistently  gaining  superior returns  cannot  be achieved
without assuming additional risk  (Fama, 1970).  If this were the case,  it would not be
possible to  get a higher  Sharpe  ratio  -  excess return in relation to risk  -  in any  other way
than levering or de-levering the market portfolio (Sharpe, 1964). However, prior research
such as  “Betting against beta”  by  Frazzini and Pedersen (2014)  has shown  how  low beta
stocks have been undervalued  compared to  high beta  stocks  in the US using a dataset
from 1926-2012.  Additionally,  Jensen, Black and Scholes (1972)  examine the US market
between 1926-1966 and  find  that low beta assets outperform  while  high beta assets
underperform in reference to their benchmark. This phenomenon is  referred to as a beta
anomaly.  Even  though  this is a well-researched  area  with  numerous studies exploring the
topic,  there has not been a study adapted for a full  Swedish setting  with the Nasdaq
Stockholm Exchange. Frazzini and Pedersen (2014) include international benchmarks for
Sweden  rather than Sweden-specific  measures, making it challenging to determine
whether Swedish investors  could  attempt to exploit this anomaly.  In our study, we use a
more  recent time-period, 2011-2023,  intended to  see  whether trading on a beta anomaly
is  still  relevant today.  This leads to research question  1,  which is  whether low beta
portfolios yield a positive and higher alpha compared to high beta portfolios in the
Swedish market.  To conduct our analysis, we categorized stocks from the Nasdaq
Stockholm exchange into three equally weighted beta portfolios: low, medium, and high.
We then perform monthly regressions on the returns of each portfolio using common asset
pricing models throughout the sample period. We employ both rolling and constant beta
methods and utilize Monte Carlo simulations to validate our findings. Our results indicate
that low beta stocks produce a significantly higher alpha compared to high beta stocks
over the examined period, supporting the existence of a beta anomaly.

   To highlight  how an  arbitrageur  could exploit  a potential  anomaly we  construct a self-
financing market-neutral betting against beta (BAB) portfolio,  which goes long low beta
assets and short high beta assets. We construct the factor by analyzing listed stocks on the
Nasdaq Stockholm exchange and divide  stocks into low versus high beta portfolios.  This
follows  a similar methodology to the one outlined by Frazzini and Pedersen (2014),
including a  monthly reweighting  and leveraging/de-leveraging  of the portfolio  for each
month  over the  sample period.   Consequently, our  second research question  examines
whether a market-neutral BAB (Betting Against Beta) portfolio yields a positive alpha in
the Swedish market. To investigate this, we construct the BAB portfolio using two
different methods: calculating both rolling and constant betas. Our analysis  reveals a
statistically significant positive alpha for both methods. Additionally, Monte Carlo
simulations   confirm   the   robustness   of   these   findings,   indicating   that   there   are
opportunities to earn abnormal returns with a BAB portfolio in Sweden.

                                   2
   Moving on, we  explore  the  underlying economics  of  the  beta anomaly  to  see whether
Frazzini and Pedersen’s (2014)  explanation  focused on  leverage constrained institutional
investors  also  applies to Sweden.  The  relevance  of  examining the investment  behavior  of
institutional investors  in Sweden is highlighted by their  significant  influence  on  the
market (roughly 61%  of the market  in 2015  (Ehne, 2018))  as well as numerous EU laws
that impose strict  regulations  on their  legal compliance,  financing,  and risk management.
Another significant benefit  for conducting this analysis in  Sweden is the  large focus on
transparency regarding  stock  ownership  as  regulated under  The Swedish Companies Act
(Regeringskansliet,  2005),  which enables us to  get unique insight into the types of owners
and their investment behavior on the Nasdaq Stockholm Exchange. This leads to research
question  3,  which  investigates whether investor groups in Sweden that are more
constrained  in terms of  leverage tend to overinvest in high beta assets.  We test this by
looking at  trends in  ownership  over time  for  those  stocks with  highest  beta  in  our  high
portfolio as well as those  stocks with  lowest  beta  in  our  low portfolio.  The  findings
indicate that pensions funds, asset management firms and mutual funds tilt their portfolios
more towards high beta, potentially  due to EU regulations  restricting their  ability to take
on leverage.  This highlights  how  explanations for the beta anomaly, such as the one by
Frazzini and Pedersen’s (2014), are still relevant and contributes to a better understanding
of  the underlying economics of BAB factors.

   Our final  exploration  examines  how  leverage  constraints  contribute  to the beta
anomaly  on  a macro level.  We investigate  whether  changing  funding restrictions  effect
the  BAB portfolio's performance  using  the Swedish  equivalent  TED  (STED) spread  as a
proxy.  This leads to research  question  4, which is whether more restrictive funding
constraints initially reduce  the  BAB  factor  performance due to increased investment in
high beta, and whether the BAB portfolio consequently receives a higher expected return
as low beta becomes more undervalued. This understanding could help investors optimize
their timing for investments in BAB portfolios, adjusting their strategies based on the
prevailing financial conditions.  We test this by regressing the monthly STED-Spread
against  our  monthly  BAB  returns  from  research question  2  and  identify that there is a
contemporaneous significant decrease to BAB  performance  when funding constraints
increase,  but  an insignificant  relationship  to future BAB returns. This indicates  an
opportunity  for arbitrageurs  to invest  more/less  or go long/short  in  the  BAB  portfolio
from  predictions  on  future financial conditions.  However, our results do not indicate an
opportunity to  gain  higher  future  returns on the BAB portfolio by  trading  on current
financial conditions, as there is no significance to the lagged  STED-Spread  and BAB
returns.

                                   3
                            II.  Related Literature

   Our  paper  builds  upon research  related  to the beta anomaly  and the findings  by
Frazzini and Pedersen (2014).  To properly understand  this  anomaly, it is crucial to relate
it to the fundamental assumptions of risk and return in finance, including the premises of
the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM). It is also important to consider alternative asset
pricing models such as  the Fama-French three-factor (FF3) and the Fama-French-Carhart
four-factor (FFC4) model, as these have shown to capture alpha from security prices more
effectively than the CAPM.  Thus, if significant alphas are present after accounting for
these factors, we believe this strongly supports the existence of a beta anomaly that is not
attributable to the omission of other relevant variables.  The following  sections  discuss
additional literature relevant for the beta anomaly, and we also conduct an in-depth review
of  the findings  by  Frazzini and Pedersen  (2014).

A.  Risk and Return
   Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT), originally developed by Harry Markowitz  (1952),
provides a theoretical framework for understanding the trade-off between risk and return.
Markowitz (1952) describes how  well-diversified  portfolios  along the efficient frontier,
referred to as tangency portfolios,  maximize this relationship  (see  Graph  A  in Appendix
C)  and that, on the efficient frontier,  it is not possible to increase returns without  taking
on more risk  (Fabozzi, Gupta and Markowitz,  2002).  This indicates the importance for
our study to compare returns of different beta sorted portfolios while considering the risk
that they assume.

B. CAPM

   The  CAPM,  one  of  the  foundational  frameworks  in  asset  pricing,  builds  on
Markowitz’s  (1952)  findings regarding risk and return.  It  adds to Markowitz (1952) by
incorporating  the concepts of the market portfolio and the risk-free rate of return,
culminating in the creation of the Capital Market Line (CML) (see Graph B in Appendix
C). The CML represents portfolios  that optimally combine  the market portfolio  -  all
investable assets weighted by market value,  serving  as  the tangency portfolio in this
context  -  with a risk-free asset.  To  gain a  higher/lower  return  while maximizing the
Sharpe ratio (Sharpe, 1964) investors  are assumed  able  to  lever/de-lever the market
portfolio, in accordance  with  one of the fundamental  assumptions  of the  CAPM
(Elbannan, 2015).  See  Appendix  D  for  a  comprehensive  list of the  CAPM  assumptions.

                                   4
C. FF3 and FFC4 Model

   Fama and French (1993) found that market risk alone does not account for a significant
portion  of a  stock's  average return,  highlighting how the  CAPM  does  not  explain enough
of asset  returns.  In their analysis of a large historical dataset from the  US  CRSP (Center
for Research in Security Prices) database, they identified two additional factors necessary
for more accurate  security  return predictions.  The first factor,  Small Minus  Big (SMB),
is related to size, where historical data has shown a significant outperformance of small
market capitalization stocks in comparison to large market capitalization stocks. Further,
their second finding,  High Minus Low (HML),  is related to the outperformance of value
stocks (high book-to-market ratio) compared to growth stocks (low book-to-market
ratio)(Fama  and  French, 1993).

   Adding to the findings of Fama and French (1993), Mark Carhart (1997) introduces a
fourth factor, momentum or Up minus down (UMD), for the FFC4 model. Carhart (1997)
analyzed  mutual fund data from the  CRSP and  found that assets performing  well in the
recent past  tend to  continue  performing  well in the near future, and vice versa  for  assets
performing poorly.

   It is therefore apparent that the findings of Fama and French (1993) and Mark Carhart
(1997)  should  help explain some of the alphas  generated for  security  returns  related to
CAPM. However, even when controlling  for these factors Frazzini and Pedersen (2014)
find that there is a beta anomaly present in the market.  Consequently, these findings
appear  insufficient to fully explain the higher alphas observed in low beta stocks
compared to high beta stocks, indicating that additional reasoning must be considered to
account for deviations from the CAPM.

E.  Betting Against Beta  (BAB)

   Despite  accounting  for  the CAPM,  FF3  model, and  FFC4  model, empirical evidence
reveals that  low-beta stocks have outperformed high-beta stocks.  This suggests  that the
assumptions of the CAPM do not  hold  in the real world,  and that one can observe an
overvaluation of high beta stocks and undervaluation of low beta stocks. This is what
Frazzini and Pedersen’s  article  “Betting Against Beta”  highlights,  through  data  from  the
CRSP database for US equities, spanning  1926  to  2012. Additionally,  they use  the
Xpressfeed Global database for  20 other international equity markets,  including Sweden,
from 1984 to 2012.  The paper also  demonstrates  how  a portfolio that  goes  long low beta
stocks and short high beta stocks  can  generate  significant positive  alphas  (Frazzini and
Pedersen, 2014).  Additionally, the paper  “The Volatility Effect: Lower Risk without
Lower Return” by Blitz and Van Vliet (2007) finds that the alpha spread between low and
high volatility decile portfolios was at 12% per year globally from 1986-2006. Thus, this

                                   5
anomaly has been  found over a large range of time periods and across numerous global
geographies, contrary to what the efficient markets hypothesis would predict.

   As discussed by  Jensen, Black and Scholes  (1972), one main rational explanation for
the beta  anomaly is due to the breach of  the  CAPM assumption that all investors can
borrow at the risk-free rate.  Research shows  that investor groups like pension funds and
mutual funds are restricted in the amount of borrowing they can take on and consequently,
to get a higher expected return, put an overweight in more volatile assets instead of using
leverage (Frazzini  and  Pedersen, 2014). Thus, investors are not able  to maximize their
Sharpe ratio, as they  lack the  ability  to leverage  the  market  portfolio to gain a higher
expected return (Kourtis, 2016). For example, Boguth and  Simutin  (2018)  find  that  time
variations  to leverage constraints  impact asset prices through  changes to  the pricing
kernel, where high-risk assets appreciate disproportionately to their true worth. This leads
investors  of  such  stocks  to gain lower risk-adjusted returns than if they were to lever up
and invest in lower risk stocks.  In addition,  a similar study by  Jylhä  (2018)  showed  that
changes in US laws on margin requirements, which  is  used as  a proxy for leverage
constraints,  lead  investors  to  excessively tilt their portfolios towards  more volatile stocks.
For our Swedish setting,  a large aspect to  borrowing  restrictions  on investors  are  those
put in place by the European parliament and the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority
(Finansinspektionen, 2018).

   Building on  the  findings  regarding leverage constraints,  Frazzini and Pedersen (2014)
show  how this  leads  to  a  flatter  Security Market Line (SML) than predicated by the
CAPM.  To account for this,  Frazzini and Pedersen (2014)  introduce a model that
incorporates  funding constraints, where  the slope of the  SML  is influenced by the degree
of  tightness,  i.e.  the Lagrange  multiplier  (𝜓𝑡),  of  these  constraints  on  the average investor
in the market.  The  equilibrium required return for a security  i,  is  highlighted in Eq.  (1)
below  (see  Appendix  A  for  a  definition of variables).

                                         $          %             $
                              𝐸!%𝑟!"#'  =  𝑟  + 𝜓!  + 𝛽!𝜆!                        (1)

   Additionally, the market risk premium (𝜆!)  in  Eq. (1),  is  defined  by  Frazzini  and
Pedersen  (2014) as  in  Eq.  (2)  below.

                                    &       %
                               𝜆!  =  𝐸!(𝑟!"#) − 𝑟  − 𝜓!                         (2)

   This demonstrates  that  when a funding constraint is prevalent (𝜓!  >  0), the  SML  is
flatter as securities with a beta below one will have a premium, as shown in  Eq.  (3),  and
securities with a beta above one will be discounted, as shown in  Eq.  (4).

                                                     $              $
                                𝜓!  − 𝛽!𝜓!  >  0 , 𝛽!>1                           (3)

                                                     $              $
                                𝜓!  − 𝛽!𝜓!  <  0 , 𝛽!<1                           (4)

                                   6
   Further,  the relationship between a security’s alpha  (𝛼)  with respect to the market  is
demonstrated in Eq. (5). This equation highlights how a lower beta leads to a higher alpha,
Frazzini and Pedersen’s  (2014)  first prediction.

                                             $                 '
                                 𝛼! =  𝜓!(1 − 𝛽! )                            (5)

   Additionally, Frazzini and Pedersen  (2014)  move on to discuss how those investors
who are unconstrained can take advantage of this anomaly, by building a  self-financing
portfolio that goes long low beta and short high beta. To construct this BAB factor,
Frazzini and Pedersen  (2014)  use the formula represented in Eq.  (6). The exact
methodology for calculating weighted betas and returns is described in our methodology
section.

                        ()(     #   +       %     #   ,      %
                       𝑟!"#  =   " (𝑟!"# − 𝑟 ) −   # (𝑟!"# − 𝑟 )                  (6)
                                   *!                *!

   This leads into their second proposition, represented in Eq. (7), which portrays positive
expected returns for BAB that increase with a larger spread in beta, shown in Eq.  (8), and
with a greater funding constraint (𝜓!) (Frazzini  and  Pedersen, 2014).

                                            #   "
                                   ()(    *! -*!
                               𝐸!(𝑟!"# )  =   " #  𝜓!>0                          (7)
                                                *! *!

                                 ,     +     +  ,
                                   (𝛽!  −  𝛽! )/(𝛽! 𝛽! )                              (8)

   Lastly, Frazzini and Pedersen  (2014)  predict that shocks to the portfolio constraints,
or margin requirements, create short term losses for the BAB portfolio as its required
return increases but then leads to long-term gains. They represent this through Eq. (9) and
Eq. (10), showing that an increase in leverage constraints leads to a contemporaneous loss
of the BAB factor;

                                      $%$
                                            ./!
                                    &  <  0                            (9)
                                    .0!

and an increased future required return;

                                       $%$
                                           .1!(/!'( )
                                   &   >  0                          (10)
                                    .0!

F.  Our Contribution

   In our study, we  extended  the research by Frazzini and Pedersen  (2014)  to a Swedish
setting by examining the beta anomaly in the Swedish market between 2011  and  2023.
We use a similar  logic as  the one outlined above, where the  Lagrange  multiplier  accounts
for the  flatness of the SML, and  alphas  are  assumed to decrease in beta  (Eq. (5)).  To
construct our BAB factor, we use  Eq.  (6) but adapted with  new  datasets  to  account  for  a
comprehensive  Swedish analysis compared to Frazzini and  Pedersen’s  (2014)  more
general international proxies to analyze the BAB factor in Sweden. More specifically, we

                                   7
use the  Nasdaq Stockholm exchange, the  Swedish  10-year government bond instead of
the US  Treasury bill as  the risk-free rate  and the  Swedish FF3 and  FFC4  model  instead
of  general international versions. In addition, research question  4  builds on Eq. (9) and
(10), but we adapt the method by Frazzini and Pedersen (2014) by using the STED-Spread
instead of the US TED-Spread. Additionally, we  extend  Frazzini and Pedersen’s (2014)
analysis on  underlying economics  driving the beta anomaly  in  Sweden,  by using data on
the   ownership   structure   for   assets   in   the   Swedish   market.   This   enhances   our
understanding of how the investment behavior of different groups contributes to the beta
anomaly, thereby expanding the general knowledge on the subject.

                            III.  Methodology

   We create  beta sorted portfolios, a betting against beta  (BAB)  factor that goes long
low  beta  securities  and short  high beta  securities,  analyze  ownership  characteristics  that
can help explain the beta anomaly as well as analyzing how changing funding constraints
affect  a potential anomaly.

A. Beta Calculation

   To calculate  betas, we  utilize  the  method  described by  the  Swedish House of  Finance
(Aytug, Fu and Sodini,  2020),  where the beta coefficient is the sensitivity of stock  “i”  to
the  excess  market return.  Betas are calculated  using  the covariance between the  excess
asset return  and the excess market return, divided by the  variance of the excess market
return  (Eq.  (11)).

                                                 𝑀       𝑓   𝑖       𝑓            𝑀       𝑓
                       𝛽  =  𝐶𝑜𝑣(𝑟  − 𝑟 , 𝑟 − 𝑟 )/𝑉𝑎𝑟(𝑟  − 𝑟 )                  (11)

   Frazzini and Pedersen  (2014)  analyzed  the BAB factor for  Sweden  until 2012,  and
since  we  intend  to update their findings, we  collect  observations from 2009 to 2023.  In
our  methodology, we face constraints on utilizing multiple years for training data, as
expanding the training period decreases the testing period.  However,  a too  short training
period  could pose challenges due to a potential impact of period specific factors, such as
macroeconomic conditions  in specific years. To account for this, we construct betas
utilizing two different methods.  In the first method,  referred to as “Method 1”,  we use a
two-year  training period  (2009-2010)  for calculating betas  and then  keep  them  constant
for the remainder of the period (2011-2023). In the second method, referred to as “Method
2”,  we  use a similar  method to  that of  Frazzini and Pedersen  (2014),  regarding  rolling
betas over the calculation period.  Using  Method 1  offers a straightforward approach that
is easier to implement, reduces computational complexity  and facilitates  our  ownership
and STED-Spread analysis. By keeping betas constant, it is assumed that the fundamental
characteristics of assets do not change  over longer periods  of time,  despite short-term
fluctuations.  However,  by calculating betas  only  once, there  is  a risk that  they  do  not

                                   8
accurately  reflect  the market dynamics during the entire period. This could  cause  our
estimates  to be  biased  and affect the validity of conclusions drawn about  the portfolio
performance. For example,  most  betas  in our sample are  calculated starting in 2009
following a  period where the fall in  the Swedish  GDP growth was the largest since the
great depression of 1929-1933 (Lindvall, 2012).  However,  the  Swedish economy
recovered quickly, bouncing back towards the third quarter of 2009, and showing a GDP
growth of 6.1% in  2010  (Sveriges  Riksbank, 2020).  To  account for any unusual  results,
we incorporate  Method 2, mirroring Frazzini and Pedersen's  (2014)  beta calculations, as
a robustness check to validate our approach  for  calculating betas.  In  Method 2,  we
calculate  time-series  betas over time, allowing  us  to adapt  the betas to  changes in market
conditions.  We acknowledge potential limitations in this method  as well, such as the
difficulty in determining our model's most appropriate calculation window and being
unable to evaluate BAB returns for the entire first calculation window.  Recognizing
potential limitations inherent in both methods, we utilize both sets of betas to calculate
our BAB factor and compare the resulting outcomes as a robustness check.

   For  Method 1, covariances between the market and the asset return are estimated on
monthly data over a two-year training period between 2009 and 2010, for each individual
asset in our sample.  With  stocks entering  the market after 2009, a  two-year  calculation
period from the moment the stock enters the market  is applied.  For example,  if  a  stock
enters the market in January 2015, the covariance between the market and the stock return
will be calculated between  January  2015 and  December  2016.  Due to our two-year
training period for betas, stocks listed after 2021 are excluded from our analysis, as they
cannot contribute to  our portfolios.  We  also  exclude delisted stocks, as  we  will  elaborate
upon in the data  description.  Variances for the market portfolio are estimated on monthly
returns  over  a  two-year period,  using OMXS30 as a market index.  Market variance used
in beta  calculations  for stocks that entered the market after 2009 are  adapted so that the
market variance  is  calculated  over a  two-year  period after the moment the stock was
introduced to the market. Having calculated betas over a  two-year  training period, we
keep them  constant  after  the end of the training period. In accordance with Frazzini and
Pedersen  (2014), we account for outliers by shrinking our time-series beta estimates
towards its  cross-sectional  mean, as seen in  Eq.  (12).

                                                     𝑇𝑆                  𝑋𝑆
                           𝛽%  = 𝑤 𝛽%  + (1 − 𝑤 )𝛽%                        (12)
                                                                                                 !               𝑖     𝑖                                  𝑖        𝑖

   Our final betas  are  the  weighted time series beta plus the weighted cross-sectional
mean. To keep it simple  and  ensure  comparability with  Frazzini and Pedersen  (2014),  we
follow  their method  of setting the weight to 0.6 and the cross-sectional mean to 1 for all
periods across all assets.  As  the shrinking factor is the same across all periods it does not
change the ranking of the betas and  does not  affect how securities are sorted into
portfolios.  On the  contrary, it will  impact  the later calculated BAB factor,  as  it is
calculated by using the beta to scale the long and short sides of the portfolio.  Thus,  noise
from the  ex-ante  betas might affect the construction of the BAB factors.  However, like

                                   9
Frazzini and Pedersen (2014), we focus our inference on realized abnormal returns, which
means that mismatches between ex ante and realized betas will be picked up by the
realized loading in the regression.  Hence, when we regress our portfolios on risk factors
such as SMB, HML and UMD, the realized betas will not be shrunk as the ex-ante betas
above. This means only the  ex-ante  betas are subject to selection bias.

   For  Method 2,  betas are estimated using rolling regressions of excess  security  returns
on the excess market return. Instead of monthly data,  we  look at  daily market and asset
returns, which  strengthens  the accuracy of covariance estimates  as they  improve  with  a
greater sample frequency (Merton, 1980). The betas are estimated using Eq. (11) as in the
previous method. Volatilities and correlations are estimated separately since correlations
tend to move slower than volatilities (de Santis  and  Gerard, 1997). In accordance with
Frazzini and Pedersen  (2014), a five-year rolling correlation and one-year window for the
standard deviations  are used  to estimate volatilities. Also, three-day log returns are used
for correlations while one-day log returns are used for volatilities.  We  use the three-day
log returns to  account for  non-synchronous trading  in our  correlation  estimates, which
should increase  the credibility of our results and ensure  that the BAB performance  is not
driven  by  any  distortions from  such  an  effect.  Lastly, as with  Method 1, a shrinking
process is made to account for  outliers.  The same rationale regarding the shrinking factor,
as applied in  Method 1, also pertains to  Method 2, where the  shrinking process does not
influence how betas are sorted into portfolios, but it does impact the  ex-ante betas used
for the  construction of  portfolios and the  subsequently  calculated BAB factor.

B.  BAB Portfolio Construction

   To construct the BAB portfolio, we follow the method described by Frazzini and
Pedersen  (2014). We divide the sample of assets into two  portfolios:  one long portfolio
containing assets with low betas and one short portfolio containing assets with high betas.
We sort assets by beta in ascending order, rank them, and assign them to a portfolio based
on their ranking. The low beta portfolio includes all  stocks with a beta below the median
of their asset class, while the high beta portfolio includes all stocks with a beta above their
median. These beta rankings are updated monthly. To ensure the portfolio is self-
financing, we weight securities according to their beta rankings, assigning higher weights
to lower beta assets in the low beta portfolio and higher weights to higher beta assets in
the high beta portfolio. To formalize, let  𝑧  be the  𝑛  × 1 vector of beta ranks  𝑧$  =
#                                                  <
 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘(𝛽$!)  at portfolio formation and  𝑧 ̅ =  1;𝑧/𝑛  be the average rank  where  1;  is an n
:
x 1 vector  of ones and n the number of  securities. Further,  𝑘  is a normalizing constant
                   <                                                   <                   <
where  𝑘  =  2/1;|𝑧 − 𝑧 |̅ .  Also, our model  ensures that  1;𝑤,  =  1 and  1;𝑤+  =  1.  The
weight of security  𝑖  within the high  and  low portfolio is then given from the methodology
shown in Eq.  (13)  and  (14).

                                     "
                                𝑤,,$  =  𝑘(𝑧$  −  𝑧 ̅) , if  𝑧$  >  𝑧 ̅                          (13)

                                  10
                                     -
                                𝑤+,$  =  𝑘(𝑧$  −  𝑧 ̅) , if  𝑧$  <  𝑧 ̅                           (14)

   Both portfolios are rebalanced monthly and adjusted  by leveraging the low beta
portfolio and de-leveraging the high beta portfolio  to maintain an ex-ante beta of one  at
portfolio formation.  This  ensures  that the self-financing portfolio achieves market
neutrality,  and that  the BAB-factor is self-financing  with  a beta of zero.  This setup allows
the overall investment to remain balanced in terms of market exposure, irrespective of
individual  security  volatilities. The return of the BAB portfolio is  highlighted  in Eq.  (15)
and  Eq. (16)  defines the  variables  from Eq. (15).

                      ()(     #   +       %      #   ,      %
                     𝑟!"#  =   " (𝑟!"# − 𝑟>?@) −   # (𝑟!"# − 𝑟A?>?@) ,               (15)
                                *!                  *!

where

                         +        <         ,       <          +      <
                       𝑟!"# =  𝑟!"#𝑤+  ,  𝑟!"# =  𝑟!"#𝑤,  ,  𝛽! =  𝛽!𝑤+,                 (16)

                                          ,      <
                                   and 𝛽!  =  𝛽!𝑤,  .

   BAB portfolios are constructed, and regressions are run  using both sets of betas  in
accordance with  method  Method 1  and  2.

C.  Construction  of Beta Portfolios

   In addition to  a  BAB factor, we  test  our first research question  by  creating  three
different portfolios based on the beta characteristics  of the  securities  in our sample. One
low, one medium and one high beta portfolio. The portfolios are created through ranking
the beta observations in ascending order and splitting into three equally large portfolios.
We calculate monthly return and rebalance the portfolios on a monthly  frequency, for
both sets of betas.

D. Testing the Performance of our Portfolios

   To measure the performance of the high,  medium,  and low portfolios, as well as the
BAB portfolio, we make several OLS regressions with different risk factors. We look at
the CAPM  (Eq. (17)),  FF3  model  (Eq. (18))  and the  FFC4  model  (Eq. (19)).  Equations
                                                                 BCD
(17),  (18)  and  (19)  show the methodology for the regressions, where  𝑟    is the return of
each specific portfolio (high, medium, low  and  BAB). The market risk premium is
calculated using the  market return  minus the risk-free rate, while the FFC4  factors  are
taken from  AQR’s  website.

                       BCD     %     BCD     &EC  0     %
                       𝑟!   − 𝑟  =  𝛼    + 𝛽    (𝑟  − 𝑟 )                  (17)

          BCD     %     BCD     &EC  0     %     F&(         ,&+
          𝑟!   − 𝑟  =  𝛼    + 𝛽    (𝑟  − 𝑟 ) + 𝛽    𝑆𝑀𝐵!  + 𝛽    𝐻𝑀𝐿!      (18)

                                  11
 BCD     %     BCD     &EC   0     %      F&(         ,&+         &G&
𝑟!   − 𝑟  =  𝛼    + 𝛽    (𝑟  − 𝑟 ) + 𝛽    𝑆𝑀𝐵!  + 𝛽    𝐻𝑀𝐿!  + 𝛽    𝑀𝑂𝑀!  (19)

E.  Ownership  Structure

   We test our third research question by looking at the ownership structure of the stocks
within our sample. We refine our dataset to isolate the top 15 entities with the highest and
lowest betas according to  the  betas  computed in Method 1.  This is  to  avoid the
recategorization of low,  medium,  and high  on a monthly basis,  which  we  would have
done using  method 2.  Subsequently, we extract information on the 15 principal investors
in each of these 30 companies from the database. We  categorize  the  owners into investor
types and investigate the aggregate value invested in low and high beta stocks, segmented
by investor class. Recognizing the potential disparity in the scale of low versus high beta
firms,  we  apply  a  market  capitalization-weighted  approach  to  their  investments
throughout the period under review.  The analysis is limited to the period between 2011
and 2019 to isolate  negative COVID-19  externalities, such as  the effects of  a short-term
increased government ownership  in equities  during  COVID-19  (OECD,  2020).  We
compute the total value invested by each category of investor annually from 2011 to 2019,
as well as the average investment into high versus low betas per year. These yearly figures
are averaged to yield an overarching view of the investment held by the distinct groups
over the specified timeframe.  Additionally, we examine variances within investor groups
to assess the homogeneity of our samples. This analysis helps determine whether we can
infer any consistent behaviors or if the observed variances suggest random behavior.

F. Implications from Tightening Funding Conditions

   The concluding segment of our methodology examines research question  4,  by
regressing the BAB-factor against a  STED-Spread  to assess how periods of tightening
funding conditions impact the return of the BAB-factor. This approach aligns with
Frazzini and Pedersen's (2014) methodology, but we adapt it to a Swedish context by
using the Swedish  3-month  government bond and the  3-month  STIBOR rate  for
calculating  the  STED-Spread.  Similar  to  the  ownership  analysis, we  use a  test period  of
2011-2019,  which intends  to limit the effects of unusual macroeconomic policies
observed  during  COVID-19.  For example, the  Swedish Central  Bank  introduced  policies
like reducing  the overnight lending rate to banks and  increased  access to liquidity  to
stimulate  the  economy  during  this  period  (Sveriges  Riksbank,  2023),  which  can
significantly impact the  STED-Spread.  Therefore, we  want to  exclude these  temporary
irregular market conditions  from our  funding conditions analysis.

                                  12
                          IV.  Data Description

   Table 1 shows summary statistics for the data  we use  throughout the thesis.  When
calculating  asset returns, covariances and correlations we use Refinitiv Eikon’s database
to get closing  prices  on all primary and active stocks listed on the Nasdaq Stockholm
main market from 2009  -  2023. This  enables us  to  include  a training period  to  calculate
betas  as well as a sufficiently large  span of years  to conduct an analysis.  After cleaning
the  data (as described in  the  methodology section),  our  total dataset consists of 319
equities, which is 42 stocks less compared to the 362 listed stocks on Nasdaq Stockholm
as of December 2023 (NASDAQ NORDIC, 2023). Additionally, stock data from Refinitiv
Eikon  does not include  delisted stocks. Thus, stocks that were present in the data  from
2009 but delisted before 2024 were not part of our sample.  We recognize that this
approach may limit our portfolio diversification, as not all equities are included.  To
explore  whether  this  impacts the returns of  our portfolios, we  conduct Monte Carlo
simulations to observe the effect of  stocks dropping out  of the market (see  Appendix B).
The  main  benefit of using only the primary market  is  that  our data  is  not subject to highly
volatile stocks such as penny stocks.  However,  a  drawback of this exclusion is that
abnormal returns  tend to be  overrepresented in penny  stocks  or lottery-like stocks.  (Bali,
Brown, Murray and Tang, 2017).

   For the risk-free rate, we use the monthly Swedish government 10-year bond  yield
from 2009  -  2023, which  is available in the Swedish  Central  Bank’s (Riksbanken)
database. The 10-year bond yield is used to get the  most accurate  term sheet, as our
regressions will be over a  13  and a  9-year period. To capture  a proxy for the Swedish
market, we  look at  the monthly return of OMX Stockholm 30, consisting of the  30 most
traded stocks on  the  Stockholm Exchange.

   In  estimating alphas for the  three  portfolios and our BAB factor, we collect data on
excess market return, size (SML), value (HML) and momentum (UMD) factors for
Sweden. Monthly excess market return between 2009 and 2023  are  computed taking the
market return (OMXS30) minus the risk-free rate  (10-year  Swedish Government Bond).
SML, HML and UMD can be found on AQR’s website, where they regularly post updated
monthly factors for a list of countries, including Sweden. It is important to note that Table
1 shows an unusual trend over the tested period where both HML and SMB show negative
returns  in Sweden.

   For  the  STED-Spread, we look at  the difference between the interest rate banks can
lend to each other over a three-month time frame and the interest rate at which the
government is able to borrow money for a three-month period.  To  construct  the  STED-
Spread, we use the  3-month  government bond and the 3-month STIBOR-rate, which can
be found in  Riksbanken's  and the Swedish Financial Benchmark Facilities databases.

   Finally,  we use  the  Holdings database to access ownership details of the companies
within our research scope. We apply the Holdings filter specifically targeting Small-,

                                  13
Medium-,   and   High-cap   stocks   listed   on   the   Swedish   exchange,   comprising
approximately 370 stocks. These are matched with our existing dataset used to calculate
betas. We refine our dataset to include only those stocks that have been active in the
market since 2009, aligning with our intent to train betas over a two-year span,
subsequently facilitating analysis from 2011 to 2019. The refined dataset  is  divided into
seven distinct classifications: Mutual Funds,  Asset  Management  Firms, Pension Funds,
Insurance Funds, Holding Companies, Strategic Acquirers, Individual Investors and
Other  Investors.  See Appendix  E  for the classification of the different  investor  types.

Table  1  shows summary statistics for the data used in our research.  The summary statistics include the
dataset, frequency, start date, end date, number of observations, minimum value, maximum value, and mean
value. Number of observations corresponds to the number of dates  multiplied by  observations per date,  in
the data for all datasets.

           V. The Beta Anomaly in the Swedish Market

   The following section  presents  the results of  research  questions  1 and 2, followed by
a section  analyzing  our findings. We display results in both  scenarios of  using  Method 1
and  2  when  calculating  betas. To determine significance, we use a confidence level of
95%, resulting in a p-value of less than 0.05. The p-values from our regressions are
incorporating t-values and degrees of freedom, and thus we can consider them  to
determine significance.

A.  BAB  Factor  Shows  a  Positive  Alpha  that  Decreases  in  Beta

   To test research questions  1 and 2,  we regress the excess return of our three beta sorted
portfolios  and  the  BAB  portfolio on the  different factor models. This  enables us  to
consider alphas with respect to the market  (MKT), size  (SMB),  value  (HML),  and
momentum (UMD) factors.

                                  14
   Table 2  demonstrates  the result from our regressions using  Method 1  betas.  From the
output, it is visible that  the  BAB  portfolio  shows  positive  and significant  alphas  under all
controls. Looking at the high,  medium,  and low beta portfolios, we find statistical
significance for a positive alpha in the low and mid beta portfolios for all the factor
models. For the high beta portfolios, we find a significant alpha for the FFC4 model but
not  under  the other  models. From  Table  2, it is also evident that alpha  increases  as beta
decreases  under all controls. Looking at Sharpe  ratios,  they  are  higher  for  low betas
compared to high betas, implying a higher return for the same level of risk. Graph 1 shows
the cumulative return from investing 1 000 SEK at time t = 0 in each beta sorted portfolio,
rebalanced each month.  The  graph  shows how  low beta  portfolios  outperform mid and
high beta portfolios, and our regressions suggest that this outperformance is still present
when  considering  risk.

Table 2 displays regressions results, volatility and Sharpe ratio using  Method 1  betas.  We sort betas  into
three equally weighted portfolios consisting of high, medium, and low betas. Alphas are calculated through
OLS regressions where the monthly excess return of the portfolio is the dependent variable, and the factors
in the factor  models the independent variables. The factor in CAPM is market excess return, the factors in
FF3 are market excess market return, SMB and HML, and the factors in FFC4 are excess market return,
SMB, HML and UMD. P-values are shown under each alpha value.  Sharpe ratios  is annualized over the
calculation period. See Tables 8-10 in Appendix F for exact correlations between each portfolio and specific
factors.

                                  15
        Graph  1:  Investing 1 000 SEK in  Method 1  Beta  Portfolios  at  Time  t = 0

The graph displays the cumulative return from investing 1 000 SEK in each beta sorted portfolio at time 0
(2011). We divide our stocks into three equally large portfolios, where  the  Low Beta Portfolio consists  of
stocks with lowest betas, Mid Beta Portfolio consists  of  the  second  lowest  stocks  and High Beta Portfolio
consists  of all stocks with the highest betas.

   To  strengthen  the  robustness  of  our method, we  test  research question  1  and  2  with
betas from  Method 2.  Using  this method,  we  find statistical significance for  positive
alphas generated by the BAB factor across all models (as shown in Table 3). Additionally,
the alphas  for the low and medium  beta portfolios  are positive and  statistically significant
in all models. We do not find significance for the high beta portfolio with the CAPM and
FF3  models. However, we observe  a significant alpha  with  the FFC4 model, consistent
with the results from Method 1. With all models except FFC4, we see an increase in alpha
as  beta  decreases.  Importantly,  across all models,  the  significance of the alpha  is greater
the lower the beta.  Additionally, the Sharpe  ratio declines as beta increases, further
suggesting  outperformance by the low betas  over high. Lastly,  Graph  2  plotting  the
cumulative return of high, medium, and low beta portfolios over time shows how the low
beta portfolio seems to offer a higher return  relative  to the high beta portfolio.  However,
compared to  Graph  1  with constant betas,  Graph  2  shows  a  closer relationship  between
the low and  mid  beta  portfolios. Despite this,  the low beta  portfolio  still  clearly
outperforms the mid beta  portfolio.

                                  16
The Table displays regressions results, volatility and Sharpe ratio using Method 2 betas. We sort betas into
three equally weighted portfolios corresponding to high, medium, and low betas. Alphas are calculated
through OLS regressions where the monthly excess return of the portfolio is the dependent variable, and
the factors in the factor models the independent variables. The factor in CAPM is market excess return, the
factors in FF3 are market excess market return, SMB and HML, and the factors in FFC4 are excess market
return, SMB, HML and UMD. P-values are shown under each alpha value.  Sharpe ratios  are  annualized
over the calculation period.  See  Tables  11-13 in Appendix F for exact correlations between each portfolio
and specific factors.

        Graph  2:  Investing 1 000 SEK in  Method 2  Beta  Portfolio  at  Time  t = 0

The graph displays the cumulative return from investing 1 000 SEK in each beta sorted portfolio at time 0,
being 2011. We divide our stocks into three equally large portfolios, where  the  Low Beta Portfolio consist
of the  stocks with lowest betas,  the  Mid Beta Portfolio  of the stocks with the  second  lowest  betas  and  the
High Beta Portfolio consist of all stocks with the highest betas.

B. Analyzing the Performance of Low vs High Beta and the BAB Factor

   It  is evident that our results  show strong support  for a beta anomaly in Sweden  using
both Method 1 and 2, similarly to what Frazzini and Pedersen (2014) found in the US. To

                                  17
test the robustness of  these  findings,  we  isolate the  years from 2020 to 2023 and find
similar results, suggesting credible results  even when accounting for potential COVID-
19 effects.  Interestingly, we  discover  this  anomaly  even when  excluding  low-quality
stocks, as  all securities  analyzed  are on the Nasdaq Stockholm exchange. Bradrania,
Veron and Wu (2023) investigate the impact of  high-quality versus junk (low-quality)
stocks on the beta anomaly and find that the beta anomaly is significantly larger for junk
stocks. Their results hold for several country portfolios, including Sweden  which
highlights that an even larger effect may be found  if we were to  consider the entire stock
population in Sweden.

   To  further  motivate  our  findings,  we  conduct  Monte  Carlo  simulations  (100
simulations)  where  we  randomly  exclude  20%  of stocks  for each month.  This is to
simulate  delisting from  the  dataset,  and  we can  observe how it impacts  our  results.  Using
a  20%  threshold  represents  a  more  extreme  case  of  delisting,  ensuring  that  the
performance of the BAB strategy remains consistent  for a narrow sample and  during
periods with a high rate of securities leaving the exchange. The exact findings can be seen
in Appendix B and show that the mean and median alphas of BAB returns remain positive
and significant under all controls for both  method  1 and 2 betas.  This  support  increases
the validity of our findings as it  reduces the  potential effect  of  having too little
diversification due to delisted stocks.  However, it is worth mentioning that  for some
simulations the alphas did not remain significant, which can be observed through the max
p-values not remaining under the 5% threshold  for  all controls.

                VI. Who owns high/low beta stocks?

   Our research  further  investigates trends in holding characteristics across  different
investor groups. Building  on  the  finding  of a beta anomaly in the Swedish market, we
employ holdings data to offer insights into why the BAB factor works in the Swedish
market. We begin by presenting the outcomes of research question  3, followed by a
detailed analysis of our findings.  We analyze  the owners of the highest and lowest beta
stocks with regards to the  betas calculated  during the initial period from 2009  -  2020 with
Method 1 betas. We deem this sufficient considering our similar results for a beta anomaly
using both Method 1 and 2 betas.

A. Holdings Data

   Table  4  summarizes our findings from analyzing the yearly average market cap
weighted investment,  into high versus low beta stocks over the period between 2011  -
2019. The ownership structure for the different investor types in our sample indicates that
strategic  acquirers,  mutual funds,  individual  investors,  and  asset management firms

                                  18
exhibit  the greatest absolute difference in ownership between low and high beta stocks.
Specifically,  mutual  funds  and  asset management firms  prefer  high beta  stocks  whereas
individual investors  and  strategic acquirers  show a  preference for low beta  investments
over  the examined period.  Further,  pension  funds,  insurance  funds and  other investors
show a smaller difference between their preferences for beta, but for all these three groups
we see more of a tilt towards high  securities.

Table  4  presents  the  market-cap weighted average  ownership across different investor types, segmented
into low and high beta categories. The percentages show how much of the group’s capital is invested in
high versus low betas. It displays both the absolute differences in investment between the low and high beta
groups and the corresponding percentages of ownership.

B. Analyzing Ownership Percentage

   The following section  examines  the trends  observed  in  the data from our  ownership
analysis.  When analyzing ownership percentages, we impose  specific  limitations on our
analysis. First, the category labeled "other investors" consists of a diverse array of entities,
ranging from labor unions to universities, each serving different functions. Given the
varied nature of this group, we choose to exclude them from our ownership analysis.
Second, the relatively low ownership percentages of the  strategic acquirers and  holding
companies at  5.8% and  1.1%, respectively, along with their  large heterogeneity in
investment preferences, we choose to also exclude these two groups from our analysis.
Instead, we concentrate our analysis on the other five investor types, being  asset
management firms,  insurance funds,  individual investors,  pension funds, and  mutual
funds.  It is  worth  highlighting  that our analysis did not include data on retail investors.
Instead, the individual investors in our study are predominantly wealthy individuals or
corporate personnel with “skin in the game”. This means that a portion of these investors
probably have not actively purchased the stocks but instead received them as part of stock
compensation  for  their  involvement  with  the  companies.  Consequently,  drawing
conclusions about the effects of leverage  constraints on these investors is challenging.
Therefore, our focus will primarily be on institutional forces rather than individuals.
However, given the significant presence of individual investors in the Holdings data, we
will still analyze their behavior to see if any meaningful  insights can be  found.

                                  19
C. Individual Investors

   Graph 3 illustrates that individual investors allocate 78% of their portfolios to low beta
stocks and 22% to high beta stocks. The sample displays  some  degree of variability in
portfolio tilting, evident in the 22% who allocate more to high beta stocks compared to
the majority, who favor low beta stocks.

   These findings would go against Frazzini and Pedersen’s  (2014)  predictions, as
individuals   are   leverage   constrained   due   to   margin   requirements   from   banks.
Nevertheless, it's important to consider that our findings may be attributed to  our sample
being comprised of  only high-net-worth individuals, as all  participants  are  among  the 15
largest  Swedish  investors  in  the  companies  under  analysis.  Such  high-net-worth
individuals  typically  own large amounts of equity and therefore cannot be classified as
leverage constrained in the same way as the typical retail investor. This is a limitation of
the data available on Holdings, as we cannot see the behaviors of typical, more small-
scale retail investors.

   Additionally, it is important to consider that large shareholders in a company typically
have a great deal of involvement in the company. For example,  there might  be board
members  or  people from  senior management  present in our data, who  choose to invest
from their private information  (Aboody  and  Lev, 2002).  Research  also  shows  that  many
heavily invested individuals are so from receiving stock options at the company they work
for  (Cremers, Driessen, Maenhout and Weinbaum, 2009). Thus, the nature of these high-
net-worth individuals’  large stake in a company could be driven by private information
or “skin in the game” rather than a decision based on an asset’s volatility. This would
explain why we do  not see a larger tilt towards high beta for this group.  For example,
from our data we can see that in the high beta group,  the largest shareholder of individuals
at New Wave Group in 2016 is Torsten Jansson, who is the founder and CEO of the
company since 1990.  Additionally, in the low beta group, we for instance see that the
largest individual shareholder at the company Abliva in 2017 was Eskil Elmér who has
been  the  Chief  Scientific  Officer  at the company from 2008-2024.  Alternatively,  other
explanations may be influencing these outcomes. For instance, it is possible that  low beta
companies are offering more equity as part of their compensation packages. This presents
a promising direction for future  research  within the scope of this topic.

                                  20
                  Graph  3:  High vs Low betas for  Individual  Investors

The graph shows the average invested fraction in high versus low betas between 2011 and 2019 by
individual investors, as well as the fraction of  investors investing more than 50% into high or low betas.

D. Asset Management Firms

   As portrayed in  Graph  4,  there is a 52% difference in the average ownership in high
beta compared to low beta entities for the asset management firms over the sample period.
On average, the group invests 76% in high beta firms and 24% in low beta firms. Of all
the capital invested,  asset management firms  account for 16.9%  (Table 4),  implying that
they are one of the biggest investors. Upon examining the sample of  asset management
firms, their investment behavior appears relatively homogenous.  When  analyzed the in-
sample variance in holding characteristics by calculating the  yearly  market  cap adjusted
average ownership percentage, our  findings indicate that 65% of the firms allocate more
than 50% of their capital invested  to  high-beta companies, suggesting a preference for
high beta stocks.  Also, the 35% investing more than 50% into low beta entities only
account for about 18% of the overall invested capital by the group, explaining the steeper
average investment curve.  Graph 5  displays the portion of average investment per year
into high versus low beta stocks for  asset management firms, where we  can  observe a
relatively consistent pattern where high beta stocks are favored over time.

   When  investigating  the  market  forces  influencing  the observed  behavior, a  potential
driver for the  investment patterns  in  favoring  high beta firms could  stem from  European
regulations  such as  the  Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR). The law applies to a
wide range of financial institutions, including credit institutions and  asset management
firms. It sets out prudential requirements these entities must meet, focusing particularly
on the quality and quantity of capital to ensure financial stability and protect investors.
The CRR includes a leverage ratio as a supplementary measure to the risk-based capital
requirements, which according to the European parliament and the council of the
European union is intended to become a binding requirement, ensuring that all institutions
must maintain a minimum standard of non-risk-based capital against their total exposures

                                  21
(Official Journal of the European Union,  2013).  The regulatory capital constraints,
including  a maximum leverage ratio,  impose limits on  asset management  firms' capacity
for excessive  leverage. Consequently, they may move  towards riskier assets  in  pursuit  of
potentially  higher returns on equity. This risk-return tradeoff, managed  under the
constraints  of  the  Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR), is grounded in  the fact that
higher beta stocks  inherently entail greater returns alongside increased  risk, as outlined
by  Lundblad  (2007). Thus, it could be a strategic choice for  asset management firms to
invest in stocks where their return on equity should be increased, especially when their
leverage is restricted.

   Also, since CRR is ensuring that firms hold sufficient capital against their investments,
the regulations might encourage more calculated risk-taking,  being another possible
explanation for the skewness towards high beta investments. For example, due to the CRR
regulations, a firm might aim to maximize the return per unit of exposure. Since the
leverage ratio limits total exposure but not the risk or return of that exposure directly,
choosing assets with  higher expected returns (like high beta stocks) can be a move to
optimize returns on limited allowable leverage. Such behavior by significant market
participants could influence the BAB factor. If many asset management firms adopt a
similar strategy,  the  trend  could  help  explain the  beta anomaly observed in the Swedish
market.  When investors systematically overinvest  in high beta stocks,  it drives  up the
value  of securities, often  higher  compared to  the underlying fundamentals (Becker  and
Ivashina, 2015).  Such  consistent  favor  for  high-beta assets, could signal a departure from
market efficiency as outlined by conventional financial theories. Looking at the yearly
average return from  our  BAB factor, we observe an increase  from 3.24% in 2012 to
11.11% in 2013, when CRR was introduced. Additionally, on a more detailed level, when
CRR was introduced in June  of 2013  (Official Journal of the European Union,  2013),  the
                                                                                        1
average BAB return  went from 2%  before June  to  7%  after June  in  2013 .

1
 Numbers are calculated by looking at the average monthly BAB return with Method 1 betas before June
2013 and after June 2013. That is, the average BAB return between Jan 2011 and Jun 2013 was 2% while
the average BAB return between Jul 2013 and Dec 2023 was 7%.

                                  22
            Graph 4: High vs Low Betas for Asset Management Firms

The graph shows the average invested in high versus low betas between 2011 and 2019 by  asset
management  firms.  That is, of all the average invested capital between 2011 and 2019, how much is
invested in high versus low betas. In addition,  the graph  shows the fraction of asset management firms
investing more than 50% of their capital invested into our firms in high versus low beta entities.

        Graph 5: Yearly Average Investment from Asset Management Firms

Graph  5  displays the fraction of average investment into high versus low beta firms per year, of  all the
capital invested by asset management firms  in our sample.

E. Mutual Funds

   Graph  6,  highlights how mutual funds invest on average 78% in high beta entities and
22% in low beta entities, resulting in an absolute difference of 56%. Examining the inter-
sample variance, we observe that  27%  of the companies in our sample allocated more
than 50% of their investments to low-beta firms. In contrast, the remaining companies
directed at least half of their investments to high-beta firms. Like the asset management

                                  23
firms, the capital directed toward low-beta investments by these companies is a minor
portion of the group's total invested capital. Specifically, within mutual funds, such
investments represent about 4% of the total, indicating that these seven firms are  in the
minority and deviate from the group's predominant investment behavior.

   Like asset management firms, European regulations restrict mutual funds from
assuming   excessive   leverage,   which   likely   influences   their   investments.   The
Undertakings for Collective Investment in Transferable Securities (UCITS) regulation
limits the ability of mutual funds to take on leverage. Specifically, UCITS restricts mutual
funds to only borrowing up to 10% of their assets and to use borrowing only for temporary
and  limited  purposes  (Official  Journal  of  the  European  Union,  2009,  Directive
2009/65/EC).  This might imply that mutual funds are seeking to adopt a strategy where
they are choosing assets with higher expected returns (like high beta stocks) to optimize
returns on limited allowable leverage. Boguth and Simutin (2018) propose a measure for
the tightness of leverage constraints and show that mutual funds switch to riskier assets
when leverage constraints tighten. When they are prohibited from using explicit leverage,
they take on leverage implicitly by investing in high beta stocks. The same phenomena
seem  to apply for our Swedish setting, where we observe mutual funds being restricted
in their leverage and investing a higher portion in high beta stocks.  Also,  Graph 7  reveals
an  interesting  trend  where  the  gap between  the average investment  in  high  and  low beta
stocks  seems to decrease  over  time. This trend could hint at  a  possible shift  in the  group's
investment  approach in the future, offering ground  for  further research.

                 Graph 6: High vs Low Betas for Mutual Funds

The graph shows the average invested fraction in high versus low betas between 2011 and 2019 by mutual
funds, as well as the  fraction of mutual funds investing more than 50% of their capital invested into our
firms in high versus low beta entities.

                                  24
              Graph 7: Yearly Average Investment for Mutual Funds

The graph displays the fraction of average investment into high versus low beta firms per year, of  all the
capital invested by mutual funds.

F. Insurance Funds

   Graph  8  shows  that on  an average group level, insurance funds invest more in high
beta (55%) compared to low beta (45%). This group exhibits much variation within its
ranks. Analyzing the market cap weighted average investment from each fund in our
sample,  half  of the funds allocated more than 50% of their total capital invested in our
sample companies to low beta firms, while  the other half  direct  more than 50% into high
beta firms.  This indicates a diverse group without a clear bias towards holding either high
or low beta firms.  Moreover, our data shows that  the greater investment in high beta
stocks across the group appears to be influenced by a few members.  Additionally, Graph
9 indicates that the average investment in high and low beta stocks has remained relatively
stable throughout  the analyzed period.

   When analyzing  the behavior from insurance funds, we focus on the Solvency 2
Directive in EU laws. The Directive was introduced in  2009  and  imposes that insurance
companies face several quantitative requirements. For instance, they must abide by
Minimum Capital Requirements (MCR), which entails holding a minimum amount of
cash to avoid regulatory intervention. Further, they must abide by Solvency Capital
Requirements (SCR), which is a  level of capital that an insurance company must hold to
cover expected losses over a one-year period with a confidence level of 99.5%. In addition
to these cash requirements, these companies must closely align their assets and liabilities
due to requirements for Asset Liability Management. This alignment ensures that cash
flows from assets can adequately meet the payment obligations from liabilities at any
given time (Official Journal of the European Union,  2009, Solvency II Directive). Thus,
we see that EIOPA, part of the European System of Financial Supervision, requires

                                  25
insurers to always maintain a significant amount of cash at hand as well as a restrictive
liability to assets ratio. These constraints would lead us to predict more of a tilt towards
high beta for insurance funds,  which is  partly  what  we find in the total amount invested.
However, we see that many insurance funds are still invested in low beta firms, which
could be explained by other requirements related to the second pillar of the Solvency 2
Directive. The second pillar requires insurers to continuously conduct an “Own Risk and
Solvency Assessment (ORSA)”, where systematic risks need to be evaluated and limited
(Official Journal of the European Union, 2009, Solvency II Directive). These limits would
encourage a movement away from riskier high beta investments into  less risky  low beta
securities.  Thus, despite constraining insurers on leverage, they are also constrained by
limits to the allowed systematic risk. This would make it challenging for insurers to tilt
their portfolio towards higher beta to gain higher returns. However, the difficulty in
assessing the exact impact is highlighted through the heterogeneity of the funds in our
sample, making it  difficult to draw any conclusion regarding the  group’s  investment
behavior.

                  Graph 8:  High vs Low  Betas for  Insurance  Funds

The graph shows the average invested fraction in high versus low betas between 2011 and 2019 by
insurance funds, as well as the fraction of insurance funds investing more than 50% of their capital invested
into our firms in high versus low beta entities.

                                  26
              Graph  9:  Yearly  Average  Investment by  Insurance  Funds

The graph displays the fraction of average investment into high versus low beta firms per year, of  all the
capital  invested by insurance funds.

G. Pension Funds

   Graph 10 demonstrates that pension funds on average invest 59% into high beta stocks
compared to 41% for low beta stocks. Examining the variance within the sample, we find
that 67% of the firms allocate more than 50% of their capital to high beta firms, whereas
33% invest more than 50% of their capital in low beta firms. Notably, the average
investment of  41% in low beta firms is significantly influenced by a single large outlier,
which allocates  68% of its capital to low beta firms and, when adjusted for market
capitalization, represents 40% of the total capital invested by the companies in our
sample. Therefore, despite some intra-sample variance there is a general trend of larger
high beta investments, which is highlighted by such outliers driving up the share invested
in low beta.

   The nature of these investment decisions can be analyzed through the Institutions for
Occupational Retirement Provision (IORP) Directive II, which aims to improve the risk
management, transparency, and governance of pension funds. Within the directive there
is a “Prudent Person Rule”, which describes how pension funds are required to invest
with prudence, diligence and avoid excessive risk-taking. This rule strictly limits the use
of derivatives for investment practices, which thus imposes constraints  on leverage.
Further,  the  directive  mandates  that  pension  funds  have  proper  risk-management
processes in place. This  incorporates  the need to continuously evaluate the risks of their
investment portfolios, including those associated with the use of leverage.  The  directive
also  enforces pension fund managers to hold a highly diverse portfolio, without exposing
it too much to one type of risk (Official Journal of the European Union,  2016). Therefore,
laws imposed on pension funds  that are  limiting  the amount of leverage they can  use,

                                  27
leads us to expect a higher investment in high beta stocks. These predictions are supported
in research from Christoffersen and Simutin (2017), who find that pension fund managers
are often evaluated in reference to a benchmark, and to beat these benchmarks the fund
managers tilt their portfolios more towards high-beta stocks and away from low-beta
stocks, even if that means a higher  level of risk.

   However,  our data indicates that  even though there is a clear  shift towards high beta
stocks, this trend  is  only  moderate.  One possible explanation for this is the nature of  the
IORP II Directive, imposing  risk management  regulations.  For example, the regulation to
limit the  overall  risk  in  their  portfolios  would indicate moving away from more risky
securities (high beta stocks) and could explain why we observe that 33% of pension funds
invest more in low beta companies, despite being constrained regarding leverage.  Graph
11 shows how the average investment into high beta stocks for pension funds  decreased
until  the end of 2016  but then  increased for the rest of the period, which might be a
consequence of the  introduction of the  IORP II Directive  in December 2016  (Official
Journal of the  European Union,  2016).  Thus, the investment behavior of pension funds
somewhat mirrors that of insurance funds, largely due to both being governed by
regulatory frameworks that have many similarities. However, the IORP II directive is less
stringent with systematic risk-taking compared to the Solvency II directive, which may
explain why pension funds lean more towards high beta firms  compared to  insurers.  In
general, the high ownership percentage of 22% (Table 5) and the preference for high beta
assets shown in our data, could imply that pension funds are one institutional force behind
the  creation of a  beta anomaly, due to an overinvestment  in high beta assets.

                 Graph 10: High vs Low Betas for Pension Funds

Graph 10 shows the average invested fraction in high versus low betas between 2011 and 2019 by pension
funds, as well as the fraction of pension funds investing more than 50% of their capital invested into our
firms in high versus low beta entities.

                                  28
              Graph  11:  Yearly  Average  Investment by  Pension  Funds

Graph  11  shows the fraction of average investment into high versus low beta firms per year, of  all the
capital invested by pension funds.

H. Hedge Funds & Leveraged Buy Out Firms

   Two groups of investors that  we have not touched upon and  operate under different
regulatory environments compared to those discussed  above  are Hedge Funds and LBO
firms. Hedge Funds are subject to regulatory oversight, but this is mainly related to fraud
and the application of systemic risk. Thus, they are not as tightly controlled regarding the
use of leverage, which is typically applied through derivatives like futures, options,
forwards, and swaps (Ang,  Gorovyy  and  van Inwegen, 2011). Additionally, Leveraged
Buy Out (LBO) firms, which are a type of private equity firm that apply a significant
amount of leverage to raise their rate of return, have significantly less stringent
restrictions for how much leverage they can take on. One of the main reasons for this is
that they can use the acquired company’s assets  as collateral when taking on debt
(Shivdasani & Wang, 2011). These two types of investors could be viewed as arbitrageurs
and  candidates that  exploit the beta anomaly. Namely, they could apply leverage to less
risky low beta securities, to gain higher risk-adjusted returns. Numerous researchers have
found this to be the case, and for instance the paper “On the Performance of Hedge Funds”
finds that unlike mutual funds, hedge funds generally have very low systemic risk in their
portfolios (Liang, 1999). Additionally, LBO firms have been shown to invest in less
cyclical and more stable companies as discussed in the paper “Consequences of leveraged
buyouts” which describes how LBO firms invest in companies with lower business risk
and increase their financial risk through debt instead (Palepu, 1990). This is supported by
Frazzini and Pedersen (2014) who find that LBO firms have on aggregate invested in
companies with a beta below 1 in the United States from 1963 to 2012.  Thus, an

                                  29
interesting avenue for further research would be to see if the same  behavior of Hedge
Funds  and LBO firms  holds for a  Swedish setting.

   VII.  How  Changes in Funding Conditions Affect the BAB Factor

   After  analyzing how  investor’s degree of leverage constraints  impacts the  beta
anomaly in the Swedish market, we  investigate  our  fourth  research  question  concerning
the influence of  changing  funding conditions on the performance of the BAB factor.  We
display results  using betas from Method 1,  as  this enables us to analyze the correlation
already  from  2011.  Only using  one of the methods  is deemed  sufficient as  our  previous
results suggest a similar trend for both  Method 1 and 2.  To determine significance, we
use a confidence level of 95%, resulting in a p-value of less than 0.05.

A. How Periods of Tight Funding Conditions Impact the Beta Anomaly

   We examine research question  4  through regression analysis,  using  the BAB factor
performance as the dependent variable and the STED-Spread as the independent variable.
Table  5  demonstrates regression results for the impact of a  STED-Spread and the BAB
factor.  The  table  shows that the constant is statistically significant,  suggesting  that when
the  STED-Spread and its changes are  zero, the BAB portfolio will  still generate  positive
returns.  Further,  the  contemporaneous  change  to  the STED-Spread  has a negative  and
significant  coefficient, of  –49.741,  with regards to the BAB portfolio. Lastly,  the
coefficient for the lagged STED-Spread is  -11.492  which would indicate  that an increase
in the lagged STED-Spread leads to a decrease in the returns of the BAB  portfolio.
However, this finding is not statistically significant as can be seen through the p-value
being larger than 0.05, which means that we cannot draw any  certain  conclusions  from
this  value.

The table displays regression results for the impact of the STED-Spread, calculated as the 3-month STIBOR
rate minus the 3-month Swedish government bond yield, on the returns from the BAB portfolio. The lagged
STED-Spread is defined as the  STED-Spread at the end of month t-1.  The  sample period is  2011-2019
since  we omit  data  from 2020-2023 due to the anomalies in the movements of the financial market from

                                  30
COVID-19. To have a sufficient sample period of 9 years, we have used BAB returns calculated from
constant betas (training period 2009-2010). The p-values are  shown  under each coefficient value.

B.  Analyzing  the Impact of Tightening Leverage Conditions on  the  BAB Factor

   Using the STED-Spread as a proxy for leverage constraint we gain interesting insights
from Table  5. Our results demonstrate a statistically significant negative relationship
between the change in  STED-Spread  and BAB returns. If we see the  STED-Spread  as a
proxy for the tightness of leverage constraints (𝜓), the negative relationship between the
change in  STED-Spread  and contemporaneous returns of the BAB portfolio would agree
with the model established by Frazzini and Pedersen  (2014)  (Equation  9). Frazzini and
Pedersen  (2014)  reason  that higher funding constraints lead investors to de-lever their
portfolios away from  low beta, as borrowing is more expensive. Investors may then also
choose to invest in higher beta assets to attain a higher expected return, when leveraging
low beta to do so is no longer feasible (Frazzini  and  Pedersen, 2014). Thus, on a  short-
term  basis,  more  leverage constraints lead to a higher demand for more risky assets
(higher beta), subsequently leading those assets to increase in price and have a higher
return in that period. For low beta securities, the opposite is the case as the net selling of
low-risk  assets leads the prices to go down and we will see negative returns during that
period.

   On the contrary, we  see  from  Table  5  that future returns  are  not  higher from an
increased funding constraint.  The results show a negative, but insignificant, relationship
between funding constraints and future returns on the BAB portfolio. This goes against
the reasoning that the contemporaneous low demand for low beta stocks from higher
funding constraints leads  to a greater undervaluation of these securities and thus a higher
future return. In Frazzini and Pedersen’s research (2014), they also found results that went
against their hypothesis. They found a statistically negative relationship between the
lagged TED-Spread and returns of the BAB portfolio. They explained this unusual result
by questioning what the TED-Spread demonstrates as a proxy. Instead of seeing the TED-
Spread as the constraints that lenders are experiencing right now, they suggest that it may
be an indication that agents' funding constraints are worsening. In this view, a higher
TED-Spread would mean that banks and other creditors are credit-constrained and
therefore raise the constraints for lenders over time. This would explain why an increase
in the TED-Spread leads to lower future BAB returns.  However, even though we find
results that may indicate a negative relationship between the lagged STED-Spread  and
BAB returns, they are not significant, and therefore we cannot draw any  certain
conclusions from it.

                                  31
                             VIII.  Discussion

A. How Our Results Impact Financial Markets

   If a market-neutral portfolio can consistently generate abnormal returns by exploiting
the mispricing of high beta and low beta assets, it suggests that the market is not
efficiently pricing assets according to their systematic risk, as indicated by the SML.
Thus, our findings regarding a beta anomaly in the Swedish market suggests that the SML
is flatter than what models like CAPM would predict. This might imply necessary re-
evaluation of the assumptions behind  these models,  and  including a BAB-factor  in future
asset pricing models can be useful to better predict the returns of a security.

   Our findings  further  suggest  that leverage constraints imposed on investors through
legal requirements  have an  impact  on  the type of assets they  choose to  invest in.  Such a
tilting towards high beta is most homogenous for mutual funds, asset management firms
and pension funds which combined make up roughly 54% of the market in our sample
(Table 4).  This  shows support for the idea  that superior returns of the BAB portfolio  are
due to  a breach of the CAPM assumptions,  leading to a flatter SML than predicted.
However, it is also important to note that, as discussed, other legal requirements may
impact decision making by  investor groups. For instance, insurance  funds  are  not only
limited in the amount of leverage they can  take on but are also heavily restricted in their
appetite for systematic risk.

  The above constraints  highlight  an opportunity for  less leverage constrained  investor
groups, like hedge funds and LBO firms, to invest more heavily in low beta assets.  Thus,
capitalizing  on the arbitrage opportunity created by the market dynamics and  making
abnormal returns. We would argue that this is a phenomenon that retail investors can take
advantage of as well,  but  possibly  not to the same extent.  Even though it may be
unfeasible  for them to invest in a BAB portfolio due to  its high complexity and need for
leverage,  they could still enhance their strategy  by  investing more of their savings in  less
volatile assets  and  thereby  ensuring better risk-adjusted  returns, even though this may
appear less exciting.

   Furthermore,  knowledge of the BAB anomaly can  make it necessary for portfolio
managers to revise their strategies and models  for risk management to  capture the
complexities of asset pricing and investor behavior more accurately.  Given  that the
regulatory environment limits opportunities for investment approaches, we may see an
even greater adoption of alternative methods in the future to achieve higher returns in an
increasingly competitive market.  This could affect  international capital flows  and posits
an additional risk that  must  be accounted for  (Guichard,  2016).

                                  32
B. Possible Other Explanations for the Beta Anomaly

   Our  analysis  mainly  revolves  around leverage constraints  but  other explanations for
the  beta anomaly  are important to consider.  One such explanation  is  investors' demand
for lottery-like stocks  which  relates to  how  investors preferences for stocks closely
resembles  demand  for  lottery tickets.  This implies  that  investors  overinvest in  stocks  that
offer a small chance of a huge payoff, which on a large scale can have a significant impact
on  stock prices and  their  returns. A few of the key factors that drive lottery demand
include  psychological attraction which relates to the appeal from potentially high payoffs
of  low  probability  events,  behavioral  biases  related  to  the  overconfidence,  and
overestimation of low probability outcomes and economic conditions as during recessions
investors are more likely to take a chance on high risk, high reward investments  in an
attempt  to  recuperate losses. These behaviors are mainly driven by individual investors
rather than institutional investors, who have constraints and mandates that  limit  them
from taking highly speculative bets. This  theory predicts that actions from individual
investors drive up the prices of high-beta stocks to levels that are not justified by their
fundamentals (Bali et al., 2017). In the study “Betting Against Beta or Demand for
Lottery”, it is found that the price pressure from a high demand for lottery-like stocks is
a major explanation for the BAB anomaly. In their portfolio and regression analysis they
observe that when controlling for lottery demand, the betting against beta abnormal
returns disappear. They have determined this by looking at stocks listed in the US on the
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), the American Stock Exchange (AMEX), and the
NASDAQ from 1963 to 2012  (Bali, Brown, Murray and Tang, 2014).  This, in turn,
provides an alternative explanation for the BAB anomaly other than leverage constrained
investors.

   The demand for lottery like stocks could be a driver for BAB’s abnormal returns in
Sweden,  highlighted by  it  being  a driver of the beta anomaly in the UK (Kambouroudis,
McMillan and Khasawneh,  2024), India (Sharma  and  Chakraborty, 2019) and Australia
(Bradrania  and  Veron, 2023). However, our data  indicates  that investors, who  are
typically not expected to  hold high beta stocks according to the lottery-demand theory  -
such as  pension funds, mutual funds, and  asset management  firms  -  do  so in  our sample
of  the Swedish market. These types of investors are on aggregate seen as informed and  it
would therefore  appear unlikely  that  behavioral biases drive their investment strategy.
Thus,  even though the demand for lottery-like stocks may impact the  beta anomaly in
Sweden  it appears unreasonable for it to be the sole explanation.

                        XI. Conclusions

   We reason that the beta anomaly persists in the Swedish market  as  highlighted  by  our
analysis demonstrating that low beta stocks outperform high beta stocks on a risk-adjusted

                                  33
basis  (research question 1)  as well  as  the BAB  portfolio  showing  abnormal returns
(research question 2).  Consequently,  we find  a breach to  the assumptions of  CAPM,
presenting opportunities for  unconstrained  arbitrageurs,  like Hedge Funds and LBO
firms,  to achieve abnormal returns.

   To explore why this anomaly occurs,  we deep dive into  the impact of leverage
constraints on  investor  behavior  (research question 3). These results portray  how
constraints  lead  to an excessive weighting  in  high beta,  likely  due to  an attempt to
outperform benchmarks,  as  they lack  the  ability to lever up  a less  volatile portfolio.  We
predict that this  behavior  from  groups like  mutual funds,  asset  management firms and
pension  funds  is a key driver for why the  beta anomaly  persists in Sweden.

   Our final area of research (research question 4),  shows  that increasing funding
constraints,  proxied  with  the  STED-Spread,  leads to  a contemporaneous decrease in the
returns of  a  BAB  portfolio.  This  emphasizes  the  correlation  between  financial conditions
and the beta anomaly.  However, we find  no  significance  to  the  relationship  with  future
BAB returns.  To potentially take advantage of these  findings, an investor could make
predictions  on  the future  STED-Spread  and  time  long/short  trades  on  a  BAB  portfolio
accordingly.  As we do not see significance regarding a lagged relationship it  would  be
interesting in future research  to see if another proxy for leverage constraints  could  give
better insight  into  the long-term impact on BAB, making it easier to take advantage of  a
potential  correlation.

   Future research could  also  explore the ownership characteristics of retail investors,
investigating their behavior and how it influences and is influenced by the beta anomaly.
Lastly, increased  awareness  on  the beta anomaly  could not only provide a shift to a
profitable trading strategy for institutional investors but also educate a broader audience
to make better-informed decisions in the future, ultimately benefiting individuals across
all levels of society.

                                  34
                          Bibliography

Aboody, David, and Baruch Lev, 2002, Information Asymmetry, R&D, and Insider
Gains, The Journal of Finance, 55(6), pp. 2747–2766.

Ang, Andrew, Sergiy Gorovyy, and Gregory van Inwegen, 2011, Hedge fund leverage,
Working Paper.

Aytug, Huseyin, Yao Fu, and Paolo Sodini, 2020, Construction of the Fama-French-
Carhart four factors model for the Swedish Stock Market using the Finbas data,
Stockholm School of Economics.

Bali, Turan G., Stephen J. Brown, Scott Murray, and Yi Tang, 2014, Betting against
beta or demand for lottery, SSRN Electronic Journal. doi:10.2139/ssrn.2408146.

Bali, Turan G., Stephen J. Brown, Scott Murray, and Yi Tang, 2017, A lottery-demand-
based explanation of the beta anomaly, The Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis, 52(6), pp. 2369–2397.

Becker, Bo, and Victoria Ivashina, 2015, Reaching for yield in the bond market, The
Journal of Finance, 70(5), pp. 1863–1902.

Blitz, David, and Pim Van Vliet, 2007, The Volatility Effect: Lower Risk Without
Lower Return, Journal of Portfolio Management, pp. 102–113.

Boguth, Oliver, and Mikhail Simutin, 2018, Leverage constraints and asset prices:
Insights from mutual fund risk taking, Journal of Financial Economics, 127(2), pp. 325–
341.

Bradrania, Reza, and Jose Francisco Veron, 2023, The beta anomaly in the Australian
stock market and the lottery demand, Pacific-Basin Finance Journal, 77.

Bradrania, Reza, Jose Francisco Veron, and Winston Wu, 2023, The beta anomaly and
the quality effect in international stock markets, Journal of  Behavioral  and Experimental
Finance, 38.

Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On Persistence in  Mututal  Fund Performance, The Journal of
Finance, 52(1), pp. 57–82.

Christoffersen, Susan E.K., and Mikhail Simutin, 2017, On the Demand for High-Beta
Stocks: Evidence from Mutual Funds, The Review of Financial Studies, 30(8), pp.
2596–2620.

                                  35
Cremers, Martijn, Joost Driessen, Pascal Maenhout, and David Weinbaum, 2009, Does
skin in the game matter? Director Incentives and Governance in the Mutual Fund
Industry, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 44(6), pp. 1345–1373.

de Santis, Giorgio, and Bruno Gerard, 1997, International Asset Pricing and portfolio
diversification with time-varying risk, The Journal of Finance, 52(5), pp. 1881–1912.

Ehne, Mikael, 2018, Institutional Investors in Swedish Corporate Governance, Working
Paper, Stockholm School of Economics.

Elbannan, Mona A., 2015, The capital asset pricing model: an overview of the theory,
International Journal of Economics and Finance, pp. 216–228.

Fabozzi, Frank, Francis Gupta, and Harry Markowitz, 2002, The legacy of modern
portfolio theory, The Journal of Investing, 11(3), pp. 7–22.

Fama, Eugene F.,  and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on
stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics, 33(1), pp. 3–56.

Fama, Eugene F., 1970, Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical
Work, The Journal of Finance, 25(2), pp. 383–417.

Finansinspektionen, 2018, Erik Thedéen: Rules prevent crises, Available at:
https://www.fi.se/en/published/presentations/2018/erik-thedeen-rules-prevent-crises/, 14
April 2024.

Frazzini, Andrea,  and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2014, Betting against beta, Journal of
Financial Economics, 111(1), pp. 1–25.

Guichard, Stéphanie, 2017, Findings of the recent literature on International Capital
Flows, OECD Economics Department Working Papers.

Jensen, Michael C., Fischer Black, and Myron S. Scholes, 1972, The Capital Asset
Pricing Model: Some Empirical Tests, Studies in the Theory of Capital Markets.

Jylhä, Petri, 2018, Margin Requirements and the Security Market Line, The Journal of
Finance, 73(3), pp. 1281–1321.

Kambouroudis, Dimos, David G. McMillan, and Maher Khasawneh, 2024, Lottery
stocks in the UK: Evidence, characteristics and cause, International Journal of Banking,
Accounting and Finance, 14(1), pp. 58–96.

Kourtis, Apostolos, 2016, The Sharpe ratio of estimated efficient portfolios, Finance
Research Letters, 17, pp. 72–78.

                                  36
Liang, Bing, 1999, On the Performance of Hedge Funds, Financial Analysts Journal,
55(4), pp. 72–85.

Lindvall, Johannes, 2012, Coping with the Crisis, Politics and Policies in Two
Economic Crises: The Nordic Countries, Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 233–260.

Markowitz, Harry, 1952,  Portfolio Selection, The Journal of Finance, 7(1), pp. 77-91.

Merton, Robert C., 1980, On estimating the expected return on the market: An
exploratory investigation, Journal of Financial Economics, 8(4), pp. 323–361.

NASDAQ NORDIC, 2023, Changes to the list  -  Nasdaq Stockholm. Available at:
https://www.nasdaqomxnordic.com/news/corporate-actions/stockholm-changes-to-list,
15 April 2024.

OECD, 2020, The COVID-19 crisis and state ownership in the economy: Issues and
policy considerations.

Official Journal of the European Union, 2009, DIRECTIVE 138/2009/EC (Solvency II
Directive).

Official Journal of the European Union, 2009, DIRECTIVE 2009/65/EC OF THE
EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL.

Official Journal of the European Union, 2013, REGULATION (EU) No 575/2013 OF
THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL.

Official Journal of the European Union, 2016, DIRECTIVE (EU) 2016/2341 OF THE
EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL.

Palepu, Krishna G., 1990, Consequences of leveraged buyouts, Journal of Financial
Economics, 27(1), pp. 247–262.

Regeringskansliet, 2005, Aktiebolagslag (2005:551).

Reilly, Frank K., and Keith C. Brown, 2002, Investment Analysis and Portfolio
Management, Tomson, pp. 285–312.

Sveriges Riksbank, 2020,  The Riksbank’s measures during the global financial crisis
2007-2010.

Sveriges  Riksbank, 2023, The Riksbank’s measures in connection with the corona
pandemic.

Sharma, Udayan, and Madhumita Chakraborty, 2019, Investing in lottery-like stocks in
India, Studies in Economics and Finance, 38(3), pp. 640–658.

                                  37
Sharpe, William F., 1964, Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under
conditions of risk, The Journal of Finance, 19(3), pp. 425–442.

Shivdasani, Anil, and  Yihui Wang,  2011, Did Structured  Credit  Fuel the LBO Boom?,
The Journal of Finance,  66 (4), pp.  1291-1328.

                                  38
                         Appendix

Appendix A: Defining Variables

 Variable   Definition
      $        Return of security i at period t+1
    𝑟!"#
      %      Risk-free rate of return
        𝑟
       $       Beta of security  s  at period t
      𝛽!
    &
    𝑟!"#     Return of market at period t+1
      $       Alpha of security  s  at period t
       𝛼!
    ()(
   𝑟!"#     Return of  BAB  at period  t+1
      +
     𝛽!       Beta of low beta portfolio at period  t
     +
    𝑟!"#     Return of low beta portfolio at period t+1
     ,
     𝛽!        Beta of high beta portfolio at period  t
    ,
    𝑟!"#     Return of high beta portfolio at period t+1
      𝜕       Partial derivative (rate of change)
      H
     𝑚!      Margin requirements at time t
      𝛽%!       Shrunk beta of security  i
     𝑤$       Weight of security  i
     XCF
     𝛽$        Shrunk time series beta of security  i
     X IF
    𝛽$        Shrunk  cross-sectional mean  beta of security  i
    𝑤,,$      Weight of security i in high beta portfolio
     𝑤+,$       Weight of security i in low beta portfolio
    %
   𝑟A?>?@     De-levered  risk-free  rate of return
     %
     𝑟>?@      Levered  risk-free  rate of return
      <
    𝑟!"#     Security returns before portfolio weighting at  period t+1
     BCD
    𝛼         Portfolio alpha
    &EC
   𝛽         Market beta
    F&(
   𝛽       Small Minus Big beta
    ,&+
   𝛽         High Minus Low beta
    &G&
   𝛽        Momentum beta
   𝑆𝑀𝐵!     Small Minus Big returns at period t
   𝐻𝑀𝐿!     High Minus Low returns at period t
   𝑀𝑂𝑀!    Momentum returns at period t

                                  39
Appendix B: BAB Portfolio Returns With Monte Carlo Simulations

The table displays summary statistics from running  100  different  simulations  with  our Method 1 betas
where we each time randomly exclude 20% of the stocks from our sample, which is intended to capture the
effect of not accounting for delisted stocks. The constant refers to the alpha estimate of our BAB portfolio
under the different asset pricing models, and P-values shows the significance of our alpha estimates. We
report  min, max, mean, median and standard deviation for both the constant and the p-value over all three
models.

The table displays summary statistics from running  100  different  simulations  with  our Method  2  betas
where we each time randomly exclude 20% of the stocks from our sample, which is intended to capture the
effect of not accounting for delisted stocks. The constant refers to the alpha estimate of our BAB portfolio
under the different asset pricing models, and P-values shows the significance of our alpha estimates. We
report min, max, mean, median and standard deviation for both the constant and the p-value over all three
models.

                                  40
Appendix C: Graphs Related to CAPM and Modern Portfolio Theory

            Graph  A:  Modern Portfolio Theory and the  Efficient  Frontier

The Graph shows the relationship between risk and expected return and how the tangency  portfolio  is
represented on the efficient frontier. Each  circle represents a portfolio.

                        Graph  (B)  -  CAPM  and the CML

The Graph shows the relationship between risk  and expected return and how the tangency portfolio is
represented on the efficient frontier, as well as how the capital market line relates to the efficient frontier.
Each circle represents a portfolio.

Appendix D: CAPM Assumptions (Reilly and Brown, 2002)

§   Investors, being risk-averse, aim to maximize their utility and returns relative to asset
   volatility (maximize Sharpe  ratio) by selecting portfolios along the efficient frontier.

§   Investors  can  borrow an unlimited amount at the risk-free rate.

                                  41
§   Investors have homogeneous expectations for future asset price movements.

§   Investors hold investments for the exact same one-period of time.

§   Investors can sell or buy portions of shares from any of the securities or portfolios that
   they hold.

§   No taxes and transaction costs for buying or selling shares.

§   Inflation and interest rates remain constant.

§   All securities are fairly priced, meaning that investors cannot influence prices.

Appendix E: Classification of Investor Groups

§   Mutual Funds consist of all conventional fund companies and funds within our dataset,
   except for pension and insurance funds which we consider separately.

§   Asset Management Firms comprise entities engaged in investment activities, asset
   management, or similar ventures.

§   Pension Funds incorporate pension entities, state-operated pension schemes, and
   standard pension funds.

§   Insurance Funds represent those specializing in insurance.

§   Holding Companies are characterized by passive investment stakeholders.

§   Strategic  Acquirers  denote  a  range  of  companies  holding  ownership  yet  not
   categorized as investment firms, funds, or under any other label.

§   Individuals Investors refer to natural persons with ownership stakes in our sampled
   companies, a mix of retail investors and company employees with equity interests.

§   Other Investors includes a small number of banks, scholarship funds, endowment
   funds, and union investors.

                                  42
Appendix  F:  Regression  Output  (Coefficients and p-values in brackets)

The table shows regression results for our FFC4 regression using Method 1 betas. P-values are represented
by brackets and coefficient estimates in normal numbers.

The table shows regression results for our FF3  regression using Method 1 betas. P-values are represented
by brackets and coefficient estimates in normal numbers.

The table shows regression results for our CAPM regression using Method 1 betas. P-values are represented
by brackets and coefficient estimates in normal numbers.

                                  43
The table shows regression results for our FFC4 regression using Method 2 betas. P-values are represented
by brackets and coefficient estimates in normal numbers.

The table shows regression results for our  FF3  regression using Method  2  betas. P-values are represented
by brackets and coefficient estimates in normal numbers.

The table shows regression results for our CAPM regression using Method 2 betas. P-values are represented
by brackets and coefficient estimates in normal numbers.

                                  44
                         AI Appendix

 LEVERAGE CONSTRAINTS AND THE BETA ANOMALY; BETTING AGAINST
                 BETA IN THE SWEDSH MARKET

                      Degree Project in Finance  –  Spring 2024

Frans Axelsson Nessim,  25339,  25339@student.hhs.se

Ludvig Gustafsson,  25335,  25335@student.hhs.se

Recognition:
We have used the AI tool ChatGPT  with help regarding specific coding methods.

                                  45