THE MATURITY AMBIGUITY

A STUDY ON THE LIQUIDITY PREMIA IN US TREASURY
SECURITIES

CASPAR RUNSTEN
JOHAN IVARSSON

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2024
The Maturity Ambiguity: A Study on The Liquidity Premia In US Treasury
Securities

Abstract:
        This thesis explores the impact of strict mutual fund maturity constraints on the liquidity
       premium of US Treasuries by examining the yield spreads between assets of varying
        maturities and liquidity. We find that there is different demand dynamics depending on
        maturity of T-bills. In addition, the existence of an on-the-run phenomenon within the T-
        bill market is assessed, with no clear evidence that a consistent liquidity premium between
        these highly liquid assets exist. The drivers behind the liquidity premium between T-bills
       and deposits is studied with the opportunity cost of money being a dominant driver over
        time, that in recent years have had the T-bill supply alongside it as a contributor to the
        liquidity premium of near-money assets.

Keywords:
  Liquidity Premium, US Treasury Market, Mutual Fund Mandates, Maturity Mandates, Near-
   Money Assets, On-the-run, Off-the-run.

Authors:
   Caspar Runsten (25316)
   Johan Ivarsson (25530)

Tutor & examiner:
   Adrien d’Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Caspar Runsten and Johan Ivarsson, 2024

                                         1
                             1.Introduction

1.1 Background
The liquidity premia hold significant relevance for monetary policy implementation and stability
of financial systems. The control of assets with near-money properties, considered highly liquid,
is essential for providing central-banks with the leverage needed to adjust short-term interest
rates and to manage the liquidity available in the market. However, post the Great Financial
Crisis shifts in regulatory frameworks aimed at increasing the resilience of financial institutions
has inadvertently complicated this dynamic. As d’Avernas and Vandeweyer (2023) detail, the
introduction of stringent liquidity requirements under the Basel III has constrained banks’ ability
to intermediate liquidity, leading to an environment where the liquidity across markets is
inhibited. The regulatory mandates requiring banks to maintain a higher liquidity ratio has
decreased their ability to distribute liquidity to other segments of the market. This effect
complicates the central bank’s ability to effectively manage monetary policy tools that rely on
manipulating short-term interest rates.

Another similar effect of how mandates effect the liquidity premium is outlined by Bretscher,
Schmid, and Ye (2023). They observe that mutual fund mandates that impose constraints on the
maturity of fixed income assets in a portfolio inherently impacts market dynamics by shifting
demand for assets meeting certain criteria. This shift results in a demand shock in the corporate
bond market attributable to passive funds. As these funds adjust their portfolios around maturity
cut-offs, it causes a disproportionate demand for certain maturities of assets. Specifically, they
investigate 10-, 5- and 3-year cut-offs, where passive funds adjust their portfolios to align with
their index mandates. This strategic realignment induces fluctuations in demand at these critical
points intensifying the liquidity premium due to an artificial increased demand for certain
maturity bonds.

Money market funds (MMF), particularly U.S. Government Money Market Funds, (GMMF)
exemplify another aspect of how regulatory constraints influence market liquidity. Designed to
maintain high liquidity and low risk, these funds face stringent regulatory mandates post the
Great Financial Crisis to strengthen financial system resilience. GMMFs are subject to a
constraint forcing them to hold short-maturity, highly liquid assets to comply with having an
average dollar-weighted maturity not exceeding 60 days. Subsequently, they are prohibited from
investing in instruments with more than 397 days to maturity and are required to maintain
substantial proportions of highly liquid assets. Specifically, 10% of assets being able to be
converted into cash within one day, 30% within five days, and max 5% held in securities
requiring longer than one week (Electronic Code of Federal Regulations, 2024). Thus, GMMFs
tend to hold treasury bills (T-bills) as noted by d’Avernas and Vandeweyer (2023), who also
observe a demand shift for T-bills after the money market reform was implemented in 2016
with enhanced liquidity requirements.

Studies on the liquidity premium commonly analyze yield spreads between assets differing in
liquidity. Mostly T-bills are utilized to understand the liquidity premium, its time variation and
the underlying monetary policy in which the central bank has influence over the premium. Nagel
(2016) analyzes the time variation using multiple yield spreads, controlling for the opportunity
cost of money, supply of near-money assets, and flight-to-safety effects. He concludes that the
short-term interest rate is a dominant driver of the liquidity premium between illiquid deposits
and liquid T-bills, and hence the central bank is setting the liquidity premium through its interest
rate policy. Other studies also outline liquidity premia persistent between Treasury securities
themselves, but often fail to analyze the variation over a substantial period to determine the

                                         2
underlying factor controlling the premia. One of these premia are the premia between T-bills,
often considered the most liquid, and T-notes (Nagel 2016; Amihud and Mendelson, 1991).
Another is that between the most recently issued on-the-run security and their nearest off-the-
run counterpart (Pasquariello and Vega 2009). Recent literature however has not thoroughly
explored these liquidity premia in recent times. Given the previously outlined changes in market
dynamics, this paper draws inspiration from Nagel (2016) to further explain these phenomena,
and ultimately understand the research question ”Do mutual fund mandates have an impact on the
liquidity premium of Treasury securities?”.

This paper addresses a gap in current liquidity premia literature by assessing the persistence of
liquidity premia between US Treasury securities over time, and during recent time. Drawing
inspiration from Nagel (2016) we study underlying factors of the liquidity premia between
Treasury securities, which are all considered highly liquid. We also examine how recent regulatory
changes may have altered the foundation of these premia. If this dynamic has changed over time,
we could find that new regulations are distorting the control the central bank has over the
premia. The paper also explores lesser observed liquidity premia between longer maturity
Treasury bills and notes. This further enlightens if implemented GMMF maturity mandates has
distorted the premia for certain maturities of Treasury bills. We find that the liquidity premium
landscape for US Treasuries differs distinctly depending on the maturity of the assets. This
reinforces the theory that demand dynamics are influenced by stricter constraints on the
maturities within portfolios of money market funds.

1.2 Literature Review
The liquidity premium is well-documented in financial literature. Previous research indicating that
the liquidity characteristics of US Treasuries affects their price, deviating from predictions of a
traditional asset pricing model include: Amihud and Mendelson (1991); Kamara (1994). Other
literature study the time-variation of the liquidity premium by considering flight-to-safety effects
and the supply of Treasuries. Longstaff (2004) analyzes the impact on the liquidity premium from
the supply of Treasuries and the flight-to-liquidity that is related to consumer confidence, similar
to Musto, Nini, and Schwarz (2014) who find that yield spreads become wider during crisis
periods due to investors’ preference for liquidity. Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012)
report that a high US government debt-to-GDP ratio coincide with narrow yield spreads using a
long sample period, similar to our study with debt-to-GDP as an explanatory variable for the
liquidity premium. In Greenwood, Hanson, and Stein’s (2015) model the T-bill supply drive
changes in the liquidity premium.

Nagel (2016), similar to this thesis, studies the liquidity premium controlling for the supply of
Treasuries and flight-to-safety effects, but unlike the papers mentioned above incorporates the
opportunity cost of money into the analysis, finding that the Treasury supply has limited effect
on the liquidity premium when controlling for the fed funds rate, indicating that deposits and T-
bills are almost perfect substitutes, contrary to previous research. Li, Ma, and Zhao (2023) find
that longer maturity Treasuries and deposits are imperfect substitutes. Similarly, Krishnamurthy
and Li (2023) who replicate parts of Nagel’s (2016) method also find them to be imperfect
substitutes explained by T-bills providing collateral services that deposits are unable to, while
deposits provide transaction services T-bills cannot do. d’Avernas and Vandeweyer (2023)
indicate that T-bill supply explains the liquidity premium better than other monetary policy tools
post the Global Financial Crisis, and that the money market reform entailed a demand shift for
T-bills. He, Nagel, and Song (2022) examine the market for long-term Treasuries during Covid-
19, finding that long-term Treasury yields increased in contrast to what is found for previous
periods turbulent periods. He and Song (2022) find for agency mortgage-backed securities that
the opportunity cost of money negatively correlates with the convenience premium for long-term

                                         3
securities, opposite of Nagel’s (2016) theory. However, for short-term repos backed by long-term
mortgage-backed securities the correlation is positive.

The literature indicates that there is a liquidity premium between on-the-run and off-the-run US
Treasuries. Warga (1992) constructs portfolios of on-the-run treasury bonds and compare the
returns with portfolios of off-the-run treasury bonds, using a short sample period of 7 years and
concludes that there is a significant difference between the two that is partially driven by liquidity.
Pasquariello and Vega (2009) identify a liquidity premium and analyze if it is caused by
information heterogeneity and imperfect competition among informed traders. Goldreich,
Hanke, Nath (2005) find a liquidity premium over the on-the-run and off-the-run cycle and
concludes that it is driven by the amount of future liquidity. They follow the same treasury notes
over time and identify that liquidity remains high during the on-the-run period before declining
prior to the next issue, and then remains low for the rest of the asset’s life. The yield spread
between on-the-run and off-the-run becomes narrower over the cycle, and the method for
constructing the on-the-run and off-the-run yield spread is to an extent utilized by Nagel (2016)
and in this thesis. Moore and Winters (2014) note that the trading activity for T-bills follow a
different pattern than T-notes over the on-the-run and off-the-run cycle, which is directly linked
to the research in this thesis and validates further exploring the existence of a liquidity premium
between on-the-run and off-the-run T-bills.

This paper is also related to literature on the impact of fund mandates on demand for assets
within a mandate. Koijen and Yogo (2019); Buffa and Hodor (2023) find that mutual fund
mandates create inelastic demand that affect the price of securities allowed to be held by
institutional investors subject to the mandate. Chaudhary, Fu, and Li (2023) study demand
elasticities in the corporate bond market using mutual fund flows where mandates can create
demand shocks for certain bonds and find that demand is inelastic short-term but more elastic
long-term. Bretscher, Schmid, and Ye (2023) study maturity mandates, observing a change in
demand when a corporate bond crosses a 10-, 5-, and 3-year time-to-maturity cutoff. A demand
shock entailing reduced yield spreads and improved liquidity.

Our contribution to the literature is that we extend Nagel (2016) which is an extensive study of
the time variation of the liquidity premium, which incorporates the opportunity cost of money as
a driver of the liquidity premium, in addition to flight-to-safety effects and the supply of
Treasuries included in research mentioned above. Nagel (2016) also examines the liquidity
premium for on-the-run and off-the-run T-notes, examining the on-the-run phenomena but
augments previous findings through controlling for the opportunity cost of money and the level
of uncertainty in the market. On money market funds in particular we incorporate the theory of
mutual fund maturity mandates’ impact on market dynamics and price, where the funds are only
allowed to hold assets with short maturities. We extend Bretscher, Schmid, and Ye (2023) with
more pronounced focus on money market funds and US Treasuries instead of corporate bonds.
Additionally, we analyze shorter maturity cutoff categories to see if mandates with shorter
maturity periods impact the yield spreads similar to what Buffa and Hodor (2023) indicate for
large institutional investors. We cover the periods that Nagel’s (2016) study focused on and the
specific period during Covid-19 He, Nagel, and Song (2022) do. Further we cover the period
before and after Covid-19 which they do not do. This is a contribution since during this gap,
there has been prominent economic periods such as the period with interest rates close to 0%.

To d'Avernas and Vandeweyer (2023) this thesis contribute insight into the observed demand
shift for T-bills following stricter regulation, since the results in our study differ depending on the
maturity left for the Treasuries employed. We further contribute by extending Nagel’s (2016)
analysis of on-the-run vs nearest off-the-run T-notes, providing a study on the existence and if so

                                         4
the magnitude of an on-the-run phenomena for T-bills which commonly is disregarded due to T-
bills being considered highly liquid throughout their lifetime. To Pasquariello and Vega (2009) we
contribute with additional drivers behind the on-the-run and off-the-run phenomenon as well as
a longer study period.

1.3 disposition
The remainder of this thesis is divided into sections. Section 2 presents the method, data used,
and where the data is sourced from, along with calculations and adjustments. Section 3 contains
the empirical analysis with results for the liquidity premium, and the drivers behind it for various
types of near money assets. Section 4 concludes the thesis, summarizing the key findings and
their implications.

                             2. Method
2.1 Data
To examine the liquidity premiums inherent in Treasury securities under different market
conditions and regulatory frameworks, the analysis leverages data covering a period as substantial
as possible to capture economic cycles and structural changes. All data for rates is either monthly
averages of daily rates or converted to a monthly average.

Treasury securities. Our main data source for Treasury securities comprises the Center for Research
in Security prices (CRSP) daily Treasury Database. A comprehensive collection of daily price
quotations, maturities, coupon rates, and issue dates, spanning from 1961 to the present for
outstanding Treasury bonds, notes, and bills. We use data from January 1976 to December 2023
to create eight time series. To create a long time series beginning in 1920, we source rates on
three-month T-bills from Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis economic database (FRED). From
January 1934 to December 2023 the data contains monthly averages of daily secondary market
quotations for the most recently issued three-month T-bills and is based on the H.15 Selected
Interest Rates report issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. We
complement the series with monthly average daily quotes for three-to-six-month T-notes and
certificates from January 1920 to December 1933. All FRED rates are quoted on a discount basis
with a 360-day year.

Deposit rates. All three-month Banker’s Acceptance and certificates of deposits rates are obtained
from FRED. The original source for the Banker’s Acceptance rates beginning from January 1941
to June 2000 is the G.13 Selected Interest Rates Release by The Board of Governors of The
Federal Reserve. These are closing yields for acceptances of the highest rated money center banks
quoted on a discount basis with 360-days day-count convention. 90-days Prime Banker’s
Acceptances for New York are used as a substitute from January 1920 to December 1939.
Quotes for three-month certificates of deposits are averages of dealer bid rates on large
denomination deposits of $1,000,000 or more. Large denomination deposits are not insured by
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and bear credit risk. From January 1976 the
original source for daily CD rates is the H.15 Release. Rates are quoted on an investment basis
using a 360-day year. The time series based on the H.15 Release was discontinued as of June
2013. To extend the series to December 2023, we collect a monthly series for three-month
certificates of deposit rates onwards. The original source is the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD) Main Economic Indicators database. The spread
between three-month Treasury bills and three-month General Collateral Repo rates is from
Stefan Nagel’s website. Daily three-month GC repo rates from May 1991 to December 2011 are
from Bloomberg and rates for three-month T-bills from CRSP. Nagel uses the midpoint between

                                         5
rates where dealers pay interest and rates where dealers receive interest to create a spread
between GC repos and T-bills.

Treasury Securities supply. We retrieve an annual time series for U.S. government debt outstanding
to GDP from Henning Bohn’s website. The series is from 1791 to 2012 and is an updated
version of the one originally featured in Bohn (2008). The debt-to-GDP ratio is fiscal year end
public debt divided by the nominal GDP, and Bohn retrieves the data from the Budget of The
United States and from National Income Accounts. We use the time series from 1920 until 2001.
From March 2001 we create a monthly debt-to-GDP series. Monthly data on U.S. government
public debt is published in the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s fiscal database. Monthly GDP
is from the US Monthly Nominal GDP Index available from S&P Global Market Intelligence.
The index uses calculation and aggregation methods comparable to those used when calculating
the official GDP, published by the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).

Monthly data on outstanding Treasury bills is retrieved from the U.S. Department of the
Treasury’s fiscal database from January 2001 to December 2023. To create a T-bills outstanding
to GDP ratio we follow Nagel (2016) and create a monthly GDP series by linearly interpolating
quarterly nominal GDP to monthly values. Quarterly nominal GDP is from the Gross Domestic
Product series available in FRED from 1947 onwards. The original source of this data is the U.S.
Bureau of Economic Analysis Gross Domestic Product release. Our primary data set covers the
period from January 2001 to the present. To extend our analysis back to January 1947, we
integrate the supplementary data from Nagel (2016). He uses a GDP computation consistent
with ours and retrieves data on T-bills outstanding further back from the CRSP monthly debt
files. These files, subject to access restrictions, contain the outstanding face value of T-bills.

Federal funds rate and VIX. Data for the daily effective federal funds rate is retrieved from FRED.
The original source of the data is the H.15 Selected Interest Rates report. This series is available
from July 1954 to the present. To create a series from 1920 we utilize the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York discount rate as a substitute. This time series is also from FRED. The daily Chicago
Board Options Exchange (CBOE) S&P 500 Volatility Index (VIX) is obtained from the CBOE
U.S. Index database via Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS) from January 1990 to the
present. To obtain a time-series ranging from January 1920 to December 2023, we substitute the
previous years with a VIX extension from Nagel’s (2016) own research. He creates a time-series
beginning in January 1920 by running a linear regression of the average monthly VIX on the
monthly average squared daily returns of the S&P 500 from 1990 to 2011. He then applies the
estimated projection coefficients backwards to calculate fitted values in earlier periods before
1990.

2.2 Model
The regression framework for our analysis of the driving factors behind different liquidity
premiums can be defined as:

                        𝑖𝑙        𝑙                                                                        𝐷𝑡                          𝐵𝑡
(1) 𝑖𝑡 − 𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽𝑜 + 𝛽1 ⋅ 𝑟𝑡 + 𝛽2 ⋅ 𝜆𝑡 + 𝛽3 ⋅ log (  ) + 𝛽4 ⋅ log (  )
                                                                                                                                           𝑌𝑡                                  𝑌𝑡

Equation (1) shows the relationship between our dependent variable and several key explanatory
                            𝑖𝑙       𝑙                                                                                            𝑖𝑙
variables, where 𝑖𝑡  − 𝑖𝑡 captures the liquidity premium between an illiquid asset 𝑖𝑡 , and a liquid
         𝑙
asset 𝑖𝑡.

The variable 𝑟𝑡 is the short-term interest rate, reflecting the opportunity cost of holding a liquid
asset. A high rate increases the opportunity cost of money and affects the premium of liquid

                                         6
assets. We capture this parameter by using the federal funds rate between July 1954 and
December 2023. Before that we used the Federal Reserve Bank of New York discount rate since
during that period banks regularly borrowed from the Federal Reserve at this discount rate
making it an adequate proxy for the short-term rate.

Subsequently, 𝜆𝑡 represents market volatility. We use this parameter to see the effects on our
liquidity premiums under periods of high uncertainty in financial markets. During these periods a
flight-to-safety effect could occur where preferences for liquid assets increase relative to illiquid
deposits. The parameter captures this effect, and subsequently its effect on the liquidity premium.
In the regressions, this parameter is captured by the CBOE index of implied volatility from 1990
to 2023 and before that we use a projection of the VIX based on monthly average squared
returns of the S&P 500.

𝐷𝑡 and 𝐵𝑡 are represented by public U.S. government debt outstanding and outstanding U.S. T-
bills respectively. 𝑌𝑡 represents U.S. nominal GDP. We use the debt-to-GDP and T-bill supply-
to-GDP to understand the effects of the supply of Treasury securities on the liquidity premium.
The public debt-to-GDP acts as a proxy for total supply of liquid government securities. We use
an annual time series for public debt-to-GDP from January 1920 to February 2001, and a
monthly time series from March 2001. The T-bill supply-to-GDP visualizes the supply of near-
money liquid government securities. Data for T-bill supply is available from January 1947
onwards. We use GDP ratios to normalize the supply by the size of the economy for better
comparison across different periods and different economic contexts. We use the natural
logarithm to create linear relationships and avoid heteroscedastic issues that could distort the
results. Figure 1 plots the explanatory variables. For visualization, all variables have been
demeaned and standardized to unit standardization. Further, Debt-to-GDP and T-bills-to-GDP
have been signed switched to visualize that a positive value in theory imply a higher yield spread
between liquid and illiquid assets.

To ensure the robustness of our regressions results, and consistency with the original framework
in Nagel (2016), we adjust for potential autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity in the error terms
of our time series data by using Newey-West standard error, 12 lags. The method provides
consistent estimates of the standard errors even in the presence of autocorrelation and
heteroskedasticity.

2.3 Yield spreads
All variables used to create the time series for rates consist of monthly averages of daily
annualized effective yields.

Liquidity premium between Deposits and T-bills
One main discussion in financial literature on liquidity premiums has been to determine the
source of the liquidity premium, and to determine to what extent near-money assets are
substitutes to deposits. Nagel (2016) suggests deposits and T-bills have a high elasticity of
substitution given that he finds the dominant driver of the liquidity premium to be the short-term
interest rate. He argues that since the premium is not driven by the supply of near-money assets,
but by interest-rates, this implies that the opportunity cost of money is explaining the liquidity
premia, and people are willing to pay a greater premium when this cost is high as the necessity for
liquidity increases in value, and thus these near-money assets are in fact substitutes.

                                         7
Panel A Panel B

       Figure 1: Standardized Explanatory Variables. The explanatory variables in the regression framework are
       plotted from 1920 to 2023. For consistency all variables have been demeaned and standardized to unit
        standardization. Subsequently, the T-bills/GDP and Debt/GDP variables in Panel A have been signed switch so that
         an increase in the plot visualizes a theoretical increase in the liquidity premia.

       To understand whether this conclusion holds over time, we create two time-series. A long from
      1920 to 2023 and a shorter from 1976 to 2023. The regression framework then determines the
       dominant driver of the spread. The highly liquid asset is represented by three-month T-bills,
       matched with the illiquid rates available that have similar risk and maturity. Thus, we isolate the
       liquidity premium as the difference between these rates.

       For illiquid assets, to create the long series we combine three different rates of illiquid assets. The
       most similar asset to T-bills in terms of safety and maturity is the three-month GC Repo spread,
       available from May 1991 to December 2011. Before this period, the three-month Banker’s
       Acceptance rate is used, and post 2011 the three-month Certificate of Deposit rate. For further
       perspective, we create a shorter time-series with the CD rate continuously used as the illiquid
       asset to see if the results hold for a shorter period with one continuous asset as the illiquid one.
       The rates are expressed using different day-count conventions and yields in different formats. We
       normalize all yields to effective annual yields with a 365.25-day year. For any quotes on a
      discount basis, we follow Amihud and Mendelson (1991) to convert the discount yield to a price
       which then is used to obtain an effective annual yield. Otherwise, we convert rates to a 365.25-
       day basis before calculating the effective annual yield.

       If Nagel’s (2016) findings still hold, we will find that the explanatory effects of the supply
      variables diminish once we account for the federal funds rate. Then the opportunity cost of
      capital sets the liquidity premia. If we find that the explanatory effects differ over time between
      these assets, it could indicate that other variables not included in the model distort the theory that
      liquidity premia are driven by the opportunity cost of capital.

       Liquidity premium between Treasury Securities
       Other liquidity premia often discussed in financial literature are the premia between on-the-run
      Treasuries and off-the-run Treasuries (Goldreich, Hanke and Nath, 2005), and that between T-
       bills and T-notes (Amihud and Mendelson, 1991). The framework is used to study different
       maturities of these liquidity premiums and determine the differences between them, in terms of

                                              8
magnitude and underlying drivers. This will identify which liquidity premia are existent in the US
Treasury market, and their variation over time. Further, discrepancies between these premia in
terms of magnitude or underlying explanatory variable could identify if there are other causes
affecting the liquidity premium of these assets.

On-the-run and nearest off-the-run
To construct the spread between on-the-run securities and their nearest off-the-run counterpart
we follow Goldreich, Hanke and Nath (2005). We construct two spreads from January 1976 to
December 2023. The spreads are the difference in yields between the on-the-run and nearest off-
the-run two-year T-Notes, and an equal spread between the on-the-run and nearest off-the-run
one-year T-bill. The purpose of this is to determine if the liquidity premia differ between on-the-
run and off-the-run T-notes and on-the-run and off-the-run T-bills.

The process of constructing the spreads consists of matching the most recently issued security,
with the security issued one auction earlier. To do this we isolate all notes with a two-year
maturity, and all bills with a one-year maturity. We then observe every day the most recently
issued security and compare it to the one with the second highest maturity. To ensure
continuously comparing the on-the-run and nearest off-the-run securities we filter out days when
either the on-the-run or off-the-run security might not have traded or are missing. Both two-year
T-notes and one-year T-bills are issued on a monthly auction cycle which helps us observe the
premium without irregular seasonal effects.

For calculating the yields of any T-note with coupon payments left, we calculate the effective
annual yield to maturity, extracting the nominal price, accrued interest, payments, and days to
each payment. Then we iterate to find the effective annual rate that sets the present value of the
payments equal to the price + accrued interest. For any zero-coupon bond we calculate the
effective annual yield in a similar fashion. Given that zero-coupon bonds do not pay coupons the
formula simplifies, and the effective yield can be found by solving for the rate that sets the face
value of the bill equal to the price, in line with Amihud and Mendelson (1991). To ensure that
yields are comparable we adjust for difference in maturity, and for notes also the difference in
coupon. We follow Nagel (2016) and value the cash-flows of the on-the-run and off-the-run
notes and bills using the off-the-run zero-coupon yield curve. This value is used to estimate the
yield of two synthetic securities, one that is equal to the on-the-run security in terms of maturity,
and coupon for the notes, and one that is equal to the off-the-run security in terms of maturity,
and coupon for the notes. The difference between these synthetic securities is added to the yield
of the off-the-run security. This adjustment accounts for the difference in maturity, and for the
notes also the difference in coupon rates.

One final issue persists, and that is that the Treasury ceased auctions of the one-year Treasury
bills at the end of February 2001, and then reintroduced them at the beginning of June 2008. To
best fill these missing values, we follow a similar approach to how Nagel (2016) filled the missing
values of the VIX index. For this purpose, we also take out the yield of the on-the-run and
adjusted yield of the nearest off-the-run six-month T-bills. The spread between these is however
excluded from the main analysis. This is done in the same fashion described above. Then we
estimate two projection coefficients, one for the on-the-run yield of one-year Treasury bills, and
one for the adjusted off-the-run yield for one-year T-bills. For the on-the-run yield, we estimate
the coefficient by running a linear regression on the on-the-run yield for two-year T-notes, and
six-month T-bills for the period where all bills are available. Similarly, we estimate the coefficient
for the adjusted off-the-run yield by running a regression on the same off-the-run spreads. We
then apply these estimated coefficients to calculate synthetic on-the-run and off-the-run yields for
one-year T-bills in the missing period. Then we calculate the spread between these two yields.

                                         9
The validity of this approach is discussed in appendix 1, where we also present why the six-
month on-the-run nearest off-the-run spread is excluded. The results of the spread between on-
the-run and nearest off-the-run six-month securities is presented in appendix 3.

Ultimately, if we see substantial differences between these two spreads in our framework, we
should be able to conclude if there is an on-the-run premium for T-bills. We should also be able
to determine if the premia differ between T-bills and T-notes, and see what is the underlying
reason for this difference.

Liquidity premium between T-notes and T-bills
When constructing the spread between T-notes and T-bills we follow Amihud and Mendelson
(1991). We use this spread to see if we can find a similar liquidity premium for T-bills as others
have found. To also widen the analysis, we further construct three different spreads between T-
bills and two-year T-notes. We do this to observe if different maturities of T-bills hold different
liquidity premiums when compared to the same less liquid asset. The three spreads are created
with three-month, six-month and one-year T-bills respectively, and we compare them to a two-
year T-note with a maturity left equal to that of the bill.

To construct these spreads, we look each day for three T-notes with a remaining maturity closest
to 91, 182 and 365 days respectively. We then identify two T-bills that straddle the respective
maturities. The spread is then calculated by subtracting the linear interpolation of the two T-bill
yields from the respective two-year notes. Calculating the yield for the notes differs depending on
whether they have coupon payments left. If a note has coupon payments left, we calculate the
effective yield to maturity as described above. If they do not, we calculate the effective annual
yield similar to how it is calculated for zero-coupon bonds, in line with Amihud and Mendelson
(1991). The formula simplifies and the effective yield can be found by solving for the rate that
sets the face value and the one coupon payment left of the note equal to the price plus accrued
interest. All yields for treasury bills are calculated as above, which aligns with Amihud and
Mendelson’s approach (1991) and is further motivated as the appropriate way to compare
coupon notes with zero-coupon bills according to Glasgo, Landes and Thompson (1982).

Once again, we encounter the issue that the Treasury ceased auctions of one-year T-bills from
February 2001 to June 2008. We solve this issue with a similar approach to how we filled the
missing values for on-the-run and nearest off-the-run one-year bills. We still have the yield for
two-year treasury notes with a maturity closest to 365-days. Thus, the approach simplifies slightly
since we must only create one synthetic yield, the interpolated one-year T-bill yield. We do this by
estimating a projection coefficient by running a linear regression on the interpolated yield of one-
year T-bills on two-year T-notes with a maturity closest to 365-days. We also control for the
interpolated yield of the other two Treasury bills we have selected, and their relation to their
respective two-year T-notes with a maturity closest to 91-days and 182-days. Then we apply the
projection coefficients on the missing period to synthetize a one-year yield interpolated to the
two-year note’s maturity. This approach is further discussed in appendix 2.

With this we intend to figure out if the liquidity premium differs for different maturities of bills
and notes, to visualize to what extent these bills provide liquidity services. Further, we aim to find
out if the spreads differ significantly, or the underlying factors driving the liquidity premium
differs between maturities. If we fail to find coherent results, it could indicate that other factors
might be distorting the liquidity premium for longer maturity bills.

                                         10
Process
The ultimate analysis follows a three-step approach to capture the entirety of the described
regression framework. Initially, we analyze the existence of the selected liquidity premiums over
time. We extend this analysis by analyzing their variation during different periods. Secondly, we
run regressions on the federal funds rate and VIX index to observe if the federal funds rate has
explanatory value for the premiums, and whether this effect holds for different time-periods.
Finally, we run six regressions on all our liquidity premiums. One controlling for each
explanatory variable individually (we include VIX in all regressions to account for flight-to-
safety), and then two subsequent regressions where we view the individual supply effects of debt-
to-GDP and T-bills-to-GDP. Then we control for the federal funds rate, to finally land in one
full regression for each liquidity premium using the entire above specified framework. This to see
which variables remain explanatory when all conditions are controlled for. The final regressions
are all run using the entire sample, since the supply variables need sufficient observations to gain
explanatory effects.

                       3. Empirical Analysis

In the analysis below we measure the liquidity premium of near-money assets between deposits
and T-bills. Furthermore, an analysis of yield spreads between liquid Treasury assets of different
maturities and payment structures is provided. Subsequently, for comparisons between T-bills
and T-notes, two-year T-notes who are generally viewed as highly liquid are used. All interest
rates and yields employed in the empirical analysis are monthly averages of daily annualized
effective yields.

3.1 Measurement of Liquidity Premium
Table 1 presents the means of the individual liquidity spreads during different time periods. To
measure the yield spread between illiquid- and highly liquid near-money assets, we match 3-
month T-bills with illiquid assets of similar maturity and risk characteristics. As illiquid assets, the
GC repo is employed between May 1991 to December 2011, BA rates January 1920 to April
1991, and CD rates January 2012 to December 2023. The credit risk components for BAs and
CDs are important to consider in the analysis, as the impact of liquidity characteristics on the
yields is more difficult to isolate. Collectively these three assets form the long spread covering the
period from January 1920 to December 2023 displayed in Panel A, column (9). It will henceforth
be referred to as long. The mean of the individual spreads in the long series are also presented for
their respective time periods. The spread for the GC repo, BA and CD are available in columns
(1), (2), and (3) respectively.

During the period 1991-2011 the average yield spread between GC repo and 3-month T-bills was
23.65 basis points (bp), in concurrence with the quoted bid-ask spreads for T-bills (0.4 bps) and
GC repo (7.0 bps) in Panel B, underscoring their liquidity difference. The bid-ask spreads
generally act as an indicator for an assets liquidity and low values signify high trading volumes.
During the same period as for the GC repo, the CD/T-bill spread was 44.42 bps, nearly double
the magnitude of the GC repo spread, attributed to the credit risk associated with CDs. Notably,
the CD/T-bill spread was higher between January 1976 and December 1990, averaging 84.30
bps, further enlightening the credit risk component of the CDs as the fed funds rate reached
levels above 19% and financial turmoil ensued stemming from the savings and loan crisis. Post
2011 the CD/T-bill spread narrowed significantly to 18.24 bps. 2012-2023 compared to previous
periods was characterized by greater stability and lower interest rates, motivating the lower
spread. Interestingly, the CD/T-bill spread for this period is still lower than the GC/Repo spread
the period before by 5.41 basis points. This strengthens the CD/T-bill spread as an adequate

                                         11
Table I

      Notes: Means for yield spreads in basis points are created with monthly averages of daily effective annual rates.
Long comprises the spread between three different illiquid assets and three-month T-bills. From January 1920 to
April 1991 the illiquid asset is the three-month Bankers’ Acceptance rate. From April 1991 to December 2011, the
illiquid asset is the three-month General Collateral Repo rate, and from January 2012 to December 2023 it is the
three-month certificate of deposit rate. Typically quoted bid-ask spreads reported in Panel B are obtained from
Nagel (2016).

measure to assess the liquidity premium outside of periods of financial turmoil. During the long
period BA-rates are available, the BA/T-bill spread averages 44.56 bps, which is consistent with
the quoted bid-ask spread in Panel B, which for BA is 10.0 bps compared to 1.3 bps for T-bills.
In column 9 the long spread for 1920-2023 is 37.72 bps, indicating that there is a liquidity
premium present over a long period, and through analysis across subperiods and various financial
instruments, this conclusion is reinforced further.

For the spread between two-year T-notes on-the-run nearest off-the-run there is a liquidity
premium of small magnitude between 1.10-3.13, depending on the observed period, which is
consistent with their different bid-ask spreads. Surprisingly, the premium was larger by a small
amount, 0.06 bps, during 2012-2023 when compared to 1991-2011. 2012-2023 is a period with
lower interest rates and less volatility and should thus imply a lower premium. For the one-year
T-bills on-the-run and nearest off-the-run the spread shows a premium during 1976-1990 where
rates were high and there was much turmoil, however in recent time the spread is instead
negative. Overtime, the spread is -0.10 bps, and thus we cannot consistently conclude that there
is a liquidity premium persistent over time. This is in line with Moore and Winters (2014), who
find that T-bills’ trading activity differs from that of T-notes, and T-bills not exhibiting the same
pronounced off-the-run period as T-notes. During 1976-1990, we observe a yield spread of 1.32
bps, but during 2012-2023 it is negative by -2.07 bps. The implication of this shift suggests a
substantial preference for off-the-run one-year-bills. Even though they are adjusted to be equal in
terms of maturity to the on-the-run bill, they still display an opposite liquidity premium to the

                                         12
expected one in theory during recent time periods. This could indicate that maturity mandates are
skewing the preferences, where the off-the-run bill fits the average dollar-weighted maturity
mandates better.

Finally, the spreads between off-the-run T-notes and T-bills of maturities three-months, six-
months and one-year are observed in columns (6), (7) and (8) respectively. We observe consistent
positive yield spreads for all maturities and analyzed periods. Thus, we can confirm that there is
an inherent liquidity premium between T-notes and T-bills. The highest spread is between three-
month T-bills and the two-year notes with three-months left to maturity, averaging 7.16 bps over
the entire period. The period between 1976-1990 this spread (14.93) is substantially higher than
for the other two maturities. The explanation presumably lies in the liquidity preference for
shorter maturity assets since they are considered the most liquid, and the interest rate volatility
during this period. Interestingly however this dynamic changes in recent periods where the
premia between one-year T-bills compared to T-notes exceeds the shorter maturities. This could
be an effect of T-bills issued with a maturity of one-year immediately being within the mandates
for GMMFs, whereas the T-notes are just coming into the time frame for GMMFs to trade them.
However, the ambiguity of that conclusion, means we cannot certainly claim this. It can also be
speculated that the stricter liquidity and maturity regulations implemented in recent years have
increased the demand for even shorter maturity Treasuries, hence the lower yield spread for
three-month Treasuries as both the T-bills and the T-notes with that maturity are subject to
higher demand.

3.2 Opportunity Cost of Money and Flight-to-safety Effects
To illustrate the time-variation in the liquidity premium between T-bills and deposits, Figure 2
presents a time series plot of the GC repo/T-bill, CD/T-bill and long spread for the time periods
for which data is available for the respective deposit rates. Additionally, the plots display the
federal funds rate from July 1954 and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s discount rate
between January 1920 to June 1954. The model implies that a potential liquidity premium is
anticipated to exhibit a positive correlation with the fed funds rate. The results indicate that large
yield spreads between illiquid deposits and liquid T-bills throughout the time series tend to occur
simultaneously as high interest rates. However, during turbulent periods the magnitude of the
change in the liquidity premium for the spreads with BAs and CDs is larger than for GC repo,
due to the credit risk associated with those assets. Apart from this the federal funds rate and the
three different spreads move together in a similar way. For the long sample period 1920-2023 we
can see the shock of the Covid-19 pandemic, but ultimately the spread between illiquid deposits
and liquid T-bills tend to follow the rate.

Figure 3 plots the various spreads for different maturities of T-bill/T-note with the federal funds
rate. Generally, the spreads move similarly in relation to one another, and in relation to the
federal funds rate. However, the spreads between one-year treasury securities and
six-month treasury securities plummet in the early 1980s, while the spread for three-month
securities increased. Two underlying arguments could explain this distortion. One, three-month
T-bills are considered the most liquid out of all the securities, and given rising interest rates and
substantial economic turbulence, the demand for short-term liquid assets would increase the
most. However, an opposing effect can be seen in 2023, where rates rise while the spread
between one-year securities rise, and the spreads for the lower maturities decrease. This once
again indicates that the demand for longer maturity T-bills has more of a preference to their two-
year note counterparts, which indicates a distinguishable change in maturity preferences.

                                         13
Panel A

Panel B

Panel C

Figure 2 – Time Variation in Yield Spreads Between Three-Month Deposits and T-bills, and the
Level of Short-Term Interest Rates. The yield spreads in basis points are shown as the shaded areas with the
corresponding axis to the left; the level of the federal funds rate, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
discount rate prior to July 1954 is shown as the solid line with the corresponding axis to the right.

                                         14
Panel A

Panel B

Panel C

Figure 3 – Time Variation in Yield Spreads Between T-bills and T-notes of equal maturity, and
the Level of Short-Term Interest Rates. The yield spreads in basis points are shown as the shaded areas with
the corresponding axis to the left; the level of the federal funds rate, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
discount rate prior to July 1954 is shown as the solid line with the corresponding axis to the right.

                                         15
Panel A

Panel B

Figure 4 – Time Variation in Yield Spreads Between On-The-Run and Nearest Off-The-Run
Treasury Securities Issued with Equal Maturity, and the Level of Short-Term Interest Rates. The
yield spreads in basis points are shown as the shaded areas with the corresponding axis to the left; the level of the
federal funds rate, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York discount rate prior to July 1954 is shown as the solid
line with the corresponding axis to the right.

Figure 4 plots the relationship between the on-the-run/off-the-run spreads and the federal funds
rate. As we can see, while the relationship is volatile, both one-year T-bills and two-year T-notes
display a co-movement with the federal funds rate in earlier periods. However, the relationship
for one-year T-bills changes drastically in later time, where the premia reverts to being almost
constantly negative. This is interesting, since if on-the-run bills were preferred as more liquid,
these would trade at a premium. Our results however show that off-the-run bills are more
preferred. Given that the off-the-run bill, while adjusted to be equal in maturity, trades at a
premium to the on the-run-bill the liquidity premium displayed is opposite to the expected one in
theory during recent time periods. This could indicate that the preference has been distorted, and
the off-the-run bill fits the maturity mandates better.

Table 2 summarizes the initial regressions with the federal funds rate and VIX to illustrate any
initial correlation of the spreads to the federal funds rate. The VIX index is employed to
incorporate flight-to-safety effects. The GC repo/T-bill spread demonstrates a strong
relationship with the fed funds rate. There are also significant results for a correlation with the

                                         16
Table II

  *p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
         Notes. The table summarizes linear regressions of yield spreads between assets of differing liquidity, consisting
  of monthly averages of daily rates. The dependent variables are yield-spreads expressed in basis points. The
  explanatory variable is the short-term interest rate in percent. The short-term interest rate is the federal funds rate
  from July 1954 to December 2023, and Federal Reserve Bank of New York discount rate before that. VIX is the
  CBOE S&P500 implied volatility index from 1990 to 2023. Before that the VIX variable comprises a linear
  projection of the VIX index on the of the daily squared returns on the S&P 500. Newey-West standard errors (12
  lags) are shown in parentheses.

                                         17
                                                    2
uncertainty in the market (VIX), with a high R value. The CD/T-bill spread in column 2 displays
similar results for the rate, consistent over multiple time periods with strong explanatory power,
but the VIX coefficient is higher which reflects the credit risk associated with CDs. Between
2000 and 2023, the relationship however weakens compared to earlier periods. The result is
interesting as it indicates that the explanatory effect of the federal funds rate is distorted in more
recent time. Further, given that the period 1991-2011 displays higher significance than the lower
significance viewed in the 2000-2023 period, the decrease in the federal funds rates explanatory
power is presumably due to changes close to or post 2011. This is coherent with the period for
the implementation of the stricter constraints on GMMFs. However, given the continuously low
federal funds rates during the subsequent period, the result seen could also be a consequence of
that.

In column 3 the two-year T-notes on-the-run/off-the-run spread indicates that there is no
significant relationship with the VIX index for this liquidity premia. However, a significant but
small relationship with the fed funds rate persists over time. The only period where the
significance disappears is if we look at January 1976 to December 1999. This is inconsistent with
the other Treasury spreads who instead lose any significance held if looking at the period
afterwards. This result is interesting as it displays that the federal funds rate holds explanatory
value for longer maturities in a more recent period, and further that the on-the-run and nearest
off-the-run two-year notes do not display similar shifts as shorter maturity spreads do.

The on-the-run/off-the-run spread for one-year T-bills in column 4 has a weaker significant
relationship of small magnitude with the fed funds rate for the entire period in Panel A. For the
subperiods in Panel B and Panel C the fed funds rate loses this significance as a driver behind the
                                       2
spread, further evidenced by low R values. This is indicative of the lacking liquidity premia
between these bills that was previously observed in Table 1. The absence of explanatory value
across all subperiods makes it hard to draw any conclusion about what is affecting this spread,
which is indicative for the lacking spread over time and the negative spread in recent time
observed graphically in figure 4, panel A.

In column 5 the T-note/T-bill spread for 3-month maturity indicates a highly significant positive
relationship between this liquidity premium and the fed funds rate as well as the VIX index for
the long period and the subperiods in Panel B and C. Although there is a weaker significance on
the fed funds rate for the period 1991-2011. This contrasts with the other two maturity spreads
who only gains significance in the short period in Panel C and in the first period in Panel D. In
column 6 and 7 the T-note/T-bill spread for six-month and one-year maturity indicates a
negative but insignificant correlation with the fed funds rate during the long period in Panel A,
and a lower significant positive relation with the VIX index. However, for the period in Panel C
there is a positive and significant relationship with the fed funds rate, in clear contrast to the
                                                                                      2
negative and insignificant relationship observed for the longer period. The R value is also
improved a lot for that period. Following, in Panel D the same result can be found, but with a
negative coefficient for the federal funds rate. In contrast though, in Panel E the results disappear
when looking at the most recent time period, potentially due to the fed funds rate being close to
0% during parts of this period. The significance for the VIX index is lower post 2000 for the 6-
                                                        2
month and one-year maturity spreads, and their R values deteriorates, while for the 3-month
                                                                                                2
maturity spread the VIX index maintains significance, while exhibiting an improved R value.
Post 2000 we conclude that there potentially are other variables, as opposed to the federal funds
rate, that drive changes in the liquidity premium for Treasuries with varying maturitie

                                         18
Table III

  *p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
       Notes: The dependent variable in Panel A is the spread, in basis points, between the three-month banker’s
  acceptance rate and the three-month T-bill yield from January 1920 until April 1991, and the spread between three-
  month GC repo and three-month T-bill from May 1991 to December 2011. Subsequently the spread between three-
  month Certificates of Deposits and three-month T-bill is used to 2023 in Panel A, and the entire period in Panel B. The
  interest rate data consist of monthly averages of daily or weekly rates. VIX refers to the CBOE S&P500 implied volatility
  index. From January 1990 onward, the data are the monthly average of the daily VIX index. Prior to 1990, the VIX
  variable refers to the linear projection of the monthly average VIX index on the monthly average of daily squared
  returns on the S&P500. The other explanatory variables are the federal funds rate and Federal Reserve Bank of New
  York’s discount rate before 1953, expressed in percent. The log government debt/GDP ratio, and the log of outstanding
  amounts of Treasury bills to GDP from 1947. Newey-West standard errors (12 lags) are shown in parentheses.

   3.3 Supply Effects
   Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) and Greenwood, Hanson, and Stein (2015) indicate
   that changes in supply variables impact the liquidity premium. Nagel (2016) opposes this view by
   including the federal funds rate as an explanatory variable, and argues that the supply effect
   diminishes if the rate is controlled for. To check if what is observed by Nagel (2016) still holds,
   and that the opportunity cost of money is the main driver behind the liquidity premium, table 3

                                           19
summaries regressions off the supply variables on the spreads of illiquid deposits and liquid
treasury bills over a long time period.

For the long sample period in Panel A, the liquidity premium cannot be explained by changes in
supply. In column 2, there is a significant negative relationship between debt/GDP that is
                                                                             2
eliminated when incorporating the fed funds rate in column 3. The R value also improves from
16.24 to 54.08, further validating the significant explanatory effect of the federal funds rate. The
same is observed in column 4-6 for the T-bill/GDP supply variable which has a significant
negative correlation with this liquidity premium until the fed funds rate is incorporated. These
results are in line with those of Nagel (2016). Over time, the main driver of the liquidity premium
between deposits and T-bills is the opportunity cost of money. In Panel B, a similar result is
found when doing the exercise on solely the CD/T-bill spread during a shorter time period.
However, when regressing on the T-bill supply to GDP in columns (4), (5) and (6), this variable
remains significant with a strongly negative coefficient of -46.32 even when controlling for the
federal funds rate. While the federal funds rate increases the explanatory value in column (5) and
(6), the persistence of the significance of T-bills supply is contrary to Nagel’s conclusion. It does
signify that supply of near-money assets holds significant explanatory effect for the liquidity
premium. This result also indicates a shift in the drivers behind the liquidity premium in recent
time, where the federal funds rate is no longer the sole explanatory variable for the premium.

Table 4 presents the same process for on-the-run/off-the-run liquidity premia. In Panel A, the 2-
year T-note on-the-run/off-the-run liquidity premium displays a significant relationship with the
federal funds rate consistently through the regressions. Furthermore, the supply variables hold
                                                 2
very small significant value, with very low R . Any significant effects deteriorate once the federal
funds rate is controlled for. This is similar to the results Nagel obtains for deposits and T-bills. In
panel B, a contrast is observed. The federal funds rate initially holds significance for the on-the-
                                                                           2
run/nearest-off-the run one-year bill spread, but with a very low R . When we control for the
debt to GDP, this effect disappears. Ultimately, in the final regression in column (6), only the
debt to GDP holds significant explanatory value. This contrast once again enlightens the two
differences in the liquidity between on-the-run/off-the-run T-bills and T-notes. The T-note
spread has a distinct relation to the opportunity cost of capital, whereas the T-bill spread has
supply as the main factor explaining the spread. This further strengthens the conclusion that
other variables are distorting the premium between on-the-run/off-the-run one-year T-bills.

Moving on to the relation between different maturities, table 5 conducts the same analysis with
the varying maturity yield spreads between off-the-run T-notes and T-bills with an equal maturity
left. In panel A, the spread between 3-month maturities has a significant relationship to the
federal funds rate consistently. Interestingly though, when controlling for supply variables the
significance of the rate decreases which is opposite to what Nagel (2016) observed, where the
rate instead increased in significance. Whereas initially debt-to-GDP holds highly significant value
when controlling for no other variables it loses its explanatory effect completely once the federal
funds rate is controlled for which is expected. Opposingly however, the T-bill supply remains
significant in all regressions. It loses some significance when controlling for the rate, but still
maintains high significance throughout. Ultimately, we can thus conclude that T-bill supply and
the federal funds rate both seem to have explanatory value for the liquidity premium between
short maturity liquid assets. Thus, it is not only the opportunity cost of capital that is controlling
this spread.

                                        20
 Table IV
 Liquidity Premia and The Opportunity Cost of Money: Including Near-Money Asset Supply

                            (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)

                                                                     1976-2023

  Panel A: Two-year T-note on-the-run/nearest off-the-run
      Fed funds rate 0.27 **                         0.32 **                         0.28 **         0.33 **
                               (0.09)                                (0.10)                                (0.10)             (0.10)
          VIX 0.03 0.02 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.04
                          (0.04) (0.04) (0.04) (0.04) (0.04) (0.03)
       log(Debt/GDP) -1.46 . 0.80 1.26
                                           (0.82) (0.60) (0.90)
      log(T-bill/GDP) -1.74 * 0.22 -0.83
                                                                            (0.78) (0.61) (0.88)
         Intercept -0.06 0.29 0.27 -3.00 0.45 -1.49
                          (0.75) (0.93) (0.78) (1.93) (1.43) (1.72)
        Adj. R² (%) 7.24 1.76 7.41 1.12 7.10 7.38
         #Obs. 576 576 576 576 576 576

  Panel B: One-year T-bill on-the-run/nearest off-the-run
       Fed funds rate 0.17 * 0.01 0.13 0.01
                          (0.09) (0.11) (0.09) (0.11)
           VIX 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.02 -0.00
                          (0.05) (0.05) (0.05) (0.04) (0.04) (0.05)
      log(Debt/GDP) -2.60 **          -2.52 *                                           -3.09 *
                                                  (0.92)             (1.19)                                                   (1.31)
       log(T-bill/GDP) -2.43 . -1.55 1.02
                                                                            (1.26) (1.43) (1.30)
         Intercept -1.20 -2.24 * -2.24 * -6.41 * -4.85 -0.08
                          (0.87) (1.00) (0.99) (3.18) (3.47) (3.09)

        Adj. R² (%) 3.02 6.58 6.42 2.56 3.77 6.47
         #Obs. 576 576 576 576 576 576
  *p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
       Notes: The dependent variable in Panel A is the spread, in basis points, of daily effective annual yields between two-
  year on-the-run T-notes and their nearest off-the-run counterpart. In Panel B the dependent variable is the spread in basis
  points between one-year on-the-run T-bills and their nearest off-the-run counterpart. VIX refers to the CBOE S&P500
  implied volatility index. From January 1990 onward, the data are the monthly average of the daily VIX index. Prior to 1990,
  the VIX variable refers to the linear projection of the monthly average VIX index on the monthly average of daily squared
  returns on the S&P500. The other explanatory variables are the federal funds rate expressed in percent. The log government
  debt/GDP ratio, and the log of outstanding amounts of Treasury bills to GDP. Newey-West standard errors (12 lags) are
  shown in parentheses.

In panel B, the spread between 6-month maturities displays a pronounced difference compared to 3-
month maturities, as the fed funds rate has no significance, regardless of if a supply variable is employed
or not. However, there is a highly significant negative correlation with the supply of T-bills illustrated
consistently in the regressions. Thus, for medium term liquid securities we can conclude that the

                                            21
Table V
Liquidity Premia and The Opportunity Cost of Money: Including Near-Money Asset Supply

                           (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)

                                                                   1976-2023

 Panel A: Two-year T-note/Three-month T-bill
     Fed funds rate 1.13 ***                         0.78 *                         0.75 **         0.86 **
                             (0.25)                                (0.33)                                (0.25)             (0.31)
         VIX 0.47 *** 0.41 ** 0.45 ** 0.52 *** 0.52 *** 0.54 ***
                         (0.14) (0.16) (0.14) (0.14) (0.13) (0.14)
     log(Debt/GDP) -10.80 *** -5.34 2.92
                                         (2.58) (3.66) (4.10)
     log(T-bill/GDP) -17.50 ***        -12.24 **        -14.66 **
                                                                                      (4.17)             (4.32)             (5.19)
        Intercept -7.18 ** -9.36 ** -9.39 ** -45.36 *** -36.08 ** -40.59 **
                         (2.69) (3.26) (3.18) (10.93) (11.16) (12.85)
      Adj. R² (%) 16.64 14.89 17.81 17.38 21.22 21.29
        #Obs. 576 576 576 576 576 576

 Panel B: Two-year T-note/Six-month T-bill
      Fed funds rate -0.22 -0.34 -0.52 -0.26
                         (0.39) (0.51) (0.40) (0.50)
         VIX 0.31 * 0.32 * 0.30 * 0.35 ** 0.35 ** 0.40 **
                         (0.13) (0.12) (0.14) (0.12) (0.13) (0.12)
     log(Debt/GDP) 0.53 -1.86 6.57 .
                                         (2.68) (3.12) (3.64)
     log(T-bill/GDP) -5.89 . -9.52 ** -14.97 ***
                                                                          (3.28) (2.90) (3.97)
        Intercept -1.90 -2.68 -2.67 -17.96 * -24.39 ** -34.53 ***
                         (2.74) (2.75) (2.78) (8.68) (7.48) (9.33)

      Adj. R² (%) 6.15 5.32 6.29 7.99 11.53 13.46
        #Obs. 576 576 576 576 576 576
 Panel C: Two-year T-note/One-year T-bill
      Fed funds rate -0.63 -0.68 -0.84 . -0.61
                         (0.46) (0.52) (0.47) (0.51)
         VIX 0.26 * 0.29 ** 0.25 * 0.29 ** 0.29 * 0.33 **
                         (0.12) (0.10) (0.12) (0.10) (0.11) (0.10)
     log(Debt/GDP) 3.95 -0.77 5.98 .
                                         (3.61) (2.60) (3.47)
     log(T-bill/GDP) -1.10 -7.04 . -12.00 *
                                                                          (4.68) (3.59) (5.04)
        Intercept 2.94 2.59 2.62 -3.19 -13.68 -22.91 *
                         (2.52) (2.53) (2.59) (11.08) (8.63) (10.84)
      Adj. R² (%) 9.60 5.76 9.49 3.61 12.09 13.45
        #Obs. 576 576 576 576 576 576
 *p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
      Notes: The dependent variable in Panel A is the spread, in basis points, of daily effective annual yields between three-
 month T-bills, and a two-year T-notes with an equal maturity. In Panel B the dependent variable is the same spread for six-
 month T-bills and a two-year T-notes with an equal maturity. In Panel C, the spread in basis points between one-year T-bills,
 and a two-year T-notes with an equal maturity. VIX refers to the CBOE S&P500 implied volatility index. From January 1990
 onward, the data are the monthly average of the daily VIX index. Prior to 1990, the VIX variable refers to the linear
 projection of the monthly average VIX index on the monthly average of daily squared returns on the S&P500. The other
 explanatory variables are the federal funds rate expressed in percent. The log government debt/GDP ratio, and the log of
 outstanding amounts of Treasury bills to GDP. Newey-West standard errors (12 lags) are shown in parentheses.

                                           22
liquidity supply is a determining factor, whereas the opportunity cost of money cannot be
determined to have a similar significant effect. In panel C we see that no variable on its own
holds significant explanatory power for the liquidity premia between longer maturity liquid assets.
When we control for all variables at the same time, we ultimately see that T-bill supply holds
explanatory value, similar to the medium-term liquidity premia. However, the weak explanatory
effects of all variables makes it hard to determine that there is a substantial relation between the
supply of liquid assets and the premia for longer term liquid assets. These weak relations do
indicate that another variable with more explanatory value for longer maturity T-bills is excluded
from our framework.

Overall, our results do indicate a discrepancy between different maturities of Treasury securities.
The opportunity cost of capital holds explanatory value over time for short term maturities, but
fail to do the same for longer maturities. Similarly, the supply of liquidity does explain the
liquidity premia between medium term securities but cannot be found to have the same effect for
long term liquid securities. Ultimately, this indicates that there are other factors excluded from
the model that have significant explanatory value for our observed liquidity premia in recent time.

3.4. Summary & Interpretation
The framework we utilize for exploring the difference in liquidity premia provides insights into
the magnitudes of different liquidity premia inherent in the U.S. Treasury securities market. We
find that most previously identified liquidity premia are existent in line with their previous
findings, and that they are persistent overtime. However, our analysis also indicates certain shifts
in liquidity premia for T-bills with longer maturities, especially in recent time. We also conclude
that the spread between on-the-run T-bills and off-the-run T-bills, that is commonly found to be
less persistent than that between on-the-run/off-the-run T-notes, has displayed an opposite
relation in recent time. The on-the-run/off-the-run T-bills have instead seen the off-the-run bills
trade at a premium to their on-the-run counterpart. These two findings are interesting, as they
display an effect where the premia differ depending on the maturity of the assets. The negative
spread for on-the-run/off-the-run T-bills also has an indication that off-the-run bills are
preferred to their on-the-run counterparts. This distortion could be a consequence of that
GMMFs maturity requirements limit their potential to hold the longer maturity on-the-run bills,
and thus they prefer off-the-run bills that have been available longer to the market.

Consequently, the regression frameworks also provides insightful observations where we can
conclude that while Nagel’s (2016) findings that the liquidity premia between deposits and T-bills
hold in the long-run, there is a slight different effect in the shorter term. Here, supply variables
gain more explanatory power, contradicting Nagel’s (2016) theory that the opportunity cost of
money is the main driver of the liquidity premia. Concurrently, regressions on different maturities
of T-bills display a similar effect where the supply of liquid assets better explain the premia for
longer term maturities. This further indicates that the premia is driven by different factors
depending on the maturity of the underlying assets compared. Thus, reasonably other factors left
out of our model such as mutual fund maturity mandates could explain this discrepancy further.

We acknowledge various limitations with this approach. First, the model utilized focuses on
supply of liquid assets and the opportunity cost of capital. However, it excludes any variable that
could ultimately confirm and substantiate the effects of mutual fund mandates on the liquidity
premia. Given this limitation, future research should consider incorporating other variables that
would substantiate the effects of the discussed mutual fund mandates on the liquidity premia
such as specific mutual fund characteristics and their changes, or analysis of different markets
where one could be used as a control group not affected by the mandates. We also recognize the

                                        23
possibility that our filling of the missing one-year bills rates might to some degree distort the
conclusions drawn.

                         4. Conclusion

The liquidity premia in the U.S. Treasury market are complex. The evidence indicates that for the
premia between T-bills and less liquid deposits the findings of Nagel (2016) still holds over a long
time period. The opportunity cost of money drives this liquidity premia in the long run, but
contrary to this the supply of Treasuries has gained a significant impact when looking at a more
recent shorter time period indicating a shift in the driver of this premia. When changing scope
towards the liquidity premia between US Treasuries of different maturities, the opportunity cost
of money has no significant impact for Treasuries of longer maturities, but for three-month
maturity securities it still has. Reasonably, on could claim that this effect is due to the stricter
maturity constraints that GMMFs are subject to following the Global Financial Crisis, leading to
the increased explanatory value of T-bill supply in more recent time, and for longer maturity
assets. This leaves room for further research on the reasons behind these distinct differences of
the drivers behind the liquidity premium between Treasuries of different maturity, and the
changed demand dynamics for T-bills following the implementations of regulatory constraints.
Going into the less explored area of the on-the-run/off-the-run phenomena between T-bills, it
appears as expected to be non-existent for these highly liquid assets in the long run, justifying it
being neglected by the researchers at the forefront of the on-the-run and off-the-run field.
Interestingly, we also observe a premium for the off-the-run one-year T-bills in recent time as
opposed to what would be expected in theory. The preference for the off-the-run bills confirms a
distorting effect from omitted variables in our framework. This effect might very well arise from
strict maturity mandates imposed on GMMFs.

                                        24
                         References

Literature:
Amihud, Yakov and Mendelson, Haim. Liquidity, Maturity, and the Yields on US Treasury
Securities. Journal of Finance, 46 (1991) 1411-1425.

Bohn, Henning. The Sustainability of Fiscal Policy in the United States. Sustainability of Public Debt,
R. Neck and J. Sturm, eds., pp. 15–49, 2008).

Buffa, Andrea M. and Hodor, Idan. Institutional investors, heterogeneous benchmarks and the
comovement of asset prices. Journal of Financial Economics. 147 (2023), 352-381.

Chaudhary, Manav and Fu, Zhiyu and Li, Jian. Corporate Bond Multipliers: Substitutes Matter
(December 2, 2022). Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4292266 or
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4292266

D’Avernas, Adrien and Vandeweyer, Quentin. Treasury Bill Shortages and the Pricing of Short-
Term Assets. (March 15, 2023) Journal of Finance (Forthcoming). Available at
https://adriendavernas.com/papers/tbillshortages.pdf

Glasgo, Philip W and Landes, William J and Thompson A. Frank. Bank Discount, Coupon
Equivalent, and Compound Yields. Financial Management, 11, (1982).

Goldreich, David and Hanke, Bernd and Nath, Purnendu. The Price of Future Liquidity: Time-
Varying Liquidity in the U.S. Treasury Market. Review of Finance, 9 (2005), 1-32.

Greenwood, Robin and Hanson, Samuel G and Stein, Jeremy C. A Comparative-Advantage
Approach to Government Debt Maturity. Journal of Finance, 70 (2015), 1683-1722.

He, Zhiguo and Nagel, Stefan and Song, Zhaogang. Treasury Inconvenience Yields during the
COVID-19 Crisis. Journal of Financial Economics, 143 (2022), 57-79.

He, Zhiguo and Song, Zhaogang, Agency MBS as Safe Assets (November 7, 2022). Available at
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4173140 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4173140

Kamara, Avraham. Liquidity, Taxes, and Short-Term Treasury Yields. Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis, 29 (1994), 403-417.

Koijen, Ralph S.J and Yogo, Motohiro. A Demand System Approach to Asset Pricing. Journal of
Political Economy. 127 (2019), 1475-1515.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Li, Wenhao. The Demand for Money, Near-Money, and Treasury
Bonds. The Review of Financial Studies, 36 (2023), 2091–2130.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette. The Aggregate Demand for Treasury
Debt, Journal of Political Economy, 120 (2012), 233-267.

Li, Wenhao and Ma, Yiming and Zhao, Yang, The Passthrough of Treasury Supply to Bank
Deposit Funding. Columbia Business School Research Paper, USC Marshall School of Business
Research Paper, (2023).

                                        25
Longstaff, Francis A. The Flight-to-Liquidity Premium in US Treasury Bond Prices. Journal of
Business, 77 (2004), 511-526.

Moore, Mark E and Winters, Drew B. When Is a Treasury Security On-the-Run? The Financial
Review, 49 (2014), 77-88.

Musto, David K. and Nini, Gregory and Schwarz, Krista. Notes on Bonds: Liquidity at all Costs
in the Great Recession. Jacobs Levy Equity Management Center for Quantitative Financial
Research Paper, (2015).

Nagel, Stefan. The liquidity premium of near-money assets. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131
(2016), 1927-1971.

Pasquariello, Paolo and Vega, Clara. The on-the-run liquidity phenomenon. Journal of Financial
Economics. 92 (2009), 1-24.

Warga, Arthur. Bond Returns, Liquidity, and Missing Data. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis, 27 (1992), 605-617.

Electronic:
Electronic Code of Federal Regulations. (2024, May 9). 17 CFR§ 270.2a-7 – Money market
funds. Retrived from https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-17/chapter-II/part-270/section-
270.2a-7

                                        26
Appendix

This thesis incorporates the use of external digital tools to aid in the preparation of the paper.
Specifically, ChatGPT is utilized, an AI language model developed by OpenAI, for grammar
checking, spelling corrections, and assistance with the structuring of content.

Appendix 1 – Missing values in the one-year T-bill on-the-run and nearest-off-the-
run spread

We choose not to include the six-month on-the-run and nearest off-the-run bills in our analysis
to be conservative with our findings. The authors Gurkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2006) who
created the yield curve we use disclaim that it might not accurately reflect shorter maturities.
Thus, the adjustments might not be entirely accurate, mostly when concerned with how big a
potential liquidity premium between these bills might be. Hence, we leave the spread out of the
analysis. However, the time variation for these bills still holds explanatory power for the variation
in the on-the-run and adjusted off-the-run yield for one-year bills, especially since they also
reflect a bill/bill spread, as opposed to the off-the-run and on-the-run two-year notes. We will
now further exemplify this conclusion and motivate our linear regression estimation for the
missing values between 2001 and 2008.

To fill the missing values using a similar method to Nagel (2016), there are two options. We can
either train a regression on the spread directly, or on the yields for the on-the-run one-year bills
and the adjusted off-the-run one-year bills separately. To be able to accurately predict a spread it
has to be trained on a variable which carries similar characteristics to the variable that we want to
predict. For the first option we can either train it directly on the spread between two-year on-the-
run and nearest off-the-run notes, or the spread between six-month on-the-run and nearest off-
the-run bills. Or we could use both. However, when training directly on the spread the model
gains little explanatory value. To be specific, the model trained on just the two-year note spread
                  2                                                                   2
gains an adjusted 𝑅  of 7.45, and similarly the model trained on both spreads an adjusted 𝑅  of
24.27. We can thus quickly determine that this approach does not provide sufficient explanatory
value for our purpose.

We also want to refrain from training our model on any independent variables in our regression
framework to avoid biases. That leaves us only with the option to train two separate yields and
take the spreads between these. This could arguably be done in many ways, but ultimately the end
results are always similar in the time-variation, and very close in the spread. To visualize this,
figure 1.1 panel A plots three different estimation methods for the yields of the on-the-run one-
year bill, and Panel B plots the same estimation methods for the off-the-run one-year bill yield.
To further solidify the estimations of our regression models, we also construct the synthetic yield
of an off-the-run one-year bill using the same method as explained in our model. This is arguably
the most accurate representation that is obtainable for a one-year bill during the period, and as
we can see, the model that we ultimately utilize to predict the off-the-run one-year bill yield
moves very close to the synthetic off-the-run one-year-bill constructed with the off-the-run yield
curve, further explaining the appropriateness of our prediction model.

Finally, we want to disclose that no matter which one of these prediction methods we use,
ultimately the end results in this thesis are similar and the same conclusions can be drawn.

                                        27
Panel A

Panel B

Figure 1.1 – Yield Estimation Results for On-The-Run and Adjusted Off-The-Run
One-Year T-bills. The figures present the estimation results from three different trained linear
models predicting the annual effective yield for missing one-year Treasury bills. Panel A presents
the estimated on-the-run yield, and Panel B the estimated adjusted off-the-run yield. The
coefficient used for training is referred to in the legend. The model trained using both factors
incorporate the six-month T-bill and two-year T-note yields in training. Panel B also displays a
synthetic off-the-run one year T-bill constructed using the off-the-run yield curve.

                                  28
Appendix 2 - Missing values in the interpolate one-year T-bill yield
The method for filling the missing values using the linear method has already been argued for in
appendix 1. Thus, here we mostly explain the choice of the variables used for estimating the
interpolated one-year T-bill yield. Given that we do have the two-year T-note with a maturity
closest to 365-days, implementing the trained coefficient become easier as we have a reference
variable. Training the interpolated one-year T-bill yield also provides us with a trained variable
that is equal in terms of maturity to the two-year T-note. Thus, the two-year T-note with a
maturity closest to 365-days becomes an essential variable to include in the regression. Given
that, we add some controls to our estimate of the time variation between the interpolated one-
year T-bill yield and the two-year note yield with 365-days left to maturity. Adding these controls
are simply an attempt to gain the most accuracy possible. However, as can be seen in in Figure
2.1, they make virtually no difference on the end estimation. In figure 2.1 we plot our prediction
results using all the defined control variables, then we also plot one estimate utilizing only the
two-year note yield with 365-days left to maturity, and the interpolated yield of three-month T-
bills and six-month T-bills. Finally, we plot an estimate using no controls at all. As seen, the
controls make virtually no difference, and the result becomes very similar either way.

        Figure 2.1 – Yield Estimation Results for Linearly Interpolated one-year T-bills. The
        figures present the resulting estimations from three different trained linear models predicting the
        interpolated effective annual yield for missing one-year Treasury bills. The coefficient used in
         training referrers to the yield of a T-note with a maturity closest to 365-days. The two controls refer
         to the linearly interpolated yields of T-bills with three- and six-months left to maturity respectively.
         The subsequent controls refer to two-year T-notes with maturities closest to the three- and six-
          month T-bills

                                        29
Appendix 3 – Spread between six month on-the-run and nearest of the run T-bills
For those who might be interested, Tables 3.1 and 3.2 also display the six-month on-the-run/off-
the-run summary statistics and regressions respectively. Figure 3.1 also plots the time difference
in this liquidity premium to the federal funds rate.

Table 3.1

                        Notes. Means for yield spreads between on-the-run and off-the-run six-
                 month T-bills in basis points are created with monthly averages of daily
                  effective annual rates. The spread is calculated by taking the yield of an on-
                   the-run six-month T-bill and comparing it with the yield of the nearest off-
                   the-run six-month T-bill issued one auction earlier.

  Figure 3.1 – Time Variation in Yield Spreads Between T-bills and T-notes of equal maturity, and
  the Level of Short-Term Interest Rates. The yield spreads in basis points is shown as the shaded areas with
  the corresponding axis to the left; the level of the federal funds rate, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
   discount rate prior to July 1954 is shown as the solid line with the corresponding axis to the right.

                                        30
Table 3.2

                                               31
32