Unveiling Market Seasonality

The Day-of-the-Week Effect on the Swedish Stock Market Across Different
Market Conditions

OLIVIA LUNDGREN

ERIK OSCARSSON

Bachelor Thesis, Olivia Lundgren & Erik Oscarsson

Stockholm School of Economics

2024
                            Stockholm School of Economics
   Unveiling Market Seasonality: The Day-of-the-Week Effect on the Swedish Stock
                    Market Across Different Market Conditions

Abstract:
This study explores the day-of-the-week effect on the Swedish stock market between 2014
and 2024. The day-of-the-week effect, a phenomenon where stock returns differ predictably
depending on the weekday, poses a challenge to the Efficient Market Hypothesis. Our
research examines variations in this effect across different market capitalizations and
timeframes defined by the COVID-19 pandemic. The results reveal a pronounced
day-of-the-week effect within Sweden's small- and mid-capitalization stocks. Further, our
findings suggest that Friday returns are significantly higher than other days of the week for
small- and mid-capitalization stocks, along with varying results for the different subsamples,
indicating that market efficiency may fluctuate based on economic conditions and specific
market capitalizations.

Keywords:

   Day-of-the-week effect, Size Effect, Volatility Clustering, Efficient Market Hypothesis,
  Anomalies

   Authors:

   Olivia Lundgren (25505)

   Erik Oscarsson (25482)

Tutors:

   Ye Zang, Associate Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Adrien d'Avernas, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Olivia Lundgren and Erik Oscarsson, 2024

                                     2
                            Stockholm School of Economics
                               I. Introduction
       The day-of-the-week effect states that stock returns exhibit patterns that vary across
different trading weekdays. Such seasonality challenges established theories in financial
economics, notably the Efficient Market Hypothesis (EMH). As outlined by Fama (1965), the
EMH asserts that asset prices fully integrate all available information, theoretically
eliminating the possibility of consistently outperforming the market through stock selection
or timing. Fama argues that only unforeseen news can influence stock prices since all known
public and private information is already reflected in the stock price. Contrary to this theory,
research has documented notable differences in stock returns across different days of the
week in various financial markets, challenging the notion (Claesson, (1987); Cinko, Avci,
Aybars, and Öner, (2015); Cross, (1971); French, (1980); Guidi, (2010); Rogalski, (1984);
Smirlock and Starks, (1986); Gibbons and Hess, (1981)).
       Studying the day-of-the-week effect in the Swedish stock market can provide valuable
insights into market anomalies, investor behavior, and investment strategies. Insights that
could result in enhanced portfolio performance, a better understanding of market efficiency,
and informed regulatory measures to ensure fair and transparent markets. Additionally, it
could contribute to advancing academic research in finance and provide knowledge for
investors, financial analysts, policymakers, and regulatory authorities. Our research
investigates whether a day-of-the-week effect has been present in the Swedish stock market
from 2014 to 2024. It aims to understand to what extent the day-of-the-week effect influences
stock returns and how these effects are moderated by stock size and the COVID-19
pandemic.
       Cross (1971) examined the S&P 500 stock returns across weekdays from 1953 to
1970, emphasizing the returns observed on Mondays and Fridays. The study revealed
significant price fluctuations on these days compared to other weekdays, suggesting distinct
market behaviors at the start and end of the trading week. Building on this research, Gibbons
and Hess (1981) extended the investigation into the day-of-the-week effect within the U.S.
stock market. Utilizing daily observations from both the S&P 500 and the Dow Jones 30
industrials from 1962 to 1978, their study highlighted a persistent negative return on
Mondays. Moreover, researchers have examined the day-of-the-week effect by investigating
its relationship with company size. Abraham and Ikenberry (1994) released a study on the
weekend effect, specifically examining the interplay between Friday and Monday. Their
findings indicated that the impact of this effect is more pronounced in small- and
mid-capitalization stocks.
       Claesson (1987) conducted an extensive study on the Swedish stock market regarding
the day-of-the-week effect, analyzing the Stockholm market between 1978 and 1984.
Claesson's findings show that the range of variation between the daily returns is 0,25
percentage units. The findings further showcased that for six of the seven years, Tuesdays
had the lowest stock return, with five of them possessing a negative average return. The day
with the largest return for three years was Friday, Monday for two years, and one year for
Wednesday and Thursday. The average daily returns for all days of the week was 0,13%, the
highest being Mondays and Fridays at 0,2%, followed by Wednesdays and Thursdays at
0,12%, and Tuesdays having a slightly negative return, suggesting that the market was
ineffective. Claesson states that an investor has the theoretical opportunity to create arbitrage,
yet questions if it has any practical implications. Furthermore, Claesson states that the
standard deviation does not vary much between the days of the week, the largest being
Mondays, which slightly declines day for day during the rest of the week. A reason suggested
for the effect is that a seller always loses two days of rent if the transaction is placed on a
Friday, compared to other days of the week. Hence, the seller could request a higher share

                                     3
                            Stockholm School of Economics
price on a Friday, meaning the return is greater than other days of the week. Consequently,
the Monday return is expected to be negative as the price reverts to normal. Practically,
Claesson questions whether this logic holds, as the Monday return was the second largest in
the sample.
       Apart from Claesson's suggested two-day rent premium, the day-of-the-week effect in
stock markets may arise from various factors. Michaely, Rubin, and Vedrashko (2016)
proposed that companies tend to disclose positive news during the week and delay bad news
until the weekend, resulting in a declining Monday price. Groth, Leweillen, Schlarbaum, and
Lease (1979) state that investors do not have much time during the week to analyze stocks;
hence, they take their stockbroker's suggestions to buy during the week. However, when the
investors have time on weekends, they may be more inclined to do their own research and
sell more, decreasing the Monday price. According to behavioral finance literature, investors
feel pessimistic on Mondays, the first day of the trading week. In contrast, they feel
optimistic during Fridays, the last day of the trading week. Hence, stock prices tend to fall on
Mondays and rise on Fridays (Lyroudi, Dasilas, Patev, and Kanaryan, 2004).
       Behavioral finance delves into the impact of psychological biases and emotional
reactions on investors' decision-making, often leading to market anomalies. Slovic (1972)
highlighted how biases can divert decisions from rational analysis, setting the stage for a
range of non-optimal financial behaviors. Shefrin and Statman (1985) further explored this
using behavioral theories to explain the disposition effect, where investors tend to sell
winning stocks prematurely while clinging to losing ones due to regret aversion and loss
aversion (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979). These biases prevent investors from cutting losses
and realizing gains efficiently. Furthermore, concepts such as herd behavior illuminate how
investors might follow the majority without independent analysis, driven by a fear of
deviating from group norms (Lux, 1995). These behavioral biases, combined with
physiological reactions to perceived financial threats or opportunities, underscore how
personal perceptions can influence financial behaviors, contributing to, for instance, the
day-of-the-week effect.
       Findings also remain inconclusive with respect to stock market anomalies, aligning
with the EMH in such cases. Apolinario, Caro, Sales, and Santana (2006) analyzed this effect
across major European stock markets from 1997 to 2004, concluding that there was no
abnormal behavior in the returns of these markets. Similarly, Puja (2010) investigated the
                                                                                                                                                st
presence of the day-of-the-week effect in the S&P 500 from January 1 , 1990, to November
    th
30 , 2004, and found the results insignificant. Supporting the notion of market efficiency in
the U.S., Gonzalez-Perez and Guerro (2013) found no evidence of the day-of-the-week effect
in the S&P 500 data spanning from 2004 to 2011. Concluding that abnormal returns are
unlikely without additional risk, as there was no consistent seasonal pattern. Likewise, a
study by Carlucci, Junior, and Lima (2013) on the primary stock exchanges in Canada and the
U.S. from 2002 to 2012 corroborated these findings, indicating an absence of the
day-of-the-week effect.
        Other researchers propose that the day-of-the-week effect was historically significant,
yet suggesting that it has declined over time as markets have become more efficient. For
instance, Kamara (1997) examined the Monday effect over 31 years from 1962 to 1993,
focusing on the daily returns of the S&P 500 and a small-capitalization stock index on the
New York Stock Exchange. The study revealed a consistent Monday effect in
small-capitalization stocks. However, abnormal Monday returns weakened as the study
period concluded. Furthermore, Yamori and Kurihara (2004) discovered that the
day-of-the-week effect was present in the 1980s for certain currencies. However, for the
1990s, their research showed that the day-of-the-week effect had vanished for almost all
currencies, indicating a more efficient market forming.

                                     4
                            Stockholm School of Economics
       Xiao (2016) incorporated subsamples to examine the influence of economic recession
or expansion based on the specific period on the day-of-the-week effect. The study
investigated the US stock market based on daily observations from the Russell 3000 index
between 2000 and 2015. Chusanachoti and Kamath (2002) analyzed the Thai stock price
index, focusing on two distinct periods: 1980-1989 and 1990-1998. Their research revealed
that the day-of-the-week effect was evident during the 1980s but had completely vanished by
the 1990s. Additionally, Högholm and Knif (2009) provide evidence from the Finnish stock
                                       nd                                th
market, covering April 2 , 1993, and June 30 , 2006. The result is documented to differ
between the periods: pre-euro and post-euro. Before implementing the euro, the market
returns were clean from weekly patterns, while after implementing the new currency, there
was an asymmetry in the returns across weekdays.
       As in previous studies, our paper investigates whether the effect remains consistent
across periods and events. Hence, the data is divided into three subsamples: Pre-, During-,
and Post-COVID-19. Additionally, similar to Abraham and Ikenberry (1994), respective
stock sizes are grouped to determine if there is a size effect, as previous research suggests
that small-capitalization stocks are less efficient than large-capitalization stocks (Brooks
2008). Hence, the data is divided into small-, mid-, and large-capitalization stocks, a novel
approach within Swedish research. Moreover, this paper explores the importance of trading
volume in relation to the day-of-the-week effect, an aspect previously unexplored in the
context of the Swedish market examining the day-of-the-week effect. The scope has been
limited to the Swedish stock market from 2014 to 2024, creating opportunities for future
research in new markets and timeframes to compare and discuss similarities and differences
with the results found in this paper.
       Our thesis explores the application of Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regression, a
frequently used econometric methodology in literature studies. It incorporates several dummy
variables tailored to the data frequency. When analyzing the day-of-the-week effect on daily
data, a separate dummy variable for each weekday is typically included (French, 1980;
Gibbons and Hess, 1981; Smirlock and Starks, 1986; Berument and Kıymaz, 2001).
Additionally, our research employs the Generalized Autoregressive Conditional
Heteroskedasticity (GARCH) model, a common method to assess the persistence of this
phenomenon (Berument and Kiymaz 2001; Guidi 2010). This approach enables us to capture
the volatility clustering often observed in financial time series data, providing a more
nuanced understanding of market behaviors. Moreover, to investigate the size effect within
the data, we utilize a t-test. This statistical test allows us to determine whether the mean
returns differ significantly between size capitalizations of stocks. Lastly, a Sharpe ratio
analysis covers the risk-adjusted returns (Sharpe, 1966). This model facilitates a more
rigorous evaluation of investment performance by accounting for risk, offering a nuanced
understanding of returns relative to the associated volatility.
       The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II covers data and key
variables. Section III discusses the methodology. Section IV presents the results, Section V
presents the discussion, and Section VI concludes.
                                   II. Data

A. Data Sources and Sample Selection
        We obtain data on closing prices for small-, mid-, and large-capitalization stocks from
Nasdaq Stockholm, the primary data source for Stockholm market statistics. It is regulated
and governed by the Swedish Securities Market Act (lag (2007:528) om
värdepappersmarknaden) and subject to supervision by the Swedish Financial Supervisory

                                     5
                            Stockholm School of Economics
Authority (Sw. Finansinspektionen) (Nasdaq, 2021). The data includes the daily closing
values that are gathered from the OMX Stockholm Small Capitalization PI (OMXSSCPI)
index, OMX Stockholm Mid Capitalization PI (OMXSMCPI) index, and OMX Stockholm
Large Capitalization PI (OMXSLCPI). It should be noted that a shortcoming with the data for
our purposes is that the companies in each index are associated with a single location, in this
case, Stockholm. Yet, several of the large-capitalization firms operate out of multiple offices.
Ideally, we would only like to analyze the Stockholm office.
       Similar to the approach used by Claesson (1987), we employ data scraping techniques
to remove non-bank days and dates represented as “NA”, reducing the dataset to 2511
observations per index. The data is filtered by weekday, with Monday represented as 1,
Tuesday represented as 2, etc. The daily return is calculated for respective indexes and
                                                                                                                                                              th
illustrated over time in Figure 1. The timeframe of the sampled data ranges from January 07 ,
                                  th
2014, to January 12 , 2024.
       For the baseline of our analysis, we restrict the sample to only the small-, mid-, and
large-capitalization indexes. Drawing inspiration from Xiao (2016), we refine our approach
in subsequent analyses by dividing the dataset into three distinct periods to assess the
persistence of the results through different phases of the COVID-19 pandemic. The
subsamples are labeled as follows: Subsample 1 - Pre-COVID-19, spanning from the start of
                                           th
our dataset on January 7 , 2014, to the announcement of the first COVID-19 case in Sweden
                                                                                                            st
by the Swedish Public Health Agency on January 31 , 2020 (Folkhälsomyndigheten, 2023).
                                                                                                                                                              th
Subsample 2 - During-COVID-19, covers the duration of the pandemic, ending on May 5 ,
2023, when the WHO declared that COVID-19 was no longer an international threat (WHO,
2023). Subsample 3 - Post-COVID-19 extends from this point until the conclusion of the
                                      th
dataset on January 12 , 2024. The respective number of observations for each subsample are
1522, 816, and 173, introducing challenges due to the varied sample sizes.

Figure 1: Figure 1 illustrates the percentage change in closing prices across all three indexes. The
graph is charted over time and initiated on 2014-01-07. The x-axis represents the time horizon, and
the y-axis shows the percentage change. Each index is normalized to start at zero, highlighting the
relative performance of each capitalization size. Dashed lines delineate the full period into three
                                                                                         th                                     st
subsamples. Subsample 1 spans from January 07 , 2014 to January 31 , 2020, subsample 2 covers

                                     6
                            Stockholm School of Economics

                        st                            th                                                                        th                                 th
the February 1 , 2020 to May 05 , 2023, and subsample 3 spans from May 06 , 2023 to January 12 ,
2024.

       The percentage change in stock price calculates the daily returns for each stock size.
The daily return for day t is calculated using Equation (1).

                                                                        𝑃 − 𝑃
                                                                                                                       𝑡       𝑡−1
                                      𝑅 = (  𝑃    ) ∗ 100                              (1)
                                                             𝑡            𝑡−1

         𝑅 denotes the daily return at day t, 𝑃 represents the closing price at day t, and 𝑃
             𝑡 𝑡 𝑡−1
denotes the closing price at day t-1. The excess return is calculated using Equation (2), where
𝑅   denotes the daily excess return and 𝑅  represents the daily risk-free rate.
  𝐸𝑅 𝑟𝑓

                                          𝑅   = 𝑅 − 𝑅                                    (2)
                                                             𝐸𝑅       𝑡       𝑟𝑓

       Data on the risk-free rate is sourced from three-month treasury bills (Svenska
stadsskuldsväxlar (SE SSVX) 3 månader), provided by the Swedish Central Bank (Riksbank,
2024). To compute the daily risk-free rate, the annual rate is divided by 252, representing the
approximate number of bank days per year. This daily risk-free rate is aligned with the dates
from the respective datasets and subtracted from the daily return percentages to adjust for the
risk-free return component.
       To study the impact of trading volume on the day-of-the-week effect, the daily trading
volume for each index, OMXSSCPI, OMXSMCPI, and OMXSLCPI, was gathered for the
                                           th                                     th
same period, January 07 , 2014 to January 12 , 2024. Due to the non-public nature of the
volume data for these indexes, it was obtained through a contact at Nasdaq Stockholm. Data
scraping was used to remove values denoted by “-” decreasing each dataset to 2510
observations.
       After combining the volume data with the datasets above, each consolidated dataset
for the full-period and the respective subsamples include daily closing prices, excess returns,
weekdays, and trading volumes for each index.

B. Descriptive Statistics
       Perhaps the most striking finding from Table I is that contrary to the EMH, all
capitalization sizes have a negative average return on Mondays, similar to Gibbons and Hess
(1981) and the hypothesis suggested by Claesson (1987). Additionally, Fridays have the
largest average return for small- and mid-capitalization stocks and the second-largest for
large-capitalization stocks, aligning with Claesson’s results. These patterns suggest potential
regularities in stock returns linked to specific weekdays.
       The daily average raw returns are 0,0504%, 0,0556%, and 0,0338% for small-, mid-,
and large-capitalization stocks. Excess returns are slightly lower at 0,0497%, 0,0549%, and
0,0332% for the respective capitalization sizes. Surprisingly, the lowest daily average
standard deviation is found in the small-capitalization index at 0,9982%, with the highest
being 1,1550%, for large-capitalization firms. This does not coincide with typical theory,
stating that small-capitalization firms tend to possess greater risk (Fama and French, 1992).
Yet, in Table VI, the baseline variance is shown to be the highest for small-capitalization
stocks, followed by mid-capitalization stocks and then large-capitalization stocks, which is
consistent with the findings of Fama and French (1992).
        Hence, this analysis indicates that while the daily standard deviation might suggest a

                                     7
                            Stockholm School of Economics

                                             Table I
Table I presents the daily mean, standard deviation, minimum, maximum values, and the number of
observations for each weekday, categorized by small-, mid-, and large- capitalization sizes. These
statistics are detailed for both the raw returns in Section A and the excess returns in Section B. The
weekdays are designated to show data specific to each day, while "All" compiles the results for the
entire dataset across all capitalization sizes.

                                     8
                            Stockholm School of Economics
        different risk profile, the baseline variance confirms the established theory of higher
risk in smaller firms. The lowest daily raw returns for each market size were observed on
                                   th
Thursday, March 12 , 2020, with declines of -12.28%, -11,31%, and -11,1% for small-, mid-,
and large-capitalization stocks, making it one of the largest decreases in the Swedish stock
market in history. Conversely, the highest daily returns in the dataset occurred on Tuesday,
                 th
March 24 , 2020, just 12 days following the crash, with gains of 4,97%, 6,40%, and 7,36%
for small-, mid-, and large-capitalization stocks. These abnormal returns could skew the
results, potentially limiting the study.
       For 1962-1993, it was suggested that there was a decline in the Monday effect for
large-capitalization stocks due to heightened Monday investor trading (Kamara 1997).
However, this was questioned in 2001, stating a reversal of the Monday effect decline
post-1987 (Mehidian and Perry, 2001). This aligns with the findings in Table II, as the
Monday effect seems to remain present. Moreover, coinciding with the research by Cross
(1971), the average Monday and Friday returns tend to differ considerably. The difference in
raw returns between Monday and Friday is 0,1304%, 0,1528%, and 0,0638% for the
respective capitalization sizes. Although the difference is considerable, it is the second largest
difference between two days of the week in the sample data. Instead, the largest difference is
between Thursday and Friday, being 0,1536%, 0,1237%, and 0,1027% for small-, mid-, and
large-capitalization stocks. The variation in the number of observations for each weekday
arises since certain weekdays are more frequently designated as non-bank days. While this
causes the sample sizes for each weekday to differ slightly, it is unlikely to impact the
findings considerably.

C. Subsample Statistics
       Table I shows that the full-period average returns are negative for Mondays. However,
in Table II, the results vary across the subsamples. Specifically, in subsample 1 for small- and
mid-capitalization stocks, and in subsamples 2 and 3 for large-capitalization stocks. Monday's
returns are positive, challenging the consistency and predictability of Monday's performance.
Furthermore, the standard deviation for Mondays is generally higher, suggesting more
variable outcomes than other weekdays, coinciding with the findings of Claesson (1987).
Table II consistently shows positive average returns on Fridays for all groups except
large-capitalization stocks during COVID-19.
       Tuesdays consistently show positive average returns across all subsamples and market
sizes, diverging from Claesson’s findings. Wednesday’s returns are less consistent between
the subsamples but generally positive across all indexes before and during the COVID-19
pandemic. In subsample 3, Wednesday's returns are negative for small- and
mid-capitalization stocks but remain positive for large-capitalization stocks. Lastly,
Thursdays are negative for all capitalization sizes during COVID-19, possibly due to the
large crash on Thursday, 2020-03-12, potentially skewing the results as five of the remaining
six subsamples have positive Thursdays.

D. Volume Statistics

       Table III reveals that Friday's volume values are slightly lower than the remaining
days of the week for the small-capitalization stocks across all columns. In contrast, Tuesdays,
Wednesdays, and Thursdays show the largest averages in the dataset. The Friday mean value

                                     9
                                                   Stockholm School of Economics

                                                                       Table II
Table II is an extension of Table I and presents the mean stock return for each weekday across all three subsamples to compare the daily return between
weekdays and the size index. Moreover, Table II lists the standard deviation, minimum and maximum values, and the number of observations in the respective
subsample and index.

                                                         10
                            Stockholm School of Economics

of 180,931,899 shares transacted daily is 8,05% lower than the average of the remaining days
of the business week (196,769,397). As the Friday volatility is also the lowest in the
small-capitalization sample, it contradicts the research by Berument and Kiymaz (2003), who
suggested that high volatility would be accompanied by low trading volume since liquidity
traders are unwilling to trade in periods of high stock market volatility. For the mid- and
large-capitalization stocks, Friday is no longer an outlier, being close to the aggregate average
in both cases. Instead, Monday has the lowest average amount of transactions, 6,4% and
11,05% lower than the average of the remaining days of the business week (1,369,399,855
and 16,324,021,304) for the mid- and large-capitalization indexes. Additionally, for the
mid-capitalization index, the results align with the findings of Berument and Kiymaz (2003),
where Monday possesses the greatest volatility while having the lowest average trading
volume.

                                            Table III
Table III presents the volume statistics for each day of the week for the small-, mid-, and
large-capitalization index on the Swedish stock market, along with the totals for the respective
indexes. Volume is measured by the number of shares transacted each day. If A sells 100 shares to B,
the volume is 100. The data includes the mean, standard deviation, min value, max value, and number
of observations for each day of the week and the aggregated values for the respective index.

                           III. Methodology

A. OLS Regression

       Following previous literature, the OLS regression is frequently used when analyzing
the day-of-the-week effect. The model analyzes the relationship between a dependent

                                      11
                            Stockholm School of Economics
variable, i.e., the daily change in stock returns, and multiple independent variables, i.e., the
days of the week. The model will regress daily stock returns on a set of dummy variables
representing each day of the week, allowing us to estimate the average return for each
weekday and test for statistically significant differences (Brooks 2008).
       Equation (3) is the mathematical expression of the model used to estimate the average
return for each day of the week.

                       𝑅 = β 𝐷  + β 𝐷  + β 𝐷  + β 𝐷  + β 𝐷  + ε                    (3)
                                𝑡     1  1𝑡     2  2𝑡     3  3𝑡     4  4𝑡     5  5𝑡     𝑡

        Where 𝑅 denotes the dependent variable, the stock index return on a day t. The model
                                                        𝑡
consists of five dummy variables 𝐷𝑖𝑡, each representing one day of the week ranging from
Monday to Friday. Each dummy variable takes the value 1 if the examined day corresponds
to the actual weekday at time t, and 0 otherwise. For instance, 𝐷1𝑡 represents Monday at time t
and 𝐷   represents Friday at time t. Lastly, the model is concluded with an error term ε ,
          5𝑡 𝑡
denoting the difference between the observed value and the regression's predicted value at
time t.
       When investigating time series, the residuals are likely to be correlated. We applied
Newey West standard errors to our model to address the common issues of autocorrelation
and heteroscedasticity in our data. Newey-West standard errors adjust for these characteristics
by incorporating information about the correlation structure and allowing standard errors to
vary. This provides more accurate estimates and ensures that the standard errors reflect the
true variability of the coefficients (Newey and West, 1987).
        The estimated coefficients β𝑖 are interpreted as the average value of the dependent
variable for each day, which in this context refers to the mean stock returns for each specific
trading day of the week. To investigate whether or not the day-of-the-week effect exists in the
sample, the null hypothesis states that the coefficients are equal to zero. The alternative
hypothesis states that there is a significant difference between one or more of the coefficients
from zero. This would imply that β for the investigated day is unique. As a result, if the
                                                                                                                                                                  𝑖
probability value is less than the significance level (i.e., one, five, or ten percent), the null
hypothesis is rejected, suggesting that the day-of-the-week effect is present in the sample.

B. Size Effect - Welch T-Test

       The Welch t-test method investigates whether the differences in each mean are related
to the size across stock indexes. Based on previous literature examining abnormalities in the
stock market, Fama and French's (2008) method includes testing the mean difference. This
model compares the small-, mid-, and large-capitalization stocks to investigate the mean
across the same weekday in different samples. It is correctly done by comparing them
separately, small to mid, small to large, and mid to large, for each weekday. The Welch test is
a two-sided independent-samples t-test (i.e. unpaired t-test) assuming that the two sample
variances are unequal. The aim is to use the model to determine if there are inconsistencies in
the mean between the samples.
       The null hypothesis in the Welch t-test states that the mean of the three independent
samples should have no significant difference between the respective days of the week. This
implies that if the probability value is less than the chosen significance level (i.e., one, five,
or ten percent), the null hypothesis is rejected, implying that the means differ between
samples (Welch 1947).
       When examining the day-of-the-week effect, it is essential to include a size effect
component in the analysis to account for the varying impacts of trading behavior, liquidities,

                                     12
                            Stockholm School of Economics
and volatilities across companies with different market capitalizations. Small-capitalization
stocks, in particular, tend to exhibit higher volatility and lower liquidity compared to
large-capitalization stocks, leading to more profound price movements in response to market
activities (Fama and French, 1992). Such movements may not be evenly distributed
throughout the week. Market dynamics, such as trading volumes and liquidity, often fluctuate
due to periodic financial disclosures, macroeconomic announcements, or systematic market
shifts, disproportionately impacting smaller firms. Additionally, investor behavior, which
may differ between small-, mid-, and large-capitalization markets, can influence the
day-of-the-week effect. Hence, incorporating the size effect allows us to refine our analysis of
the day-of-the-week effect, providing a more detailed understanding of daily performance
patterns across different market sizes. This approach facilitates our understanding of how
small-, mid-, and large-capitalization stocks react differently to external factors and investor
actions.
                                                                  𝑥 −𝑥
                                                                                                                                                                                                   𝑖           𝑗
                               𝑇 =                                      (4)
                                                       2         2
                                                    (𝑠 ÷𝑛 )−(𝑠 ÷𝑛 )
                                                                                                                                                                                     𝑖            𝑖                 𝑗            𝑗

       Equation (4) presents the Welch t-test, which is used to investigate the presence of
size effect across the days of the week between the different indexes. In the equation, 𝑥𝑖 and 𝑥𝑗
denote the means of the tested independent samples, 𝑠 and 𝑠 represent the respective standard
                                                                                                         𝑖 𝑗
deviation and, 𝑛𝑖 and 𝑛𝑗 are the number of observations.

C. Volatility Clustering - GARCH

       The GARCH model predicts the volatility of returns on financial assets. It was first
developed by Bollerslevin (1986), following the work on the ARCH (Autoregressive
Conditional Heteroskedasticity) model by Engle (1982). The GARCH model covers volatility
clustering, a phenomenon where a series of previous volatility affects the current volatility.
High volatility series are followed by high volatility, and low volatility series are followed by
low volatility, clustering periods based on their volatility. The null hypothesis for the model is
that the data exhibits no volatility clustering.
       The GARCH(1,1) model, which is one of the simplest forms of the GARCH model,
can be represented by Equation (5) and (6):

Conditional mean equation:

                                      𝑅 = μ + ε                                       (5)
                                                                     𝑡                𝑡

Where 𝑅𝑡 denotes the return at time t, μ (mu) represents the constant term in the mean
equation of the GARCH model. It can be interpreted as the average return of the series,
assuming the mean equation only includes a constant and ε𝑡 is the error term at time t.

Conditional Variance Equation of the GARCH Model:

                                    2            2      2
                          σ = ω + αε   + βσ                       (6)
                                                           𝑡                     𝑡−1           𝑡−1

                                     13
                            Stockholm School of Economics

          2
Where σ  denotes the forecasted variance at time t, ω (Omega) is the constant term
                                𝑡
representing the baseline variance without any previous shocks or volatility clustering. Lower
                                                   2
values suggest less inherent variance. ε𝑡−1 denotes the residual from the mean at time t-1.
Additionally, α (alpha1) measures the reaction of the conditional variance to the squared
residuals from the previous period. It captures the impact of the shock from the previous
period on the current variance. A higher alpha indicates that recent shocks substantially affect
current volatility, contributing to volatility clustering. β (beta1) measures the persistence of
past variance in the current variance. A high beta, close to 1, suggests that volatilities are
highly persistent over time, meaning that the effect of a volatility shock decreases slowly.
           2
Lastly, σ   denotes the variance from time t-1. The sum of α + β where α + β < 1 states the
              𝑡−1
presence of volatility clustering. Values close to 1 indicate volatility clustering, while values
close to 0 imply random volatility.
       The Autoregressive (AR) part of the GARCH model captures the persistence of
volatility over time by regressing the returns on their own lagged values over time.
Conditional heteroscedasticity (CH) refers to the continuously changing variance over time.
This implies that the residuals (the difference between the realized and predicted values) are
not constant over time. In addition, the GARCH model includes a moving average, including
the short-term effects on volatility. It covers how the variance of the current period's error
term is influenced by the error terms from previous periods.
        Identifying whether or not volatility clustering is present in the data is fundamental as
it has considerable impacts on risk management. Since high volatility signals risk, many
investors will adjust their strategies and risk assessments accordingly. This could involve
changing the portfolio allocations, employing different financial instruments for hedging, or
adjusting leverage, potentially affecting the day-of-the-week effect. To effectively utilize the
GARCH model, the data must demonstrate stationarity, autocorrelation, and
heteroscedasticity. Three statistical tests are employed to evaluate these properties: the
Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test for stationarity, the Box-Ljung (BL) test for
autocorrelation, and the Breusch-Pagan (BP) test for heteroscedasticity (Bollerslevin, 1986).
The results, detailed in Appendixes A, B, and C, allow for rejecting the null hypothesis for
each capitalization size, confirming the dataset's appropriateness for GARCH modeling.

D. Risk-Adjusted Values - Sharpe Ratio
       Risk-adjusted values are generally more relevant to investors than expected returns as
they account for reward and risk, allowing for better investment comparisons. For our
analysis, this helps us identify which days of the week offer the best performance when
considering both returns and volatility, leading to a more informed conclusion. The Sharpe
ratio, a method used to compare risk-adjusted returns between investments, is presented in
Equation (7).

                                                               𝐸(𝑅 −𝑅  )
                                                                                                                                                                          𝑡         𝑟𝑓
                                      𝑆𝑅 =    σ                                         (7)
                                                                                                                                                                                                        𝑡

       Roy (1952) was the first to propose the reward-to-risk ratio to determine the
performance of an investment. Sharpe (1966) later introduced the Sharpe ratio, a
measurement used to rate the performance of mutual funds concerning risk and return.
Moreover, Bailey and Lopez de Prado (2012) state that the calculation of the Sharpe ratio has
become one of the best-known performance evaluation metrics.
       The most optimal investment has the highest Sharpe ratio, which provides the most
considerable reward per unit of volatility of any investment available. However, this

                                     14
                            Stockholm School of Economics
statement only applies to the assumption that investors are mean-return optimizers. If other
factors and preferences are considered, such as investment goals, time horizon, and risk
tolerance, the Sharpe ratio is no longer sufficient for evaluating performance (Berk and
DeMarzo, 2019). For our paper, the average Sharpe ratio is expected to be the same for each
day of the week. Hence, significant differences between the weekdays suggest a
day-of-the-week effect.

                                 IV. Results

Section IV is divided into two parts: the full-period results are in part A, and the subsample
results are in part B.

A.1 The Presence of the Day-of-the-Week Effect on the Swedish Stock Market
        Table IV presents significant findings for small-, mid-, and large-capitalization stocks.
Specifically, Tuesday's returns for these stock categories are significantly higher than on other
weekdays, with significance levels at 10%, 10%, and 5%, respectively. Additionally,
small-capitalization stocks show a positive return estimate on Wednesdays at a 5%
significance level. These patterns persist in both raw and excess returns, though the latter's
significance is slightly diminished due to the risk-free rate adjustment. The most notable
results occur on Friday for small- and mid-capitalization stocks, where the null hypothesis is
rejected at a 99% confidence level, coinciding with the findings of Claesson (1987).
However, compared to Claesson's work, which suggested that Tuesdays generally yielded the
lowest returns, Table IV shows the opposite effect. This is increasingly evident for
large-capitalization stocks. Moreover, the results align with the findings of Abraham and
Ikenberry (1994), suggesting that the day-of-the-week effect is stronger for small- and
mid-capitalization stocks.
       Despite the insignificance of Monday returns across all capitalization sizes, the
estimates are negative, aligning with Gibbons and Hess (1981). Similar to Claesson (1987),
our result suggests a day-of-the-week effect still exists in the Swedish stock market.
However, there has been a shift in which days significantly deviate from the mean return.
Friday's returns remain the highest, albeit not at a significant level for large-capitalization
stocks. Tuesdays, the lowest previous performer, show no such significance anymore and has
shifted to a significantly positive average for the large-capitalization index (5% significance
level). The Monday average return, theoretically expected by Claesson (1987) to be the
lowest, aligns somewhat with the findings in Table IV, although it lacks statistical
significance. This contrasts with Claesson's results, where Monday returns were the second
highest.

A.2 Implications of Capitalization Size on the Day-of-the-Week Effect

       The results in Table V indicate a size effect in the sample data between small- and
large-capitalization stocks and between mid- and large-capitalization stocks. However, for
small- and mid-capitalization stocks, the data suggests no significant size effect. When
comparing small- and large-capitalization stocks, the null hypothesis that Friday returns are
equal can be rejected at a 10% significance level. The mean difference between the paired
observations is 0,0656464%, supporting the theory of inconsistencies across capitalization
sizes. The size effect is more profound between mid- and large-capitalization stocks. On
Thursdays, the mean return difference is 0,0527%, rejecting the null hypothesis at a 5%
significance level. On Fridays, the mean return difference is 0,07366%, leading to a rejection
of the null hypothesis at a 1% significance level. Hence, Table V suggests that the size effect

                                     15
                                                   Stockholm School of Economics

                                                                Table IV
Table IV presents the output for raw returns gathered from Nasdaq Stockholm. The excess returns are calculated by subtracting the daily risk-free rate,
gathered from The Swedish Central Bank, from the daily raw returns. Each data sample of small-, mid-, and large-capitalization stocks is run by an OLS
regression, investigating if the estimated mean return for each weekday differs significantly from zero. An independent dummy variable represents each day
of the week. “Estimate” is the model's prediction of that specific weekday’s contribution to the stock price change (i.e. the dependent variable). Furthermore,
Table IV provides a standard error (“Std. Error”) and a probability value denoted as “Pr(>|t|)”. *, **, and *** denote the statistical significance of the output
data at a 10%, 5%, or 1% level.

                                                         16
                            Stockholm School of Economics
is more profound for small- and mid-capitalization stocks in the sample data, consistent with
Abraham and Ikenberry's (1994) findings. A limitation of the t-test is that the returns have not
been adjusted for risk. Therefore, a risk-adjusted comparison is provided in Table VII.

                                        Table V
Table V provides the difference in mean between weekdays, the probability value, and the t-statistic
for each weekday in respective capitalization size. The statistical result from the Welch t-test explains
whether there is a significant difference in mean between the market capitalizations for each weekday.
Meaning, the mean return for Monday - small-capitalization is compared with Monday
mid-capitalization and large-capitalization stocks. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the
10%, 5%, or 1% level, respectivly.

A.3 The Presence of Volatility Clustering

       Table VI showcases the statistics gathered from the GARCH model. Mu is the largest
for mid-capitalization stocks and the lowest for large-capitalization stocks, corresponding to
the descriptive statistics seen in Table I. However, the difference between small- and
mid-capitalization stocks is more profound in the GARCH estimates. Omega is the smallest
for large-capitalization stocks, followed by the mid-capitalization stocks, while the
small-capitalization stocks have the largest. Interestingly, this is the opposite of the realized
volatility in Table I. Hence, the GARCH model suggests that additional factors contribute to
the increased volatility of large-capitalization stocks rather than being more inherently risky.
This aligns with the findings of Zaremba and Shemer (2017), stating that small-capitalization
stocks are more risky. The sum of alpha1 and beta1 yields 0,957, 0,985, and 0,985 for the
respective indexes. As the values are near 1, it implies that volatility clustering exists for each
capitalization size. This is further implied by doing the ARCH (Autoregressive Conditional
Heteroskedasticity) test, where the null hypothesis is that there is no volatility clustering. The

                                     17
                            Stockholm School of Economics
P-values for the ARCH test are all above the 99% significance level seen in Appendix D. The
clustering is further visualized in Appendixes E-G for respective capitalization size.

                                        Table VI
Table VI presents the results of the GARCH model for all three indexes. The model uses four
parameters to explain the different characteristics of the respective time series. Mu, a constant term,
represents the estimated return. Omega represents the baseline variance. Alpha1 represents the
reaction of the conditional variance to the squared residuals from the previous period. Beta1 measures
the persistence of past variance in the current variance.

       The presence of volatility clustering does not inherently contradict the EMH.
However, it does introduce complexities in understanding market dynamics, suggesting that
investment risks vary over time. This variability in risk levels can influence investor
behavior, indicating that reactions to information and market adjustments may not be as
immediate or rational as the EMH assumes. Such patterns highlight the nuanced ways
information is absorbed and reflected in market prices, potentially leading to periods of
higher uncertainty that affect investment strategies and decision-making. These insights are
essential as they provide a more detailed framework for assessing market efficiency and
understanding the psychological factors in the day-of-the-week effect.

A.4 Consequences of Risk Adjustments for the Day-of-the-Week Effect
                                         Table VII
Table VII includes the average Sharpe ratio for each day of the week across all capitalization indexes.
The daily Sharpe ratio is calculated by dividing the daily excess return (daily raw return - daily excess
return) by the daily expected standard deviation estimated by the GARCH model.

       Table VII suggests that the overall highest risk-adjusted return occurs on Friday.
Fridays have the highest risk-adjusted return for small- and mid-capitalization stocks and are
the second highest for large-capitalization stocks. The lowest Sharpe ratio was found for
Thursdays across all indexes, followed by Monday, which was the second lowest for both

                                     18
                            Stockholm School of Economics
small- and mid-capitalization stocks, and the third lowest was for large-capitalization stocks.
The considerable differences in Sharpe ratios between the days of the week further suggest
the presence of a day-of-the-week effect, as the abnormally high Friday return cannot be
explained by an increase in volatility.

A.5 Days with the Highest and Lowest Returns of the Week Annually

                                         Table VIII
Table VIII summarizes the times each weekday has the lowest or highest average returns annually
from 2014-2024.

       We take a similar approach to Claesson’s investigation of the Swedish stock market,
the results of which are shown in Table VIII. The findings show that Monday has had the
lowest return for small-capitalization stocks in three out of the ten years and the highest in
one year. Contrastingly, Friday never had the lowest return across the entire decade and twice
the highest. The high Friday and low Monday returns remain consistent across the other
capitalization sizes. Friday never had the lowest stock return and the highest four times for
mid-capitalization stocks. At the same time, Monday had the lowest return in four out of ten
years and never the highest. The large-capitalization index suggests less of a day-of-the-week
effect when comparing Monday and Friday. Friday was the highest twice and lowest once,
while Monday was the lowest once and is not the highest for any year. Moreover, the
remaining days, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays, across all indexes, indicate varying
results, making it difficult to suggest any day-of-the-week effect. These results differ from the

                                     19
                            Stockholm School of Economics
findings of Claesson (1987), who found low-performing Tuesdays. However, the persistence
of well-performing Fridays seems to have been consistent over time. More detailed and
descriptive statistics of the highest and lowest returns for each year are presented in Appendix
H-J.
       Looking at the aggregate results across all indexes, Monday had the lowest return
eight times while only having the largest one year across all capitalization sizes. On the other
hand, Fridays had the highest return eight times and the lowest only once. Once again, this
indicates a considerable difference between Friday’s and Monday’s average returns,
suggesting a day-of-the-week effect.

B. Day-of-the-Week Effect Across Periods

       Table IX investigates the persistence of the day-of-the-week effect over time. In
subsample 1, small-capitalization stocks show the highest stock return with a significance
level of 1% on Friday. Furthermore, a smaller stock return was yet at a significant level of
10% on Wednesday. In the second subsample, representing the period during COVID-19, the
Friday returns are no longer significantly different. On the other hand, Tuesdays yield the
highest return at a significance level of 10%. The third subsample of the daily stock returns
for small-capitalization stocks does not provide significant results for any weekday.
       Moreover, subsample 1 for mid-capitalization stocks investigating stock returns
before the COVID-19 pandemic shows similar results to small-capitalization stocks. The
highest stock return had the lowest significance level of 1% on Friday, and a smaller stock
return yet at a significant level of 10% on Wednesday. During COVID-19, results for
subsample 2 of the OLS regression suggest no significant results for any weekday. In
subsample 3 for the mid-capitalization index, Fridays again show significance at 5%.
       Lastly, for large-capitalization stocks in subsample 1, the OLS regression suggests
that Fridays yield the highest, most significant stock return at a significance level of 10%. In
subsample 2, the results are shifted, where Tuesday is the weekday with the highest return at
a significance level of 5%, while Friday's estimate becomes negative. Lastly, no regression
estimates are significant for the large-capitalization stocks in subsample 3.

                                     20
                                                   Stockholm School of Economics

                                                                Table IX
Table IX is an extension of Table IV. It presents an OLS regression on the observations divided into three subsamples based on the period before, during, and
after COVID-19 to explore if there are inconsistencies over time. As in previous OLS, Newey West adjustments for standard error concerning autocorrelation
and heteroscedasticity are added to the model. Furthermore, for the simplicity of the analysis, only raw returns have been analyzed, as the excess returns yield
nearly identical results for all tests. The OLS regression is presented through estimates of the return for each weekday, standard error, and the probability
value denoted as Pr(>|t|). *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, or 1% level, respectively.

                                                         21
                            Stockholm School of Economics

                               IV. Discussion
       The analysis of the Swedish stock market from 2014 to 2024 reveals patterns in stock
returns dependent on the day of the week, which may contradict the EMH. These findings
align with previous studies by Kohers and Patel (1996), Yamori and Kurihara (2004), and
Claesson (1987), which reported similar day-of-the-week effects in various markets. The
patterns of stock returns peaking on specific weekdays suggest that information asymmetry or
investor behavior could influence stock prices beyond what EMH would predict.
        Additionally, the results suggest a size effect as small- and mid-capitalization stocks
have a greater relative difference between the days of the week than the large-capitalization
firms, aligning with the findings of Zaremba and Shemer (2017). Table IV shows that the
results are most significant for Fridays, corresponding with several previous papers, most
notably, the findings of Claesson (1987), who also looked at the Swedish market.
       The findings challenge the weak form of EMH, suggesting that historical price data
(in this case, the day of the week) can predict future returns. This could indicate that the
Swedish stock market is inefficient, as prices reflect more than random information
distributions. The findings suggest that investors, especially active traders, could enhance
their strategies by accounting for the day-of-the-week effect. The evidence of the
day-of-the-week effect might necessitate closer monitoring of trading practices that could
exploit these inefficiencies, potentially destabilizing the market. Regulatory bodies might
need to consider whether current market practices allow for fair trading. Portfolio managers
might use this information to time their transactions more effectively or to manage risk, based
on the variability in returns associated with the days of the week. Furthermore, due to
volatility clustering in the Swedish stock market, investors might employ certain risk
management strategies based on their risk appetite. However, as Claesson (1987) discussed,
despite its importance in theory, it could be argued whether the day-of-the-week effect has
any practical significance.
       Table IX suggests inconsistencies depending on the timeframe in which each dataset
is investigated. Pre-COVID-19, the Friday returns were especially significant for small- and
mid-capitalization stocks while having some statistical significance for large-capitalization
stocks. However, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the Swedish stock weekday returns
deviated less profoundly. This resulted in the full-period analysis not being as statistically
significant regarding the day-of-the-week effect, which is especially true for the small
capitalization index. These findings could potentially indicate that external shocks might
diminish the effect, corresponding with the findings of Högholm and Knif (2009), showing
that the day-of-the-week effect can be affected by macroeconomic events.
       Behavioral finance explains why investors make irrational decisions, potentially
impacting the day-of-the-week effect. Individuals possess behavioral biases that affect their
perception of a situation, thus influencing their decision-making (Slovic 1972). For instance,
the absence of self-control could lead to more impulsive buying behavior, as investors may be
inclined to act on short-term gratification (O'Donoghue & Rabin, 1999). According to
prospect theory, individuals tend to experience the pain of losses worse than the pleasure of
gain, so-called loss aversion. Therefore, theory implies that investors who experience a loss
earlier in the week tend to become more risk-averse. However, this caution may be
overlooked by the attempt to recoup previous losses, and investors dare to take on additional
risk. Fear of regret among investors might drive them to increase consumption during certain
days of the week. The dissatisfaction of missing previous opportunities or underperformance
during the week increases, which might increase the willingness to pay overprice on Fridays
(Kahneman and Tversky 1979). Lyroudi K., et al. (2004), suggest that investors feel

                                     22
                            Stockholm School of Economics
pessimistic on Mondays as it is the first day of the trading week, resulting in a decrease. In
contrast, they feel optimistic during Fridays, the last day of the trading week, increasing stock
returns.
       Besides the behavioral finance aspect of the day-of-the-week effect, previous research
suggests ulterior reasons that correspond to our study's findings. As Claesson (1987)
suggested, there is a two-day return premium when investing on Fridays, which increases the
share price, followed by a return to normal on Mondays, resulting in a price decrease. This
phenomenon is particularly evident in our findings for Fridays but also has implications for
the observed Monday returns. Additionally, as seen in Michaely et al. (2016), firms tend to
wait until after the market has closed on Fridays to release bad news, while good news is
published promptly. Although this does not explain why the Friday price generally increases
compared to other days of the week, it does suggest a decline in Monday returns, aligning
with our findings. The payday effect implies increased returns on the payday, as seen by Ma
and Pratt (2018) when analyzing the US market. In Sweden, paydays occur most often on
Fridays compared to any other day of the week due to the inability to pay employees during
weekends (PFC, 2023). Hence, the payday effect is more likely to occur on Fridays,
potentially resulting in abnormally positive returns.
       This study is constrained by its focus on the Swedish stock market alone, which may
limit the generalizability of the findings to other markets with different trading dynamics and
regulations. Potentially, different cultural, economic, and regulatory contexts could lead to
different behaviors on the stock market. Although a 10-year sample of data is used to capture
the current effect, it may not consider longer-term trends or cyclical implications that could
affect future predictions of the day-of-the-week effect. Furthermore, COVID-19 could have
event-specific effects, which are not typical in other periods, potentially yielding a skewed
view of the full period results. To some extent, this is mitigated by dividing the data into
subsamples. However, dividing the data into subsamples has further potential limitations as
the sample sizes decrease. This can reduce the statistical power of the tests conducted and
may increase the risk of Type II errors. Using OLS regressions and GARCH models provides
a robust analysis but might not capture all nuances of market behavior. Future studies could
employ more complex models incorporating more variables or non-linear relationships.
Additionally, other unobserved factors such as macroeconomic changes, political events, or
global market dynamics could influence the day-of-the-week effect but are not controlled for
the study. The Sharpe ratio provides a risk-adjusted comparison between the weekdays and
the respective capitalization sizes. However, it does not provide sufficient information to
compare with other papers and does not show if the differences are significant, limiting the
study. The GARCH model is not applied to the subsample statistics; this is not done because
the subsample data is not large enough to apply the model effectively, limiting the study.
       We find significant results for a day-of-the-week effect. Yet, mainly due to the
limitations above, the results do not provide enough evidence to determine whether the effect
will remain consistent. Further analysis into other markets and time frames could help
determine whether these patterns are unique to Sweden or part of a broader phenomenon.
Additionally, incorporating interdisciplinary approaches that blend finance with psychology
could provide deeper insights into the causes of these market anomalies. Moreover, exploring
the impact of digital transformation and the increasing use of algorithmic trading could also
be worthwhile, as these factors might influence the traditional day-of-the-week effects
observed in stock markets. In our analysis, we have observed a size effect. However, the
study does not consider why it has occurred, which opens the potential for continued
investigation. Additionally, the effects of COVID-19 on the day-of-the-week is an unexplored
topic. Further research could explore how other markets have been affected by the pandemic.

                                     23
                            Stockholm School of Economics
        Interestingly, despite the high Friday returns, the trading volume is not high compared
to other days of the week for any indexes. For small-capitalization stocks, the trading volume
is surprisingly the lowest across all weekdays. Since Friday returns are generally higher, one
could expect that investors would increase the trading volume, as seen in Kamara (1997).
This area of the day-of-the-week effect would be interesting for future research to explore, if
the volume relative to the returns is persistent across markets. Apart from investigating the
impacts of volume statistics, further research could analyze more thoroughly why the
day-of-the-week effect occurred in the Swedish stock market between 2014 and 2024,
potentially investigating if some of the suggested reasons from other studies, are true, such as
the news release timing, the payday effect or behavioral finance aspects. Our analysis shows
that Thursday's average and risk-adjusted returns are the lowest for the different weekdays,
rarely mentioned in historical literature. Additional studies could explore why this has
happened and if it is expected to persist.

                             V. Conclusion

       This study explored the day-of-the-week effect on the Swedish stock market from
2014 to 2024, aiming to understand how stock returns vary across different weekdays and
under different market conditions. Our findings reveal a significant day-of-the-week effect,
particularly seen in small- and mid-capitalization stocks, which challenges the Efficient
Market Hypothesis (EMH).
       The results suggest that Fridays consistently yield higher returns, while Mondays
show lower, aligning with behavioral finance theories suggesting investor optimism at the
end of the week and pessimism at the start. Apart from positive Tuesdays, our results align
with previous findings of the Swedish stock market. Furthermore, our results suggest a size
effect, with smaller stocks exhibiting more profound anomalies. Additionally, the period
during the COVID-19 pandemic differed from Pre-COVID-19, where the significance of the
day-of-the-week effect during the crisis period was diminished. Potentially indicating that
macroeconomic fluctuations impact the day-of-the-week effect.
       While this study contributes to further understand market anomalies, it is limited by
its focus on the Swedish market and data division into subsamples, reducing statistical power.
Continued studies could extend this analysis to other markets and investigate potential
reasons for the effect.

                                     24
                            Stockholm School of Economics
References

Abraham, A., and D.L. Ikenberry, 1994, The Individual Investor and the Weekend Effect,
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 29, 263-277.

Apolinario, R.M.C., A.R. Caro, L.J. Sales, and O.M. Santana, 2006, Day of the Week Effect
on European Stock Markets, International Research Journal of Finance and Economics 2,
53-70.

Bailey, D.H., and M. Lopez de Prado, 2012, The Sharpe Ratio Efficient Frontier, Journal of
Risk 15, 3-44.

Berk, J., and P. DeMarzo, 2019, Corporate Finance (5th Edition), Pearson Press.

Berument, Hakan, and Halil Kiymaz, 2001, The Day of the Week Effect on Stock Market
Volatility, Journal of Economics and Finance 25, 181-193.

Berument, Hakan, and Halil Kiymaz, 2003, The day of the week effect on stock market
volatility and volume: International evidence, Review of financial economics 12, 363-380.

Bollerslevin, Tim, 1986, Generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity, Journal of
Econometrics 31, 307-327.

Brooks, C., 2008, Introductory Econometrics for Finance (2nd Edition), Cambridge
University Press.

Carlucci, F. V., T. P. Junior, and F. G. Lima, 2013, A Study on the Day of the Week Effect in
the Four major Capitals Markets of the Americas, Journal of International Finance &
Economics 13, 11-20.

Chusanachoti, J., and R. Kamath, 2002, Market Conditions, Return Distributions, and the
Day-of-the-Week Effects in Thailand: The Experience of the 1990s, American Business
Review 20, 6-14.

Cinko, M., E. Avci, A. Aybars, and M. Öner, 2015, Analyzing the Existence of the Day of
the Week Effect in Selected Developed Country Stock Exchange, International Journal of
Economics and Finance 7, 33-43.

Claesson, Kerstin, 1987, Effektiviteten på Stockholms fondbörs, Ekonomiska
forskningsinstitutet vid Handelshögskolan i Stockholm.

Cross, F., 1971, The Behavior of Stock Prices on Fridays and Mondays, Financial Analysts
Journal 29, 67-69.

Engle, Robert, 1982, Autoregressive Conditional Heteroscedasticity with Estimates of the
Variance of United Kingdom Inflation, Econometrica 50, 987-1007.

Fama, F.E., 1965, The Behavior of Stock Market Prices. Journal of Business 38, 34-105.

                                     25
                            Stockholm School of Economics
Fama, F. Eugene, and Kenneth R. French, 2008, Dissecting Anomalies, The Journal of
Finance 63, 1653-1678.

Fama, F. Eugene, and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The Cross-Section of Expected Stock
Returns, The Journal of Finance 47, 427-465.

Folkhälsomyndigheten, 2023, När hände vad under pandemin?, Available Online:
https://www.folkhalsomyndigheten.se/smittskydd-beredskap/utbrott/aktuella-utbrott/covid-19
/nar-hande-vad-under-pandemin/, Accessed: 14 May 2024.

French, K. R., 1980, Stock Returns and the Weekend Effect, Journal of Financial Economics
8, 55-69.

Gibbons, M.R., and P. Hess, 1981, Day of the Week Effects and Asset Returns, The Journal
of Business 54, 579-596.

Gonzalez-Perez, M.T., and D. E. Guerrero, 2013, Day-of-the-week Effect on the VIX: A
Parsimonious Representation, North American Journal of Economics and Finance 25,
243-260.

Groth, John C., Wilbur G Lewellen, Gary G Schlarbaum, and Ronald C Lease, 1979, An
analysis of brokerage house securities recommendations, Financial Analysts Journal 35,
32-40.

Guidi, F., 2010, Day-of-the-week Effect and Market Efficiency in the Italian Stock Market:
an Empirical Analysis, The IUP Journal of Applied Finance 16, 5-51.

Högholm, K., and J. Knif, 2009, The impact of portfolio aggregation on day-of-the-week
effect: Evidence from Finland, Global Finance Journal 20, 67-79.

Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky, 1979, Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision
under Risk, Econometrica 47, 263-292.

Kamara, A., 1997, New evidence on the Monday Seasonal in Stock Returns, Journal of
Business 70, 63-84.

Kohers, Theodor, and Jayen B. Patel, 1996, An Examination of the Day-Of-The-Week’ Effect
in Junk Bond Returns over Business Cycles, Review of Financial Economics 5, 31-46.

Lux, Thomas, 1995, Herd Behaviour, Bubbles and Crashes, The Economic Journal 105,
881-896.

Lyroudi, K., A. Dasilas, P.G. Patev, and N.K. Kanaryan, 2004, Day of the Week Effect in the
Central and Eastern European Transition Stock Markets and Higher Moments of Security
Returns, SSRN Electronic Journal.

Ma, Aixin J., and William R. Pratt, 2018, Payday Anomaly, Oklahoma City University.

Mehdian, Seyed, and Mark J. Perry, 2001, The Reversal of the Monday Effect: New Evidence
from US Equity Markets, Journal of Business Finance & Accounting 28, 1043-1065.

                                     26
                            Stockholm School of Economics

Michaely, Roni, Amir Rubin, and Alexander Vedrashko, 2016, Further evidence on the
strategic timing of earnings news: Joint analysis of weekdays and times of day, Journal of
Accounting and Economics 62, 24-45.

Nasdaq, 2021, Rules & Regulations, Nasdaq Stockholm (Stockholmsbörsen), Available
Online: https://www.nasdaq.com/market-regulation/nordic/stockholm, Accsessed: 14 May
2024.

Nasdaq Nordics, 2024, Historical prices NOMXSCSEPI, NASDAQ OMX Small Cap
Sweden PI, (SE0002896373), Available Online:
https://www.nasdaqomxnordic.com/indexes/historical_prices?Instrument=SE0002896373,
Accessed: 20 January 2024.

Nasdaq Nordics, 2024, Historical prices OMXSLCPI, OMX_Stockholm_Large_Cap_PI,
(SE0001775784), Available Online:
https://www.nasdaqomxnordic.com/indexes/historical_prices?Instrument=SE0001775784,
Accessed: 20 January 2024.

Nasdaq Nordics, 2024, Historical prices OMXSMCPI, OMX_Stockholm_Mid_Cap_PI,
(SE0001775800), Availabe Online:
https://www.nasdaqomxnordic.com/indexes/historical_prices?Instrument=SE0001775800,
Accessed: 20 January 2024.

Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite,
Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix, Econometrica 55,
703-708.

O'Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin, 1999, Doing It Now or Later, The American
Economic Review 89, 103-124.

Personal Finance Co. (P.F.C), 2023, Pay day, Available Online:
https://www.getpfc.com/articles/payday-2022-2023, Accessed: 14 May 2024.

Puja, P., 2010, Days-of-the-Week-Effect and Stock Return Volatility: Theory and Empirical
Evidence, Advances in Management 3, 14-21.

Riksbank, 2024, Sök räntor och valutakurser, Svenska stadsskuldsväxlar (SE SSVX) 3
månader, Available Online:
https://www.riksbank.se/sv/statistik/sok-rantor--valutakurser/?g6-SETB3MBENCH=on&fro
m=2019-04-27&to=2019-05-27&f=Day&c=cAverage&s=Comma, Accessed: 5 February
2024.

Rogalski, Richard J., 1984, New Findings Regarding Day-of-the-Week Returns over Trading
and Non-Trading Periods: A Note, The Journal of Finance 39, 1603-1614.

Roy, A., 1952, Safety First and the Holding of Assets, Econometrica 20, 431-449.

Sharpe, William F., 1966, Mutual Fund Performance, Journal of Business 39, 119–138.

                                     27
                            Stockholm School of Economics
Shefrin, Hersh, and Meir Statman, 1985, The Disposition to Sell Winners Too Early and Ride
Losers Too Long: Theory and Evidence, The Journal of Finance 40, 777-790.

Slovic, P., 1972, Psychological Study of Human Judgment: Implications for Investment
Decision Making, Journal of Finance 27, 779-799.

Smirlock, Michael, and Laura Starks, 1986, Day-of-the-week and intraday effects in stock
return, Journal of Financial Economics 17, 197-210.

Welch, B.L., 1947, The Generalization of ‘Student’s’ Problem When Several Different
Population Variances are Involved, Biometrika 34, 28-35.

World Health Organization (WHO), 2023, Statement on the Fifteenth Meeting of the
International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee regarding the Coronavirus
Disease (COVID-19) Pandemic, Available Online:
https://www.who.int/news/item/05-05-2023-statement-on-the-fifteenth-meeting-of-the-intern
ational-health-regulations-(2005)-emergency-committee-regarding-the-coronavirus-disease-(
covid-19)-pandemic, Accessed: May 14 2024.

Xiao, B., 2016, The Monthly Effect and the Day of the Week Effect in the American Stock
Market, International Journal of Financial Research 7, 11-17.

Yamori, Nobuyoshi, and Yutaka Kurihara, 2004, The day-of-the-week effect in foreign
exchange markets: multi-currency evidence, Research in international business and finance
18, 51-57.

Zaremba, A., and J. Shemer, 2017, Country Asset Allocation (1st Edition), Palgrave
Macmillan.

                                     28
Stockholm School of Economics
       Appendix
          Appendix A

          Appendix B

          Appendix C

          Appendix D

            29
Stockholm School of Economics

          Appendix E

          Appendix F

          Appendix G

            30
Stockholm School of Economics

          Appendix H

            31
Stockholm School of Economics

           Appendix I

            32
                            Stockholm School of Economics

                                         Appendix J

Appendix H-J: The tables above present the Mean, SD, Min-value, Max-value, and total observations
for each separate day of the week across all examined years. Excluding 2024 the small number of
observations.

                                     33
                            Stockholm School of Economics

                                        AI Appendix

The AI tools Chat GPT 4 and Grammarly have been used to improve the quality of the writing in this
bachelor's thesis in order to refine the viewer's readability. The tools have not been used to write any
parts of the thesis or provide any results. All of the data collection, theoretical framework, findings,
and conclusions have been done by the thesis authors.

                                     34