The Stockholm School of Economics
Department of Accounting & Financial Management
BSc Thesis Spring 2024

Climate Crisis: Just Another Annual Report
An Impression Management Discourse Analysis of Organizational
Decarbonization in Corporate Disclosures

Authors Athene Markgren (25475) & Viktor Frennert (25473).

Abstract
This paper investigates the discursive strategies involved in communicating carbon targets,
analysing 27 publicly available corporate reports of five major Swedish firms – Atlas Copco,
Essity, H&M, Scania, & Skanska – from 2019 to 2023. This period captures the increasing
adoption and standardisation of carbon emission reduction targets with respect to the disclosing
firms. The analysis is framed by organizational discourse theory, applying an adjusted typology
of impression management strategies (Dunne et al., 2021) to the firms’ decarbonization
communications. Four aggregate themes emerge from this analysis, conveying the following
impressions: (1) We are climate leaders, (2) We have embarked on a climate journey, (3) We
trust the science, and (4) Underperformance is not our fault - We will perform in the long term.
Altogether, this study addresses the impression management research gap in carbon accounting,
demonstrating the discursive strategies involved in communicating organizational climate work
to stakeholders. Furthermore, these findings contribute to critical research understandings of
the translational process of climate change in corporate disclosures.

Keywords Carbon Accounting, Impression Management, GHG Emissions Reporting,
Discourse Analysis, Corporate Sustainability, Environmental Communication

Supervisor Emilia Cederberg, Assistant Professor at the Department of Accounting,
Stockholm School of Economics.

Acknowledgements We would like to express our sincerest gratitude to our supervisor Emilia
Cederberg for her continuous support and invaluable insights throughout the research process.
Contents
Climate Crisis: Just Another Annual Report ........................................................................ 1
   1. Introduction .................................................................................................................. 3
   2. Literature Review......................................................................................................... 6
     2.1 Sustainability Accounting ...................................................................................... 6

     2.2 Carbon Accounting ................................................................................................ 7

     2.3 Institutionalising Carbon Accounting .................................................................. 10

     2.4 Discourse Analysis in Accounting ....................................................................... 10

     2.5 Theoretical Framework: Impression Management .............................................. 12

   3. Method......................................................................................................................... 14
     3.1 Research Design and Approach ........................................................................... 14

     3.2 Case Selection ...................................................................................................... 15

     3.3 Data Collection..................................................................................................... 18

     3.4 Data Analysis ....................................................................................................... 18

     3.5 Delimitations ........................................................................................................ 20

   4. Empirical Analysis ..................................................................................................... 21
     4.1 Positioning and Leadership .................................................................................. 22

     4.2 The Climate Journey ............................................................................................ 25

     4.3 Trusting the Science ............................................................................................. 29

     4.4 Excusing Underperformance and Future Promises .............................................. 32

   5. Discussion .................................................................................................................... 35
    5.1 Contribution to Discursive Understandings of Carbon Targets ........................... 35

     5.2 Contributions to Critical Research on Organizational Climate Work.................. 37

   6. Conclusion ................................................................................................................... 39
     6.1 Limitations ........................................................................................................... 39

     6.2 Further Research Suggestions .............................................................................. 40

   7. References ................................................................................................................... 41
   8. Appendices .................................................................................................................. 48

                                                                           2
   1. Introduction
“The increasing sophistication of climate science reinforces the catastrophic implications of
‘business as usual for a twenty-first-century world. […] The worst-case scenarios paint an
‘unimaginable’ vision of large tracts of Earth rendered uninhabitable, the collapse of global
food production, the acidification of the oceans, substantial sea-level rises, and storms and
droughts of growing intensity – a literal hell on Earth […] And yet how do we choose to
respond? Tangible political action remains limited to rhetorical flourishes against a
background of even greater fossil fuel exploitation.” (Wright & Nyberg 2015)

With the goal to mitigate the impact of global warming, the Paris Agreement (UNFCCC, 2015)
was adopted, representing a historic milestone in the combat against the existential challenge
of climate change. The aim of this legally binding international treaty is to limit the rise in
global temperatures to within 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels, a goal to be achieved through
a historic reduction of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. As the climate crisis intensifies, so
does the urgency for private businesses to align with the Paris Agreement by decarbonizing.

Indicative of this urgency, non-financial reporting standards have become increasingly
sophisticated (Wagenhofer, 2024), and institutional and stakeholder pressures for enhanced
Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) transparency have intensified (Lee & Raschke,
2023). Consequently, there has been a substantial uptick in corporate communications centered
on climate work (Gulluscio et al., 2020). This increased discursive focus on the ways in which
organizations engage with climate change has hence spurred a surge of research interest in
carbon accounting. Carbon accounting is a distinct discipline within sustainability reporting
that encompasses the disclosure, management, performance, and assurance of carbon emissions
(He et al., 2022), and has thus gained prominence as a crucial field that can help companies
align with broader environmental sustainability goals.

To achieve this decarbonization, corporations are increasingly engaging with external
organizations like the Science Based Targets initative (SBTi) - a carbon institution established
in 2015 with the intent to help companies set emission reduction targets (Science Based Targets,
2015). The SBTi is a driving force of organizational carbon target setting through its creation
of Science Based Targets (SBTs), which aim to create alignment between the Paris Agreement
and the SBTi-admitted firms (Giesekam et al., 2021). Nonetheless, the SBTi has drawn
criticism from scholars like Tilsted et al. (2023), who argue that it not only wields significant

                                                                           3
political and economic influence, but that this influence is obfuscated through its common
portrayal in organizational discourses as objective and purely scientific. Accordingly, the
SBTi's emphasis on techno-economic assessments is suggested to limit the scope of potential
decarbonization strategies, shaping expectations for transition pathways in a specific way that
benefits incumbent companies (Tilsted et al., 2023). Moreover, Tilsted et al. criticism extends
to the flexibility afforded to firms in setting and meeting SBTs, a flexibility that is suggested to
effectively shield the adhering firms from public scrutiny. These critiques hence underscore the
importance of critical engagement with how corporations discursively navigate the political
dimensions of the SBTi in their climate work.

Beyond criticism of specific carbon institutions, researchers have studied broader political
dimensions of carbon accounting as a discourse within the business environment, specifically
within discourse-focused analysis of organizational translations of climate change (Wright &
Nyberg, 2016). In their multiple-case study, Wright & Nyberg argue that in the translation
process of climate change into business operations, firms often regress over time to treat climate
change as business-as-usual, i.e. mundane, comfortable concerns to be addressed through
incumbent business models rather than transformative climate action. This regression, Wright
& Nyberg continue, constrains the organization’s ability to make meaningful environmental
contributions, hence constituting a significant critique of corporate climate work. Permeating
the literature on organizational environmental work in carbon accounting is thus this
highlighted significance of furthering critical engagement with corporate carbon discourses.

Thereby, the grand challenge of climate change has spurred research interest into carbon
accounting, while regulatory initiatives like the Paris Agreement are putting pressure on
organizations to decarbonize. Hence, carbon target setting has become a predominant method
for organizations to engage with climate work (Gulluscio et al., 2020; He et al., 2022; M. T.
Lee & Raschke, 2023). Meanwhile, the discourses surrounding carbon target setting in
corporate communications have been suggested to require additional critical engagement
(Tilsted et al., 2023; Wright & Nyberg, 2016), aimed at improving the understanding of the
organizational translations of climate change. In this light, the distinct lack of research within
carbon accounting on the actual discourse that companies use to communicate their targets and
climate initiatives garners attention. Consequently, the following questions remain to be
engaged with in literature:

                                                                           4
    1. How do companies employ discursive strategies in their corporate communications to
        influence perceptions of their carbon emission targets and initiatives?
    2. What broader organizational and political implications arise from these perceptions?

This paper sets out to explore these questions qualitatively, through an investigation of the
discursive strategies involved in communicating carbon targets. To achieve this purpose, we
conduct discourse analysis on the corporate disclosures of five major Swedish firms – Atlas
Copco, Essity, H&M, Scania, & Skanska – using the annual and sustainability reports from
2019 to 2023. This period captures the increasing adoption and standardisation of carbon
emission reduction targets, as previously signified through the popularisation of SBTs. The
analysis utilises impression management theory, which is the strategic practice to craft or
preserve a desired organizational image while avoiding undesirable attributes (Bolino et al.,
2008). In this sense, this theory provides an exemplary fit to the purpose of understanding how
organizations shape perceptions of their decarbonization work through discursive strategies. In
practice, we apply an adjusted typology of impression management strategies, based on the
work of Dunne et al. (2021), mapping the discursive strategies underlying the selected firms’
environmental communications through analysis of corporate disclosures.

The result of this analysis is the distillation of four aggregate discursive themes aimed at
enforcing certain impressions of the organization’s climate work: (1) We are climate leaders,
(2) We have embarked on a climate journey, (3) We trust the science, and (4)
Underperformance is not our fault - We will perform in the long term. This identification of
strategic mechanisms behind decarbonization communications contributes to existing literature
by providing a nuanced understanding of how narrative techniques can influence the perceived
legitimacy and effectiveness of corporate environmental actions. These findings echo previous
discourse studies in carbon accounting, by scholars such as Milne et al. (2009) and Cho et al.
(2012), regarding the relevance of corporate sustainability discourse projections, however
through the specific context of carbon targets. By doing so, it adds a critical layer of insight into
the interplay between corporate communication, stakeholder perceptions of climate work, and
discursive strategies. Thus, this thesis bridges existing knowledge gaps in carbon accounting
by providing nuanced, critical engagement mapping the impression management strategies used
by organizations when communicating climate work, setting the stage for further research into
the elucidation of the discursive strategies involved in organizational carbon communications.

                                                                           5
   2. Literature Review
   2.1 Sustainability Accounting
Accounting serves as a language for conveying a business's financial information and
performance (Bloomfield, 2008). Unlike language standards, however, accounting standards
are typically legally binding, exerting significant influence over internal and external
communication strategies within organizations (Angeloni, 2016). Moreover, accounting
competes with other forms of organizational performance measurement, hence being
operationally relevant (Lowe & Koh, 2007). These recognitions highlight the importance of
accounting as a technical discipline, shaping social and institutional imperatives within firms
(Lounsbury, 2008).

As stakeholder interest in environmental, social, and governance (ESG) dimensions grows,
sustainability accounting and its institutionalisation emerges as a crucial field, reflecting the
material value of ESG activities to businesses (Contrafatto, 2014; Killian, 2010). Sustainability
accounting involves the disclosure of non-financial information that constitute organizational
performance, emphasizing the ESG impact of the reporting organization (Hörisch et al., 2020).
In accordance with this development, European companies now face new non-financial
reporting standards, as introduced by the European Commission and the European Financial
Reporting Advisory Group (European Parliament and Council, 2022), exemplifying the
increased regulatory pressure for sustainability accounting, and necessitating organizational
adaptation to meet institutional demands for non-financial reporting (Giner & Luque-Vílchez,
2022). As previously established, this standardization process of sustainability accounting
extends beyond accounting functions, impacting strategic business decisions and corporate
communication strategies with stakeholders.

The ways in which sustainability reporting impacts strategic decisions and stakeholder
communication are suggested to be multifaceted. For instance, the historical differences in
perspectives on sustainability within organizational processes significantly shape the
implementation of strategic sustainability initiatives today (Frost & Rooney, 2021). In this
sense, integrating non-financial data into standard accounting activities broadens performance
metrics for decision-making and establishes new benchmarks for communicating business
strategies with stakeholders (Lee & Wu, 2014). Moreover, sustainability reporting has adopted
characteristics from financial reporting, perpetuating attributes that prioritize profit-seeking

                                                                           6
(Jollands et al., 2015). Hence, balancing financial and non-financial interests is an integral part
of translating sustainability work into business strategy and in subsequent communications with
stakeholders. This balance is especially evident in emerging research on environmental factors
material to organizational work. In the realm of environmental sustainability reporting, there is
a notable emphasis on climate change risk and mitigation as a dominant paradigm (Gulluscio
et al., 2020; Solomon et al., 2011). As organizations strive to address climate change concerns
and meet stakeholder expectations, carbon accounting thus plays a crucial role in quantifying
environmental impacts and informing strategic decisions towards improved environmental
sustainability.

   2.2 Carbon Accounting
Carbon accounting has emerged as a distinct field in sustainability accounting, concerning the
disclosure, management, performance, and assurance of carbon emissions (He et al., 2022).
Early carbon accounting literature focused on the implementation of carbon emission trading
systems at a corporate level, and in international and national contexts. The primary question
concerned by carbon accounting researchers was how the valuation and volatility of different
valuation systems for carbon emissions created difficulties in establishing global carbon
accounting standards (Cook, 2009). The adoption of the Paris Agreement at COP-21 outlined a
sizeable development at the international level by recognizing the importance of developing
global systems of climate accountability to mitigate environmental risks associated with climate
change (UNFCCC, 2015; Falkner, 2016). Following this shift, as climate-related risks have an
increasingly salient impact on corporate assets, the academic focus has moved away from
carbon allowance valuations towards carbon disclosure in practice (Solomon et al., 2011).

Carbon Disclosure
Carbon disclosure focuses on the establishment of effective and transparent regulation
processes for carbon measurements and controls (Luo et al., 2013). A multitude of explanatory
factors for understanding corporate carbon disclosure have been identified, including external
pressures from regulatory, institutional, economic and social actors, (Alrazi et al., 2016;
Bebbington et al., 2008; Freedman & Jaggi, 2005; Ott et al., 2017; Rankin et al., 2011) and
firm-specific characteristics related to governance, financial performance and managerial
expertise (Elsayih et al., 2018; Hollindale et al., 2019; Liesen et al., 2015; Luo & Tang, 2014;
Ott et al., 2017). The quality of carbon disclosures has been another area of concern for
researchers. Specifically, the issue of incomplete or otherwise inadequate technical details in

                                                                           7
corporate carbon has been suggested to highlight the need for regulatory guidelines (Kolk et
al., 2008). Finally, carbon disclosure is suggested to be achieved primarily through
communicative material in the annual report and sustainability report, documentation related to
corporate social responsibility (CSR) and corporate strategy, and through third-party channels
such as participation in the Carbon Disclosure Project survey (He et al., 2022). Hence, through
analysis of these documents, communication strategies employed by the firm disclosing carbon
emissions can be produced, enhancing transparency.

Carbon Management
Carbon management has been defined as the practices organizations implement to mitigate
operational GHG emissions (Hartmann et al., 2013). Previous studies include both descriptive
research, focusing on carbon management practices and their institutionalization, as well as
research on the factors influencing carbon management (Bui & Fowler, 2019; Vesty et al.,
2015). Carbon accounting can thus constitute valuable managerial tools to evaluate carbon-
related performance, perform green projects and capital budgeting, enforce decarbonisation,
and adapt to mitigate climate-related risks (Kumarasiri & Gunasekarage, 2017; K. H. Lee &
Wu, 2014; Linnenluecke et al., 2015; Ratnatunga & Balachandran, 2009). The role of regulatory
pressures may be closely interlinked with carbon management practices, as regulations that
impact the economic interests of an organization, like target setting incentives for emission
mitigation, have been found to enhance the usage of carbon management accounting techniques
(Kumarasiri & Jubb, 2016). Emission target setting has been of especial research interest as a
tool for carbon management, due to its widespread adoption (Ioannou et al., 2016).

Carbon Performance
Carbon performance concerns the efficiency, efficacy, and effectiveness of organizations at
controlling carbon emissions (He et al., 2022). The reliability and comparability of GHG
emission measurements can vary significantly based on the chosen estimation method,
particularly regarding selected emission scopes, aggregation bases, and boundary-setting
(Bowen & Wittneben, 2011; Cooper & Pearce, 2011; Milne & Grubnic, 2011; Young, 2010).
Furthermore, the purpose of the carbon performance metric is context-dependent, as GHG
emission can be evaluated as an absolute metric or in relation to other units of production as
efficiencies, or as comparisons of how these metrics change over time (Busch & Hoffmann,
2011). In support of this conditionality, carbon performance has been found to have a non-linear
relationship with a firm’s financial performance (Broadstock et al., 2018). Hence, caution

                                                                           8
should be applied when attempting to interpret and extrapolate from self-reported carbon
emission data, as the complexity involved when producing carbon performance data might
reduce data comparability and reliability.

Carbon Assurance
Finally, carbon assurance has emerged as a practice aimed at assessing the accuracy and
reliability of GHG emission information (Simnett et al., 2009). Compared to financial auditing,
carbon assurance differs in multiple aspects: its legal and regulatory basis, the degree of
organisational participation, the materiality threshold, the required competencies of auditors,
the accounting processes, and the users of the assurance reporting (Olson, 2010). Previous
studies on carbon assurance have found that companies with legitimacy threats have a higher
likelihood of obtaining carbon assurance, to indicate carbon disclosure credibility and mitigate
illegitimacy risks related to GHG emissions (Datt et al., 2018). In recent years, the concept of
audit quality has gained traction in carbon assurance, similarly to how it previously developed
in financial accounting (DeFond & Zhang, 2014). This development coincides with the creation
of multi-stakeholder carbon institutions, like the Science Based Targets initiative (SBTi), that
focus on carbon target setting as a means of reliably reducing GHG emissions.

Carbon Targets
Carbon targets constitute measurable, long-term commitments for carbon policies aiming to
limit the extent of climate change (Ioannou et al., 2016). Carbon target setting has emerged as
an integral organizational practice, used to formulate firm-specific decarbonization strategies,
with the hope of improving environmental sustainability (He et al., 2022). In this sense, carbon
targets encompass an integral tool in the global response to climate change (Bui & Fowler,
2019). Science Based Targets (SBTs) denote carbon targets set in alignment with the Paris
Agreement, limiting global warming to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels by halving GHG
emissions every decade, until reaching net-zero GHG emissions in 2050 (IPCC, 2022). SBTs
are approved by the SBTi and have emerged as an increasingly common method for firms to
engage in climate work, reflecting the increasing institutionalization of carbon accounting
(Giesekam et al., 2021).

                                                                           9
   2.3 Institutionalising Carbon Accounting
The Greenhouse Gas Protocol
Initiated in 2001 by the WBCSD and WRI, the Greenhouse Gas Protocol marked a significant
step in global carbon accounting institutionalization. It aimed to establish a uniform framework
for GHG measurement and management across organizations (Green, 2010). The widespread
adoption of these standards was driven by the need to minimize transaction costs when
exchanging organisational GHG information, potential first-mover advantages originating from
being an early adopter of carbon reporting standards, and reputational considerations, as
explained by Green (2010). This protocol also introduced the widely adopted GHG emission
scope terminology, distinguishing between scope 1 (direct emissions), scope 2 (indirect
emissions from purchased energy), and scope 3 (indirect emissions along the value chain) GHG
emissions. These definitions, along with subsequent initiatives like the Carbon Disclosure
Project (CDP) and the SBTi, have become integral to modern corporate carbon reporting.

The CDP & SBTi
Established in 2002, the CDP has evolved into a multinational carbon disclosure platform where
companies report their GHG emissions. Participating firms respond to an annual questionnaire
regarding their environmental impact and mitigation efforts (CDP, 2024). In collaboration with
the WRI, WWF, and UNGC, the CDP launched the SBTi in 2015 to assist companies in setting
environmental targets aligned with the scientific consensus on climate change, aiming to limit
global warming to 1.5°C as per the Paris Agreement (UNFCCC, 2015). The SBTi provides
guidance on transitioning to net-zero emissions by 2050, including setting targets for all three
emission scopes and linking executive compensation to emission-related milestones. While
lauded for advancing carbon accounting standardization, the SBTi has also faced criticism for
obfuscating the political aspects of the climate transition and incumbents in decarbonization
efforts as mentioned in the introduction (Tilsted et al., 2023), together with wider discursive
criticism of organizational climate work (Wright & Nyberg, 2016).

   2.4 Discourse Analysis in Accounting
Discourse encompasses both everyday language use and broader societal examination of
language, power, and society (Alvesson & Karreman, 2000). Within accounting, discourse
analysis thus examines how accounting is systematized and used prescriptively. Much of
previous discourse research in accounting has occurred within the financial accounting field
(Llewellyn & Milne, 2007), providing insights into financial auditing practices, intellectual

                                                                          10
capital management, organizational management systems and discourses in corporate annual
reports (Frezatti et al., 2014; Khalifa et al., 2007). A specific example of discourse analysis in
accounting is provided by Rogers et al. (2011), who analyzed the connection between the tone
of earnings announcements and firms involved in disclosure-related litigation, revealing a more
optimistic discourse from the sued firms. Hence, discursive analyses have had significant
contributions to the financial accounting field.

In the realm of non-financial accounting, researchers have employed discourse analysis to delve
into various areas, including CSR reporting and corporate climate change disclosure. Studies
by Milne et al. (2009) and Solomon et al. (2011) have contributed to understandings of how
companies communicate their CSR initiatives and commitments regarding climate change.
Specifically, Milne et al. (2009) found that organizations respond to external sustainability
pressures in corporate communications by portraying themselves as leaders in the climate field.
Additionally, discourse analysis has been applied to examine crisis management strategies from
different perspectives. Cooper & Slack (2015) explore crisis responses through the lens of
corporate reporting practices, while Dunne et al. (2021) focus on crisis management from an
auditing standpoint, demonstrating the varied applications of discourse theory within the non-
financial domain.

Discourse analysis in the narrower realm of carbon accounting is relatively underdeveloped in
literature. While some research has explored discursive strategies in sustainability reports, this
analysis has primarily been conducted exclusively from the perspective of financial investors
(Diouf & Boiral, 2017). Moreover, despite the emergence of carbon targets as a predominant
method for businesses to practice carbon management and climate action (Giesekam et al.,
2021), especially with the widespread adoption of SBTs, there remains a significant gap in the
literature concerning the discursive strategies involved in communicating these targets and
initiatives to stakeholders. Hence, understanding the discourse strategies employed in the
communication of carbon targets could enhance transparency in carbon reporting and provide
a critical perspective for analyzing organizational climate efforts.

Thus, the following research questions remain unanswered in carbon accounting literature:
   • How do companies employ discursive strategies in their corporate communications to
        influence perceptions of their carbon emission targets and initiatives?

                                                                          11
    • And in the wider context of the corporate translations of climate change: What broader
       organizational and political implications arise from these influenced perceptions?

   2.5 Theoretical Framework: Impression Management
Echoing the findings of previous scholars (Cooper & Slack, 2015; Dunne et al., 2021),
impression management emerges as an exemplary theory equipped to investigate the discursive
strategies involved in organizational communication, helping shed light on these questions.
Impression management theory concerns the processes through which an actor attempts to
influence the perceptions of another actor through the regulation and control of information in
interactions (Goffman, 1959; Goffman, 1967). The theory was initially conceptualized in the
individual context, but the framework has since expanded to yield research centered on
organizational dynamics. Impression management in the organizational context has been
outlined as a strategic practice to craft or preserve a desired organizational image while avoiding
undesirable attributes (Bolino et al., 2008). Furthermore, the theory has been suggested to
emerge as a vital tool for shaping or revitalizing an organization’s perceived legitimacy and is
frequently employed by companies to highlight favorable trends rather than unfavorable ones,
especially within the sustainability context (Cho et al., 2012).

In the accounting field, impression management theory has been used extensively to conduct
discursive analysis of financial statements and other corporate communications, predominantly
to understand damage mitigation strategies in times of organizational crises (Aerts, 2005; Patelli
& Pedrini, 2014). Annual reports have been suggested to constitute corporate communications
of significant credibility in the context of impression management research in financial
accounting (Linsley & Kajuter, 2008). In academia, the textual content of annual reports has
consequently been extensively studied through the impression management theoretical lens, in
addition to visual elements (e.g. graphics and photographs) used to sway stakeholders along
crafted narratives (Leung et al., 2015). Accounting reports, through the impression management
lens, thus constitute not solely technical tools for reporting, but also wields significant influence
as a vehicle for political, social, and economic agendas (Cooper & Slack, 2015).

In non-financial accounting, previous discursive research has found that firms with poorer ESG
performance employ more optimistic language and report non-financial metrics with less
precision (García-Sánchez et al., 2019). In contrast, other scholars find that optimistic language

                                                                          12
in CEO letters is congruent with both past and future financial performance, although they also
warn about the impact of impression management on this congruence (Patelli & Pedrini, 2014).
From a social responsibility perspective, impression management has also been applied at an
aggregate level to sustainability reports, identifying rhetorical tactics and writing styles
accompanying non-financial corporate communications (Sandberg & Holmlund, 2015).

Nonetheless, in the narrower context of carbon accounting and carbon targets, there is a distinct
absence of research on impression management strategies, especially considering the theory’s
typical application in response to crises. Applications of impression management to carbon
accounting include research on rationalizations of climate change impact for a Canadian firm,
focusing on its influence on regulators of carbon policy (Talbot & Boiral, 2015). Another study
by the same authors analyzed the quality of climate data in sustainability reports, and
consequently identified impression management strategies developed to conceal poor
environmental carbon performance (Talbot & Boiral, 2018). Beyond aggregate-level carbon
accounting, the role of impression management strategies in shaping discourses on carbon
targets through corporate communication is thus yet to be researched.

Impression Management Strategies
Impression management strategies are discursive strategies employed in the pursuit of
conveying impressions (Bolino et al., 2008). These strategies have been classified into two
major categories: assertive strategies and defensive strategies. Assertive impression
management strategies are proactive and attempt to enhance the organization’s image in
particular ways. In contrast, defensive impression management strategies are reactive and
adopted in response to situations that threaten to damage perceptions of the organization.
Previous literature has identified a plethora of impression management strategies (Dunne et al.,
2021), including the assertive strategies of enhancement, exemplification, ingratiation,
selectivity, and self-promotion. Similarly, multiple defensive IM strategies have been
established, including concealment, disassociation, and external attribution (see Appendix A
for a full list of the 18 strategies and their respective definitions compiled by Dunne et al.
(2021)). These strategies offer a lens for analysing the language used by organizations, allowing
the impressions conveyed by these strategic choices to be laid out. Hence, the application of
impression management strategies as a theoretical lens could fill the research gap on the
discursive mechanisms involved in carbon target communications.

                                                                          13
   3. Method
   3.1 Research Design and Approach
The purpose of this study is to address the gap in carbon accounting literature by studying the
discursive strategies applied in corporate communications to influence perceptions of carbon
emission targets and initiatives. In practice, qualitative analysis of the corporate
communications of five major Swedish firms; Atlas Copco, Essity, H&M, Scania, and Skanska
over the five-year reporting period 2019 to 2023, was conducted. Although qualitative research
in accounting has been suggested to lack support for the generalisability of quantitative
methods, this view has been opposed, suggesting qualitative generalisation as a preferred means
of engaging with accounting practice and discourses (Parker & Northcott, 2016). Hence, we
find support in accounting literature for a qualitative approach in exploring this research
question. Since the focus of this study is how reporting organizations influence audience
perceptions discursively, particularly on communications of carbon targets, impression
management emerges as a qualitative, language-based research approach that appropriately
systematizes this analysis. In addition, previous research aiming to investigate similar questions
in sustainability accounting have opted for the same theorization, providing further support for
our selection of impression management theory (García-Sánchez et al., 2019; Sandberg &
Holmlund, 2015; Talbot & Boiral, 2018).

This study applies a typological approach to impression management strategies inspired by the
compilation work of Dunne et al. (2021) to analyse carbon target discourse in corporate
communications. A fundamental precondition for discourse analysis is that language material
can be examined as evidence of phenomena beyond the singular individual or organization
(Taylor, 2013). In this sense, the examination and identification of impression management
strategies applied by one firm could provide evidence for the implicit emergence of broader
dominant discursive strategies within carbon emission target communications, developing the
view of qualitative generalisability. To ensure that our paper adheres to scientific best practices
and to ensure data quality, we emphasise the vital role of reflexivity regarding our choice of
methodology by providing comprehensive descriptions of our case selection, data collection
and data analysis processes throughout this section.

In practice, the study was conducted as a longitudinal, multi-organizational design. The
motivation behind conducting a longitudinal study was to examine and control for potential

                                                                          14
shifts in discourse strategies over time. The recency of the selected reporting years: from 2019
to 2023, in combination with the emergence and popularization of carbon accounting initiatives
during that time, particularly the SBTi (Giesekam et al., 2021), implies that firms have had to
initiate or adjust carbon target communication strategies in novel ways. Consequently, by
adopting a multi-organizational approach within the same national context, we gain comparable
legislative and market-based preconditions over the period and can thus develop relations in
discourses and impression management strategies across the surveyed organizations.

   3.2 Case Selection
The selection of companies - Atlas Copco, Essity, H&M, Scania, and Skanska - was based on
fulfilment of several criteria. Firstly, they are large (>100 billion SEK revenue and >10,000
employees in 2023) firms publicly listed in Sweden, significant players in their respective
industries, and have substantial GHG emissions (reported absolute sum of scope 1 and 2
emissions above >50,000 tonnes CO2 equivalents each year of the period). The fulfilment of
these criteria together, encompasses strong stakeholder interests in the carbon work of these
firms. Furthermore, by including companies from a diverse set of industries we aim to obtain a
multifaceted understanding of existing discourse patterns regarding carbon emission targets.
Secondly, every chosen company has a long (>5 year) history of sustainability reporting and
has worked with GHG reduction targets over the full period. As of 2023, each company was
committed to SBTi and hence aligned with broader decarbonization targets. Therefore, there
the selected firm have produced abundant textual data to analyse, allowing us to scrutinize a
spectrum of discourses surrounding carbon emission targets and their influence on stakeholders.
An overview of the selected organizations carbon emission targets follows.

Table 1: Overview of GHG Emission Reduction Targets (Scope 1 & 2)
 Company SBTi Approval Year Reduction Target Baseline Path

 Atlas Copco 2021 46% by 2030 2019 1.5 °C

 Essity 2018 35% by 2030 2016 Well below 2 °C

 H&M 2022 56% by 2030 2019 1.5 °C

 Scania 2020 50% by 2025 2015 1.5 °C

 Skanska 2021 70% by 2030 2015 1.5 °C

                                                                          15
Source: Science Based Targets (2022)

Table 2: Overview of GHG Emission Reduction Targets (Scope 3*)
 Company SBTi Approval Year Reduction Target Baseline Path

 Atlas Copco 2021 28% by 2030 2019 Well below 2 °C

 Essity 2018 18% by 2030 2016 Well below 2 °C

 H&M 2022 56% by 2030 2019 1.5 °C

 Scania 2020 20% per vehicle km  2015 Well below 2 °C
                                   by 2025

 Skanska 2021 50% by 2030 2020 1.5 °C

*Scope 3 target boundaries differ between firms
Source: Science Based Targets (2022)

Table 1 and Table 2 provide overviews of the scope 1 and 2, and scope 3 carbon emission
reduction targets respectively for the selected firms. As is evident from Table 1 and Table 2,
all companies have committed to the SBTi within the last six years, with the majority doing so
around 2021, aligning their decarbonization goals with the well-below 2°C ambition at
minimum. For Table 2, note that the scope 3 targets differ in what scope 3 emission categories
were included for calculations. For example, Skanska’s scope 3 target includes only purchased
goods and services, fuel and energy-related activities, waste generated in operations, business
travel, and the use of sold products (Science Based Targets, 2022). Overall, despite operating
in different industries, all companies exhibit similar alignments with decarbonization paths and
utilize the SBTi framework to set target for the reduction of GHG emissions.

Atlas Copco: Atlas Copco AB is a Swedish multinational industrial company that manufactures
advanced machinery (Atlas Copco, 2024). Since 2003, the firm has integrated sustainability
reporting into their annual reports, motivating decarbonization as a strategic priority: “[Atlas
Copco is] committed to contributing to a sustainable development and to being part of the
transformation to a low-carbon society.” (Atlas Copco, 2024). Beyond this explicit
prioritization of decarbonizing, Atlas Copco is an especially intriguing firm to analyse from a
carbon target setting perspective due to its heavy technology focus for industrial applications.

                                                                          16
Essity: Essity AB is a global provider of hygiene and health products and services and has
integrated sustainability into their annual reports since 2017 (Essity, 2024). Their company
mission is: “to break barriers to well-being for the benefit of consumers, patients, care givers,
and customers across the globe. As well as for the benefit of society and the planet” (Essity,
2024). This wider corporate purpose of having a positive environmental makes the firm a
suitable subject for this decarbonization-focused study. Additionally, the strong social
sustainability health focus of the firm could provide a new approach to carbon target setting
discourse compared to the other firms.

H&M: H&M Group is a global fashion and design company who has published sustainability
reports since 2002, the longest of any of our selected firms (H&M, 2024). Part of H&M’s
corporate strategy is to “[s]upport a circular fashion industry with net-zero climate impact”
(H&M, 2024). The fast-fashion industry, of which H&M is considered a considerable actor,
has been extensively criticised for its negative environmental impact (Niinimäki et al., 2020).
H&M thus emerges as an intriguing organization in terms the communication strategies
involved in aligning discourses of their carbon target with their corporate strategy.

Scania: Scania Group is a global provider of transport solutions and has integrated
sustainability into their annual reports since 2015 (Scania, 2024). Their corporate purpose is
“to drive the shift towards a sustainable transport system, creating a world of mobility that is
better for business, society and the environment.” (Scania, 2024). Anchoring their
decarbonization strategy in creating vehicles for improved carbon efficiency in mobility, Scania
could therefore provide a distinct approach to communications of carbon targets, nuancing our
findings.

Skanska: Skanska Group is a project development and construction company who has
published integrated annual and sustainability reports since 2018, starting the latest of observed
firms (Skanska, 2024). Skanska describes their climate work in the following way: “By creating
and implementing transformative climate solutions, we drive our business forward and enable
our customers to fulfill their sustainability goals.“ (Skanska, 2024). Skanska thus embodies the
unique strategic discourses of carbon targets in the construction industry context – an industry
they describe as characterised by high carbon dependency.

                                                                          17
   3.3 Data Collection
The qualitative data acquired in this study consists of textual secondary data excerpted from the
respective annual reports of the five selected firms over the five-year reporting period. For
H&M, the sustainability performance report was used in 2019 and 2020 to complement the
annual report, due to non-integration of the sustainability report in the annual report those years.
In total, data was collected from 27 corporate reports over the five-year period, from 2019 to
2023, summing up to 4106 pages. The usage of corporate disclosures as a data source was
motivated by the establishment of these disclosures as important signifiers of emerging
discourses in the organizational settings, particularly with respect to extra organizational
communication (Taylor, 2013).

Searches in these texts were conducted using relevant keywords (e.g. “science-based”,
“emission”, “carbon” and “climate”). From these searches, excerpts were collected based on
fulfilment of two criteria: the text focuses on environmental sustainability and/or GHG
emissions of the firm, and the text is discursively prominent. For example, this excerpt from
Skanska’s annual report of 2022 was selected: “During 2022, we continued our journey
towards net-zero carbon emissions, we focused on reducing our own emissions, and made
strategic decisions in planning and designing future projects in our property development
business.” (Skanska, 2023). This quote was deemed to address the GHG emissions of the firm,
fulfilling the first criterion, and to contain significant discursive themes like the metaphor of
climate work as a journey, fulfilling the second criterion. In total, 448 excerpts were collected.

These excerpts were then compiled in Excel, together with information on the year, the firm,
the corporate disclosure, and the context they were taken from. Excerpts were then sorted by
firm and by year, to provide the basis for comparisons within and across organizations, and
within and across years. The collection of excerpts from all 27 corporate disclosures was
completed independently before initiating data analysis, to mitigate the risk of data dredging
and in accordance with best practice (Taylor, 2013).

   3.4 Data Analysis
Our data analysis follows the meaning-oriented content analysis methodology developed by
Dunne et. al (2021), allowing a richer investigation that highlights deeper meanings of the
analysed text. The initial reading and subsequent excerpt collection was thus followed by a two-

                                                                          18
stage coding process. The first stage of the coding process consisted of abductive analysis of
the excerpts, classifying the textual passages according to emerging discursive themes. In total,
eight themes were identified and used to colour-code the excerpts (for a full list of the eight
initial themes, please see Appendix A). A single, most prominent theme was associated with
each excerpt. After a time gap, this initial coding process was redone as a double-checking
mechanism. Where differences in coding had occurred, for 103 excerpts in total, the data was
scrutinized to establish the most appropriate themes. For example, the excerpt “At Scania,
sustainability is not something added on top of what we already do. We have always focused
on lean work models, efficiency and elimination of waste and as such sustainability is built into
the organisation and operations naturally.” (Scania, 2020) was coded to the theme Enhancing
decarbonization-related capabilities in the first round, but later coded to the theme Projecting
an image of integrity and environmental responsibility in the second round. The second theme
was settled on as most fitting due to the surrounding context, where engagement with
sustainability is described by Scania as the fulfilment of a deeper purpose.

The second stage of the coding process involved mapping our initial coding to the typology of
impression management strategies, hence analysing the excerpts in the context of surrounding
text to identify underlying discursive strategies (see Table 3 for the identified strategies and
associated definitions). For example, the excerpts that were coded to the discursive theme of
Selective showcasing and framing of climate initiatives was mapped to the assertive impression
management strategy Selectivity, defined as “An organization highlights facts that portray it in
the best possible light” (Dunne et al. 2021). The excerpts in the initial coding were hence
considered to use showcasing and framings to produce a bright view of the organization’s
climate initiatives, coinciding with the definition of Selectivity as provided.

Table 3: Typology of Impression Management Strategies (adjusted version of Dunne et al.’s
2021 typology, for full version with all impression management strategies, see Appendix B).
 Assertive IM Strategy Definition
 Enhancement An organization accentuates the desirability of a positive event for
                             which it was at least partially responsible
 Exemplification An organization projects an image of integrity, social
                            responsibility or moral worthiness
 Ingratiation An organization flatters an audience or expresses similar beliefs
                            and attitudes to the audience

                                                                          19
 Selectivity An organization highlights facts that portray it in the best possible
                              light
 Self-promotion An organization promotes its competence, talents and capabilities
 Defensive IM Strategy Definition
 Concealment An organization downplays transgressions by giving them less
                       prominence
 Disassociation An organization distances itself from a negative event
 External attribution An organization attributes negative outcomes to external events or
                           chance factors

Following this two-step coding process, we abstracted our mapping to higher levels of
aggregate themes, summarizing the impressions on decarbonization conveyed through these
discursive strategies by the reporting firms. Figure 1 shows an overview of this abstraction
process, constituting the product of our analytical work, from initial coding of carbon discourses
(see Appendix A), through subsequent coding using the typology of impression management
strategies (Dunne et al., 2021, see Table 3), to the final mapping of aggregate themes.

      evel 1 coding Carbon iscourses evel 2 coding Typology o Strategies Aggregate Themes mpressions Conveyed

   ccentuating the desirability of climate engagement                    Enhancement

                                                                                                   We are climate leaders
    Pro ecting an image of integrity and environmental
                  responsibility                                      Exemplification

     Expressing decarbonization as an organizational
         priority, appealing to climate science                                 ngratiation
                                                                                      We have embarked on the Climate
                                                                                             ourney
 Selective showcasing and framing of climate initiatives                          Selectivity

    Enhancing decarbonization related capabilities                    Self promotion
                                                                                                      We trust the science

    Giving less prominence to GHG emissions from
         operationally significant activities                              Concealment

     Distancing the firm from its industry, which is
           presented as carbon inefficient                               Disassociation                             nderperformance is not our fault
                                                                               we will perform in the long term

  ttributing substandard carbon performance to external
         factors beyond the firm s control                        External attribution

Figure 1: Impression management strategies employed by firms to convey climate impressions.

   3.5 Delimitations
This study is delimited in scope in three major ways, aiming to abridge our approach to
effectively explore our research question. Firstly, the data used to extrapolate discourses in this
study are solely textual, hence excluding visual elements like pictures and graphs. While we

                                                                          20
recognize the discursive characteristics of non-textual elements, this delimitation is motivated
to prevent double counting (i.e. capturing the same impression management behaviour twice,
once in text and once outside), echoing the delimitation of Cooper & Slack (2015). Secondly,
our selection of data sources is delimited to corporate disclosures, as deemed appropriate
according to Taylor’s (2013) recognition of these reports as exemplary documents for discourse
analysis in the extra organizational context. Finally, our research interest is focused on the
communication of GHG emission targets and scopes, and hence specifically delimited to
carbon-related environmental sustainability.

   4. Empirical Analysis
In this section, we analyse the carbon targeting excerpts from the annual reports of the selected
firms to reveal underlying impression management strategies and illustrate how these strategies
convey aggregate perception-shaping themes. Firstly, we explore the discursive techniques
involved in positioning the reporting firm as leaders in climate work. Secondly, we introduce
the journey metaphor in the context of climate work, identifying its characteristics and the
impression management strategies that uphold this discourse. Thirdly, we investigate the
discourse of trusting the science in the context of carbon targeting communications. Fourthly,
and finally, the ways in which firms explain underperformance in their decarbonization work,
are laid out together with the prevalent usage of the future as a source of carbon target
realisation.

The analysis will be conducted multi-organizationally - meaning that the focus will be on the
employment of impression management strategies with specific firms as indicative examples
for aggregate themes. Although a general trend towards increasing technical sophistication in
GHG targets was observed for all firms over the time period, especially from the year each firm
adopted SBTs, these differences in adoption years were found to not extensively change
discursive strategies of carbon reduction targets. Firm-specific differences were similarly
prominent at a technical level, for example in what business areas are prioritised in
decarbonization and industry-specific contexts, but these differences waned at the discourse
level. Rather, a strong degree of similarity in the conveying of climate communications was
identified, motivating a standardised approach to exploring the discourses of carbon targets in
a cross-organizational fashion.

                                                                          21
In summary, by employing the adjusted typology of impression management strategies, as
initially compiled by Dunne et al. (2021), we analyse the corporate disclosures of the chosen
firms spanning the five-year period, from 2019 to 2023. Our primary research inquiry, how
companies employ discursive strategies in their corporate communications to shape perceptions
of their carbon emission targets and efforts, will help guide the uncovering of prevalent
impression management strategies and the discernment of discursive trends in GHG emission
targets articulations.

   4.1 Positioning and Leadership
Proactive stance
Positioning and leadership refer to the aggregate theme of firms conveying the impression that
they are climate leaders, transforming their industry through carbon efficiency. By positioning,
a permeating theme of firms describing themselves as taking a proactive stance with regards to
climate change emerges. For example, Essity's 2021 annual report asserts, "As a global
company in hygiene and health, Essity plays a leading role in driving change to reduce the
company’s climate impact." (Essity, 2022). Similarly, in Scania’s annual report of 2019, the
firm declares that: "As a large player in this industry, we at Scania have taken a clear stance
and decided that we want to take a leading role in driving the shift towards a sustainable
transport system." (Scania, 2020). These two excerpts show how Essity and Scania position
themselves as spearheading climate work in their respective industries, applying the
exemplification impression management strategy to achieve the image of proactive climate
leadership. There is a slight difference in these excerpts, as Essity claims to already be a climate
leader, while Scania claims the aspiration to become one. Nonetheless, two years later in
Scania’s annual report of 2021, they seem to have achieved their aspiration: “We continue to
push and challenge other stakeholders to follow our lead because we know that we cannot
achieve this change alone.” (Skanska, 2022). These examples illustrate the common theme of
how companies strategically use exemplification in their portrayal of themselves as industry
leaders and drivers of change. This trend is reinforced by companies' linguistic choices when
describing commitments to carbon projects and targets. Phrases like "innovation" and
"leadership" are commonly used with regards to climate work, indicating a proactive stance.
The employment of exemplification to project an image of integrity and social responsibility
with regards to climate work is thus prevalent.

                                                                          22
Several other underlying impression management strategies were found to guide companies’
discourses of decarbonization ambitions. Firstly, through statements like "We seize
opportunities and manage risks through our sustainability strategy" (H&M, 2022) from
H&M’s 2021 annual report, and "At Skanska, we take a holistic approach to designing and
building with fewer emissions, incorporating resource efficiency, circularity, renewable
energy, electrification, and digitalization" (Skanska, 2024) from Skanska’s 2023 annual report,
a trend of ingratiation emerges. This impression management strategy is utilised to reassure
readers of the companies' commitment to addressing the climate crisis, aligning with beliefs
that emphasise the importance of environmental sustainability. Hence, H&M and Skanska
assure their stakeholders through ingratiation that they are proactively positioned to manage
climate challenges. Additionally, the companies employ exemplification to reinforce their
image as industry leaders in climate work, emphasising responsibilities to manage risks and
take holistic approaches. Thus, through these impression management strategies, the companies
aim to project a positive and proactive stance on environmental sustainability, enhancing their
reputation and credibility among stakeholders.

The companies’ positioning of themselves as proactive sustainability leaders emerged as
immensely pervasive. For instance, in the following excerpts H&M asserts their role as a
driving force of decarbonization: "The H&M group accepts responsibility for its part in this
and is determined to drive the transition to a fossil-free economy" (H&M, 2020a), and "We
have set ambitious sustainability goals, which to the greatest possible extent are based on latest
science, best practice and knowledge" (H&M, 2023). These statements strengthen the
positioning of companies as leaders of the journey towards net-zero, once again employing
exemplification to align sustainability with an image of moral responsibility and ingratiation to
emphasise the scientific support for their climate work. Similar formulations aimed at putting
the disclosing firm at the forefront of decarbonization were found in all surveyed disclosures.
We have hence observed the widespread adoption of assertive impression management
strategies, ingratiation and exemplification in particular, to discursively position the
communicating corporation as a major climate leader in their respective field. Through these
discursive mechanisms, this proactive stance on climate change thus enhances the perceived
credibility and authority of the firm in addressing environmental challenges, reinforcing an
image of commitment to sustainability and creating moral alignment with stakeholder
expectations regarding climate innovation.

                                                                          23
Magnifying Small Projects
To delve deeper into how companies showcase their innovative capabilities, the tendency of
companies to amplify the significance of smaller projects is now explored. In Atlas Copco's
2020 annual report, the firm describes ways in which they decarbonise: "Atlas Copco
undertakes a range of activities to reduce CO2 emissions from energy in operations and
transport of goods, such as installing solar panels, buying renewable electricity and avoiding
air freight." (Atlas Copco, 2021). While initiatives like transitioning to renewable energy and
selecting carbon-efficient methods of travel can reduce GHG emissions, the report fails to
provide the specific impact of these efforts on absolute GHG emissions. Similar general
formulations regarding the climate work of the firms were common, for instance in Skanska’s
annual report of 2019, describing the usage of solar panels in their residential building BoKlok
without providing actual calculations on the consequential carbon impact: “In 2019, BoKlok
began equipping all of its new apartment projects in Sweden with solar panels, which will help
people reduce their energy costs and carbon emissions'' (Skanska, 2020). These excerpts
indicate the usage of the assertive impression management strategy of selectivity. By giving
prominence to general decarbonization initiatives in their corporate disclosures, the
operationally significant GHG emissions are downplayed. This selectivity strategy hence allows
companies to maintain a positive narrative by implying proactive decision-making,
strengthening impact of previously described assertive strategies, even when the extent and
impact of the featured climate initiatives remains elusive. By spotlighting small projects and
magnifying their importance, attention is diverted from the climate impact of actual operations,
highlighting the transitory and innovative capabilities of the firm while enhancing the image of
climate leadership.

An additional illustration of this tendency to magnify projects is evident in this statement from
Essity’s 2020 annual report: "During 2021, we are starting the production of tissue from wheat
straw at our facility in Mannheim, Germany. It is a good example of ground-breaking
production that generates a significantly lower climate impact while retaining quality." (Essity,
2021). In this excerpt, emphasis is placed on future initiatives and their perceived impact, yet
concrete measurements of their actual contribution to GHG emissions are notably absent.
Furthermore, this concealment of current emissions highlights a common discursive strategy of
accentuating the significance of upcoming projects without providing quantitative data on their
effectiveness in reducing emissions. Hence, this discourse aligns stakeholders' expectations of

                                                                          24
companies to demonstrate proactive measures against climate change, overshadowing the lack
of transparency regarding the environmental benefits.

In contrast, some firms provide specific data on emissions reduction for certain projects. For
instance, Skanska’s 2023 annual report describes the environmental benefits of constructing the
roof in an airport with wood rather than conventional materials, stating that: “carbon was
reduced by 3,900 metric tons compared with calculations for an all-steel structure” (Skanska,
2024). In this case, the provided technical details help provide necessary quantifiable data for
stakeholders to determine the initiative’s climate impact. However, similar showcases that
provide specific carbon calculations often lack context regarding the pro ect’s overall GHG
emissions. For example, critical details such as baseline emissions or the proportion of total
emissions reduced by this initiative was omitted. This omission contrasts with Skanska’s
previous practices, as seen in their 2022 annual report showcasing the Gottorps Hage project,
where replacing concrete with slag “reduc[ed] carbon emissions by 34 percent” (Skanska,
2023) for the entire project. Hence, selective presentations of data can enable companies to
highlight their efforts in reducing GHG emissions without offering a comprehensive
understanding of the overall impact on their scopes. As a result, organisations are applying
strategic selectivity discursively to create an impression of proactive engagement with emission
reduction initiatives, while sidestepping comparisons to the broader organisational carbon
impact.

   4.2 The Climate Journey
The journey metaphor of sustainability in business practices has previously been critically
researched and found to manufacture an appearance of sustainability engagement, while
paradoxically reinforcing unsustainable business-as-usual (Milne et al., 2006). Echoing the
findings of Milne et al. (2006), we explore the journey metaphor of sustainability from a climate
work perspective, motivated by the persistent usage of the “ ourney” term across the selected
firms during the time frame. In this subsection, we will thus analyse the discourse of climate
work as a journey, its characteristics, and explore the impression management strategies
involved in sustaining this narrative.

                                                                          25
Climate Work as a Journey
 n H&M’s sustainability report from 2019, the early steps in their decarbonization ourney is
exemplified by the decoupling of financial growth from emissions growth: “Our total scope 3
CO2e emissions were 17,622 kilotonnes. This is a 4% increase from 2018, indicating that we
have begun our journey to decouple growth of these emissions from our financial growth
(6%).*” (H&M, 2020b). This climate journey is suggested to have continued to develop, and
to have expanded to include several focal areas in their business model, as written in H&M’s
annual report from 2023: “Our investments in innovation mean we are taking important steps
on our journey /.../ We are continually working to develop our business model in order to add
profitable growth while at the same time reducing our energy consumption, increasing the
percentage of renewable energy and reducing our climate footprint” (H&M, 2024). In similar
terms, Scania wrote about their climate journey in their annual report from 2022: “During 2022
Scania also complemented our decarbonisation journey with targets related to the supply
chain.” (Scania, 2023). These excerpts show the common metaphorization of decarbonisation
work as a journey. The climate journey thus encompasses moving the company from a past
origin of higher GHG emissions towards a future destination of carbon efficiency. The term
“ ourney” is described as a continuous and recursive process in which organisations undergo
sustained refinements (Milne et al., 2006), in this case related to climate work. Beyond
sustainability journeys, this discourse on climate journeys highlights two significant
transformations in organisational impression management strategy, as will be developed in this
subsection: Firstly, transition work becomes intrinsic to the firm in question, and secondly, the
decarbonization process adopts an inherently optimistic and positive tone.

Intrinsic Centering
The discourse of climate journeys intrinsically places the firm in question at the heart of
transition work, thus becoming a central actor in the climate transition. In this discourse, the
role of the firm is strongly emphasised and the way to progress on environmental issues is
through self-discovery. In this sense, the climate journey is one of self-determination and
incumbency, as the topic of interest is delimited to the historical, present and future
environmental work of the journeying organisation. In consequence, the impression
management strategies that follow are similarly self-centred, assertive and anchored in
organisational exploration and discovery. Specifically, the self-promotion and exemplification
impression management strategies are observed to be principal communication strategies used
to assert the firm as the protagonist of the decarbonization journey.

                                                                          26
To illustrate, consider how Skanska describes their decarbonisation journey in their Annual
report from 2022: “During 2022, we continued our journey towards net-zero carbon emissions,
we focused on reducing our own emissions, and made strategic decisions in planning and
designing future projects in our property development business.” (Skanska, 2023). This journey
is expanded upon in the previous paragraph: “We remain committed to our climate target and
believe that demand for sustainable and climate-resilient buildings and infrastructure will
continue to increase.” (Skanska, 2023). These excerpts show how self-promotion is used as an
impression management strategy in the context of the climate journey discourse. Climate
efficiency in operations is described as an inherent quality of Skanska’s work and acts to anchor
decarbonization as a firm-specific activity that creates stakeholder value in response to
changing market demand. Similarly, Scania reflects on their climate journey in their 2023
annual report: “2025 is far from the end of our decarbonisation journey, but rather an important
milestone and a time for evaluation as we continue to drive the shift towards a sustainable
transport system” (Scania, 2024). In this excerpt, Scania applies the self-promotion strategy to
promote climate innovation as a key capability of the firm. In addition, the exemplification
impression management strategy is employed to pro ect Scania’s moral worthiness as an
evolving provider of sustainable transport. Hence, the climate journey employs multiple
assertive impression management strategies in combination, particularly self-promotion and
exemplification, to intrinsically centre the reporting organisation at the heart of decarbonization
discourse.

Positive and Optimistic Tonality
In the climate journey, carbon work is frequently portrayed in a positive light and with strong
hopefulness. Concepts like cost efficiencies, energy savings, and circularity as a business model
are used to frame carbon-efficiency as enhancements of offerings. Skanska emphasises this
point in their annual report of 2019, noting that "Often reducing carbon emissions goes hand in
hand with improving efficiency and resource efficiency, thus helping to lower costs." (Skanska,
2020). Atlas Copco echoes this sentiment, stating that "Today’s environmental and societal
challenges present business opportunities for a company like Atlas Copco." (Atlas Copco,
2021). These excerpts show how companies assert control over the climate crisis in discourse,
accentuating the desirability of positive opportunities and cost efficiencies. This emphasis on
enhancement suggests organisations' GHG reductions and climate action as avenues for growth,
enforcing this positive tone. Nuancing this description, firms adopt a more cautious tone when

                                                                          27
underlining the potential risks associated with non-achievement of carbon targets. Essity, for
instance, underscores that ”Our commitment [to decarbonize] is accompanied by science-based
targets for Scope 1, 2 and 3, encompassing our own operations and our entire value chain. Not
achieving these targets constitutes a major risk for Essity, potentially resulting in reputational
and, consequently, revenue losses” (Essity, 2024). Notwithstanding, this cautious tone is
specifically relegated to future underperformance, which is rendered improbable due to the
optimistic tone of the climate journey, as is explored below.

The discourse surrounding climate work as a journey has an underlying optimistic view, in
combination with a positive tonality of the firm’s decarbonization work. Climate change is
rendered to be an immense challenge of existential proportions on a societal scale, yet on the
firm-specific scale of the journey, there is an expression of strong optimism regarding the
transition in question. In essence, this permeating optimism is summarised as: (1) carbon
performance is a strategic priority for our firm, (2) our operations are in line with our targets,
and (3) although the climate journey is ongoing, the capabilities acquired throughout this
journey are creating value today. An example of this positive tonality and optimism is found in
the annual report of Scania from 2020, where its CEO Henrik Henriksson predicts the outcome
of their decarbonization process: “The good news is that we already have most of the elements
we need to succeed. We have the right technology, a powerful brand, closeness to customers
and amazing people in the Scania family. And we have early on put a stake in the ground with
a clear purpose which has developed into a fantastic business asset.” (Scania, 2021). This
excerpt illustrates how climate work is expressed by senior management as something to
succeed on. The self-promotion impression management strategy is constructed through the
usage of several positively value-laden words like “amazing”, “powerful” and “fantastic”,
establishing an optimistic view of Scania’s climate ourney and the firm as central to positive
developments. Furthermore, Scania’s early prioritisation of decarbonization is described as
already becoming a valuable asset, reinforcing point (3) of the climate ourney’s optimism. The
ingratiation impression management strategy is also applied in this excerpt to describe the
customers’ prioritisation of sustainability as central to the decarbonization process.

In other excerpts, this strong optimism in the capabilities of the reporting firm to succeed in
their climate journey means that they have the capability to guide others. To illustrate, consider
this excerpt from tlas Copco’s annual report from 2022, where the firm’s CEO Mats
Rahmström states: “We have a long tradition of focusing on our customers’ needs and today

                                                                          28
this includes helping them improve their climate performance. We innovate and develop
efficient and low-carbon products, but we can also guide and support our customers on their
climate journey.” (Atlas Copco 2023). In this quote, the senior manager appeals to the shared
importance attributed to climate performance between Atlas Copco and their customers, hence
constituting an ingratiation impression management strategy. There is also a suggestion of self-
promotion, as the firm is described as a leading innovator in the sustainability field and as
having the ability to inspire others on their own climate journeys. In summary, the positive and
optimistic tonality of the climate journey is achieved through the employment of the assertive
impression management strategies enhancement, self-promotion and ingratiation in the
discourse of decarbonization work in corporate disclosures.

   4.3 Trusting the Science
The theme of “Trusting the Science” represents a prevalent narrative among firms when
describing their carbon target setting process. This theme emphasises the scientific and
objective characteristics of climate work to lend credibility to the firms' climate goals,
especially in connection to external carbon institutions. In this analysis, the description of the
SBTi as a source of credibility and the SBTs as the climate science ideal, emerge as central
components to the examined discursive material.

Science Based Targets
Consider the appeal to climate science in the following statements: “Science dictates that we
as a society must halve CO2 emissions every decade to meet the global target as defined in the
Paris agreement.” (Scania, 2020) and “Scientific consensus tells us that to avoid catastrophic
effects, we must not go beyond an average global temperature increase of 1.5ºC from pre-
industrial levels.” (H&M, 2021b). These excerpts highlight how firms contextualise the
importance of climate work with scientific consensus, using science as a basis for the
organisation’s carbon reporting. From this basis, SBTs are described as constituting more than
carbon target setting, rather signifying the climate leadership and commitment to sustainability
of the adhering firm. For example, in Scania’s annual report from 2021, the company writes:
”Our strategic decisions are guided by independent scientific insights, such as the findings of
the IPCC report, as well as our own scientific research. Our carbon reduction targets have
been approved by the Science Based Targets initiative.” (Scania, 2022). In a previous annual
report, Scania motivates their dedication to decarbonise by appealing to science: ”Scania is an

                                                                          29
engineering company, so listening to science is second nature to us.” (Scania, 2020).
Nonetheless, in a subsequent report, the commitment to decarbonise is not only motivated as
being the right choice according to climate science, but also as a form of signalling: ”Scania’s
commitment to science-based targets will not only contribute to reducing climate risks, but
sends a strong signal through the economy that decarbonising constitutes an investment in
future competitiveness.” (Scania, 2021). These statements from Scania reflect a strategic use of
both ingratiation and enhancement impression management strategies. By emphasising their
commitment to SBTs, Scania ingratiates itself with stakeholders, positioning the company as
scientifically conscious and aligned with global climate goals. Additionally, by highlighting the
broader economic benefits of decarbonization, Scania enhances its image, portraying its actions
as not only environmentally responsible but also contributing to future competitiveness.

Another excerpt that underscores the SBTs as a dominant discourse is the following: “We were
the first in our industry to set science-based targets for reducing our carbon emissions and, in
2022, we took another major step towards decarbonising our business by becoming the first to
set supply chain carbon reduction targets.” (Scania, 2023). In this sentence, the SBTs serves
to exemplify the firm’s image of being environmentally responsible and to underscore the firm’s
early adoption of SBTs, upholding the climate leadership narrative as developed in subsection
4.1. Additionally, the likening of their adoption of SBTs as a major decarbonization step
constitutes a form of self-promotion, aimed at highlighting the firm’s scientific competence and
collaborative talent. Hence, the discourse surrounding SBTs in the analytical material equates
SBTi-alignment of GHG emission reduction targets with “Trusting the Science”, allowing
companies to communicate dedication to evidence-based decision-making and their adherence
to global climate goals.

The Science Based Target initiative
In their annual report from 2020, Essity describes their work with the SBTi: ”Essity has adopted
the Science Based Targets issued by the Science Based Targets initiative (SBTi) to reduce the
company’s climate impact and to support the 2015 Paris Agreement.” (Essity, 2021). In this
excerpt, the credibility of the SBTi is appealed to as an institution for decarbonization,
indicating the usage of the ingratiation impression management strategy. Similar ingratiation
appeals to the SBTi can be found in the corporate disclosures of all other analysed firms. For
example, H&M writes in their annual report from 2020: “The H&M group has set an SBTi-
approved science-based target to achieve a 40 percent reduction in CO2 e emissions within

                                                                          30
scopes 1 and 2 by 2030 (compared with the 2017 level), to contribute to keeping global warming
to a well below 2°C trajectory.” (H&M, 2021a). Similarly, Skanska writes in their Annual and
sustainability report of 2023: “-60% Reduction of carbon emissions from our own operations
(scope 1 and 2) since 2015. Our climate target is approved as a science-based target on the
1.5°C trajectory.” (Skanska, 2024). The similarity in application of SBTs in the quotes above
suggests the emergence of a standard discourse method for firms to appeal to climate
commitment through SBTi involvement, hence encompassing ingratiation. In addition,
aligning with the SBTi is constructed both as a resource to help guide the decarbonization
strategy of the firm, as well as a relational competence that the firm can use to give credibility
to its climate work. n this sense, the “Trusting the Science” discourse also applies the self-
promotion impression management strategy to internalise the perceived scientific and climate-
positive qualities of the SBTi. At a deeper level, even the construction of the SBTi as scientific
and objective may constitute the application of the ingratiation impression management
strategy, as the appeal to the apolitical climate science could resonate with more stakeholders.

Evolution of Carbon Target Discourse over Time
The discussion concerning GHG reduction targets has undergone substantial evolution over
time. Prior to the adoption of SBTs, companies had already shown a dedication to addressing
GHG emissions, with several targets established in 2019, and some already in alignment with
the SBTi (as previously shown in Table 1 and Table 2). An illustrative example of pre-SBT
discourse is found in tlas Copco’s communication in 2019: “The goal for reducing carbon
dioxide from operations and transport has already had considerable impact in the organization
[...]”, continued by the description that they have seen “significant investment and action
across the organisation” in renewable energy and other sustainability initiatives (Atlas Copco,
2020). In the 2021 annual report, when Atlas Copco set a science-based target, this transition
was communicated as “The science-based targets significantly raise Atlas Copco’s ambition
for carbon emissions reduction” (Atlas Copco, 2022). The change in targets is presented as an
elevation in ambition, employing selectivity to accentuate and highlight the notion that SBTs
constitute climate ambition, thereby portraying their climate work in a positive light. However,
one could argue that this strategy diverts attention from the inadequacy of their previous goals
and its failure in guiding long-term decarbonization strategies. This abandonment of previous
targets is not explained beyond raising ambitions: "The targets have been validated by the
Science Based Targets initiative and replace our previous greenhouse gas emission targets
from 2022” (Atlas Copco, 2022). Once again, appeals are made to the scientific nature of the

                                                                          31
SBTi, signalling an enhancement of their new targets as more desirable and as a specific
instance of “Trusting the Science”.

Looking further at the target communications, Essity's 2019 annual report states: "Essity’s new
targets to reduce greenhouse gas emissions were approved by the Science Based Targets
initiative in 2018," (Essity, 2020) highlighting the establishment of new targets and the
significance of their scientific basis. In 2021, Essity increased their cooperation with the SBTi:
“During the year, we raised our ambitions and have, for example, committed to achieving net-
zero emissions of greenhouse gases by 2050.” (Essity, 2022). This commitment is suggested to
reflect the firm’s dedication to sustainability and hence aligns with the broader industry trend
towards more alignment of climate goals with carbon institutions over time. Companies hence
strategically exemplify their SBTs as “Trusting the Science”, serving as reinforcement for the
projection of social responsibility.

Beyond the SBTi
Outside of the SBTi, other NGOs were mentioned in the observations to lend credibility to the
climate work of the firms, providing an exemplification strategy for firms to project the image
of climate integrity. Although, in contrast to the SBTi, these other collaborations were neither
consistently mentioned across firms nor over time. For example, Skanska describes their
cooperation with several other sustainability certifiers: “We continue to offer our customers
certified projects using established certification schemes such as Living Building Challenge,
LEED, BREEAM, BREEAM Infrastructure and WELL.” (Skanska, 2024). Similarly, H&M
wrote about their commitment to remove carbon emissions with the NGO, Frontier, in their
annual report from 2023: “We joined Frontier, an advanced market commitment for permanent
carbon removal, to support the scaling of this emerging sector” (H&M, 2024). From these
excerpts we can recognise that the SBTi is not the only institutional actor used by firms for
climate communications, although none of these were observed to have acquired a similar
degree of trans-organisational discourse relevance as the SBTi.

   4.4 Excusing Underperformance and Future Promises
Excusing underperformances and future promises refer to the communication strategies applied
when firms underachieve or fail to meet their carbon targets. The impression management
strategies evident in these instances focus on externalising the underperformance and refuting

                                                                          32
the notion that long-term targets risk being missed. For instance, consider Atlas Copco's
statement ”In 2022, the absolute emissions in scope 3 were 29% higher than in the baseline
year. The main reason for this was increased sales, but the availability of renewable energy to
our customers has also been lower than we expected.” (Atlas Copco, 2023). In this excerpt,
Atlas Copco attributes the increase in absolute scope 3 emissions to increased sales, while also
citing the lower-than-expected renewable energy consumption of their customers as a
contributing factor. By attributing the increase in emissions to factors beyond their control,
particularly to the availability of renewable energy, the firm employs a defensive strategy of
external attribution to link carbon underperformance with external factors. In a later annual
report from Atlas Copco, published in 2023, similar externalisations of poor scope 3
performance are attributed to customers: “[A]s the majority of our products run on electricity,
the impact during the use-phase, and thus their value-chain footprint, is affected by the
availability of renewable energy, which varies between countries and regions.” (Atlas Copco,
2024). Because of the attribution of poor climate performance with organisations beyond the
control of the organization, in this case the electricity suppliers of their customers, the external
attribution impression management strategy is applied here to relegate the responsibility for
GHG emission target underachievement away from Atlas Copco.

Another example of how organisations explain not reaching targets is found in H&M's annual
report of 2022: “The increase in scope 1 and 2 emissions compared to last year was largely a
result of the reduction in the share of renewable electricity purchased in 2022. This is primarily
due to us not purchasing renewable electricity certificates in Russia, and to some degree
sourcing challenges in a few other markets. A historic undercalculation due to use of an
incorrect conversion factor for natural gas calculations also caused part of this increase in
emissions.” (H&M, 2023). This quote shows how the rise of GHG emissions is discursively
associated with specific challenges in renewable electricity certificate obtainance and
calculation errors. H&M hence employs the external attribution impression management
strategy to limit the firm’s responsibility for negative outcomes, instead emphasising the exit
from the Russian market and historic miscalculations as short-term anomalies that should not
be considered indicative of changes in long-term climate performance.

 n Scania’s annual report from 2022, the firm discusses their carbon performance: “The rise in
emissions during 2021 and 2022 is related to our operations returning to a more normal level
of activity post-Covid-19. Despite this increase, emissions have fallen by 44 percent since 2015.

                                                                          33
By following our decarbonisation roadmap, Scania still sees a clear path towards reaching our
targets for 2025. Important steps towards this goal will be growing the number of electrified
vehicles in the company fleet, as well as switching to renewable fuels and fossil free electricity
in our operations globally.” (Scania, 2023). The discursive explanation of short-term carbon
underperformance is once again made using external attribution, suggesting the extraordinary
external circumstances of the rebound from the Covid-19 pandemic as the context through
which one should see their emissions increase. Within the broader trajectory of emissions
reduction, Scania reassures its stakeholders that their GHG emissions are in line with their long-
term targets and repeat their confidence in their strategy to achieve these goals. Another clear
example of the external attribution impression management strategy to explain suboptimal
climate performance, specifically in terms of value chain and scope 3 emissions, is found in the
following annual report of Scania: “In 2023, our scope 3 reduction was lower than planned at
3 percent. This is due to the slower-than-expected pace of the industry transition, among other
external factors.” (Scania, 2024). In this quote, Scania explicitly attributes poor climate
outcomes to external factors and the industry as a whole. Beyond the external attribution
impression management strategy applied, there is also a simultaneous disassociation of Scania
from the remaining industry players. The heavy vehicle manufacturing industry is described as
external to the firm and as a force counteracting the climate ambitions of Scania itself as a
climate leader. Through this limitation, Scania can maintain stakeholder confidence in their
future sustainability efforts.

In summary, the discourse surrounding underperformance in GHG reduction efforts reveals a
complex interplay of impression management strategies, aimed at limiting the firm’s
responsibility and to reestablish confidence in the firm’s long-term decarbonization strategy.
The companies utilise the defensive external attribution and disassociation impression
management strategies, to attribute increases in emissions to external factors, and to distance
the firm from less carbon-efficient actors respectively. Altogether, this aggregate theme aims
to restore confidence in the firm’s long-term carbon strategy.

                                                                          34
   5. Discussion
Through Dunne et al.'s (2021) impression management framework, we have identified four
distinctive impressions that companies aim to convey when communicating their carbon
reduction targets and progression: (1) We are climate leaders, (2) We have embarked on a
climate journey, (3) We trust the science, and (4) Underperformance is not our fault - We will
perform in the long term, as explored in their respective sections of the empirical analysis (4.1
for (1), 4.2 for (2), and so on). These insights shed light on how companies employ impression
management strategies in corporate communications to shape perceptions of their carbon
emission targets and initiatives. Our discussion is divided into two parts that compare our
empirical findings to existing literature, hence identifying our contributions. In the first part,
we explore how our findings contribute to the existing carbon accounting literature, delving
into the implications of the outlined impression management mapping and their alignment with
previous research. In the second part, we broaden our scope of the carbon accounting literature
to analyse the political implications of the impressions conveyed by these discursive strategies,
especially in the context of previous critical literature on carbon institutions and organizational
translations of climate change to business-as-usual (Tilsted et al., 2023; Wright & Nyberg,
2016). By doing so, we contribute to the existing literature in carbon accounting by offering
new insights into how organizations communicate carbon reduction targets and influence
stakeholder perceptions through corporate communication strategies.

   5.1 Contribution to Discursive Understandings of Carbon Targets
Our investigation highlights the crucial role of carbon accounting as a robust tool for evaluating
carbon-related performance and advancing decarbonization efforts, a concept reinforced by
previous research (Kumarasiri & Gunasekarage, 2017; Lee & Wu, 2014; Linnenluecke et al.,
2015; Ratnatunga & Balachandran, 2009). Notably, the findings echo the previous scholarly
emphasis on the importance of carbon assurance in enhancing the reliability of carbon emission
information (Simnett et al., 2009), but in our case from a discursive approach that highlights
strategic communications as another layer to organizational carbon assurance. In this sense, the
ingrained adoption of carbon targets in organizational practices as previously established in
literature (He et al., 2022) is expanded upon, by creating an impression management approach
for understanding stakeholder communication with regards to carbon targets, hence warranting
further discursive examination.

                                                                          35
Our findings illuminate how organizations leverage SBTs, the SBTi, and other environmental
certification initiatives through strategic communications to portray early-adopter advantages
and position themselves as frontrunners in the climate action arena. As evidenced by the
widespread adoption of SBTs (Giesekam et al., 2021), companies aspire to align themselves
with esteemed institutions like SBTi, seeking to bolster their credibility. Specifically, the (1)
We are climate leaders aggregate theme, along with the identified underlying impression
management strategies (exemplification, ingratiation, selectivity, and concealment), describe
how this positioning of leadership in corporate disclosures is achieved. These findings mirror
those of Green (2010), who observed a similar trend where companies adopt emission
accounting standards to secure a sustainability leadership position, highlighting parallel
motivations across emission accounting standards and SBTs adoption. In addition, research by
Milne et al. (2009) revealed how organisations project a “leading the way” image in
sustainability development through their discourse, meaning that our findings support the
continued perpetuation of this image with respect to decarbonization. Hence, the widespread
adoption of leadership positioning in sustainability discourse constitutes a theme reaffirmed by
the carbon accounting domain, and by our research in the specific context of impression
management strategies in corporate climate work.

Impression management emerges as a crucial concept in understanding organizational
discourse, as highlighted by previous researchers (Cooper & Slack, 2015; Dunne et al., 2021).
Our investigation identifies these prevalent assertive impression management strategies utilized
in corporate communication regarding carbon emission reduction. When unexpected or
insufficient carbon outcomes arise, defensive impression management strategies surface
(disassociation and external attribution), exemplified by the narrative (4) Underperformance
is not our fault - We will perform in the long term. These findings resonate with observations
by Sandberg and Holmlund (2015), who noted similar patterns in impression management. In
particular, Sandberg & Holmlund (2015) found that while companies often employ praise to
shape favourable impressions, they resort to defensive methods inform about failures, hence
meaning that our research finds support for these patterns in the discourse of decarbonization.
Moreover, our research unveils a notable trend wherein companies' communication concerning
climate targets is evolving to convey increased complexity and technicality, as described in the
(3) We trust the science aggregate theme. This trend echoes the observations of Milne et al.
(2009), who highlighted the organizational adoption of sophisticated mechanisms and

                                                                          36
institutions to address sustainability challenges, albeit our findings grant a specifically
communicative approach with regards to carbon target setting and initiatives.

Shifting focus to the tonality in communications of corporate climate work reveals distinct
patterns of predominantly positive and optimistic formulations surrounding carbon reduction
targets, as described in the aggregate narrative of (2) We have embarked on a climate journey.
Moreover, this imbalance between positive and negative communication underscores the
prevalent inclination towards highlighting positive content and trends, aligning with the
findings of Cho et al. (2012) regarding the portrayal of corporate actions in sustainability
contexts. Beyond confirming Cho et al.’s (2012) positive framing of organizational
sustainability work, but specifically with regards to carbon communications, our analysis also
indicates that when companies fail to meet targets, they tend to downplay unfavourable
information and emphasize their future performance, promising improvement. This
observation, developed in (4) Underperformance is not our fault - We will perform in the long
term, expands upon the research of Rogers et al. (2011), who unveiled a common trend among
companies to pivot towards a positive and forward-looking stance immediately after addressing
financial stress from litigation. Thereby, we have expanded these defensive discursive strategies
to the context of non-financial accounting and carbon targets, hence contributing to the
furthering of carbon accounting research.

   5.2 Contributions to Critical Research on Organizational Climate Work
From a broader perspective, our research findings reveal the political strategies in carbon
accounting that underly the organizational discursive processes involved in corporate
translations of climate change, especially in the context of carbon target setting. We echo the
findings of Tilsted et al. (2023), whose research on the SBTi describes the obfuscating political
power of the initiative, encouraging critical engagement with corporate climate work. In
particular, the aggregate theme (3) We trust the science, was enforced through multiple assertive
impression management strategies in our analysis (enhancement, exemplification, ingratiation,
selectivity, and self-promotion), indicating corporate appeals to depoliticized constructions of
carbon institutions. The SBTi and SBTs were similarly emergent in corporate discourses as
permeating sources of climate credibility over the period, supporting the normative power of
the SBTi as explored by Tilsted et al. Furthermore, we outline the legitimization of incumbent-
driven decarbonization in the aggregate theme (2) We have embarked on the climate journey,
creating connections between the incumbency focus of the journey metaphor (Milne et al.,

                                                                          37
2006) and the narrow portrayal of decarbonised futures of the SBTi (Tilsted et al., 2023).
Through these mechanisms, the analysed incumbents are discursively portrayed as central
actors in decarbonization, reinforcing the literature of impression management theory in
organizational analysis (Cho et al., 2012; Cooper & Pearce, 2011; Dunne et al., 2021). Hence,
by creating understanding for the impression management strategies applied in the current
discourse of carbon targets, the furthering of critical engagement with corporate climate
governance is achieved.

Beyond carbon institutions, this paper addresses the work of Wright & Nyberg (2016), who
explore how organizations transform climate change into business-as-usual through discourse.
Our research hence expands the literature on discursive understandings of climate work
(Cooper & Slack, 2015; Khalifa et al., 2007; Kolk et al., 2008) by investigating the perception
management strategies underlying the organizational translation process of climate change
(Wright & Nyberg, 2016). We reiterate Wright & Nyberg’s description of organizational
regression to treating climate change as business-as-usual – i.e. mundane, comfortable concerns
to be addressed through incumbent business models rather than transformative action – through
the aggregate themes of (2) We have embarked on the climate journey and (4)
Underperformance is not our fault – We will perform in the long-term. The Climate Journey
encompasses the treatment of climate work as an organizational process of learning and
adaptation (Milne et al., 2006), positively communicated and optimistic in terms of the
communicator’s carbon performance. Paradoxically, the simultaneous attribution of worsened
carbon performance to short-term, external factors in the same corporate disclosures highlight
the discursive strategies that together: limit corporate responsibility for decarbonization while
constructing the perception of compatibility between incumbent business models and effective
climate work. In this sense, we join previous research in emphasising the role of critical research
on business engagement in climate work (Ogden & Clarke, 2005; Talbot & Boiral, 2018; Tilsted
et al., 2023; Vesty et al., 2015; Wright & Nyberg, 2016), urging continued scientific
involvement in the popularisation of corporate carbon management and the institutionalisation
of carbon assurance.

                                                                          38
   6. Conclusion
In face of the urgent threat posed by climate change, corporate engagement in carbon target
setting has become increasingly prevalent as a means of displaying commitment to climate
action with regards to stakeholders. This study meticulously examines the annual and
sustainability reports of five major firms – Atlas Copco, Essity, H&M, Scania, and Skanska –
utilizing a typology of impression management strategies to discern prevalent themes in their
recent communications on decarbonization targets. Our analysis reveals four primary discursive
themes employed by these companies, that together convey the following impressions: (1) We
are climate leaders, (2) We have embarked on a climate journey, (3) We trust the science, and
(4) Underperformance is not our fault - We will perform in the long term. These impressions
are manifested through impression management strategies underlying the textual content of the
corporate disclosures, resulting in the cultivation of positive stakeholder impressions with
regards to the companies' climate efforts. While some minor variations were found in
communication approaches among the firms studied, these variations were explained by
industry-specific conditions. Hence, the strong similarities observed in the carbon disclosures
of interest suggest the emergence of dominant impression management strategies involved in
the reporting of organisational decarbonization work, within the scope of our study.
Consequently, our findings contribute to the critical discussions in carbon accounting research
that explore the translation of climate change in the business context and the political
considerations of carbon institutions. In conclusion, our study bridges the research gap in
carbon accounting on the ways firms manage perceptions of their climate work through the
textual content of their corporate disclosure, elucidating the impression management strategies
underlying organizational carbon disclosures, hence addressing broader societal implications
of corporate climate engagement.

   6.1 Limitations
This study’s findings should, nevertheless, be considered in light of the following limitations.
Firstly, the lack of prior research on the topic of impression management in carbon targeting
constitutes a methodological limitation, causing a reliance on adjacent discourse analysis
literature in carbon accounting. Secondly, linguistic interpretations could be subject to cultural
or other biases, having systemic consequences for our data analysis process. Thirdly, the study
is limited to the five companies of interest, which may restrict the generalizability of our
findings to firms (i) operational in other markets with different regulatory requirements, (ii)

                                                                          39
with different organizational types (e.g. privately held businesses or NGOs), and/or (iii) with
different carbon targeting practices (e.g. non-alignment with the SBTi). These factors
collectively suggest that while this study provides valuable insights into the discursive carbon
target strategies of the studied companies, caution should be exercised when extending the
findings beyond this scope.

   6.2 Further Research Suggestions
The notable contribution of the theoretical and empirical contents of this study to the discursive
analysis approach in carbon accounting necessitates similar research. Specifically, we
encourage future researchers to conduct further investigations into longitudinal studies of
different periods, firms in different markets and firms with different corporate governance
structures. Firstly, the emergent nature of the carbon targets in institutional and corporate
contexts elucidates the need for additional research into the longitudinal effects of impression
management in corporate sustainability discourse. This study’s period of 2019-2023 was
especially interesting from an SBTi standpoint, but similar studies could contextualize climate
work with other carbon initiatives like the GHG Protocol. Secondly, studies in different national
contexts could reveal the cultural impacts on impression management strategies applied in
communicating carbon targets to stakeholders. Finally, the disclosures of firms of a different
corporate governance structure could expand the impression management analysis of carbon
targets by considering these differences in stakeholder interests.

                                                                          40
   7. References
Aerts, W. (2005). Picking up the pieces: impression management in the retrospective
     attributional framing of accounting outcomes. Accounting, Organizations and Society,
    30(6), 493–517. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.AOS.2004.07.001
Alrazi, B., de Villiers, C., & Van Staden, C. J. (2016). The environmental disclosures of the
     electricity generation industry: a global perspective. Accounting and Business Research,
    46(6), 665–701. https://doi.org/10.1080/00014788.2015.1135781
Alvesson, M., & Karreman, D. (2000). Varieties of Discourse: On the Study of Organizations
     through Discourse Analysis. Https://Doi.Org/10.1177/0018726700539002, 53(9), 1125–
     1149. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018726700539002
Angeloni, S. (2016). Cautiousness on convergence of accounting standards across countries.
     Corporate Communications, 21(2), 246–267. https://doi.org/10.1108/CCIJ-06-2015-
    0034
Atlas Copco. (2020). Annual Report 2019.
     https://www.atlascopcogroup.com/content/dam/atlas-
     copco/group/documents/investors/financial-publications/english/20200306-annual-
     report-2019.pdf
Atlas Copco. (2021). Annual report 2020.
     https://www.atlascopcogroup.com/content/dam/atlas-
     copco/group/documents/investors/financial-publications/english/20210311-annual-
     report-2020.pdf
Atlas Copco. (2022). Annual Report 2021.
     https://www.atlascopcogroup.com/content/dam/atlas-
     copco/group/documents/investors/financial-publications/english/20220321-annual-
     report-2021.pdf
Atlas Copco. (2023). Annual Report 2022.
     https://www.atlascopcogroup.com/content/dam/atlas-
     copco/group/documents/investors/financial-publications/english/20230322-annual-
     report-incl-sustainability-report-and-corporate-governance-report-2022.pdf
Atlas Copco. (2024). Annual Report 2023.
     https://www.atlascopcogroup.com/content/dam/atlas-
     copco/group/documents/investors/financial-publications/english/20240321-copy-of-the-
     official-annual-report-in-ESEF-format-incl-sustainability-report-and-corporate-
     governance-report-2023.pdf
Bebbington, J., Larrinaga-González, C. (2008). Carbon Trading: Accounting and Reporting
     Issues. European Accounting Review, 17(4), 697–717.
     https://doi.org/10.1080/09638180802489162
Bloomfield, R. (2008). Accounting as the Language of Business. Accounting Horizons, 22(4),
    433–436. https://www.proquest.com/docview/208908460?fromopenview=true&pq-
    origsite=gscholar&sourcetype=Scholarly%20Journals&parentSessionId=tnqqr%2F%2B
    z9dEUlEqh7NtNyDlP6F381aUXbTsoxK5lP0o%3D
Bolino, M. C., Kacmar, M. K., Turnley, W. H., & Gilstrap, B. J. (2008). A Multi-Level
    Review of Impression Management Motives and Behaviors.
     Https://Doi.Org/10.1177/0149206308324325, 34(6), 1080–1109.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206308324325
Bowen, F., & Wittneben, B. (2011). Carbon accounting: Negotiating accuracy, consistency
     and certainty across organisational fields. Accounting, Auditing and Accountability
     Journal, 24(8), 1022–1036. https://doi.org/10.1108/09513571111184742/FULL/PDF
Broadstock, D. C., Collins, A., Hunt, L. C., & Vergos, K. (2018). Voluntary disclosure,
     greenhouse gas emissions and business performance: Assessing the first decade of

                                                                          41
     reporting. The British Accounting Review, 50(1), 48–59.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BAR.2017.02.002
Bui, B., & Fowler, C. J. (2019). Strategic Responses to Changing Climate Change Policies:
     The Role Played by Carbon Accounting. Australian Accounting Review, 29(2), 360–375.
     https://doi.org/10.1111/AUAR.12213
Busch, T., & Hoffmann, V. H. (2011). How Hot Is Your Bottom Line? Linking Carbon and
     Financial Performance. Http://Dx.Doi.Org/10.1177/0007650311398780, 50(2), 233–265.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/0007650311398780
CDP. (2024). Who we are. https://www.cdp.net/en/info/about-us
Cho, C. H., Michelon, G., & Patten, D. M. (2012). Impression Management in Sustainability
     Reports: An Empirical Investigation of the Use of Graphs. Accounting and the Public
     Interest, 12(1), 16–37. https://doi.org/10.2308/APIN-10249
Climate Change, Capitalism, and Corporations - Christopher Wright, Daniel Nyberg -
     Google Böcker. (n.d.). Retrieved May 12, 2024, from
    https://books.google.se/books?hl=sv&lr=&id=XtyCCgAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PR10&dq
    =daniel+nyberg+climate+change&ots=y49kTUEmHM&sig=5V6IfPhhYEOv3K5_yM0
    mrPFh8wg&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q=daniel%20nyberg%20climate%20change&f=fa
     lse
Contrafatto, M. (2014). The institutionalization of social and environmental reporting: An
     Italian narrative. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 39(6), 414–432.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/J.AOS.2014.01.002
Cook, A. (2009). Emission rights: From costless activity to market operations. Accounting,
     Organizations and Society, 34(3–4), 456–468.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/J.AOS.2007.12.001
Cooper, S., & Pearce, G. (2011). Climate change performance measurement, control and
     accountability in English local authority areas. Accounting, Auditing and Accountability
     Journal, 24(8), 1097–1118. https://doi.org/10.1108/09513571111184779/FULL/PDF
Cooper, S., & Slack, R. (2015). Reporting practice, impression management and company
     performance: a longitudinal and comparative analysis of water leakage disclosure.
     Accounting and Business Research, 45(6–7), 801–840.
     https://doi.org/10.1080/00014788.2015.1081554
Datt, R., Luo, L., Tang, Q., & Mallik, G. (2018). An International Study of Determinants of
     Voluntary Carbon Assurance. Journal of International Accounting Research, 17(3), 1–
     20. https://doi.org/10.2308/JIAR-52221
DeFond, M., & Zhang, J. (2014). A review of archival auditing research. Journal of
     Accounting and Economics, 58(2–3), 275–326.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JACCECO.2014.09.002
Diouf, D., & Boiral, O. (2017). The quality of sustainability reports and impression
     management: A stakeholder perspective. Accounting, Auditing and Accountability
     Journal, 30(3), 643–667. https://doi.org/10.1108/AAAJ-04-2015-2044/FULL/PDF
Dunne, N. J., Brennan, N. M., & Kirwan, C. E. (2021). Impression management and Big Four
     auditors: Scrutiny at a public inquiry. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 88,
     101170. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.AOS.2020.101170
Elsayih, J., Tang, Q., & Lan, Y. C. (2018). Corporate governance and carbon transparency:
     Australian experience. Accounting Research Journal, 31(3), 405–422.
     https://doi.org/10.1108/ARJ-12-2015-0153/FULL/PDF
Essity. (2020). Annual and Sustainability Report 2019.
     https://masdpstatic.azureedge.net/essity/ecc60fb7-3dfe-41d6-ac61-5abce3ba3d46/Essity-
     Annual-and-Sustainability-Report-2019.pdf

                                                                          42
Essity. (2021). Annual and Sustainability Report 2020.
     https://masdpstatic.azureedge.net/essity/901d106a-2b90-4967-986c-
     f8c52a7ab7f6/Essity-Annual-and-Sustainability-Report-2020.pdf
Essity. (2022). Annual and Sustainability Report 2021.
     https://masdpstatic.azureedge.net/essity/8fe54e3f-ec63-442f-91b4-
    600d6449b2c2%2FEssity_Annual%20and%20Sustainability%20Report%202021_22030
     2.pdf
Essity. (2023). Annual and Sustainability Report 2022.
     https://masdpstatic.azureedge.net/essity/Essity_Annual-and-Sustainability-Report-
    2022_0302.pdf
Essity. (2024). Annual and Sustainability Report 2023.
     https://masdpstatic.azureedge.net/essity/Essity_AR_ENG_2023.pdf
European Parliament and Council. (2022). DIRECTIVE (EU) 2022/2464 OF THE
     EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL. Eur-Lex.europa.eu. https://eur-
     lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2022/2464/oj
Falkner, R. (2016). The Paris Agreement and the new logic of international climate politics.
     International Affairs, 92(5), 1107–1125. https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-2346.12708
Freedman, M., & Jaggi, B. (2005). Global warming, commitment to the Kyoto protocol, and
     accounting disclosures by the largest global public firms from polluting industries. The
     International Journal of Accounting, 40(3), 215–232.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/J.INTACC.2005.06.004
Frezatti, F., Carter, D. B., & Barroso, M. F. G. (2014). Accounting without accounting:
     Informational proxies and the construction of organisational discourses. Accounting,
     Auditing and Accountability Journal, 27(3), 426–464. https://doi.org/10.1108/AAAJ-01-
    2012-00927/FULL/PDF
Frost, G., & Rooney, J. (2021). Considerations of sustainability in capital budgeting decision-
     making. Journal of Cleaner Production, 312, 127650.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCLEPRO.2021.127650
García-Sánchez, I. M., Hussain, N., Martínez-Ferrero, J., & Ruiz-Barbadillo, E. (2019).
     Impact of disclosure and assurance quality of corporate sustainability reports on access
     to finance. Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Management, 26(4),
    832–848. https://doi.org/10.1002/CSR.1724
Giesekam, J., Norman, J., Garvey, A., & Betts-Davies, S. (2021). Science-Based Targets: On
     Target? Sustainability 2021, Vol. 13, Page 1657, 13(4), 1657.
     https://doi.org/10.3390/SU13041657
Giner, B., & Luque-Vílchez, M. (2022). commentary on the “new” institutional actors in
     sustainability reporting standard-setting: a European perspective. Sustainability
     Accounting, Management and Policy Journal, 13(6), 1284–1309.
     https://doi.org/10.1108/SAMPJ-06-2021-0222/FULL/PDF
Goffman, E. (1959). The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. Bantam Doubleday Dell
     Publishing Group.
Goffman, E. (1967). Interaction ritual: Essays in face-to-face behavior. New York: Anchor
    Books.
Green, J. F. (2010). Private Standards in the Climate Regime: The Greenhouse Gas Protocol.
     Business and Politics, 12(3), 1–37. https://doi.org/10.2202/1469-3569.1318
Gulluscio, C., Puntillo, P., Luciani, V., & Huisingh, D. (2020). Climate Change Accounting
     and Reporting: A Systematic Literature Review. Sustainability, 12(13), 5455.
     https://doi.org/10.3390/su12135455
H&M. (2020a). Annual Report 2019. https://hmgroup.com/wp-
     content/uploads/2020/10/HM_Annual-Report-2019.pdf

                                                                          43
H&M. (2020b). Sustainability Performance Report 2019. https://hmgroup.com/wp-
     content/uploads/2020/10/HM-Group-Sustainability-Performance-Report-2019.pdf
H&M. (2021a). Annual Report 2020. https://hmgroup.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/HM-
     Annual-Report-2020.pdf
H&M. (2021b). Sustainability Performance Report 2020. https://hmgroup.com/wp-
     content/uploads/2021/03/HM-Group-Sustainability-Performance-Report-2020.pdf
H&M. (2022). Annual and Sustainability Report 2021. H&M Group.
     https://hmgroup.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/HM-Group-Annual-and-
     Sustainability-Report-2021.pdf
H&M. (2023). Annual and Sustainability Report 2022 . https://hmgroup.com/wp-
     content/uploads/2023/03/HM-Group-Annual-and-Sustainability-Report-2022.pdf
H&M. (2024). Annual and Sustainability Report 2023. https://hmgroup.com/wp-
     content/uploads/2024/03/HM-Group-Annual-and-Sustainability-Report-2023.pdf
Hartmann, F., Perego, P., & Young, A. (2013). Carbon Accounting: Challenges for Research
     in Management Control and Performance Measurement. Abacus, 49(4), 539–563.
     https://doi.org/10.1111/ABAC.12018
He, R., Luo, L., Shamsuddin, A., & Tang, Q. (2022). Corporate carbon accounting: a
     literature review of carbon accounting research from the Kyoto Protocol to the Paris
     Agreement. Accounting & Finance, 62(1), 261–298. https://doi.org/10.1111/ACFI.12789
Hollindale, J., Kent, P., Routledge, J., & Chapple, L. (2019). Women on boards and
     greenhouse gas emission disclosures. Accounting & Finance, 59(1), 277–308.
     https://doi.org/10.1111/ACFI.12258
Hörisch, J., Schaltegger, S., & Freeman, R. E. (2020). Integrating stakeholder theory and
     sustainability accounting: A conceptual synthesis. Journal of Cleaner Production, 275,
     124097. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCLEPRO.2020.124097
Ioannou, I., Li, S. X., & Serafeim, G. (2016). The Effect of Target Difficulty on Target
     Completion: The Case of Reducing Carbon Emissions. The Accounting Review, 91(5),
    1467–1492. https://doi.org/10.2308/ACCR-51307
IPCC. (2022, April 4). The evidence is clear: the time for action is now. We can halve
    emissions by 2030. — IPCC. IPCC. https://www.ipcc.ch/2022/04/04/ipcc-ar6-wgiii-
     pressrelease/
Jollands, S., Akroyd, C., & Sawabe, N. (2015). Core values as a management control in the
     construction of “sustainable development.” Qualitative Research in Accounting and
     Management, 12(2), 127–152. https://doi.org/10.1108/QRAM-04-2015-0040
Khalifa, R., Sharma, N., Humphrey, C., & Robson, K. (2007). Discourse and audit change:
     Transformations in methodology in the professional audit field. Accounting, Auditing
     and Accountability Journal, 20(6), 825–854.
     https://doi.org/10.1108/09513570710830263
Killian, S. (2010). “No accounting for these people”: Shell in reland and accounting
     language. Critical Perspectives on Accounting, 21(8), 711–723.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CPA.2010.08.001
Kolk, A., Levy, D., & Pinkse, J. (2008). Corporate Responses in an Emerging Climate
     Regime: The Institutionalization and Commensuration of Carbon Disclosure. European
     Accounting Review, 17(4), 719–745. https://doi.org/10.1080/09638180802489121
Kumarasiri, J., & Gunasekarage, A. (2017). Risk regulation, community pressure and the use
     of management accounting in managing climate change risk: Australian evidence. The
     British Accounting Review, 49(1), 25–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BAR.2016.10.009
Kumarasiri, J., & Jubb, C. (2016). Carbon emission risks and management accounting:
     Australian evidence. Accounting Research Journal, 29(2), 137–153.
     https://doi.org/10.1108/ARJ-03-2015-0040/FULL/PDF

                                                                          44
Lee, K. H., & Wu, Y. (2014). Integrating sustainability performance measurement into
     logistics and supply networks: A multi-methodological approach. The British Accounting
     Review, 46(4), 361–378. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BAR.2014.10.005
Lee, M. T., & Raschke, R. L. (2023). Stakeholder legitimacy in firm greening and financial
     performance: What about greenwashing temptations?☆. Journal of Business Research,
    155, 113393. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JBUSRES.2022.113393
Leung, S., Parker, L., & Courtis, J. (2015). Impression management through minimal
     narrative disclosure in annual reports. The British Accounting Review, 47(3), 275–289.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BAR.2015.04.002
Liesen, A., Hoepner, A. G., Patten, D. M., & Figge, F. (2015). Does stakeholder pressure
     influence corporate GHG emissions reporting? Empirical evidence from Europe.
     Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal, 28(7), 1047–1074.
     https://doi.org/10.1108/AAAJ-12-2013-1547/FULL/PDF
Linnenluecke, M. K., Birt, J., & Griffiths, A. (2015). The role of accounting in supporting
     adaptation to climate change. Accounting & Finance, 55(3), 607–625.
     https://doi.org/10.1111/ACFI.12120
Linsley, P., & Kajuter, P. (2008). Restoring reputation and repairing legitimacy: a case study
     of impression management in response to a major risk event at Allied Irish Banks plc.
     International Journal of Financial Services Management, 3(1), 65.
     https://doi.org/10.1504/IJFSM.2008.016699
Llewellyn, S., & Milne, M. J. (2007). Accounting as codified discourse. Accounting, Auditing
     & Accountability Journal, 20(6), 805–824.
    https://doi.org/10.1108/09513570710830254/FULL/PDF
Lounsbury, M. (2008). Institutional rationality and practice variation: New directions in the
     institutional analysis of practice. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 33, 349–361.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aos.2007.04.001
Lowe, A., & Koh, B. (2007). Inscribing the organization: Representations in dispute between
     accounting and production. Critical Perspectives on Accounting, 18, 952–974.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpa.2006.05.001
Luo, le, Tang, Q., & Lan, Y. C. (2013). Comparison of propensity for carbon disclosure
     between developing and developed countries: A resource constraint perspective.
     Accounting Research Journal, 26(1), 6–34. https://doi.org/10.1108/ARJ-04-2012-
    0024/FULL/PDF
Luo, L., & Tang, Q. (2014). Does voluntary carbon disclosure reflect underlying carbon
     performance? Journal of Contemporary Accounting & Economics, 10(3), 191–205.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCAE.2014.08.003
Milne, M. J., & Grubnic, S. (2011). Climate change accounting research: keeping it
     interesting and different. Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, 24(8), 948–
    977. https://doi.org/10.1108/09513571111184715/FULL/PDF
Milne, M. J., Kearins, K., & Walton, S. (2006). Creating Adventures in Wonderland: The
     Journey Metaphor and Environmental Sustainability.
     Http://Dx.Doi.Org/10.1177/1350508406068506, 13(6), 801–839.
     https://doi.org/10.1177/1350508406068506
Milne, M. J., Tregidga, H., & Walton, S. (2009). Words not actions! The ideological role of
     sustainable development reporting. Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal,
    22(8), 1211–1257. https://doi.org/10.1108/09513570910999292/FULL/PDF
Niinimäki, K., Peters, G., Dahlbo, H., Perry, P., Rissanen, T., & Gwilt, A. (2020). The
     environmental price of fast fashion. Nature Reviews Earth & Environment 2020 1:4,
     1(4), 189–200. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43017-020-0039-9

                                                                          45
Ogden, S., & Clarke, J. (2005). Customer disclosures, impression management and the
     construction of legitimacy: Corporate reports in the UK privatised water industry.
     Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, 18(3), 313–345.
    https://doi.org/10.1108/09513570510600729/FULL/PDF
Olson, E. G. (2010). Challenges and opportunities from greenhouse gas emissions reporting
     and independent auditing. Managerial Auditing Journal, 25(9), 934–942.
    https://doi.org/10.1108/02686901011080071/FULL/PDF
Ott, C., Schiemann, F., & Günther, T. (2017). Disentangling the determinants of the response
     and the publication decisions: The case of the Carbon Disclosure Project. Journal of
     Accounting and Public Policy, 36(1), 14–33.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JACCPUBPOL.2016.11.003
Parker, L. D., & Northcott, D. (2016). Qualitative generalising in accounting research:
     concepts and strategies. Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal, 29(6), 1100–
     1131. https://doi.org/10.1108/AAAJ-04-2015-2026/FULL/PDF
Patelli, L., & Pedrini, M. (2014). s the Optimism in CEO’s Letters to Shareholders Sincere?
    Impression Management Versus Communicative Action During the Economic Crisis.
     Journal of Business Ethics, 124(1), 19–34. https://doi.org/10.1007/S10551-013-1855-
    3/TABLES/7
Rankin, M., Windsor, C., & Wahyuni, D. (2011). An investigation of voluntary corporate
     greenhouse gas emissions reporting in a market governance system: Australian evidence.
     Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal, 24(8), 1037–1070.
    https://doi.org/10.1108/09513571111184751/FULL/PDF
Ratnatunga, J. T. D., & Balachandran, K. R. (2009). Carbon Business Accounting: The
     Impact of Global Warming on the Cost and Management Accounting Profession.
     Http://Dx.Doi.Org/10.1177/0148558X0902400208, 24(2), 333–355.
    https://doi.org/10.1177/0148558X0902400208
Rogers, J. L., Van Buskirk, A., & Zechman, S. L. C. (2011). Disclosure Tone and Shareholder
     Litigation. The Accounting Review, 86(6), 2155–2183.
     https://www.jstor.org/stable/41408050?sid=primo&seq=25
Sandberg, M., & Holmlund, M. (2015). Impression management tactics in sustainability
     reporting. Social Responsibility Journal, 11(4), 677–689. https://doi.org/10.1108/SRJ-
     12-2013-0152/FULL/PDF
Scania. (2020). THE SCANIA REPORT 2019 Annual and Sustainability Report.
     https://www.scania.com/content/dam/group/investor-relations/financial-reports/annual-
     reports/Scania_AnnualReport_2019-English.pdf
Scania. (2021). THE SCANIA REPORT 2020 Annual and Sustainability Report.
     https://www.scania.com/content/dam/group/investor-relations/annual-review/download-
     full-report/scania-annual-and-sustainability-report-2020.pdf
Scania. (2022). THE SCANIA REPORT 2021 Annual and Sustainability Report.
     https://www.scania.com/content/dam/group/investor-relations/annual-review/download-
     full-report/scania-annual-and-sustainability-report-2021-final.pdf
Scania. (2023). DRIVING THE SHIFT Annual and Sustainability Report 2022.
     https://www.scania.com/content/dam/group/investor-relations/annual-review/download-
     full-report/scania-annual-and-sustainability-report-2022.pdf
Scania. (2024). DRIVING THE SHIFT Annual and Sustainability Report 2023.
     https://www.scania.com/content/dam/group/investor-relations/annual-review/download-
     full-report/scania-annual-and-sustainability-report-2023.pdf
Science Based Targets. (2015). Science Based Targets. Sciencebasedtargets.org.
     https://sciencebasedtargets.org

                                                                          46
Science Based Targets. (2022). Companies taking action. Science Based Targets.
     https://sciencebasedtargets.org/companies-taking-action
Simnett, R., Nugent, M., & Huggins, A. L. (2009). Developing an International Assurance
     Standard on Greenhouse Gas Statements. Accounting Horizons, 23(4), 347–363.
     https://doi.org/10.2308/ACCH.2009.23.4.347
Skanska. (2020). Annual and Sustainability Report 2019.
     https://group.skanska.com/4a194f/siteassets/investors/reports-publications/annual-
     reports/2019/annual-and-sustainability-report-2019.pdf
Skanska. (2021). Annual and Sustainability 2020.
     https://group.skanska.com/4a1971/siteassets/investors/reports-publications/annual-
     reports/2020/annual-and-sustainability-report-2020.pdf
Skanska. (2022). Annual and Sustainability Report 2021.
     https://group.skanska.com/49b28a/siteassets/investors/reports-publications/annual-
     reports/2021/annual-and-sustainability-report-2021.pdf
Skanska. (2023). Annual and Sustainability Report 2022.
     https://group.skanska.com/493785/siteassets/investors/reports-publications/annual-
     reports/2022/annual-and-sustainability-report-2022.pdf
Skanska. (2024). Annual and Sustainability Report 2023.
     https://group.skanska.com/493370/siteassets/investors/reports-publications/annual-
     reports/2023/annual-and-sustainability-report-2023.pdf
Solomon, J. F., Solomon, A., Norton, S. D., & Joseph, N. L. (2011). Private climate change
     reporting: An emerging discourse of risk and opportunity? Accounting, Auditing and
     Accountability Journal, 24(8), 1119–1148.
    https://doi.org/10.1108/09513571111184788/FULL/PDF
Talbot, D., & Boiral, O. (2015). Strategies for Climate Change and Impression Management:
       Case Study mong Canada’s Large ndustrial Emitters. Journal of Business Ethics,
     132(2), 329–346. https://doi.org/10.1007/S10551-014-2322-5/TABLES/2
Talbot, D., & Boiral, O. (2018). GHG reporting and impression management: An assessment
     of sustainability reports from the energy sector. Journal of Business Ethics, 147(2), 367–
     383. https://doi.org/10.1007/S10551-015-2979-4/TABLES/3
Taylor, S. (2013). What is Discourse Analysis? In G. Crow (Ed.), What is Discourse
     Analysis? (1st ed., Vol. 1). Bloomsbury Academic.
     https://doi.org/10.5040/9781472545213
Tilsted, J. P., Palm, E., Bjørn, A., & Lund, J. F. (2023). Corporate climate futures in the
     making: Why we need research on the politics of Science-Based Targets. Energy
     Research & Social Science, 103, 103229. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ERSS.2023.103229
UNFCCC. (2015). Paris Agreement. United Nations.
     https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/english_paris_agreement.pdf
Vesty, G. M., Telgenkamp, A., & Roscoe, P. J. (2015). Creating numbers: Carbon and capital
     investment. Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal, 28(3), 302–324.
     https://doi.org/10.1108/AAAJ-10-2013-1507/FULL/PDF
Wagenhofer, A. (2024). Sustainability Reporting: A Financial Reporting Perspective.
     Accounting in Europe, 21(1), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1080/17449480.2023.2218398
Wright, C., & Nyberg, D. (2016). An Inconvenient Truth: How Organizations Translate
     Climate Change into Business as Usual. Https://Doi.Org/10.5465/Amj.2015.0718, 60(5),
    1633–1661. https://doi.org/10.5465/AMJ.2015.0718
Young, A. (2010). Greenhouse gas accounting: Global problem, national policy, local
     fugitives. Sustainability Accounting, Management and Policy Journal, 1(1), 89–95.
    https://doi.org/10.1108/20408021011059269/FULL/PDF

                                                                          47
   8. Appendices
Appendix A: Initially identified discursive themes in the analysed excerpts.

 Discursive
             Description
 Theme

 A Accentuating the desirability of climate engagement

 B Projecting an image of integrity and environmental responsibility

              Expressing decarbonization as an organizational priority, appealing to climate
 C
              science
 D Selective showcasing and framing of climate initiatives

 E Enhancing decarbonization-related capabilities

             Giving less prominence to GHG emissions from operationally significant
 F
                activities
 G Distancing the firm from its industry, which is presented as carbon inefficient

             Attributing substandard carbon performance to external factors beyond the
 H
               firm’s control

                                                                          48
Appendix B: Full typology of impression management strategies, as defined by Dunne et al.
(2021). “x” indicates that the impression management strategy was identified in this study.
 Assertive IM Strategy Definition Usage
                                An organization accentuates the desirability of a
 Enhancement              positive event for which it was at least partially  x
                              responsible
                              An organization projects an image of integrity,
 Exemplification                                              x
                               social responsibility or moral worthiness
                                An organization flatters an audience or expresses
 Ingratiation                                                x
                               similar beliefs and attitudes to the audience
                                An organization attributes positive events to its
 Internal attribution
                             own actions
                             An organization emphasizes its power,
 Intimidation defensive       dominance, and willingness to hurt those that
                               oppose it
                             An organization attempts to portray strong
 Performance comparision
                               performance using low prior-period benchmarks
                                 An organization highlights facts that portray it in
 Selectivity A or D                                               x
                                the best possible light
                             An organization promotes its competence,
 Self-promotion                                                 x
                                talents and capabilities
 Defensive IM Strategy Definition
                              An organization attempts to appear weak and in
 Supplication
                               need of assistance
                             An organization accepts responsibility for a
 Apologies
                              negative event and expresses remorse
                            An organization downplays transgressions by
 Concealment                                             x
                              giving them less prominence
                             An organization denies its role in a negative
 Denial
                             event
                               An organization distances itself from a negative
 Disassociation                                               x
                             event
                              An organization attributes negative outcomes to
 External attribution                                                x
                               external events or chance factors
                              An organization describes an external cause for
 Justification
                                  its action
                              An organization withholds negative information
 Omission
                             from an audience
                            An organization presents a task as being so
 Organizational
                               difficult to complete, that it should be excused
 Handicapping
                                for not completing it
                              An organization offers compensation to victims
 Restitution
                               of a negative event

                                                                          49