THE CARBON CONUNDRUM
________________________

INVESTIGATING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
CARBON RISK AND EUROZONE CORPORATE BOND
RETURNS

JULIA OLIVERO-REINIUS

UM E HANIA

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2024
The Carbon Conundrum: Investigating the Relationship Between Carbon Risk
and Eurozone Corporate Bond Returns

Abstract:

We examine whether carbon risk, proxied by a firm’s carbon emission intensity
(CEI), is priced in the cross-section of the Eurozone corporate bond market. Using
rolling regressions to estimate systematic risk factor loadings and then
conducting panel regressions under different fixed effects combinations, we
examine the varying dynamics that affect the pricing of carbon risk in the bond
market. We find that bonds issued by firms with higher CEI systematically earn
lower returns, indicating a mispricing at a broader level, although the economic
effect is marginal at -0.1 basis points. Further investigation suggests that the
pricing of carbon risk is episodic in nature and context-sensitive rather than being
consistently integrated overtime in the bond market. Disruptive periods such as
COVID-19 amplify the mispricing due to intensified climate concerns and shifts
in investor preferences leading to lower returns for bonds of high-CEI firms
relative to others. Outside such disruptions, carbon risk is priced significantly
within industries. In the stable and longer run, carbon risk is priced at a more
localized level, reflecting the influence of changing sectoral norms in favor of
sustainability and investors’ attention to their local contexts.

Keywords:

Carbon risk, corporate bonds, carbon emission intensity

Authors:

   Julia Olivero-Reinius (25544)
  Um E Hania (25599)

Tutor:

   Ran Guo, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Ramin Baghai, Associate Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Julia Olivero-Reinius and Um E Hania, 2024
I. Introduction

According to scientific literature, climate change poses a major threat that could
result in severe damage to the global economy (Burke, Hsiang and Miguel, 2015;
Dietz, Bowen, Dixon and Gradwell, 2016; Lesk, Rowhani and Ramankutty, 2016).
For instance, Stern (2007) projects that the annual economic cost of climate change
will amount to at least 5% of annual global gross domestic product (GDP).
Consensus has grown this past decade around the need for stricter government
regulations and enforcement to mitigate the potential catastrophic effects of
climate change. Since climate change is primarily driven by the accumulation of
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the atmosphere, any effective regulation
would focus on decreasing companies’ carbon emissions substantially. This
could, for example, be done through mechanisms such as cap-and-trade
programs or carbon taxes.

Policies aimed at mitigating climate change are expected to have varied impacts
across the economy, with the most significant impacts likely occurring on carbon-
intensive companies. As climate conditions worsen, stricter emission regulations
are likely to be introduced, leading to declining values for carbon-intensive
companies. Moreover, they may face increased financing costs if banks and
institutional investors want to reduce their exposure to such companies because
of climate-related policies that induce a shift towards sustainable investment,
according to Delis, De Greiff, Iosfidi and Ongena (2024) and Krueger, Sautner
and Starks (2020). We refer to the financial risks associated with owning or
financing carbon-intensive assets as carbon risk. This includes exposure to
regulatory changes and transition risks, such as shifts in consumer preferences
toward sustainable products, technological advances, and potential reputational
damage, all of which can have significant financial implications (Görgen, Jacob,
Nerlinger, Riordan, Rohleder and Wilkens, 2019).

Securities issued by carbon-intensive firms are generally considered riskier
because they lose value in scenarios where investors are more sensitive to climate
concerns (Pástor, Stambaugh and Taylor, 2022). To compensate for their
increased exposure to carbon risk, investors should demand higher expected
returns, according to risk-based asset pricing theories. We refer to this as the
‘carbon risk premium’ hypothesis, following Duan, Li and When (2021). An
alternative hypothesis, referred to as the ‘investor preference’ hypothesis, is that
bonds of carbon-intensive firms underperform the bonds of firms with low
carbon intensity because of strengthening investor preference for greener assets.
This can be motivated by recent research such as Pástor et al. (2022) which

                                                                               1
suggests that over a period when climate concerns increase more than anticipated
and demand from investors with a non-pecuniary preference for green assets
rises, green assets might outperform brown ones in the short run. The findings
of Duan et al. (2021) support this hypothesis, as they find that bonds of more
carbon-intensive firms earn significantly lower returns.

The conflicting findings in current research suggest that whether carbon risk is
priced in the financial markets remains a conundrum, motivating the focus of our
research. Our paper examines the pricing of carbon risk, which is proxied by a
firm’s carbon emission intensity (CEI) since it offers a direct quantification of
climate impact, in the European corporate bond market. More specifically, we
test whether the carbon risk premium hypothesis holds. We expect that the
clientele of corporate bonds in Europe will take carbon risks into account and
have a stronger preference for sustainable investments since Europe has
embraced a proactive stance on climate change with strong regulatory
frameworks and a cultural commitment to sustainability. Their non-pecuniary
preference for greener assets, in our case low-CEI firms, can increase, especially
over a period where climate concerns increase unexpectedly, which leads to the
underperformance of firms with high CEI; in other words, more greener, low-
CEI firms can outperform their high-CEI counterparts over that period, despite
having lower expected returns as found by Pástor et al. (2022). Thus, we expect
our results to be like those of Duan et al. (2021).

Within the European corporate bond market, our paper focuses on the Eurozone
market specifically to avoid currency denomination risk and facilitate cross-
country benchmarking. The countries in our sample consist of Germany,
Portugal, Italy, France, Spain, Slovenia, Austria, Belgium, the Netherlands,
Greece, Latvia, Luxembourg, Slovakia, Ireland, Malta, and Finland. We exclude
Cyprus, Lithuania, and Estonia from the sample as they adopted the Euro in-
between our sample period. Excluding these countries ensures that all countries
in our sample share a fully consistent Eurozone history during the analysis
period, leading to a clean and comparable dataset.

We collect bond pricing and characteristics data from Bloomberg for the period
2009-2021, and firm-level carbon emissions data from MSCI for the period 2008-
2020. The bond pricing data is filtered to exclude bonds that are structured notes,
mortgage-backed, asset-backed, perpetual, convertible, or trading under unusual
conditions. We are focusing on Eurozone fixed-coupon bonds with greater than
a year to maturity. To capture broader economic impacts, ensuring that the
relationship between CEI and bond returns is isolated, we estimate time-varying
factor loadings (bond market beta, default beta, term beta, illiquidity beta and

                                                                               2
macroeconomic uncertainty beta) using rolling regressions with 24-month and
36-month windows. CEI is calculated by dividing the firm’s carbon emissions
(scopes 1 and 2) by its sales.

Panel regressions are used to test whether carbon risk is priced in bond returns
after controlling for bond-specific characteristics and systematic risk factors. In
the baseline model, the log of carbon emissions intensity (LN_CEI) shows a
negative but insignificant relationship with bond returns, suggesting no
systematic impact without accounting for unobserved heterogeneity. Control
variables, such as downside risk and liquidity beta, are significant, aligning with
our theoretical expectations. When fixed effects are included, LN_CEI becomes
significant and negative under time-fixed effects, indicating that higher CEI
reduces bond returns systematically over time. When we combine different fixed
effects, we find LN_CEI to be insignificant under the country plus industry and
country plus time fixed effects specifications but highly significant under time
plus industry fixed effects. This suggests systematic market-wide mispricing. A
mixed-effects model supports these findings, showing greater variability in bond
returns over time than across industries, emphasizing the role of time-varying
factors such as regulatory shifts, increasing climate concerns, and investor
sentiment. Overall, carbon risk appears systematically mispriced in the Eurozone
bond market, with high CEI linked to lower bond returns. These results align
with recent literature, such as Duan et al. (2021).

We conduct further robustness checks using 36-month rolling betas. While
LN_CEI remains significant under time-fixed effects, it also starts showing
weaker significance under industry-fixed effects but goes on to lose significance
when both are applied together, reflecting limited robustness over longer
horizons. These mixed results stem from a smaller sample size, as many bonds
lack sufficient return data for 36-month calculations, making interpretations less
reliable. However, assuming reliability, the results suggest nuanced dynamics
influencing carbon risk pricing over the long run. LN_CEI remains insignificant
in baseline and country-fixed effects models but shows weak significance under
time- and industry-fixed effects, hinting at localized pricing of carbon risk. We
find a significant positive coefficient under country-industry fixed effects which
suggests a carbon premium for high-emission firms in specific contexts, reflecting
heterogeneity influenced by regional and sectoral characteristics and the
investor's localized perspective. Over time, markets may adjust and price carbon
risk more efficiently within certain sectors and regions.

Carbon-intensive industries are then excluded as our next robustness check to
test whether our results reflect broader market trends or if they are being driven

                                                                               3
by specific sectors. Our results stay robust for all specifications when we
systematically remove energy and utility, materials, and industrials one by one
and then all together, which credibly addresses the concerns that the significance
of LN_CEI is driven by carbon-intensive industries. This suggests that our earlier
findings are not influenced by the presence of high-emitting sectors but persist
in the broader market.

Moreover, to check whether our findings are not altered by the periods of
extreme market disruption during COVID-19, we exclude the year 2020 when
running our regression. We find LN_CEI to be negative and significant under the
baseline model, which implies market-wide mispricing of carbon risk without
accounting for heterogeneity. Under country-fixed effects, LN_CEI remains
insignificant, indicating that carbon risk pricing is not localized. In comparison,
it becomes significant and negative with industry-fixed effects, suggesting
systematic penalization of high-carbon firms within industries. Interestingly,
LN_CEI becomes marginally insignificant under time-fixed effects when 2020 is
excluded, contrasting with its earlier significance. This suggests that temporal
shocks, such as the pandemic, amplify carbon risk mispricing, likely due to
heightened investor attention on sustainability during crises. Outside periods of
disruption, industries play a key role in pricing carbon risk. These findings
emphasize the contingent and event-driven nature of carbon risk pricing, shaped
by periods of increasing climate concerns and strengthening investor preference
for sustainability during crises.

As our main results and robustness checks overall support the finding that higher
LN_CEI is associated with lower future bond returns and already point towards
the context-sensitivity of the mispricing, we further examine the nature of this
negative relationship by testing the investor preference hypothesis. Using the
Crimson Hexagon (CH) Negative Climate Change News Index created by Engle,
Giglio, Kelly, Lee and Stroebel, (2020), we create the dummy variable
HIGH_CHNN and interact it with LN_CEI. When combining both of their
effects, we can see that bonds of high-CEI firms yield relatively lower returns
when negative climate news is high. We go on to investigate the moderating
effect using the Wall Street Journal (WSJ) Climate Change News Index, also
constructed by Engle et al. (2020). In contrast to the first index, the interaction
between our dummy variable HIGH_WSJ and LN_CEI is insignificant here. This
could be because the WSJ index captures both positive and negative news.
Overall, these results highlight the importance of negative news in moderating
the pricing of carbon risk.

                                                                               4
Our research makes several significant contributions to the existing strand of
literature. First, we extend the discussion of carbon risk pricing from the equity
market, which has been the focus of the existing literature in this field (e.g. Bolton
and Kacperczyk, 2021), to the bond market. Second, our paper fills a regional gap
by focusing on the Eurozone bond market instead of the U.S. market, which most
research papers in this field, like Duan et al. (2021); Engle, Giglio, Kelly, Lee and
Stroebel (2020) focus on. Furthermore, we take a more detailed approach to
studying the evolving and time-varying dynamics of carbon risk pricing in the
bond market. Our research gives insight into the complex factors that shape risk
pricing in this market. Moreover, it highlights the need and acts as motivation to
further investigate this underexplored market.

Our discussion would be incomplete without mentioning the data limitations.
After filtering for complete cases, the number of annual observations in our
dataset is reduced substantially, mainly due to the limited availability of firm-
level CEI measures for all years in the time period, and the data requirements of
rolling regressions, which demand a minimum time window for beta estimation.
Moreover, our data is inherently unbalanced since the majority of bonds in the
sample were issued toward the end of the time period. This can cause biases since
bonds issued later in the sample period might be more sensitive to carbon risk as
investor awareness and regulations have evolved recently. Also, our sample
mainly consists of bonds from the financial sector as well as German bonds,
which could create further bias in the estimates. A limitation in our methodology
is that we use standard test statistics in our regressions, due to inconsistencies
with alternatives like Newey-West and clustered errors, which may influence the
robustness of our estimates. However, the standard t-statistics is aligned with
Newey-West results, so we chose t-statistics for simplicity.

The rest of our paper is structured in the following way: In section II, we review
the existing literature and develop different hypotheses as motivated by recent
findings. In section III, we describe the data and construct the variables used in
our empirical analysis. In section IV, we present our methodology, results and
discussions. Section V concludes our paper, providing a summary of our findings
in addition to a discussion of limitations and suggestions for future research.

II. Literature Review & Hypotheses
Development

                                                                               5
In this section, we present our literature review and hypotheses development. In
subsection A, we offer a concise review of the relevant literature and highlight
how our study contributes to the existing body of work. In subsection B, we
present our hypotheses motivated by theories linking a firm's carbon risk to its
expected returns.

A. Related Literature and Contribution
Our study makes several major contributions to the existing strand of literature.
First, our paper extends the discussion of carbon risk beyond the equity market,
bringing much-needed attention to the bond market. There is a substantial body
of work examining the pricing of carbon risk in the equity market (e.g. Bansal,
Wu and Yaron, 2021; Hong, Li and Xu, 2019; Bolton and Kacperczyk, 2021; Engle
et al., 2020). However, limited attention has been paid to how the carbon risk of
firms influences the expected returns of corporate bonds. One reason why it is of
value to focus on the corporate bond market is that corporate bonds differ from
equities in their risk-reward profiles, as bonds are more exposed to downside
risks (Hong and Sraer, 2013), which climate policies and regulations often
exacerbate for carbon-intensive firms, particularly in high-yield segments (Ilhan,
Sautner and Vilkov, 2018; Hoepner, Oikonomou, Sautner, Starks and Zhou,
2024). Moreover, since debt financing is a crucial component of firms' capital
structures, understanding how carbon emissions influence borrowing costs is
critical. The corporate bond market's size (Goldstein, Jiang and Ng, 2017) further
emphasize the policy importance of studying the relationship between carbon
risk and bond pricing.

Second, our paper shifts the geographic focus from the U.S. market, which has
been the subject of most research in this area, to the Eurozone corporate bond
market. Closely related to our paper, Duan et al. (2021) investigate whether
carbon risk is priced in the cross-section of U.S. corporate bond returns, using
both a portfolio-level and bond-level approach. They find that bonds of firms
with higher CEI tend to underperform, contradicting the carbon risk premium
hypothesis. We recognize that the Eurozone market operates under different
regulatory, economic, and environmental conditions, which may lead to unique
pricing dynamics. Thus, since the dynamics are different in the Eurozone, we
want insight into the relationship between CEI and corporate bond returns in this
area, considering specific systematic risks inherent to the Eurozone corporate
bond market. This makes our findings more relevant to investors and
policymakers in this region.

Third, we provide valuable insight into the complex factors that influence risk
pricing in the Eurozone corporate bond market, for instance by taking into

                                                                               6
account liquidity premium in our analysis, inspired by Aussenegg, Goetz and
Jelic (2012). Additionally, compared to, for example, Duan et al. (2021) who
conduct Fama-MacBeth regressions with industry-fixed effects, our approach
delves deeper into the heterogeneity that may influence the relationship between
LN_CEI and future bond returns. For example, we study the differences between
short-term and long-term dynamics by systematic risk betas estimated from 36-
month rolling regressions. Our robustness check for COVID-19 gives us a deeper
insight into how carbon risk pricing is influenced in times of disruption. This
allows us to present a more nuanced perspective on the temporal dynamics of
carbon risk pricing in the bond market. Moreover, our research offers a
foundation and motivation for future research in this underexplored market,
particularly in the Eurozone.

B. Hypotheses Development
Since carbon-intensive firms are more likely to lose value when climate policies
become more stringent or customers shift to green products, investors should
demand higher expected returns for holding these riskier assets, according to
risk-based asset pricing theories. Theories grounded in limited risk-sharing
(Merton, 1987) also suggest a positive relationship between CEI and expected
returns. With a growing number of investors divesting from carbon-heavy assets,
corporate bond investments in carbon-intensive companies are declining. This
significant divestment leads to less risk diversification, making investors demand
a higher return for holding these riskier bonds. This leads us to our first
hypothesis:

H1: Carbon risk premium hypothesis: Corporate bonds issued by firms with higher
CEI are riskier and should earn higher average returns than bonds issued by firms with
lower CEI.

Although risk-based theories predict a positive carbon risk premium, the
empirical relationship between CEI and bond returns could go in either direction.
Pástor et al. (2022) suggest that over a period when climate concerns increase
more than anticipated and demand from investors with a non-pecuniary
preference for green assets rises, green assets might outperform brown ones in
the short run. Duan et al. (2021) further find that bonds of firms with higher CEI
consistently underperform the bonds of firms with lower CEI. More specifically,
they find that the cross-sectional relationship between CEI and future bond
returns is negative and highly significant. Their full model generates a negative
average slope of −0.036 for LN_CEI, representing an economically significant
effect of 0.12% per month. Their results align with the view that carbon risk is not
fully incorporated in bond pricing, therefore implying that investors are not

                                                                               7
appropriately compensating for the carbon risk posed by firms with higher CEI.
This leads us to our alternative hypothesis:

H2: Investor preference hypothesis: If climate concerns strengthen unexpectedly, the
corporate bonds of firms with higher CEI perform worse than anticipated.

III. Data and Variable Definitions

In this section we describe the data and variable definitions that will go into the
main empirical analysis. Section A focuses on bond characteristics data and bond
returns. Section B focuses on bond market systematic risk factors. Section C
focuses on emission data and Section D presents a detailed discussion of our
sample and summary statistics.

A. Corporate Bond Data and Bond Returns
Eurozone corporate bond pricing data is retrieved from Bloomberg covering the
period 2009-2021. This period is chosen to capture post-financial crisis dynamics
and incorporate relevant macroeconomic changes. To exclude bonds that do not
meet our research criteria, the bond pricing data is filtered by removing bonds
that are structured notes, mortgage-backed, asset-backed, perpetual, or
convertible, since these securities differ significantly in risk structure and pricing.
We also exclude bonds that are trading under unusual conditions, such as flat
trading, from the data set to ensure reliability. We only select bonds that have
greater than one year to maturity and have fixed coupon rates, as floating-rate
and short-term instruments behave differently in response to market conditions,
such as interest rate changes and liquidity fluctuations, which could introduce
inconsistencies into our analysis. Fixed coupon rates provide stability in interest
payment structures, making these bonds more suitable for assessing the impacts
of long-term macroeconomic and regulatory changes. Furthermore, we only
select bonds from Eurozone countries, excluding Lithuania, Cyprus and Estonia,
as they adopted the Euro after 2009. Excluding these countries ensures that all
countries in our sample share a fully consistent Eurozone history during the
sample period, resulting in a clean and comparable dataset.

For bond pricing data, we use the last traded price of the bond for the day,
sourced from Bloomberg. After we have compiled the bond pricing data, we use
the bond CUSIP identifier to collect bond characteristics data from Bloomberg
and then merge them together. We collect data on amount issued, amount
outstanding, issue date, maturity date, coupon rate, coupon type, coupon

                                                                               8
frequency, credit rating and issuer information such as the industry they belong
to. Regarding credit ratings, we select bond credit ratings from Moody's, which
are then converted into numerical values to help make the analysis
straightforward. 1 refers to an AAA rating and 21 refers to a C rating, 22 D rating.
A higher numerical score means higher credit risk. Numerical ratings of 10 or
below, which correspond to BBB- or better, are considered investment grade, and
ratings of 11 or higher, corresponding to BB + or worse, are labeled high yield.
Additionally, we assign a value of zero to unrated bonds.

We calculate the monthly return for each bond 𝑖 in month 𝑡 by first calculating
the dirty price of the bond by first adding accrued interest to the end-of-month
clean price, then dividing it by previous months’ dirty price and subtracting one
at the end. The excess bond return is calculated by subtracting the risk-free rate,
                                                       1
which is proxied by the one-month EURIBOR rate.

B. Bond Market Systematic Risk Factors
We also compute the systematic risk factors linked to the corporate bond market,
specifically in Europe, to estimate the time-varying factor loadings which will
then be used as control variables for the main panel regressions. This helps us
consider economic factors that determine the cross-section of corporate bond
returns in the Eurozone, hence giving us a clearer analysis of the relationship
between a firm's CEI and its corporate bond returns.

We use the excess corporate bond market return, the term spread, the default
spread and macroeconomic uncertainty to proxy for bond market risk factors.
We calculate the bond market excess returns for the Eurozone market
(EXCESS_BMKT_RETURN) as the difference between the bond market monthly
returns and our risk-free rate proxy, the 1-month EURIBOR rate. The index used
as a benchmark for the bond market return is the Bloomberg Euro Aggregate
Corporate Total Return index. This index gives comprehensive coverage while
being consistent with our research focus on Eurozone corporate bonds. The 1-
month EURIBOR rate is chosen as it is well aligned with the scope of our analysis,
reflects short-term, low-risk borrowing costs, and is widely accepted in financial
research and practice.

Next, the default spread (DEFAULT_SPREAD) is measured as the difference
between BAA and AAA-rated corporate bond monthly yields. We include this
factor because bonds with higher credit risk are more vulnerable to financial
instability. The term spread (TERM_SPREAD) is computed as the difference

1
 This has been taken from Eurostat

                                                                               9
between the monthly return on the ICE BofA 10+ Euro Government Index and
the EURIBOR 1-month rate. This allows us to capture the sensitivity of bond
returns to changes in the term structure of interest rates, as longer-term bonds
are more sensitive to interest rate changes. De Vette and Mosk’s (2022) study
highlights the significance of these spreads in analyzing financial stability and
the pricing of corporate bonds in the Eurozone.

To proxy for a bond’s exposure to broad economic uncertainties
                                                                             2
(MACRO_UNC), we use the Global Uncertainty Index (GUI)  to account for
macroeconomic uncertainty, recognizing the Eurozone's sensitivity to global
economic conditions due to its integration into international markets. Events like
the 2008 global financial crisis demonstrate how global uncertainty affects
regional economies, impacting bond markets.

In addition to these common risk factors, we consider factors that are especially
relevant for the European bond market. For instance, Houweling, Mentink and
Vorst (2005); Diaz and Navarro (2002); Frühwirth, Schneider and Sögner (2010)
find a liquidity premium for European corporate bonds in their sample.
Illiquidity is a critical factor since bonds that are harder to trade generally
demand a premium, impacting their returns. To proxy for the market illiquidity
(MARKET_ILLIQUIDITY), we subtract the EURIBOR 1-month rate from the 1-
                       3
month EONIA rate following Aussenegg et al. (2012).

We estimate the time-varying betas for every bond i in month t using rolling
regressions. We use betas estimated by rolling windows of 24 months, which
provides a balanced view, capturing both short-term fluctuations and medium-
term trends, to model each bond’s exposure to the systematic risk factors that we
previously introduced:

Where βMKT,i,t is the bond market beta, βDEF, i,t is the default beta, βTERM, i,t the term

beta, βUNC, i,t is the macroeconomic uncertainty beta and βILLIQ, i,t is the market
illiquidity beta. The betas have been scaled in order to normalize their
magnitudes and the differences in their scales.

2
 The index is freely available at http://www.policyuncertainty.com/

3 This can be found on ECB Data Portal

                                                                              10
C. Emission Data
Firm-level carbon emission data for Eurozone corporations from 2008-2020 is
sourced from MSCI. The reason why we use this time period is to establish a lag
between the predictor (CEI) and the future excess bond returns. Our collected
carbon emissions data consists of direct emissions from owned or controlled
facilities by the company (that is, scope 1 emissions) and emissions from
purchased heat, steam, and electricity (that is, scope 2 emissions), measured in
metric tons/million EUR. We use scope 1 and scope 2 emissions as they are more
observable and reported than scope 3 emissions, so investors can rely more on
scope 1 and 2. We construct CEI from scratch since MSCI currently has carbon
emission intensities expressed in metric tons/million USD. We calculate it as a
firm’s carbon emissions (scope 1 and 2) divided by its sales in EUR, taken from
Bloomberg, to construct the CEI measure in metric tons/million EUR. For further
regression analysis, the emissions data is log-transformed to address skewness.

D. Sample and Summary Statistics
We begin with a comprehensive set of monthly pricing data for 8,493 unique
bonds and create our main dataset for analysis by first cleaning the pricing data.
Bonds with trading histories of less than 6 months are excluded to ensure the
reliability of our return estimates. We then compute monthly excess returns and
subsequently annualize them to align with the temporal structure of CEI, which
is available as an annual measure. All other explanatory variables, like monthly
beta estimates, have been annualized for this reason as well.

To construct the firm-level CEI measure, we gather a time series of carbon
emissions for firms remaining in the sample after the pricing data is cleaned. We
combine our main variables of interest with control variables like scaled betas,
lagged returns, downside risk and others critical for explaining bond returns.
After filtering for complete cases, the dataset is reduced to 3,457 annual
observations for 1,463 unique bonds when using annualized betas estimated via
24-month rolling regressions. The sample size diminishes further when 36-month
rolling regressions are employed in one of our robustness checks.

The main factors driving this substantial decrease in our sample are the limited
availability of firm-level CEI measures for all years in the period and the data
requirements of rolling regressions, which demand a minimum time window for
beta estimation. Alternative methods such as a GARCH-BEKK model (Pieterse-
Bloem et al., 2016) could be used to estimate unconstrained betas without losing
data for the window size but it requires a much longer time series, typically 20 to

                                                                               11
40 years of data, to be able to produce any estimates. Consequently, we proceed
with the rolling regression method which provides a practical balance between
data requirements and estimation flexibility. Second, the lack of consistent
carbon emissions disclosures across the sample period may itself be pointing
towards uneven pricing of carbon risk over time in our sample. Despite this, the
reporting improves towards the end of our sample period reflecting the growing
importance of this factor. Nevertheless, even though such cleaning of data leads
to a substantial shrinking of the sample size, avoiding missing values is
important to obtaining reliable estimates.

Moreover, it is also important to note that our data is inherently unbalanced, as
most bonds in the sample were issued toward the end of the time period. This
characteristic of our data has important implications for further analysis since it
can cause potential biases as bonds issued later in the sample period might reflect
heightened sensitivity to carbon risk as investor awareness and regulations
would have evolved in recent years. The bonds predominantly belong to
Germany and the financial sector. This may potentially be another source of bias
in our estimates due to the limited geographic and sectoral diversity. For
instance, one may expect the carbon risk to not be significantly priced in the
financial sector. These characteristics constrain the analysis and can point
towards the need to control for such time, industry, and country-specific factors
in our main model.

Table 1 reports summary statistics for the key variables used in our baseline
analysis. Over our sample period, the average annual return on the corporate
bonds is 0.82% with a standard deviation of 0.053. This shows that the returns do
not vary as much, which may be due to homogeneous bond market
characteristics within the Eurozone. Our main independent variable, LN_CEI,
                                                                             4
has a mean of 5.26 metric tons per million Euros approximately and a standard
deviation of 8.94 metric tons per million Euros, showing some variance. An
average bond has a rating of 2.6 (which can be interpreted as an Aa2 Moody's
rating) and has 10.97 years to maturity. All of the betas exhibit positive means ,
except Beta_UNC which shows a slightly negative mean, and all have quite low
variances, while, for example, maturity and rating_score show significant ranges.
The VIF tests conducted on the data do not show any serious multicollinearity
issues between our explanatory variables.

4  1.66
 e   ≈ 5.26. Same is done for standard deviation.

                                                                               12
            TABLE 1: SUMMARY STATISTICS

 Table 1 reports summary statistics for annual bond observations over the sample period from
 January 2009 to December 2021. The descriptive statistics include the sample mean, 25th
 percentile, median, 75th percentile and standard deviation of the key variables used in this
 study. Variables are defined in the Appendix, Table A1.

IV. Empirical Results

In this section we describe our methodology and present as well as discuss our
results. Subsection A considers bond-level panel regressions while subsection B
focuses on robustness checks, and in section C we test the investor preference
hypothesis.

A. Bond-Level Panel Regressions
To examine the cross-sectional relationship between CEI and future bond
returns, Fama-Macbeth regressions are widely used (e.g. Duan et al., 2021).
However, according to Petersen (2007), panel regressions with fixed effects
enable researchers to enhance the efficiency of estimates. Like Huyhn and Xia
(2020), we thus choose to use bond-level panel regressions. This approach is ideal
for handling panel data with multiple time periods, enabling us to estimate
average coefficients. The model is specified as follows:

                                                                              13
where Ri,t+1 (Excess Return) is the future excess return on bond in year t +1 and
LN_CEIi,t is the natural logarithm of firm-level CEI in the previous year 𝑡.
CONTROLSk,t include bond-level characteristics and systematic risk factors.
Bond-level characteristics include downside risk (VAR), which represents the 5%
Value-at-Risk of corporate bond return. To ensure consistency, the rolling
window for calculating VAR matches the rolling window used for estimating
betas. For example, if 24-month windows are used for the regressions, the same
24-month window is applied for VAR calculations. We define VAR as the second
lowest monthly return observation over the rolling window and multiply it by
−1. A higher VAR is interpreted as a higher downside risk. Downside risk is
included because it captures extreme negative outcomes, which are essential
when assessing the risks faced by bondholders in times of financial stress.
Another bond-level characteristic we use is credit ratings (rating_score) to
represent the bond’s risk level. Furthermore, we use time to maturity (Maturity),
the natural logarithm of bond's outstanding amount in EUR
(log_amt_outstanding), and one-month lagged bond return (Lagged_Return).
Moreover, the factor loadings estimated in section III are included to capture the
covariance between corporate bond returns and the relevant systematic risk
factors. We exclude firm-level characteristics from our analysis motivated by
Huynh and Xia's (2020) findings that their results do not qualitatively change if
they do not control for firm-level characteristics, such as market capitalization,
Tobin’s Q, ROE and leverage ratio.

To choose between random or fixed effects, we conduct the Hausman test, which
shows us that the fixed effects model is preferred over random effects. After
finding significance for the Hausman test, we proceed to test the relationship
between LN_CEI of a firm and the future excess returns of its corporate bonds
using various fixed-effects specifications. The choice of the fixed effects is made
based on how much variation in our main variable of interest, LN_CEI, is
explained by them. Unlike Huyhn and Xia (2020), who apply bond fixed effects
when investigating the relationship between a bond’s climate change news beta
and future returns, we find that LN_CEI varies little within our bonds which
makes them unsuitable to control for in our analysis as they would likely absorb
most of the variation in LN_CEI. However, we find substantial variation in
LN_CEI across countries and industries which motivates our choice to include
country and industry fixed effects. We further control for time-fixed effects based
on an ANOVA test, which reveals highly significant variation over time for our
main independent variable. The results of applying different combinations of
fixed effects reveal interesting insights into how carbon risks are priced into the
cross-section of bond returns in our sample.

                                                                               14
In the baseline model in the first column of Tabel 2, panel A, without any fixed
effects, we see a negative but statistically insignificant relationship between
LN_CEI and future bond excess returns. The control variables included in the
regression, such as the downside risk and the default and term beta, are highly
significant which aligns with our theoretical expectations of these variables based
on previous research (Bai, Bali and Wen, 2019; Pieterse-Bloem et al., 2016). The
liquidity beta also shows significance, giving support to the findings of
Aussenegg, Goetz and Jelic (2012), Houweling et al. (2005), Diaz and Navarro
(2002) and Frühwirth et al. (2010). Moreover, the presence of significance for the
intercept suggests that there are other omitted variables that contribute to
explaining the corporate bond returns. The result shows that a firm’s carbon
emissions intensity is not a significant determinant of bond returns when we do
not account for unobserved heterogeneity.

However, as we start applying different fixed effects one at a time, not only does
the direction of the relationship change, but the significance also changes. When
we apply industry-fixed effects (Table 2, Panel A, column 3), the coefficient
remains insignificant with a negative sign. This means that within-industry
differences in the carbon emissions intensity do not explain the bond pricing. We
get similar statistically insignificant results when we apply country-fixed effects
(Table 2, Panel A, column 2), but with a small positive coefficient, which implies
that within-country differences do not account for carbon risk substantially as
well. Together, they tell us that carbon risk is not significantly priced within a
specific country or industry and hence is not localized. However, when we
control for time-varying factors (Table 2, Panel A, column 4), LN_CEI becomes
highly statistically significant at 1% and shows a negative relationship with
future bond excess returns (coefficient = -0.001). This shows that, after accounting
for time-specific factors like changes in regulations and environmental concerns,
higher CEI consistently leads to lower bond returns over time. In economic terms,
a coefficient of -0.001 implies that a 1% increase in CEI reduces annual future
                                                                                      5
excess bond returns by approximately -0.001% or -0.1 basis points (bps)  relative
to the mean. The negative effect, although it seems small, may accumulate over
time and/or as carbon-intensive firms continue to be careless about their
emissions. For example, if a firm increases its CEI by 10%, it will see a decrease
in its annual bond excess returns by around -1 basis point. A doubling of its CEI
would reduce returns by approximately -6.93 basis points annually. This finding
rejects our first hypothesis that carbon risk is efficiently priced according to
traditional risk pricing theories and aligns with the findings of the closely related

5
 A 1% increase in the original CEI corresponds to a change in log CEI of approximately 0.00995.

                                                                               15
     emissions

      s on the logarithm of carbon

                   indicate the significance at a 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.
                   ∗∗∗

                     , and
                  ∗∗
                                  ,
                   ∗


TABLE 2: PANEL REGRESSIONS WITH 24 MONTH ESTIMATED BETAS

      This table reports the average intercept and slope coefficients from panel regressions of future corporate bond excess returnintensity (CEI) with all control variables under different combinations of fixed effects. The dependent variable is the corporate bond excess returns (EXCESSRETURNS) in the year t +1. The key independent variable LN_CEI is based on the firm-level carbon emissions intensity in the previous year t. Scaled betas estimatedfrom 24 month rolling regressions windows are used. All other variables are defined in the Appendix, Table A1. Panel A shows the estimates (1) without any fixedeffects, under (2) country, (3) industry and (4) time fixed effects. Panel B shows the estimates under (1) country plus time, (2) industry plus time and (3) countryplus industry fixed effects. Standard t-statistics are reported in the parenthesis.

                                                                                       16
research of Duan et al. (2021). As the CEI of a firm increases, the returns on its
bonds decrease instead of the investors being compensated, in the form of higher
returns, for holding the higher risk. This can suggest that investors might be
systematically mispricing carbon risk. Bringing together insights from these
combinations of fixed effects, we can conclude that carbon risk is systematically
priced inefficiently at a broader market-wide level.

Next, we test combinations of fixed effects shown in Table 2, Panel B. We avoid
applying all factors together to avoid overfitting data. First, LN_CEI remains
insignificant for country plus industry and country plus time combinations
(Table 2, Panel B, column 1 and 3, respectively), which builds on our argument
that carbon risk pricing is not driven by local, country- or industry-related
contexts. A plausible reason for this could be that countries in our sample all
belong to the Eurozone and have similar policies, even though they can still have
differences in investor attitudes among others. Moving on, the coefficient for
LN_CEI is negative and highly significant under time plus industry fixed effects
(Table 2, Panel B, column 2). This implies that the Eurozone corporate bond
market displays systematic mispricing on a broader market level and penalizes
firms with high CEI when industry-related factors interact with time-related ones
and that industries can serve as a channel for (mis)pricing of carbon risk. This
could be because of a shift in broader sectoral norms. We explore this notion
further using a mixed effects model (Appendix, Table A2) which shows similar
estimates and significance levels but gives additional insight through variance
decomposition (Appendix, Table A3) which shows that bond returns exhibit
greater variability over time than across industries, as evidenced by larger
random-effect variance for time. This highlights the greater influence of time-
related dynamics (Pástor et al., 2022), for instance, regulatory shifts or investor
sentiment changes, compared to industry-specific factors in driving bond
pricing. Since both fixed and mixed models have a similar fit, we proceed with
the fixed-effects model for further analysis.

Our results show that carbon risk is systematically mispriced over time in the
Eurozone bond market at a market-wide level and is potentially influenced by
time-varying dynamics. The conclusion made above may face certain risks due
to low data quality or small sample coverage, as discussed before. However, we
see robust significance for other control variables, which may suggest that the
regression models are generally well-specified. Moreover, we use standard test
statistics in our regressions, which may influence the robustness of the
significance of our estimates. The reason for continuing with the standard test
statistics was the lack of robustness between different methods, such as Newey-
West and clustered standard errors. This obviously stems from the underlying

                                                                               17
issue they try to correct. After accounting for heterogeneity, clustered standard
errors may over-control by inflating standard errors in smaller samples or when
there is insufficient variability within clusters. During initial tests, Newey-West
standard errors quantitatively give similar results to the standard test statistics,
and hence, for simplicity, we chose to use them in our regressions. A better and
more thorough selection of standard errors may increase the reliability of our
results. Lastly, the regressions will benefit from additional control variables, to
mitigate omitted variable bias, increased sample size and improved data quality
to reliably estimate the exact relationship between carbon emissions intensity and
bond returns.

B. Robustness Checks
To ensure the robustness of our findings, we perform various robustness checks
across different dimensions. These robustness checks ensure that our findings are
reliable and can be generalized across various market conditions, bond
characteristics, and economic periods.

B.1. Different Rolling Regression Window
When checking for robustness of our findings with 36-month rolling betas, we
find significance for LN_CEI when applying time-fixed effects (Table 3, Panel A,
column 4), consistent with our previous results. Interestingly, industry-fixed
effects (Table 3, Panel A, column 3) also show some significance and a positive
relationship for LN_CEI. This time, LN_CEI loses its significance when applying
both industry plus time fixed effects (Table 3, Panel B, column 2). One of the
reasons behind the lack of statistical robustness of our results when using 36-
month betas could be that our sample consists mostly of bonds that were issued
towards the end of our period of interest. Hence, there is not sufficient return
data to compute reliable 36-month betas and this leads to a much smaller sample
of bonds with complete cases, which affects the robustness of our results.

Alternatively, assuming estimates are reliable, it could give us insight into the
difference between the short-term and longer-term relationship between LN_CEI
and future excess bond returns. In the baseline and country-fixed effects model
(Table 3, Panel A, column 1 and 2, respectively), LN_CEI continues to be
insignificant. The intercept also becomes less significant in the baseline
regression which can imply that our model includes most of the variables which
explain the bond excess returns in the long run. After controlling for industry
and time-fixed effects separately (Table 3, Panel B, column 3 and 4, respectively),
we see a weak significance for the relationship between CEI and the future excess
bond returns. This means that carbon risk might be priced within industries and

                                                                               18
across time while not being dependent on country-specific contexts, but the
evidence for it is weak.

Here, the country plus time and industry plus time fixed effects combinations
(Table 3, Panel B, column 1 and 2, respectively) do not show any significance.
This can indicate that when looking at the market dynamics in a slightly longer-
term setting, carbon risk is not systematically priced across time. However,
LN_CEI becomes positive and significant under country plus industry fixed
effects (Table 3, Panel B, column 3) with a slightly higher economic effect. The
positive coefficient means that there is a carbon premium for bonds of high CEI
firms within specific industries and countries and that markets price in the
carbon risk efficiently. This implies that there is heterogeneity in how countries
and industries price carbon risks in the long run and, in contrast to our analysis
with 24-month betas, points towards the importance of local factors when it
comes to carbon risk pricing in the long run. It suggests that carbon risk pricing,
rather than being persistent overtime, operates within specific contexts shaped
by more localized and sectoral dynamics. It is expected that investors naturally
pay attention more to their local contexts. Moreover, although its plausibility
may be argued, a reason for the premium can be that markets tend to correct any
efficiencies in the longer term.

The difference in our results could mainly be attributed to the use of 36-month
betas which smooths out the effects of large-scale shocks by incorporating a
longer historical data period in their estimation. The longer window gives more
stable estimates of systematic risk factors effectively giving us insight into longer-
term dynamics where the fluctuations in the market are smoothened out. We
continue with further analysis using 24-month rolling betas due to the larger
sample space it offers.

B.2. Excluding Carbon-Intensive Industries
Our results, shown in Table 4, stay robust for all specifications when we
systematically remove energy and utility, materials, and industrials one by one
and then all together to address the concern that the significance of LN_CEI is
driven by carbon-intensive industries. This suggests that our earlier findings are
not influenced by the presence of high-emitting sectors but persist in the broader
market.

                                                                               19
      s on the logarithm of carbon emissions

                   indicate the significance at a 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.
                   ∗∗∗

                     , and
                  ∗∗
                                  ,
                   ∗


TABLE 3: PANEL REGRESSIONS WITH 36 MONTH ESTIMATED BETAS

      This table reports the average intercept and slope coefficients from panel regressions of future corporate bond excess returnintensity (CEI) with all control variables under different combinations of fixed effects. The dependent variable is the corporate bond excess returns (EXCESSRETURNS) in the year t +1. The key independent variable LN_CEI is based on the firm-level carbon emissions intensity in the previous year t. Scaled betas estimatedfrom 36 month rolling regressions windows are used. All other variables are defined in the Appendix, Table A1. Panel A shows the estimates (1) without any fixedeffects, under (2) country, (3) industry and (4) time fixed effects. Panel B shows the estimates under (1) country plus time, (2) industry plus time and (3) country plusindustry fixed effects. Standard t-statistics are reported in the parenthesis.

                                                                                       20
                  indicate the
                  ∗∗∗

                    , and
                 ∗∗
                                ,
                  ∗


    logarithm of carbon emissions intensity (CEI) with all

TABLE 4: EXCLUDING CARBON-INTENSIVE INDUSTRIES

     This table reports the slope coefficients from panel regressions of future corporate bond excess returns on thecontrol variables under different combinations of fixed effects. Energy & utilities and industrials have been removed from the sample. The dependent variable is thecorporate bond excess returns (EXCESS RETURNS) in the year t +1. The key independent variable LN_CEI is based on the firm-level carbon emissions intensity inthe previous year t. Scaled betas estimated from 24 month rolling regressions windows are used. All other variables are defined in the Appendix, Table A1. Panels tothe left show the estimates (1) without any fixed effects, under (2) country, (3) industry and (4) time fixed effects. Panels to the right show the estimates under (1)country plus time, (2) industry plus time and (3) country plus industry fixed effects. Standard t-statistics are reported in the parenthesis.significance at a 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

                                                                                       21
                  ∗∗∗

                   , and
                 ∗∗
                                ,
                  ∗


     on emissions intensity (CEI) with all

TABLE 4: EXCLUDING CARBON-INTENSIVE INDUSTRIES (CONTINUED)

     This table reports slope coefficients from panel regressions of future corporate bond excess returns on the logarithm of carbcontrol variables under different combinations of fixed effects. Materials and then all of the carbon intensive industries are removed from the sample. The dependentvariable is the corporate bond excess returns (EXCESS RETURNS) in the year t +1. The key independent variable LN_CEI is based on the firm-level carbon emissionsintensity in the previous year t. Scaled betas estimated from 24 month rolling regressions windows are used. All other variables are defined in the Appendix, TableA1. Panels to the left show the estimates (1) without any fixed effects, under (2) country, (3) industry and (4) time fixed effects. Panels to the right show the estimatesunder (1) country plus time, (2) industry plus time and (3) country plus industry fixed effects. Standard t-statistics are reported in the parenthesis.indicate the significance at a 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

                                                                                       22
B.3. Removing the Effects of COVID-19
Motivated by our second hypothesis that the systematic pricing of carbon risk
may be driven by periods of increasing climate concern, we test the robustness
of our results by excluding the period during which COVID-19 caused large-scale
disruptions in financial markets while also increasing climate concerns. This
could have affected the pricing of carbon risks in corporate bonds. We exclude
the year 2020 from our sample to investigate how removing a year where climate
concerns are strengthened affects the relationship between LN_CEI and bond
excess returns. The baseline model (Table 5, Panel A, column 1) reveals a negative
and significant coefficient for LN_CEI which suggests a broader mispricing of
carbon risk in the market without accounting for potential heterogeneity. The
insignificance of LN_CEI after applying country-fixed effects (Table 5, Panel A,
column 2) suggests that the pricing of carbon risk has not been localized to
country-specific factors even outside major disruptions, indicating a more
market-wide pricing of carbon risk, which is consistent with our previous
conclusion.

However, when we control for industry-fixed effects (Table 5, Panel A, column
3), LN_CEI becomes negative and significant, which means that bonds of firms
with higher CEI within industries have been earning lower returns. This implies
that there has been systematic mispricing and penalization of carbon-intensive
firms within industries and implies that industries can serve as another key
channel for carbon risk pricing outside periods of large-scale disruption and
intensified climate concerns. This reflects the fact that investors focus more on
sector-specific carbon risks and incorporate them into pricing compared to
broader, market-wide temporal factors in the absence of such disruptions. In
contrast, when we included COVID-19 in our sample earlier, industry-specific
pricing became insignificant, likely because the pandemic introduced
overlapping shocks that blurred industry-specific pricing. Investors most likely
shifted their attention to broader risks and immediate economic uncertainties
and climate concerns which reduced the focus on sector-level carbon risks. The
fact that LN_CEI becomes marginally significant when we apply time-fixed
effects after removing the pandemic gives more nuance to this argument (Table
5, Panel A, column 4). After comparing the result to the initial significance of
LN_CEI under time-fixed effects (Table 2, Panel A, column 3), we can conclude
that major market shocks and large-scale intensification of climate concerns
amplify the mispricing of carbon risk where bonds of firms with high CEI earn
lower returns, possibly due to shifts in investors nonpecuniary preferences
aligning with the expectations of our second hypothesis and findings of Pástor et
al. (2022), indicating that investor demand for greener assets play a critical role
in these periods.

                                                                               23
                  indicate the significance
                  ∗∗∗

                    , and
                 ∗∗
                                ,
    carbon emissions intensity (CEI) with∗


TABLE 5: REMOVING THE EFFECTS OF COVID-19

     This table reports the slope coefficients from panel regressions of future corporate bond excess returns on the logarithm ofall control variables under different combinations of fixed effects. The year 2020 is removed from the sample as a proxy for Covid-19. The dependent variable isthe corporate bond excess returns (EXCESS RETURNS) in the year t +1. The key independent variable LN_CEI is based on the firm-level carbon emissions intensityin the previous year t. Scaled betas estimated from 24 month rolling regressions windows are used. All other variables are defined in the Appendix, Table A1. PanelA shows the estimates (1) without any fixed effects, under (2) country, (3) industry and (4) time fixed effects. Panel B shows the estimates under (1) country plustime, (2) industry plus time and (3) country plus industry fixed effects. Standard t-statistics are reported in the parenthesis.at a 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

                                                               24
Next, we fail to see any significance for LN_CEI under different combinations of
fixed effects (Table 5, Panel B). One reasonable interpretation could be that
outside the setting of large-scale climate concerns and disruptions, the market
dynamics for pricing carbon risk may be simpler and less interactive. During
periods like the COVID-19 pandemic, the effects of heightened market volatility,
shifting investor preferences and government interventions may overlap and
lead to a more complex environment with different factors interacting more
intensely which can amplify their impact on carbon risk pricing as we saw earlier.
In comparison, outside of such periods, we can see a more stable market
environment. Here, the interactions between these factors may be less intense
leading to simpler relationships where traditional systematic risk factors, like
default risk, are priced more significantly.

These results highlight how carbon risk pricing varies under stable versus
disrupted market conditions and intensified climate concerns. They imply that
carbon risk pricing may not be a consistently visible factor in bond markets,
rather it is contingent on investor preferences and periods of heightened external
pressures or attention. Furthermore, they suggest that the inclusion of the
pandemic in our initial analysis could have distorted our conclusions about the
general relationship between a firm's CEI and its bonds' future excess returns.
COVID-19 amplified carbon risk pricing due to heightened investor concerns
about sustainability and climate-related risks. This highlights the importance of
temporal events which lead to a mispricing of carbon risk as highlighted by
Pástor et al. (2022).

While our findings show that carbon risk remains systematically mispriced at the
industry level outside the pandemic, its varying significance under different
specifications can point towards its episodic nature. This can imply that multiple
factors are influencing its integration into financial markets. Future research
should focus on the interaction between these different factors and uncover the
conditions that amplify or suppress carbon risk pricing.

C. Testing the Investor Preference Hypothesis
As we saw under the robustness check for COVID-19, while carbon risk can be
systematically priced, the degree of its impact can vary over time. Specifically
when investors' non-pecuniary preferences for greener assets increase during
periods of intensified environmental concerns. During these periods, bonds from
low CEI firms can outperform the ones from high CEI firms, not because of the
fundamental risk-return relationship but because of increasing investor concerns
and preferences for sustainability. Although removing the effects of large-scale
disruptions already gave support to this hypothesis, there can be events of a

                                                                               25
smaller scale which may also have similar characteristics. We further test this
hypothesis to investigate if the pricing of carbon risk is moderated by periods
where climate concerns intensify more than average. Under the hypothesis, we
expect CEI to have a negative and significant relationship with bond excess
returns if climate-related concerns unexpectedly strengthen. We use the
innovations in Crimson Hexagon (CH) Negative Climate Change News Index
and the Wall Street Journal (WSJ) Climate Change News Index constructed by
Engle et al. (2020) as a proxy for change in climate concerns.

 We start with the first index. To identify periods of high concern, we construct a
dummy variable, HIGH_CHNN, by assigning a value of 1 to those years where
the innovation in the CH Negative News Index exceeds the median value of the
index and assigning 0 otherwise. To test for moderation, we interact
HIGH_CHNN with LN_CEI and reexamine our baseline regressions by
including the interaction term (LN_CEI:HIGH_CHNN1). We choose to test this
on the baseline regression since adding fixed effects may absorb the interaction
term if it is constant within the fixed effects groups. Our results in Table 6, Panel
A show that LN_CEI is not directly significant and does not explain bond returns
independently. HIGH_CHNN1 on its own is highly significant and positive,
indicating that bond excess returns tend to increase during this time. This means
that overall, investors display risk aversion and seek higher returns in time when
the risk they hold increases, consistent with traditional risk pricing theory. When
both of their effects are combined in the interaction term
(LN_CEI:HIGH_CHNN1), we see a significant and negative relationship. Bonds
of firms with higher CEI earn lower returns during high negative climate change
news. In periods of low climate concern (HIGH_CHNN = 0), LN_CEI has no
significant impact on bond returns since its main effect is insignificant. In periods
of high climate concern (HIGH_CHNN = 1), the main effect of HIGH_CHNN
leads to an overall increase in bond excess returns but the negative interaction
term means that this increase in returns is diminished for bonds of carbon-
intensive firms. This highlights that carbon-intensive firms are penalized,
reducing their returns relative to others. The economic effect of the interaction is
also slightly higher than what we found in previous regressions (coefficient = -
0.006)

This interesting dynamic gives more nuance to our understanding of how climate
concerns amplify the market's focus on carbon risk. So even though there may be
a general increase in returns to compensate for the increased risk, there may also
be increased scrutiny for carbon-intensive firms and investor preferences may
shift towards greener assets leading to lower relative returns for carbon intensive

                                                                               26
             terms


              Interaction


               values.


     of heightened climate concerns, as
            median


               their


             exceed


             indexes


              these
              month rolling regressions windows are used. All other variables are
              in
             24

              innovations


           when


              assigned
              1

               of


              values         indicate the significance at a 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.

                           ∗∗∗
             with

                              , and
                          ∗∗
                                                 ,
                           ∗


               respectively,


              indexes,


         WSJ

TABLE 6: MODERATION OF CARBON RISK PRIICING BY PERIODS OF HIGH CLIMATE CONCERNand

     This table presents the regression results analyzing the interaction between carbon emissions intensity (LN_CEI) and periodsmeasured by the Crimson Hexagon (CH) Negative Climate Change News Index and the Wall Street Journal (WSJ) Climate Change News Index. LN_CEI representsthe carbon emissions intensity of the firms. HIGH_CHNN and HIGH_WSJ are dummy variables identifying years of heightened climate concerns based on theCH(LN_CEI:HIGH_CHNN and LN_CEI:HIGH_WSJ) capture the combined effects of carbon intensity and heightened climate concerns. No fixed effects have beenapplied. The dependent variable is the corporate bond excess returns (EXCESS RETURNS) in the year t +1. The key independent variable LN_CEI is based on thefirm-level carbon emissions intensity in the previous year t. Scaled betas estimated fromdefined in the Appendix, Table A1. Panel A shows the estimates under CH negative news index and Panel B shows the estimates WSJ index. Standard t-statisticsare reported in the parenthesis.

                                                                        27
firms. This finding gives support to our second hypothesis and connects back to
our earlier discussion on context sensitivity of carbon risk pricing.

We follow the same process for creating a dummy variable for the index based
on WSJ (Table 6, Panel B). Just like in the previous case, LN_CEI does not show
any significance while the main effects of HIGH_WSJ show a positive and
significant relationship leading to a similar interpretation as HIGH_CHNN. The
interaction term (LN_CEI:HIGH_WSJ1) is, however, insignificant in contrast to
our previous results. A major reason could be that WSJ captures all types of
media coverage on climate related topics irrespective of their neutral, positive or
negative tone. The impact of high carbon intensity on bond returns is not
pronounced during periods of increased general media attention as mixed news
may dilute the effect of carbon risk on bond returns or investors may not be
sensitive to it. The difference in our results can highlight that carbon risk is priced
more specifically when negative concerns about climate strengthen which gives
a better understanding of the subtle role of investor sentiment in pricing of
carbon risk. Moreover, this role of investor sentiment may be more enhanced
when using indexes tailored to the Eurozone region as the current indexes were
constructed more generally to understand the dynamics of hedging climate
change news in the US stock market (Engle et al., 2020).

V. Conclusion
Our paper aims to find some common ground among the mixed evidence within
the fast- growing Climate Finance literature that examines whether financial
markets can efficiently price climate change-related risks. By investigating
whether carbon risk, estimated by a firm’s CEI, is priced in the cross-section of
the Eurozone corporate bond market, we provide a valuable addition to the
previous literature, which mainly focuses on equities (e.g., Bolton and
Kacperczyk, 2021) or the U.S. (e.g., Huyhn and Xia, 2020). By using fixed-effect
panel regressions, we find overall evidence of a systematic mispricing of carbon
risk, rejecting the carbon risk premium hypothesis. This result is consistent with
the findings of Duan et al. (2021). We also find evidence for the episodic and
context-sensitive nature of carbon risk pricing in corporate bonds. Leveraging the
two climate change news indexes constructed by Engle et al. (2020), we further
find support for this by testing the investor preference hypothesis which
proposes that Eurozone corporate bonds issued by firms with higher CEI
perform worse when climate concerns unexpectedly strengthen. We find
evidence in line with this proposition when we exclude periods of extreme
market disruption which amplify the mispricing of carbon risk similar to the
findings of Pástor et al. (2022). The testing of the second hypothesis particularly

                                                                               28
gives us insight into how negative sentiments of investors moderate the pricing
of carbon risk in the bond market. Our results mainly serve to highlight the
context-sensitivity and temporal nature of carbon risk pricing. We also uncover
potential long-term trends in carbon risk pricing during periods of relative
stability by testing our results with systematic risk factors estimated by a larger
rolling window which adds value to our research.

Despite the value of our study, our analysis is subject to several limitations. After
filtering for complete cases, the number of annual observations in our dataset is
reduced substantially. Moreover, our data is inherently unbalanced, since most
bonds in the sample were issued toward the end of the period of interest. This
can cause biases since bonds issued later in the sample period might reflect
heightened sensitivity to carbon risk as investor awareness and regulations
would have evolved in recent years. Furthermore, there is a risk of bias in our
estimates because of the limited geographic and sectoral diversity. We try to
handle such constraints by controlling for time, industry, and country-fixed
effects in our regression models.

Another limitation is our reliance on monthly last prices rather than intraday
price and volume data, which might introduce noise and limit the accuracy of
our estimated bond returns. Bessembinder et al.'s (2008) trade-weighted price
methodology could have enhanced precision if implemented with
comprehensive intraday data. Another limitation is that we employed rolling
regressions to estimate time-varying factor loadings. A multivariate GARCH-
BEKK specification could have offered more precise modeling of time-varying
covariances and dynamic interactions. Another limitation is that we use standard
test statistics in our regressions, which could affect the robustness of our model’s
significance.

Our study attempts to serve as an inspiration and catalyst for future research into
the evolving role of carbon risk in financial markets. Future research can build
further upon our study and address its current limitations. For instance,
orthogonalized CEI measures could also improve estimates by isolating pure
carbon risk from other confounding factors. Moreover, using intraday bond price
and volume data could improve the accuracy of bond return calculations and
further validate findings. Better computation of the systematic risk factors would
also be an improvement over our current study. Most importantly, it would be
valuable if future researchers would study the interplay between market shocks,
and industry- and country-specific factors over different dimensions. Our results
suggest that carbon risk pricing is highly dynamic, exacerbated during market
shocks, and is priced differently over the long run and in periods of relative

                                                                               29
stability. For instance, in stable periods, industry-specific factors play a more
important role. Given the number of dynamics at play here, we need more
nuanced and strong empirical studies examining how these various factors
interact and develop over time to better understand when and how carbon risk
becomes a dominant factor in bond pricing. Such studies would help offer a
clearer framework for incorporating carbon risk into investment strategies and
policy making.

                                                                               30
References

Aussenegg, Wolfgang., Goetz, Lukas., and Jelic, Ranko, 2012, Common factors in
the performance of European corporate bonds – evidence before and after the
financial crisis, European Financial Management 21, 265–308.

Bai, Jennie., Bali, Turan G., and Wen, Quan, 2019, Common risk factors in the
cross-section of corporate bond returns, Journal of Financial Economics 131, 619–
642.

Bansal, Ravi., Wu, Di., and Yaron, Amir, 2021, Socially responsible investing in
good and bad times, Review of Financial Studies 35, 2067–2099.

Bessembinder, Hendrik., Kahle, Kathleen M., Maxwell, William F., and Xu,
Danielle, 2008, Measuring abnormal bond performance, Review of Financial
Studies 22, 4219–4258.

Bolton, Patrick., and Kacperczyk, Marcin, 2021, Do investors care about carbon
risk?, Journal of Financial Economics 142, 517-549.

Burke, Marshall B., Hsiang, Solomon M., and Miguel, Edward, 2015, Global non-
linear effect of temperature on economic production, Nature 527, 235–239.

Delis, Manthos D., de Greiff, Kathrin., Iosfidi, Maria., and Ongena, Steven, 2024,
Being stranded with fossil fuel reserves? Climate policy risk and the pricing of
bank loans, Financial Markets, Institutions & Instruments 33, 239-265.

De Vette, Nander., and Mosk, Benjamin, 2022, Euro area spread divergence, risk
premia and financial stability, Financial Stability Review, European Central
Bank.

Díaz, Antonio., and Navarro, Eliseo, 2002, Yield spread and term to maturity:
Default vs liquidity, European Financial Management 8, 449-477.

Dietz, Simon., Bowen, Alex., Dixon, Charlie., and Gradwell, Phillip, 2016, Climate
value at risk of global financial assets, Nature Climate Change 6, 676–679.

Duan, Tinghua., Li Frank Weikai., and Wen, Quan, 2021, Is carbon risk priced in
the cross-section of corporate bond returns?, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 39, 1-35.

                                                                               31
Engle, Robert., Giglio, Stefano., Kelly, Bryan., Lee, Heebum., and Stroebel,
Johannes, 2020, Hedging climate change news, Review of Financial Studies 33,
1184–1216.

Frühwirth, Manfred., Schneider, Paul., and Sögner, Leopold, 2010, The risk
microstructure of corporate bonds: A case study from the German corporate
bond market, European Financial Management 16, 658-685.

Gennaioli, Nicola., and Shleifer, Andrei, 2010, What comes to mind, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 125, 1399–1433.

Goldstein, Itay., Jiang, Hao., and Ng, David T, 2017, Investor flows and fragility
in corporate bond funds, Journal of Financial Economics 126, 592–613.

Görgen, Maximilian, Jacob, Andrea, Nerlinger, Martin, Riordan, Ryan, Rohleder,
Martin, and Wilkens, Marco, 2019, Carbon risk, working paper, SSRN.

Hoepner, Andreas G F., Oikonomou, Ioannis., Sautner, Zacharias., Starks, Laura
T., and Zhou, Xiao Y, 2024, ESG shareholder engagement and downside risk,
Review of Finance 28, 483–510.

Hong, Harrison., Li, Frank Weikai., and Xu, Jiangmin., 2019, Climate risks and
market efficiency, Journal of Econometrics 208, 265–281.

Hong, Harrison., and Sraer, David, 2013, Quiet bubbles, Journal of Financial
Economics 110, 596-606.

Houweling, Patrick., Mentink, Albert., and Vorst, Ton, 2005, Comparing possible
proxies of corporate bond liquidity, Journal of Banking & Finance 29, 1331–1358.

Huynh, Thanh D., and Xia, Ying, 2020, Climate change news risk and corporate
bond returns." Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 56, 1-49.

Ilhan, Emirhan., Sautner, Zacharias., and Vilkov, Grigory, 2018, Carbon tail risk,
The Review of Financial Studies 34, 777-799.

Krueger, Philipp., Sautner, Zacharias., and Starks, Laura T, 2020, The importance
of climate risks for institutional investors, Review of Financial Studies 33, 1067–
1111.

                                                                               32
Lesk, Corey., Rowhani, Pedram., and Ramankutty, Navin, 2016, Influence of
extreme weather disasters on global crop production, Nature 529, 84–87.

Merton, Robert C, 1987, A simple model of capital market equilibrium with
incomplete information, Journal of Finance 42, 483–510.

Pástor, Ľuboš., Stambaugh, Robert F., and Taylor, Lucian A, 2022, Dissecting
green returns, Journal of Financial Economics 146, 403–424.

Petersen, Mitchell A, 2007, Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets:
Comparing approaches, The Review of Financial Studies 22, 435-480.

Pieterse-Bloem, Mary., Qian, Zhaowen., Verschoor, Willem., and Zwinkels,
Remco, 2016, Time-varying importance of country and industry factors in
European corporate bonds, Journal of Empirical Finance 38, 429-448.

Stern, Nicholas, 2007, The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review,
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK).

                                                                               33
   Appendix

     Table A1: VARIABLE DEFINITIONS
       The following table presents a summary of the definitions and data sources of
       the variables used in our main regressions.

Variables Description Data Sources

Excess Return It is the future excess return on bond in year t +1. Risk free rate   Bloomberg, ECB Data Portal,
                    to calculate the excess return of the bond is 1-month EURIBOR.   Eurostat
                    The monthly bond return is estimated by calculating the dirty
                     price of the bond by first adding accrued interest to the end-of-
                    month clean price, then dividing it by previous months dirty
                     price and subtracting one at the end.

Bond Market Beta  Estimated from the monthly rolling regressions of individual    Bloomberg, Eurostat, ECB
(Beta_BMKT)      bond excess returns on the excess bond market return.           Data Portal

Default Beta        Estimated through a rolling-regression of excess bond returns    Bloomberg
(Beta_DEFAULT)   on the default spread over a 24/36-month window.

Term Beta         Estimated by regressing excess bond returns on term spread     Bloomberg
(Beta_TERM)      over a 24/36-month window.

Macroeconomic    Estimated by regressing excess bond returns on changes in       EPU indexes
Uncertainty Beta    Global Economic Uncertainty index over a 24/36-month
(Beta_UNC)       window.

Illiquidity beta      Estimated by regressing excess bond returns on the over spread  ECB Data Portal
(Beta_ILLIQ)       between 1- month EURIBOR and 1- month EONIA rate over a
                  24/36-month window.

Lagged_Return It is the past annual excess return on the bond in year t -1. Bloomberg

VAR The second lowest monthly return observation over a 24/36-     Bloomberg
                  month rolling window multiplied it by −1

rating_score Bond rating converted into numerical scores (1-AAA to 22-D) Moody’s

Maturity Time remaining until bond maturity, measured in years Bloomberg

Log_amt_outstan-  Natural log of amount outstanding of the bond Bloomberg
ding

LN_CEI Log transformation of firm’s carbon emissions intensity metric   MSCI & Bloomberg
                     constructed by dividing carbon emissions of the firm by its
                     sales (metric tons/million Euro)

                                                                                      34
Table A2: THE MIXED EFFECT MODEL
This table reports the average and slope coefficients from panel regressions of
future corporate bond excess returns on the logarithm of carbon emissions
intensity (CEI) with all control variables under different combinations of mixed
effects. The dependent variable is the corporate bond excess returns (EXCESS
RETURNS) in the year t +1. The key independent variable LN_CEI is based on
the firm-level carbon emissions intensity in the previous year t. Scaled betas
estimated from 24 month rolling regressions windows are used. All other
variables are defined in the Appendix, Table A1. Column (1) represents industry
plus dates, column (2) represents country plus dates, and column (3) presents the
results for country plus industry mixed effects. Standard t-statistics are reported
in the parenthesis. ∗, ∗∗, and∗∗∗ indicate the significance at a 10%, 5% and 1%
level, respectively.

                                                                              35
Table A3: VARIANCE DEMOPOSITION OF THE INDUSTRY PLUS DATES
MIXED EFFECTS MODEL
This table presents the variance components derived from the mixed effects
model with industry plus dates mixed effects. It shows the proportion of total
variance attributable to industry-level effects, time-level (Dates) effects, and
residual variation. The results highlight that bond returns exhibit greater
variability over time compared to differences across industries, emphasizing the
dominant role of time-related factors such as regulatory changes or
macroeconomic events in driving bond returns.

                                                                              36