The Impact of Going Public on the
Firm Scale and Commercialisation Strategy

Timothy Tideman
Eldór Hennermark

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2024
The Impact of Going Public on the Firm Scale and Commercialisation Strategy

Abstract
We examine the impact of Initial Public Offerings (IPOs) on firm scale and
commercialization strategy on Swedish firms that went public between 2001 and 2020. We
construct a matched control group of private firms and employ a difference-in-difference
methodology to analyze how changes in total assets, net sales, employees, sales per
employee, profitability, workplaces, subsidiaries, and geographical presence differ between
IPO firms and their matched private counterparts. We find that IPOs drive significant growth
in total assets, net sales, employees, and workplaces, and that firms expand into new cities
and countries. However, we observe no significant improvements in profitability,
productivity, or the number of subsidiaries post-IPO. Our results highlight the role of IPOs in
shifting towards a strategy of increased commercialization and international operational
expansion.

Keywords
IPO, Scale, Commercialization, Geographical Expansion

Authors
Timothy Tideman (25624)
Eldór Hennermark (25704)

Supervisor
Mustafa Bulut

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Timothy Tideman and Eldór Hennermark, 2024

*We are very grateful to our supervisor, Mustafa Bulut, for his continuous support during this period. This paper
has benefited greatly from his guidance.

                                     1
   1. Introduction

       Among equity financing options, Initial Public Offerings (IPOs) stand out as a
particularly significant milestone for firms. They represent a notable step, providing firms
with access to public equity and signaling their readiness to operate on a larger, more
competitive stage. The scale and direction of a firm are crucial for its long-term success, but
transitioning to public ownership is complex. On the one hand, IPOs provide the resources to
grow and commercialize on a larger scale. On the other hand, public firms face new
challenges, like shareholder pressure for quick returns, strict transparency rules, and
heightened market expectations; factors that might significantly alter a firm's behavior and
strategy. This thesis dives into this question, specifically looking at how going public affects
a firm’s scale and commercialization strategy. Do firms use the new public status to
commercialize and try to scale, and if so, how is this scaling done? Is it done locally or
internationally, and is it done through subsidiaries or though the mother company? And what
effect does it have on the firm's profitability?
       We attempt to answer these questions by examining how key indicators, like the size
of a firm’s balance sheet, sales, labor force, profitability, and expansion through workplaces
and subsidiaries, change after an IPO. Specifically, we measure the development of their total
assets, net sales, employees, net sales per employee, return on assets, workplaces and
subsidiaries. To capture the effect of an IPO on these variables, we analyze data from
companies that have gone public in Sweden since 2001 and compare their performance to a
matched control group of firms that remain private. Using a difference-in-difference
methodology, we can measure how IPOs affect both groups’ variables of interest and identify
any potential differences between the two.
       Furthermore, to better understand the nature of this scaling, we use AI to analyze
annual reports of companies that went public in order to identify the number of countries and
cities in which they operate during the years subsequent to the IPO. This approach provides
valuable insights into their scaling strategy, helping us determine whether their growth is
primarily local or international. By capturing their geographical development, we can paint a
clearer picture of how firms use their public status to expand their market presence.
       A lot of research has already explored why firms go public and what happens
afterward. Pagano, Panetta, and Zingales (1998) show that companies primarily go public to
improve access to capital, increase liquidity, and enhance visibility. These benefits facilitate
opportunities for growth and scaling operations, as firms can leverage greater funding access

                                     2
and reputational advantages to expand their activities. Our thesis builds on this foundational
work by examining the specific ways firms in Sweden use their new public profile to grow,
particularly through operational and geographical expansion. While Pagano et al. provide
broad insights into IPO motivations, we focus on the tangible outcomes in terms of the
variables mentioned above.
       Celikyurt, Sevilir, and Shivdasani (2010) show that IPOs often fund acquisitions,
helping firms grow strategically, especially into new markets. Similarly, Bulut (2024) looks
at post-IPO restructuring, finding that IPOs lead firms to pursue divestitures and alliances.
Our research complements this by looking at scaling and geographical expansion beyond
acquisitions, analyzing if firms increase their scale, and how this scale is distributed through
new workplaces, cities, and countries. This broader view helps us understand how IPOs drive
expansion not just through M&A but also through organic growth and operational scaling.
       Our study mainly connects to the broader research on how IPOs affect firm scale and
commercialisation strategy. Baghai and Silva (2019) show that IPOs significantly impact a
firm's workforce by attracting and retaining more skilled and professional employees, while
Kenney, Patton, and Ritter (2012) find that IPOs often lead to growth in employment and
revenue as firms use public capital to scale their operations. Our thesis builds on these ideas
by exploring how firms use their new capital to grow their operations and expand
geographically. By looking at changes in total assets and net sales after an IPO in relation to
their operational expansion, we provide a clearer picture of the nature and strategy of the
growth.
       Bernstein et al. (2015) explore how IPOs influence firms' innovation strategies and
find that public firms often shift their focus. After going public, these firms tend to reduce
reliance on internal R&D, experience a decline in the quality of internally generated
innovation, and increasingly seek external talent and resources. Larrain et al. (2023) find that
IPOs facilitate firm expansion by increasing profitability, net sales per employee, and the
number of subsidiaries and countries in which firms operate. While their work emphasizes
broad geographical reach, we go deeper by also analyzing the number of workplaces, cities,
and countries where firms operate. This approach gives a more detailed view of how firms
grow and scale strategically after going public, contributing new insights to the literature on
geographical expansion.
       By including countries, cities, and workplaces, we also build on Cornaggia et al.'s
(2021) findings that IPOs enable firms to expand geographically, largely by increasing the
share of non-local mergers and acquisitions (M&As). This expansion also manifests in

                                     3
broader measures of spatial growth, such as the establishment of new locations, highlighting
the role of IPOs in alleviating information frictions that constrain private firms. Our study
takes a broader perspective by examining the physical presence of firms across different
locations. This allows us to capture aspects of geographical expansion that go beyond M&A
activity, such as organic growth through new operational sites. By focusing on workplaces,
cities, and countries, we complement Cornaggia’s findings and provide a more
comprehensive view of how IPOs shape a firm’s market presence and strategic growth.
        Our findings confirm that IPOs significantly impact firm scale, leading to increases in
total assets, net sales, and number of employees as firms use raised capital to expand
operations, enter new markets, and boost commercialization efforts. This supports earlier
studies like Pagano et al. (1998), who highlight IPOs as a mechanism to rebalance firm
financing and increase shareholder liquidity, which can indirectly facilitate growth.. However,
the impact on productivity and profitability is less clear. The immediate post-IPO period
shows no significant gains in net sales per employee. Similarly, profitability remains
unchanged, aligning with Mikkelson et al. (1997), who attribute post-IPO profitability
challenges to a combination of agency costs arising from reduced managerial ownership and
the inefficiencies associated with rapid scaling. Our findings contribute to this discussion by
showing how Swedish firms balance the benefits of increased scale with the operational
challenges of going public.
       We find evidence for IPOs playing a major role in helping firms grow operationally.
Our analysis shows a clear increase in the number of workplaces, enabling firms to expand
their market presence and capture new customers. This builds on Cornaggia et al. (2021),
who find that IPOs help firms enter new markets by reducing information frictions and
providing access to networks and transparency. On the other hand, the effect of IPOs on
creating new subsidiaries is less conclusive, possibly due to our small sample size and
different methodology.
       Furthermore, our study finds that an IPO has significant effects on the number of
cities and countries a firm is active in. Firms significantly increase their presence in new
locations, showing how IPOs facilitate strategic market entry. Building on Larrain et al.
(2023), who highlight the role of going public in enabling firms to expand their scale and
geographic presence, our findings delve deeper into how this expansion specifically unfolds
across cities, workplaces, and countries. Overall, our thesis sheds light on how IPOs
transform a company’s commercialization strategy, showing how going public influences the

                                     4
way firms scale and grow, providing new insights into where this growth occurs, locally
through workplaces and cities, and internationally across countries.

  2. Data and Variables

       To measure the effect that an IPO has on firm scale and commercialization strategy,
we compare accounting data for firms that go public (treatment group) with a matched set of
control firms (control group) over a range of years relative to the IPO (the treatment).
Specifically, we analyse accounting data for these firms from three years before to three years
after their respective IPO. The years [t-3, t-2, t-1, t, t+1, t+2, t+3] indicate years relative to the
IPO year, where [t-3] refers to three years before the IPO, [t] denotes the IPO year itself, and
[t+3] refers to three years after the IPO. [t-3, t-1] represent the pre-IPO period, while [t, t+3]
represent the post-IPO period.
       To facilitate this comparison, we construct a dataset using two main data sources.
First, we gather information on all IPOs in Sweden between 1992 and 2021 from SDC
Platinum, a financial data provider. Second, we obtain accounting data on all Swedish firms
from Serrano, a database housed at the Swedish House of Finance (SHOF). We also collect
data on the Swedish consumer price index (CPI) from Statistics Sweden (SCB) to convert
nominal accounting values to real terms. A combination of our IPO data and our accounting
data enables us to observe potential deviations in the evolution of firm scale and
commercialization strategy between our treatment and control group. Below, we explain in
detail how we construct the combined dataset.

       2.1. IPO Data
       From SDC Platinum, we extract data that contains information on all IPO filings
completed in Sweden between 1992 and 2021. Our analysis uses the following variables:
IPO-id (a unique code identifying the specific IPO), a dummy variable indicating whether the
filing eventually led to a successful IPO or whether it was withdrawn, the name of the IPO
firm, the date the IPO is finalised, the primary industry classification of the IPO firm, and a
dummy variable indicating whether the IPO was a result of a spinoff. Using the date that the
IPO is finalised, we create a variable indicating the year of the IPO.
       We drop all firms that IPO before 2001 and all firms that IPO after 2020. The reason
for this is that the Serrano Database only contains data for the years 1998-2023 and we
require the firms in our sample to have available accounting data for all years in the pre-IPO

                                     5
period [t-3, t-1] and all years in the post-IPO period [t, t+3]. In line with established IPO
literature, we also exclude spin-offs and financial firms from our analysis. Following
established IPO literature, we exclude both financial firms and spin-offs from our study.
Financial firms are typically excluded because their unique regulatory requirements and
capital structures differ significantly from those of industrial firms, potentially distorting
comparisons. Similarly, spin-offs are often excluded due to the restructuring processes
involved, such as asset transfers and carve-outs, which make them fundamentally different
from traditional IPOs and could bias the results. By adopting this approach, we ensure
consistency with established research practices and enhance the comparability of our findings
with the broader literature.

       2.2. Accounting Data
       We collect accounting data from the Serrano Database, which provides
comprehensive financial accounting data for all Swedish registered companies since 1998.
This database, housed at the Swedish House of Finance (SHOF), includes financial statement
data from the Swedish Companies Registration Office (Bolagsverket). It also integrates
general company data from Statistics Sweden (SCB), subsidiary information, and group data
from the Bisnodes group register.
       From Serrano, we extract the variables that display the firm’s organisation number
(corporate ID), the entity's legal form, the calendar year for the observation, the year the firm
was founded, the primary converted SNI07 code, and a dummy variable indicating whether
the business was active during the calendar year or not. Additionally, we extract the
accounting data items relevant for our analysis: total assets, net sales, return on assets,
employees, and workplaces. We create a variable for net sales per employee by dividing net
sales (after being converted to real values) with employees. From Serrano KNC, a specialised
sub-file of the Serrano Database focused on corporate group structures, we extract data on the
number of subsidiaries each company owns.

       2.3. Merging Data and Variable Creation
       We construct a combined dataset by merging our data on IPO filings with accounting
data from the Serrano Database. Our IPO datafile and the Serrano datafile have a common
variable displaying the business names, however, the names do not constitute a perfect match
for several reasons: multiple businesses may share the same name, older firms may have
undergone name changes, there may be variations in spelling, and other dissimilarities may

                                     6
exist. Due to these restrictions, we merge based on organisation number (corporate ID),
which uniquely identifies each legal entity and remains unchanged over time. However, our
IPO data collected from SDC Platinum does not have organisation numbers. Hence, we
manually find organisation numbers for our IPO firms using The Swedish Tax Agency’s
business registry. A limitation of our strategy that should be considered is that this manual
process is subject to potential human error. Using organisation number as the common
variable for the datasets, we merge each treatment firm with its accounting data for the period
[t-3, t+3].
       Our combined dataset contains the following seven variables that this study uses as
measures of firm scale and commercialisation strategy: total assets; measuring the size of the
firm’s balance sheet, net sales; measuring revenues, the number of employees; measuring the
size of the labour force, net sales per employee; measuring labour productivity, return on
assets; measuring profitability, the number of workplaces and the number of subsidiaries;
measuring market expansion. We extend our analysis in Section 3.4., where we introduce two
additional variables; number of countries and number of cities, to investigate geographical
expansion further.
       The seven main variables are processed to maximise comparability. Our accounting
data ranges over twenty five years and in accordance with the concept of time value of
money, nominal balance sheet and income statement items in the past have a higher value in
real terms today. To ensure a fair comparison, we convert variables whose values are affected
by time (total assets and net sales) from nominal to real using the annual average consumer
price index in absolute terms. With the data collected from Statistics Sweden (SCB), we
index the CPI values using 2022 as the base year. Further, we winsorize all variables at 1%,
capping values below the 1st percentile to the 1st percentile value and values above the 99th
percentile to the 99th percentile value, with the purpose of limiting extreme values in our
dataset. Finally, we take the natural logarithm of variables expressed in absolute terms: total
real assets, real net sales, employees, workplaces, and subsidiaries. This improves
interpretability since our sample firms differ in scale, and makes the distribution of variables
that are either positively or negatively skewed closer to normal. Additionally, some of our
variables may exhibit a variance that increases with their magnitude and by taking the natural
logarithm of these variables, the variance often becomes more stable across observations,
reducing heteroscedasticity.

                                     7
  3. Empirical Strategy

       In a perfect world, we would compare each treatment firm to other firms that are
identical in every aspect, except for the fact that the control firm never goes public. However,
in the absence of such identical firms, we construct a group of control firms for each
treatment firm using a matching process. The goal is to find comparable firms that are as
similar as possible to the treatment firm based on certain shared characteristics. The matching
is based on firm characteristics during the pre-IPO period [t-3, t-1], to maximise parallel
trends prior to the treatment. We then study the scale and commercialisation strategy of our
treatment firm in comparison to its control firms, during the seven years surrounding the
treatment, i.e. three years prior to the IPO, the IPO year itself, and three years after the IPO.
This comparison is done using a difference-in-difference regression. Below, we explain the
process of matching each IPO firm with a control group.

      3.1. Constructing Matched Control Group
       Control groups are constructed with the goal of being as similar to the treatment firm
as possible, based on certain characteristics. Similar to Boucly, Sraer, and Thesmar (2011),
we identify an appropriate control group for each treatment firm in our sample through a
matching procedure. We identify a set of active limited liability firms that operate in the same
industry and have a similar return on assets (ROA) three years prior to the IPO [t-3], and have
a similar size of total assets each year during the pre-IPO period [t-3, t-1].
       First, using the variable displaying entities’ legal form in the Serrano Database, we
exclude all observations belonging to firms that are not limited liability firms. We do this to
maximize structural, financial, and ownership similarities (for example, excluding
state-owned businesses). Second, using the dummy variable indicating whether the entity was
active during the calendar year, we exclude all observations belonging to firms that are
inactive at any point during the time period studied.
       After these exclusions, we match each treatment firm with up to 5 control firms that:
(a) belong to the same industry (using the first two digits of the primary converted SNI07
code) in the year [t-3]; (b) have a return on assets (ROA) within a 50% bracket of the
treatment firm in the year [t-3]; and (c) have total assets within a 50% bracket of the IPO firm
for each year during the pre-IPO period [t-3, t-1].
       To maximise the accuracy of our analysis, we verify that the control firms themselves
are not public at any point during the time period studied. We therefore manually examine

                                     8
each control firm using The Swedish Tax Agency’s registry, which records whether a firm
(identified based on organisation number) is public. If a control firm is public at any point
during the time frame, we exclude it.
       Each treatment firm constitutes a perfect match with its own observations in the
Serrano Database. These observations are excluded. If no other observations within the set of
potential control firms fulfill criterias (a), (b) and (c), we exclude the treatment firm from the
sample. If at least one control firm could be identified, the treatment firm remains in the
sample.
        If more than five potential control firms fulfil criteria (a), (b), and (c), we measure the
Euclidean distance between the treatment firm and the potential control firms. The five
control firms with the lowest Euclidean distance based on total assets and ROA in [t-3] are
chosen to constitute the control group. Our final sample consists of 90 treatment firms and
329 control firms, as shown in Table 3 Panel A.
       Unlike Boucly, Sraer, and Thesmar (2011), who match LBO targets with control firms
based on variables at a single point in time [t-1], our study uses total assets during the entire
pre-IPO period [t-3, t-1] as a matching variable. This approach ensures that control firms are
not only similar in one year, but that they also follow similar trends to the IPO firms during
the pre-IPO period.
       After we match each treatment firm with a control group, we merge accounting data
for the entire period [t-3, t+3] from Serrano for all firms (treatment and control) using
organisation numbers. This leaves our sample with 2854 observations.

      3.2. Comparison of Treatment and Control Groups
       In Table 1, we compare how well our sample represents the overall economy in terms
of industry distribution. The classification is based on two-digit industrial classification SNI
2007, taken at the last observation for each firm, i.e. three years after the IPO [t+3]. The table
also reports the distribution of firms across industries for the entire universe of Swedish
enterprises. The data is collected from Statistics Sweden (SCB), and represents the average
number of firms in each industry during the period 2008 to 2023. Earlier data could not be
collected due to a change in SNI standards in 2007, preventing comparability. The results
show a fairly good representation, with the two largest categories in our sample,
“Professional, scientific and technical activities” and “Wholesale and retail trade; repair of
motor vehicles”, making up the second and third largest industries in the economy overall,
respectively. Agriculture, forestry, and fishing" is Sweden's largest industry but is absent from

                                     9
our sample. Generally, the dissimilarity between our sample and the entire universe of
Swedish enterprises is likely due to differences in how industries grow and attract capital,
affecting their tendency to go public.
       In Figure 1, we illustrate the total number of firms that successfully undergo an IPO in
Sweden between 2001 and 2020 per year and the number of firms that successfully undergo
an IPO in our sample, per year. In other words, we compare the total number of IPO firms
with the number of IPO firms that remain in our sample after observations have been
excluded for one reason or another. Both series display unique firms only, i.e. if a firm has
been listed on multiple exchanges, only the earliest observation is kept.
       In Table 2, we present the summary statistics for our main variables. 22.1% of our
2854 observations belong to treatment firms while the remaining 77.9% belong to control
firms. The logarithmic averages of total real assets and employees are close to the variables’
median values, suggesting symmetric distributions. Real net sales per employee has a large
standard deviation and the variable compasses a large range, suggesting great variability. The
logarithmic averages of workplaces and subsidiaries are greater than the variables’ medians
(0), suggesting these variables have positively skewed distributions. The standard deviation
of return on assets is large and the median is greater than the mean, suggesting a left-skewed
distribution and great variability in return on assets among our sample firms.
       We complement our summary statistics by comparing the means of our variables for
treatment firms and control firms at different stages relative to the IPO. The results are
displayed in Table 3. We present the differences in means in the rightmost column, whose
statistical significance are tested at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels using the student’s t-test.
       Table 3 Panel A compares the means of our variables three years prior to the IPO
[t-3]. Because our control group is constructed largely using characteristics in year [t-3], the
significance of differences in means in Panel A indicate the quality of our matching strategy.
Neither total real assets, real net sales, employees, real net sales per employee, or workplaces
have statistically significant differences in means at [t-3], suggesting our matching strategy
was successful in regards to these variables. Treatment firms have a significantly greater
logarithmic mean of subsidiaries however. This may be because subsidiaries is not used as a
matching variable, and the correlation with our matching variables (total assets and ROA)
may be low. Although both treatment firms and control firms are unprofitable on average in
year [t-3], treatment firms have a notably lower return on assets (-14.8% versus -7.1%). The
difference in means (-7.7%) is statistically significant at the 10% level despite ROA being
one of the matching variables in year [t-3], suggesting poorer quality of our matching

                                     10
strategy. The significant difference can be explained by a relatively small sample size and
matching imperfection. The issue might have been avoided would we have used a more
conservative bracket when matching, like 30%. Alternatively, we could have constructed the
control group by matching ROA over several years (like was done with total assets).
However, it was deemed reasonable to avoid these approached to preserve power, because
using more conservative matching criteria results in a large number of treatment firms not
finding suitable control firms.
       Table 3 Panel B presents the means of our variables for each group and the difference
in means for the entire pre-IPO period [t-3, t-1]. Table 3 Panel C presents the means of our
variables for each group and the difference in means for the entire post-IPO period, [t, t+3].
Comparing Panel B and Panel C provides a preliminary indication of the results we strive to
achieve in this study. Panel B shows that treatment firms are slightly larger than control firms
scale-wise in terms of total real assets, real net sales, number of employees, and number of
workplaces throughout the pre-IPO period. However, the differences are not statistically
significant. During the post-IPO period on the other hand, the difference in means for these
variables are significant at the 1% level, suggesting a clear treatment effect.
       Both groups experience an increase in real net sales per employee after the treatment
takes place. Although the variable transitions from being higher for control firms pre-IPO
(negative difference in means in Panel B) to being higher for treatment firms post-IPO
(positive difference in means in Panel C), the difference in means is statistically insignificant
in both periods. The insignificance likely arises because the proportional increases in the two
variables used to construct the ratio (real net sales and number of employees) offset each
other. Additionally, the covariance between these variables may reduce the variability in real
net sales per employee, reducing its statistical significance despite significant increases in the
individual variables.
        The difference in the average number of subsidiaries is statistically significant at the
1% level both pre-IPO and post-IPO. Although treatment firms experience a minor
improvement in their return on assets on average, the negative difference in means is
amplified (-10.9% pre-IPO versus -14.8% post-IPO). Like in the case for subsidiaries, the
difference in means for return on assets is statistically significant at the 1% level both
pre-IPO and post-IPO, suggesting that the observed differences may reflect inherent
structural or strategic differences between treatment and control firms rather than changes
specifically driven by the IPO itself.

                                      11
       It's important to note that our methodology does not entirely solve the issue of
endogeneity. Inherent differences between firms in our treatment group and our control group
exist, regardless of the similarity in accounting characteristics during the matching years. As
can be seen in Table 3 Panel B, significant differences between our treatment firms and our
control firms start appearing in some variables already before the treatment takes place. This
is partially a result of the fact that firms that have the intention of going public start preparing
for this event before the actual IPO. This means that the full effects captured in our
regressions may, in part, be influenced by firm-specific characteristics rather than solely by
the IPO. Nonetheless, the larger and more statistically significant differences in means for
most variables displayed in Table 3 Panel C, suggest that going public does indeed have
meaningful effects on firms’ scale and commercialisation strategy to varying degrees.

       3.3. Difference-in-Difference Regression
       To estimate the differences in firm scale and commercialization strategy between our
control group and treatment group, we estimate the following difference-in-differences
regression:
              𝑌  = α  + β  × 𝐼𝑃𝑂 × 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡 + ϕ + μ + δ + ϵ  (Table 4)
                      𝑖𝑡      1      1         𝑖           𝑡      𝑖      τ      𝑡      𝑖𝑡
        Here, 𝑌 is the outcome variable, 𝑖 indexes IPO firms, 𝑡 indexes calendar years, and τ
indexes the year relative to the IPO year. 𝐼𝑃𝑂  is a dummy variable equal to one if the firm
                                                                                                                                                                       𝑖
belongs to the treatment group and zero if it belongs to the control group. 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡 is a dummy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        𝑡
variable equal to one in the post-IPO period [t, t+3] and zero in the pre-IPO period [t-3, t-1].
The coefficient of interest, β , measures the effect of going public on the outcome variable.
                             1
      We control for firm-specific characteristics using firm fixed effects, denoted by ϕ . To
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                𝑖
capture specific characteristics of a treatment firm's IPO stage, we include relative year fixed
effects, denoted by μ . Furthermore, we control for calendar year fixed effects, δ , to account
                             τ 𝑡
for time-specific shocks and macroeconomic trends. Robust standard errors are clustered at
the firm level, and the residual error term is denoted by ϵ . Table 4 Panel A shows the output
                                                                                                                                                                                        𝑖𝑡
of this regression without any control variables, and Table 4 Panel B shows the output of this
regression controlling for firm age, assets and ROA at [t-3].
       We also estimate the following regression:
              𝑌  = α  + β  × 𝐼𝑃𝑂 × 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡 + κ  + μ + δ + ϵ  (Table 5)
                     𝑖𝑡      1      1         𝑖          𝑡      𝐶      τ      𝑡     𝑐𝑡

                                     12
      Here, we replace firm fixed effects ϕ with cohort fixed effects κ , which account for
                                                                          𝑖 𝐶
shared characteristics between the issuing firm (treatment firm) and its matched control firms
(i.e. an issuer group). In this specification, robust standard errors are clustered at the cohort
level, and the residual error term is denoted by ϵ  . Table 5 Panel A shows the output of this
                                                                                                                                    𝑐𝑡
regression without any control variables, and Table 5 Panel B shows the output of this
regression controlling for firm age, assets and ROA at [t-3].
        The inclusion of firm fixed effects in the first regression and cohort fixed effects in
the second regression removes time-invariant differences between treatment and control firms
or cohorts, respectively. However, the validity of our results relies on the parallel trends
assumption. Specifically, we assume that treatment firms (those undergoing an IPO) and
control firms (those remaining private) would have experienced similar trends in scale and
commercialization strategy in the absence of the IPO. To evaluate the validity of this
assumption, we examine the underlying trends in our variables of interest. To formally test
the parallel trends assumption, we estimate the following regression:

                        τ=−2               τ=3
                                             τ                   τ
           𝑌  = γ +  ∑ γ 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒  + ∑ γ 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒  + ϕ + μ + δ
                     𝑖𝑡       0             τ             𝑖𝑡            τ             𝑖𝑡       𝑖      τ      𝑡
                        τ=−3               τ=0
        The dependent variable 𝑌   represents the outcome of interest for firm i in year t,
                                                                                                              𝑖𝑡
measured across the years surrounding the IPO [t-3, t+3]. The formula incorporates indicator

                        τ
variables, 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 , which takes the value one if the observation corresponds to a specific
                                                                𝑖𝑡
year relative to the IPO filing year, and zero otherwise. The year immediately prior to the IPO
[t-1] serves as the base year, and is hence omitted. The coefficients γ  estimate the effect of
                                                                                    τ
going public on the dependent variable for each relative year τ. The regression includes fixed
effects for firms, relative years, and calendar years to account for time-invariant firm
characteristics, trends within relative years, and broader macroeconomic factors. By
specifying this model, we aim to assess whether the treatment and control groups exhibit
parallel trends in the outcomes prior to the IPO. Figure 2B through Figure 8B show the point
estimates ( γ ) and 95% confidence intervals on relative year dummies from this regression.
              τ

       3.4. Geographical Expansion
       Although firms typically outline the territories in which they operate in their annual
reports, the Serrano Database lacks these variables. The reason for this is that no standardised
method of reporting geographies of operations exists and therefore, firms usually deliver this

                                     13
information in floating text. This, in combination with the fact that private firms are not
obliged to publish annual reports, prevents the facilitation of statistically reliable testing of
geographical expansion.
       To get a broad picture of whether going public leads to firms increasing their
territorial scale and thereby entering new geographical segments, we scan the annual reports
of our treatment firms in the post-IPO period using artificial intelligence. Using organisation
numbers, we identify our treatment firms in Retriever, a media monitoring service, from
which we download firms’ annual reports for the year of the IPO and the preceding three
years [t, t+3]. We upload the four annual reports of the post-IPO period [t,t+3] for each firm
into ChatGPT and instruct the AI to scan each document and return the number of cities and
countries in which the firm has operations, per year.
       The definition of “operations” differs from business to business. For example, a
retailer may define the geographical distribution of its operations as the number of locations
in which they have physical stores while the definition for a provider of professional services
may relate to the number of locations in which their clients reside. We therefore ensure
consistency by instructing the AI to only return values that relate to the exact same measure
for each year. For example, if a firm mentions that they manufacture their products in two
countries in their annual report one year, but mentions that they have alliances with
businesses in five countries in their annual report the following year, the AI may not return
these values, as they are not comparable.
       Furthermore, we recognize a pattern of firms stating that they have operations in
“more than X locations”. In such cases, we instruct the AI to return value X, meaning our
values represent the minimum number of locations in which the firm operates. Lastly, we
instruct the AI to return values only if an absolute number of locations is mentioned in the
annual reports, neglecting statements like “our products are sold in all cities in Southern
Sweden” or “we operate in the majority of European countries”. The exact prompt that we
use is provided in this paper’s Appendix. The natural logarithm is taken from our two new
variables, number of countries and number of cities, to improve comparability, after values
are winsorized at 1% to limit outliers.

                                     14
  4. Main Results

       For a visual understanding of the effects of an IPO on our outcome variables, we plot
the means of each variable per relative year, distinguishing between the treatment group and
the control group. The results are visualised in Figure 2A through Figure 8A. Additionally,
Figure 2B through Figure 8B visualises the results from the tests of parallel trends
assumption, as explained in Section 3.3.. Finally, Table 4 shows the main regression outputs
for each of our variables.

       4.1. The Impact of Going Public on the Firm’s Scale and Profitability
       Figure 2A shows that both IPO firms (treatment group) and private firms (control
group) see steady growth in total real assets during the pre-IPO period. However, the
difference between the two groups becomes more noticeable between the end of the pre-IPO
period [t-1], and the beginning of the post-IPO period [t]. This could be a result of our
matching strategy being based on data of total assets during all years [t-3, t-1], naturally
leading to a narrower gap during these years. However, the large increase suggests that there
could be a significant effect of the IPO on total real assets, as evidenced by the growth during
the transition from the pre-IPO to the post-IPO period. Column 1 of Table 4 Panel A provides
evidence supporting this hypothesis. The regression results show a significantly positive
effect of IPOs on total real assets, with a coefficient of 0.899 at the 1% level. This suggests
that going public enables firms to scale the size of their balance sheets. These findings are
consistent with prior research, such as Bernstein (2015) who highlight that IPOs provide
firms with the capital necessary to expand their asset base and invest in growth opportunities,
particularly in innovation and scaling operations. It’s worth noting that the parallel trends
assumption in Figure 2B isn’t fully met. Specifically, in year [t-3], there’s a small but
statistically significant difference, which suggests the trends between the two groups might
not align perfectly. That said, the difference in [t-3] is quite small and only marginally
significant. More importantly, in the year closer to the IPO, like [t-2], the trends for the two
groups line up better. This makes it more likely that the discrepancy in [t-3] is due to outliers
or broader economic factors related to that year, rather than anything directly related to the
IPO.
       Our study also shows that the increase in firm scale is accompanied by an increase in
real net sales. Figure 3A paints a similar picture as the trend observed in total real assets. The
treatment group experiences an increase in real net sales between the end of the pre-IPO

                                     15
period [t-1], and the beginning of the post-IPO period [t]. This indicates that the treatment has
a clear effect on real net sales. Column 2 of Table 4 Panel A shows a positive (1.210) and
significant effect of IPOs on real net sales at the 1% level, confirming this observation. The
increase in real net sales may be linked to firms using the public status to expand into new
markets, enhance marketing efforts, or scale up production capabilities. For example,
Bernstein et al. (2015) notes that firms often shift their focus toward commercialization after
an IPO, prioritising revenue-generating activities. The parallel trends assumption in Figure
3B holds, indicating well-matched groups with similar trends before the IPO
      Figure 4A indicates that firms scale their labour force in terms of number of
employees too, as evidenced by the clear growth trajectory of the treatment group. Column 3
of Table 4 Panel A reveals a positive coefficient of 0.504 on the firm’s number of employees,
significant at the 1% level. This aligns with prior literature emphasising how IPOs enable
firms to expand their human capital base. Baghai and Silva (2019) for example, demonstrate
that IPOs not only provide financial resources to hire more employees but also help firms
professionalise their workforce by attracting skilled and high-value workers. The expansion
likely reflects a shift towards commercialization, as firms grow their labour force to scale
production, improve service offerings, and enter new markets. What must be pointed out,
however, is that the parallel trends assumption, visualised in Figure 4B, is clearly violated,
suggesting that the number of employees followed different trends in the pre-treatment period
between the treatment and control groups. Because of the violated parallel trends assumption,
we can conclude that any differences observed post-treatment could be driven by the
pre-existing divergence in trends rather than the treatment itself.
       Column 4 of Table 4 Panel A shows a positive (163.5) but statistically insignificant
coefficient for real net sales per employee. This could suggest that while IPO firms expand
sales and hire more employees, the expansion does not necessarily translate into higher
productivity per employee, as both increase proportionately. This aligns with Pagano et al.
(1998), who note that IPOs facilitate scaling through increased resources, though efficiency
gains may not occur immediately. Larrain et al. (2023), however, do find a significant rise in
sales per employee following IPOs. Figure 5A visualises that treatment firms grow their real
net sales per employee at a faster rate than control firms, but our model does not give us a
significant output in the regression, which could be due to our smaller sample or other
unobservable factors. Interestingly, in Figure 5A it looks like treatment firms experience a
fast rate of expansion in [t+2], suggesting it might take a few years for the efficiency to
increase.

                                     16
        We conclude that IPOs drive a clear scaling within total real assets, real net sales, and
number of employees, but productivity in terms of real net sales per employee seems to
require a longer timeline or additional operational adjustments.
       Looking at Figure 6A, profitability follows a similar trend in the pre-IPO period for
both groups. Once the treatment has taken place though, treatment firms’ ROA drops during
years [t, t+2], but then recovers and increases after [t+2]. Interestingly, this aligns with the
pattern of real net sales per employee (Figure 5A), which also spikes after year [t+2]. Column
5 Table 4 Panel A shows a small negative coefficient on the treatment firm's ROA (-0.033).
This coefficient is however not significant. The literature on the effect of IPOs on firms’
profitability has generally been divided. For example, Mikkelson, Partch, and Shah (1997)
find that operating performance declines following an IPO, suggesting potential challenges
associated with the transition to public ownership. However, as recently as 2023, Larrain et
al. (2023) showed that the previously established negative impact of IPOs on profitability
might not hold when accounting for endogeneity in IPO decisions, actually showing an
increase in profitability when accounting for this. Therefore, when analyzing our result, we
must take into consideration that our negative coefficient and insignificance might have to do
with the inherent endogeneity issue with our matching process, rather than the actual causal
effects of an IPO.

                       2
        The high 𝑅  (>0.6) for all variables indicates that our model explains a large portion of
the variability in our outcome variables.
        In conclusion, firms that go public appear to prioritize scaling the size of their balance
sheets and operations immediately after the IPO, using the new public status and possibly
new capital to expand their workforce, total real assets, and increase real net sales. However,
we find no significant evidence that this scale expansion translates into improved profitability
and productivity. Doing so may require an adjustment period to optimize operations, realize
economies of scale, and fully integrate new investments into their business model.
Additionally, the transition to public ownership might introduce short-term challenges, such
as increased scrutiny, regulatory compliance, and the higher costs of maintaining a public
company, which might temporarily harm profitability and disrupt efficiency.

       4.2. The Impact of Going Public on the Firm’s Operational Expansion
       As established in Section 4.1., a clear relationship between going public and
expanding firm scale exists, although this does not necessarily translate into profitability or

                                     17
efficiency gains. What is interesting to study is how the increase in scale translates to actual
operational expansion. Is the increase in workforce and total real assets used to expand into
new markets and geographies, or do firms focus on consolidating their position and growth
within their existing market? Do firms create and acquire subsidiaries for this expansion, or is
it done through the mother company?
       Figure 7A shows how the number of workplaces develops during the time period
studied for treatment firms and control firms. The two groups start off at a similar level,
suggesting a strong matching process, and follow similar trends during the first year. After
[t-2], control firms start experiencing a decreasing number of workplaces while the treatment
group experiences an increasing change. This could signal endogeneity issues, namely that
IPO firms begin to prepare for their listing before it happens. Our parallel trends, however,
are not violated, giving the regression validity. Column 6 of Table 4 Panel A presents a
positive coefficient of 0.096, significant at the 5% level, indicating that IPOs result in a
significant increase in the number of workplaces firms operate. Besides increasing their total
real assets, firms that go public rapidly expand their office and workplace presence in a way
that may capture new market share and customers, which could explain the significant
increase in real net sales that we show in Section 4.1. Our results complement prior findings,
such as those of Cornaggia et al. (2021), who show that IPOs enable firms to expand
geographically by leveraging public capital and reducing information frictions, particularly
through non-local mergers and acquisitions (M&A). The significance of the number of
workplaces in our analysis underscores the role of IPOs in facilitating a broader strategy of
operational expansion. While Cornaggia et al. (2021) demonstrate that IPOs drive geographic
expansion via non-local M&As, our findings complement this by showing that this expansion
is also evident in the increase in the number of workplaces.
       When looking at the number of subsidiaries, we observe a sizable difference between
treatment firms and control firms at the matching year (Figure 8A). This can likely be
explained by our relatively small sample size, as well as subsidiaries not being used as a
matching variable. While the control group shows a stable growth pre-IPO that eventually
stagnates, the treatment group shows an irregular pattern that likely has more to do with the
small sample size than any notable trends. Column 7 of Table 4 Panel A displays a positive
but statistically insignificant coefficient of 0.019 for the number of subsidiaries. While prior
studies, such as Bulut (2024), highlight that IPOs lead to significant restructuring of firm
boundaries—including increased divestitures, acquisitions, and strategic alliances—our
results do not confirm similar trends regarding subsidiaries. It should be noted though, that

                                     18
Bulut uses a notably larger sample size as well as a different empirical strategy, using firms
that withdraw their IPO filings as control firms, rather than constructing a control group by
matching. The insignificance in our paper may thus be a fact of low statistical power or
alternative empirical strategy.
       In regards to geographical expansion, Section 3.4. explains that our empirical strategy
largely differs form the strategy used to analyze the other variables. Still, the results are
notable and are an important contribution to the thesis. We find a significant positive effect at
the 1% level on the number of countries in which an IPO firm operates. Similarly, there is a
significant positive effect at the 1% level on the number of cities where the company is
present (Table 6). This sheds new light on our coefficient for the number of workplaces. With
our geographical expansion test and evidence of significance, we prove that the
organizational expansion through an increase in workplaces implies expanding into new
cities and countries, broadening the geographical presence. We conclude that IPOs not only
drive organizational growth but also facilitate a strategic expansion into new markets,
enhancing the geographical reach and presence of firms.
       Ultimately, IPOs not only help firms scale their balance sheets and workforce but also
play a critical role in driving operational expansion by increasing the number of workplaces
and broadening their geographical reach. The significant growth in workplaces shows how
firms use the resources gained from going public to enter new markets and connect with more
customers. Similarly, the expansion into more cities and countries highlights the strategic
importance of IPOs in enhancing a firm’s presence on a broader scale.

  5. Robustness Testing

Table 5 Panel A and Table 5 Panel B serve as robustness tests for the main empirical results
presented in Tables 4 Panel A and Table 4 Panel B. While the latter control for firm-specific
fixed effects, the former introduce cohort fixed effects based on issuer groups (i.e. each
treatment firm and its respective control firms are grouped). This approach ensures that the
results are not driven by firm-level idiosyncrasies but hold true across broader matched
cohorts. These robustness checks strengthen the credibility of our findings, demonstrating
their consistency across different model specifications. Comparing the regression results
show that all significance levels remain unchanged regardless of whether firm fixed effects or
cohort fixed effects are used, which signals robustness in our findings across different model
specifications.

                                     19
  6. Conclusion

        This thesis investigates the effect of going public on firm scale and commercialization
strategy by comparing Swedish firms that go public with Swedish firms that remain private
using a matching methodology. Our findings show that IPOs lead to a significant increase in
the size of total real assets, real net sales, and the number of employees, supporting the
hypothesis that access to public equity enables firms to grow and expand their scale. The lack
of significant effect on real net sales per employee suggests that firms prioritize workforce
expansion and sales growth over improvements in internal productivity and efficiency after
being listed. We find no significant effect of going public on profitability, as measured by
return on assets, indicating that IPOs may not lead to immediate efficiency gains.
       Furthermore, we find evidence that an IPO drives organizational expansion, as seen in
the significant increase in the number of workplaces a firm operates after going public. This
suggests that firms leverage their new public status and access to capital to strengthen their
market presence and capture new customers, often through operational scaling rather than
mergers or acquisitions. The increase in workplaces is also linked to expansion across new
countries and cities, highlighting IPOs' role in enabling geographical diversification and
strategic market entry. However, we find no evidence of an increase in the number of
subsidiaries, which may indicate that firms prefer to grow organically or through direct
operations rather than creating new corporate entities.
       Building on the findings and limitations of this thesis, there are several promising
areas for future research that could deepen understanding of how IPOs affect firm scale and
commercialization strategy that we encourage other authors to pursue. One interesting
direction would be to explore differences in how firms benefit from going public across
different industries. The advantages of an IPO may not be consistent for all sectors, for
example, high-tech firms may focus more on innovation and commercialization, while firms
in more traditional industries may use public funding to scale operations. Finally, while this
thesis used a matching method to study the effects of IPOs, future research could test
alternative ways to address potential endogeneity. For example, analyzing external events that
make it more or less likely for firms to go public, like changes in regulations or economic
conditions, could provide stronger evidence of the causal effects of IPOs.

                                     20
     References

Bernstein, Shai. (2015). Does Going Public Affect Innovation? The Journal of Finance

Bulut, Mustafa. (2024). Going Public and the Boundaries of the Firm. Working Paper.
Available at SSRN.

Baghai, Ramin P. and Rui C. Silva, The Impact of Going Public on the Firm’s Human
Capital, 2019. Working Paper.

Boucly, Q., Sraer, D., & Thesmar, D. (2011). Growth LBOs. Journal of Financial
Economics

Chemmanur, T. J., & He, J. (2011). IPO Waves, Product Market Competition, and the
Going Public Decision: Theory and Evidence. Journal of Financial Economics

Celikyurt, Ugur, Merih Sevilir, and Anil Shivdasani. (2010). Going Public to Acquire?
The Acquisition Motive in IPOs. Journal of Financial Economics, 96(3)

Cornaggia, Jess, Gustafson, Matthew, Kotter, Jason D., and Pisciotta, Kathleen. (2021).
Does Being Private Constrain Geographic Expansion? Journal of Financial Economics

Kenney, Martin, Patton, David, and Ritter, Jay R. (2012). Post-IPO Employment and
Revenue Growth for U.S. IPOs. Small Business Economics

Larrain, Borja, Gordon M. Phillips, Giorgio Sertsios, and Francisco Urzúa I. (2023).
The Effects of Going Public on Firm Profitability and Strategy. Working Paper.

Mikkelson, Wayne H., M. Megan Partch, and K. Shah. (1997). Ownership and operating
performance of companies that go public. Journal of Financial Economics

Pagano, Marco, Fabio Panetta, and Luigi Zingales. (1998). Why Do Companies Go
Public? An Empirical Analysis. The Journal of Finance

                                     21
     Figures

                    Figure 1: Number of Successful IPOs per Year
The chart compares the number of firms that successfully undergo an IPO in Sweden between 2001 and 2020
per year and the number of firms that successfully undergo an IPO in our sample (i.e. treatment firms) per year.
Both series display unique firms only, i.e. if a firm has been listed on multiple exchanges, only the earliest
observation is kept.

  Figure 2A: Average ln(Total Real Assets)   Figure 2B: Parallel Trends Assumption –
            Around IPO Year                       ln(Total Real Assets)
 This figure shows the evolution of total assets around   This figure shows the results from a test of parallel
 the IPO for firms that go public and for firms that   trends assumption for the effects of going public on
 remain private. The natural logarithm has been taken  ln(Total Real Assets). We estimate the following
 of total assets after values have been adjusted to real   regression, which is explained in Section 3.3.:
 terms with 2022 as the base year and winsorized at              τ=−2              τ=3
                                                                                    τ               τ
 1%. Total assets are averaged separately for   𝑌 = γ +  ∑ γ 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 + ∑ γ 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 + ϕ + μ + δ
                                                                                    𝑖𝑡      0           τ           𝑖𝑡         τ           𝑖𝑡      𝑖     τ     𝑡
                                                                              τ=−3               τ=0
 treatment firms and control firms over the years
 around the IPO.                                       Year [t-1] serves as the base year, hence omitted. The
                                                    figure visualises point estimates (γ τ) and 95%
                                                          confidence intervals for the relative year dummies.

                                     22
  Figure 3A: Average ln(Real Net Sales)    Figure 3B: Parallel Trends Assumption –
           Around IPO Year                        ln(Real Net Sales)
This figure shows the evolution of net sales around   This figure shows the results from a test of parallel
the IPO for firms that go public and for firms that   trends assumption for the effects of going public on
remain private. The natural logarithm has been taken  ln(Real Net Sales). We estimate the following
of net sales after values have been adjusted to real   regression, which is explained in Section 3.3.:
terms with 2022 as the base year and winsorized at              τ=−2              τ=3
                                                                                   τ               τ
1%. Net sales is averaged separately for treatment   𝑌 = γ +  ∑ γ 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 + ∑ γ 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 + ϕ + μ + δ
                                                                                  𝑖𝑡      0           τ           𝑖𝑡         τ           𝑖𝑡      𝑖     τ     𝑡
                                                                             τ=−3               τ=0
firms and control firms over the years around the
IPO.                                                Year [t-1] serves as the base year, hence omitted. The
                                                  figure visualises point estimates (γ ) and 95%
                                                                                                                                               τ
                                                        confidence intervals for the relative year dummies.

   Figure 4A: Average ln(Employees)      Figure 4B: Parallel Trends Assumption –
           Around IPO Year                        ln(Employees)
This figure shows the evolution of the number of   This figure shows the results from a test of parallel
employees around the IPO for firms that go public   trends assumption for the effects of going public on
and for firms that remain private. The natural  ln(Employees). We estimate the following
logarithm has been taken of the number of  regression, which is explained in Section 3.3.:
employees after values have been winsorized at 1%.              τ=−2              τ=3
                                                                                   τ               τ
Number of employees are averaged separately for   𝑌 = γ +  ∑ γ 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 + ∑ γ 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 + ϕ + μ + δ
                                                                                  𝑖𝑡      0           τ           𝑖𝑡         τ           𝑖𝑡      𝑖     τ     𝑡
                                                                             τ=−3               τ=0
treatment firms and control firms over the years
around the IPO.                                       Year [t-1] serves as the base year, hence omitted. The
                                                   figure visualises point estimates (γ τ) and 95%
                                                        confidence intervals for the relative year dummies.

                                    23
  Figure 5A: Average Real Net Sales per    Figure 5B: Parallel Trends Assumption –
      Employee Around IPO Year              Real Net Sales per Employee
This figure shows the evolution of net sales per  This figure shows the results from a test of parallel
employee around the IPO for firms that go public   trends assumption for the effects of going public on
and for firms that remain private. Net sales have been  Real Net Sales per Employee. We estimate the
adjusted to real terms with 2022 as the base year and   following regression, which is explained in Section
divided by the number of employees. Values have   3.3.:
been winsorized at 1%. Real net sales per employee            τ=−2             τ=3
                                                                                   τ               τ
is averaged separately for treatment firms and control   𝑌 = γ +  ∑ γ 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 + ∑ γ 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 + ϕ + μ + δ
                                                                                  𝑖𝑡      0           τ           𝑖𝑡         τ           𝑖𝑡      𝑖     τ     𝑡
                                                                             τ=−3               τ=0
firms over the years around the IPO.
                                                         Year [t-1] serves as the base year, hence omitted. The
                                                  figure visualises point estimates (γ ) and 95%
                                                                                                                                               τ
                                                        confidence intervals for the relative year dummies.

  Figure 6A: Average Return on Assets     Figure 6B: Parallel Trends Assumption –
           Around IPO Year                        Return on Assets
This figure shows the evolution of return on assets   This figure shows the results from a test of parallel
around the IPO for firms that go public and for firms   trends assumption for the effects of going public on
that remain private. Return on assets have been  Return on Assets. We estimate the following
winsorized at 1%. Return on assets is averaged  regression, which is explained in Section 3.3.:
separately for treatment firms and control firms over              τ=−2               τ=3
                                                                                   τ               τ
the years around the IPO.                             𝑌 = γ +  ∑ γ 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 + ∑ γ 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 + ϕ + μ + δ
                                                                                  𝑖𝑡      0           τ           𝑖𝑡         τ           𝑖𝑡      𝑖     τ     𝑡
                                                                             τ=−3               τ=0

                                                         Year [t-1] serves as the base year, hence omitted. The
                                                   figure visualises point estimates (γ τ) and 95%
                                                        confidence intervals for the relative year dummies.

                                    24
   Figure 7A: Average ln(Workplaces)     Figure 7B: Parallel Trends Assumption –
           Around IPO Year                        ln(Workplaces)
This figure shows the evolution of the number of   This figure shows the results from a test of parallel
workplaces around the IPO for firms that go public   trends assumption for the effects of going public on
and for firms that remain private. The natural  ln(Workplaces). We estimate the following
logarithm has been taken of the number of  regression, which is explained in Section 3.3.:
workplaces after values have been winsorized at 1%.              τ=−2              τ=3
                                                                                   τ               τ
Number of workplaces are averaged separately for   𝑌 = γ +  ∑ γ 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 + ∑ γ 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 + ϕ + μ + δ
                                                                                  𝑖𝑡      0           τ           𝑖𝑡         τ           𝑖𝑡      𝑖     τ     𝑡
                                                                             τ=−3               τ=0
treatment firms and control firms over the years
around the IPO.                                       Year [t-1] serves as the base year, hence omitted. The
                                                  figure visualises point estimates (γ ) and 95%
                                                                                                                                               τ
                                                        confidence intervals for the relative year dummies.

   Figure 8A: Average ln(Subsidiaries)     Figure 8B: Parallel Trends Assumption –
           Around IPO Year                         ln(Subsidiaries)
This figure shows the evolution of the number of   This figure shows the results from a test of parallel
subsidiaries around the IPO for firms that go public   trends assumption for the effects of going public on
and for firms that remain private. The natural  ln(Subsidiaries). We estimate the following
logarithm has been taken of the number of  regression, which is explained in Section 3.3.:
subsidiaries after values have been winsorized at 1%.              τ=−2               τ=3
                                                                                   τ               τ
Number of subsidiaries are averaged separately for   𝑌 = γ +  ∑ γ 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 + ∑ γ 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 + ϕ + μ + δ
                                                                                  𝑖𝑡      0           τ           𝑖𝑡         τ           𝑖𝑡      𝑖     τ     𝑡
                                                                             τ=−3               τ=0
treatment firms and control firms over the years
around the IPO.                                       Year [t-1] serves as the base year, hence omitted. The
                                                   figure visualises point estimates (γ τ) and 95%
                                                        confidence intervals for the relative year dummies.

                                    25
Figure 9: Average ln(Countries) post-IPO    Figure 10: Average ln(Cities) post-IPO
This figure shows the evolution of the average  This figure shows the evolution of the average
number of countries in which firms in our treatment  number of cities in which firms in our treatment
sample have operations in the years after the IPO.   sample have operations in the years after the IPO.
The values are extracted from firms’ annual reports   The values are extracted from firms’ annual reports
using AI. The natural logarithm has been taken of the   using AI. The natural logarithm has been taken of the
number of countries after values have been  number of cities after values have been winsorized at
winsorized at 1%.                                1%.

                                    26
     Tables

                             Table 1: Industry Distribution
The table compares the distribution of firms per industry in our treatment sample and in our full sample with the
distribution of firms in the entire Swedish enterprise universe. The classification is based on two-digit industrial
classification SNI 2007. Values for our sample are taken at the last observation for each firm, i.e. three years
after the IPO (relative year three). The enterprise universe data is collected from Statistics Sweden (SCB) and
represents the average over the period 2008-2023. Earlier data could not be collected due to a change in SNI
standards in 2007, preventing comparability.

                                                          Treatment                       Enterprise
 Industry Full sample
                                                       sample                universe
 Agriculture, forestry and fishing 0.00% 0.00% 20.39%
 Mining and quarrying 0.00% 0.00% 0.06%
 Manufacturing 13.48% 12.21% 4.49%
 Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply 0.00% 0.26% 0.24%
 Water supply 0.00% 0.00% 0.13%
 Construction 3.37% 3.64% 8.55%
 Wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles 23.60% 24.94% 10.87%
 Transportation and storage 0.00% 0.26% 2.60%
 Accommodation and food service activities 1.12% 1.04% 2.70%
 Information and communication 13.48% 15.32% 5.08%
 Financial and insurance activities 0.00% 0.00% 1.64%
 Real estate activities 0.00% 0.00% 7.51%
 Professional, scientific and technical activities 41.57% 39.22% 15.11%
 Administrative and support service activities 2.25% 1.56% 3.25%
 Public administration and defence 0.00% 0.00% 0.05%
 Education 0.00% 0.00% 2.26%
 Human health and social work activities 0.00% 0.00% 3.03%
 Arts, entertainment and recreation 0.00% 0.26% 5.49%
 Other service activities 1.12% 1.30% 5.68%
 Activities of households as employers 0.00% 0.00% 0.00%
 Activities of extraterritorial organisations and bodies 0.00% 0.00% 0.00%
 Section unknown 0.00% 0.00% 0.86%

 # of Observations 90 419

                                     27
                             Table 2: Summary Statistics
The table presents the summary statistics for the main variables used in this study. The data covers all treatment
firms and control firms in our sample between 1998 to 2023. Main variables are defined in Appendix Table A1.

                               Obs Mean Std Median Min Max
 IPO 2854 0.221 0.415 0 0 1
 POST 2854 0.560 0.496 1 0 1
 Firm Age 2854 21.041 18.298 15 0 108
 ln(Total Real Assets) 2849 10.840 1.702 10.774 7.162 14.527
 ln(Real Net Sales) 2850 9.192 3.820 9.999 0 15.309
 ln(Employees) 2854 2.301 1.852 2.303 0 7.107
 Real Net Sales per Employee 2405 4367.423 6853.924 2236.228 0 46103.707
 Return on Assets 2849 -0.033 0.383 0.042 -2.098 0.622
 ln(Workplaces) 2854 0.236 0.720 0 0 4.277
 ln(Subsidiaries) 2854 0.220 0.510 0 0 2.303
 # of Observations 2854

                                     28
        Table 3: Average Firm Characteristics by Endogenous Treatment Status
In this table, we compare firms that go public with firms that remain private. Panel A compares the means of our
variables for observations three years prior to the IPO only; Panel B during the pre-IPO period; Panel C during
the post-IPO period (including IPO year). The rightmost column displays the differences in means, whose
statistical significance has been tested using a t-test. Stars ***, **, * indicate that the difference in means is
significantly different from zero at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Three years prior to IPO [t-3]

                                         Control Group Treatment Group Difference
 ln(Total Real Assets) 10.495 10.530 0.045
 ln(Real Net Sales) 8.926 8.763 -0.163
 ln(Employees) 2.191 2.236 0.045
 Real Net Sales per Employee 4008.533 2783.702 -1224.83
 Return on Assets -0.071 -0.148 -0.077*
 ln(Workplaces) 0.222 0.243 0.021
 ln(Subsidiaries) 0.160 0.283 0.123**
 # of Observations 329 90

Panel B: Pre-IPO period [t-3, t-1]
                                         Control Group Treatment Group Difference
 ln(Total Real Assets) 10.611 10.769 0.159
 ln(Real Net Sales) 9.091 9.097 0.007
 ln(Employees) 2.201 2.356 0.155
 Real Net Sales per Employee 4187.573 3471.859 -715.714
 Return on Assets -0.029 -0.136 -0.109***
 ln(Workplaces) 0.224 0.259 0.035
 ln(Subsidiaries) 0.163 0.321 0.158***
 # of Observations 985 270

Panel C: Post-IPO period [t, t+3]
                                         Control Group Treatment Group Difference
 ln(Total Real Assets) 10.763 11.802 1.038***
 ln(Real Net Sales) 9.011 10.176 1.165***
 ln(Employees) 2.214 2.830 0.615***
 Real Net Sales per Employee 4632.219 4686.612 54.392
 Return on Assets 0.015 -0.133 -0.148***
 ln(Workplaces) 0.212 0.331 0.120***
 ln(Subsidiaries) 0.199 0.368 0.169***
 # of Observations 1239 360

                                     29
                                          Table 4: Regression Results with Firm Fixed Effects
This table compares firms that undergo an IPO (treatment group) with firms that remain private (control group). The difference is measured using the interaction term
IPO#POST. Fixed effects include firm fixed effects, relative year fixed effects and calendar year fixed effects. The two panels report coefficient results whether we control for
age, assets, and ROA or not. Stars ***, **, * indicate that the estimated coefficients are significantly different from zero at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. Robust
standard errors that are clustered at the firm level are reported in parentheses.

Panel A: OLS regression with Firm FE and with no control variables

                            (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
                          ln(Total Real                                                 Real Net Sales per
                                        ln(Real Net Sales) ln(Employees)                   Return on Assets ln(Workplaces) ln(Subsidiaries)
                        Assets)                                      Employee

                        0.899***           1.210***           0.504***           163.500             -0.033             0.096**             0.019
 IPOxPOST
                            (0.117)              (0.309)              (0.081)             (644.900)             (0.048)              (0.044)              (0.045)
 Observations 2849 2850 2854 2405 2849 2854 2854

  2
 𝑅                        0.915 0.842 0.929 0.838 0.657 0.938 0.834

 Firm FE YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
 Relative year FE YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
 Calendar year FE YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
 Ctrl for age NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
 Ctrl for assets NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
 Ctrl for ROA NO NO NO NO NO NO NO

                                                         30
Panel B: OLS regression with Firm FE and with control variables

                            (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
                          ln(Total Real                                                 Real Net Sales per
                                        ln(Real Net Sales) ln(Employees)                   Return on Assets ln(Workplaces) ln(Subsidiaries)
                        Assets)                                      Employee

                        0.876***           1.144***           0.487***           193.600             -0.063             0.107**             0.022
 IPOxPOST
                            (0.110)              (0.302)              (0.084)             (653.500)             (0.039)              (0.050)              (0.046)
 Observations 2849 2850 2854 2405 2849 2854 2854

  2
 𝑅                        0.919 0.842 0.931 0.839 0.689 0.939 0.835

 Firm FE YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
 Relative year FE YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
 Calendar year FE YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
 Ctrl for age YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
 Ctrl for assets YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
 Ctrl for ROA YES YES YES YES YES YES YES

                                                         31
                                         Table 5: Regression Results with Cohort Fixed Effects
This table compares firms that undergo an IPO (treatment group) with firms that remain private (control group). The difference is measured using the interaction term
IPO#POST. Fixed effects include firm cohort fixed effects, relative year fixed effects and calendar year fixed effects. The two panels report coefficient results whether we
control for age, assets, and ROA or not. Stars ***, **, * indicate that the estimated coefficients are significantly different from zero at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively. Robust standard errors that are clustered at the cohort level are reported in parentheses.

Panel A: OLS regression with Cohort FE and with no control variables

                            (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
                          ln(Total Real                                                 Real Net Sales per
                                        ln(Real Net Sales) ln(Employees)                   Return on Assets ln(Workplaces) ln(Subsidiaries)
                        Assets)                                      Employee

                        0.902***           1.174***           0.477***           751.000             -0.035             0.090**             0.021
 IPOxPOST
                            (0.102)              (0.253)              (0.073)             (726.200)             (0.041)              (0.043)              (0.042)
 Observations 2849 2850 2854 2405 2849 2854 2854

  2
 𝑅                        0.869 0.390 0.562 0.322 0.471 0.455 0.325

 Cohort FE YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
 Relative year FE YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
 Calendar year FE YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
 Ctrl for age NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
 Ctrl for assets NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
 Ctrl for ROA NO NO NO NO NO NO NO

                                                         32
Panel B: OLS regression with Cohort FE and with control variables

                            (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
                          ln(Total Real                                                 Real Net Sales per
                                        ln(Real Net Sales) ln(Employees)                   Return on Assets ln(Workplaces) ln(Subsidiaries)
                        Assets)                                      Employee

                        0.879***           1.106***           0.465***           602.000            -0.066*            0.101**             0.025
 IPOxPOST
                            (0.098)              (0.238)              (0.074)             (719.500)             (0.036)              (0.049)              (0.043)
 Observations 2849 2850 2854 2405 2849 2854 2854

  2
 𝑅                        0.872 0.396 0.568 0.330 0.516 0.483 0.328

 Cohort FE YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
 Relative year FE YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
 Calendar year FE YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
 Ctrl for age YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
 Ctrl for assets YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
 Ctrl for ROA YES YES YES YES YES YES YES

                                                         33
                Table 6: Regression Results – Geographical Distribution
This table presents the regression results from the following estimation:
                                       𝑌  = α + β  × 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 + ϵ
                                                  𝑖𝑡            1               𝑡     𝑖𝑡
Stars ***, **, * indicate that the estimated coefficients are significantly different from zero at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels, respectively. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.

                                                   (1) (2)
                                              ln(Countries) ln(Cities)

                                            0.139***                        0.147***
 Relative year
                                                   (0.054)                             (0.054)
 Observations 354 325

  2
 𝑅                                                0.019 0.022

                                     34
    Appendix

                             Table A1: Variable Definition
This table presents the definitions of the main variables used in the study. Variable names in the Serrano
Database are in italic.

 Variable Definition
                               A dummy variable that takes the value one if the firm undergoes an IPO
 IPO
                                   (treatment group) and zero if the firm remains private (control group).
                                  A dummy variable that takes the value one if the observation belongs to the
 POST
                                  IPO year or any of the three preceding calendar years, and zero otherwise.
                                   A variable representing the year of the observation relative to the year of the
 Relative year                    IPO. Ranges from negative three to positive three. The IPO year takes the
                                   value zero.
 Calendar year
                                  The calendar year of the observation.
 ser_year
                                   Years since the entity was founded. Calculated by subtracting the registration
 Firm age                      year (extracted from ser_regdat (registration date) in the Serrano Database)
                                   from the calendar year of the observation.
 Organisation number
                                  Corporate ID no. (Organisationsnummer) for legal entities.
 ORGNR
                             Primary SNI code according to currently applicable SNI07, indicating
 Primary SNI07, converted
                                 industry. For years prior to 2007, the code according to the SNI02 system
 bransch_sni071_konv
                                  has been translated into the current SNI07 system.
 Legal form
                                    The legal entity’s legal form.
 ser_jurform
 Active during the year           A dummy variable indicating whether the business is active during the
 ser_aktiv                        calendar year.
 ln(Total Real Assets)             The natural logarithm of total assets after values have been adjusted to real
 br09_tillgsu                     terms with 2022 as the base year and winsorized at 1%.
 ln(Real Net Sales)               The natural logarithm of net sales after values have been adjusted to real
 rr01_ntoms                    terms with 2022 as the base year and winsorized at 1%.
 ln(Employees)                 The natural logarithm of the number of employees after values have been
 bslov_antanst                   winsorized at 1%.
 Real Net Sales per Employee    Net sales, adjusted to real terms with 2022 as the base year, divided by the
 rr01_ntoms / bslov_antanst      number of employees. Values have been winsorized at 1%.
 Return on Assets                Return on assets, defined as adjusted operating profit/loss after financial
 ny_avktokap                   income divided by total assets. Values have been winsorized at 1%.
 ln(Workplaces)                 The natural logarithm of the number of workplaces after values have been
 ser_aas                        winsorized at 1%.
 ln(Subsidiaries)                  The natural logarithm of the number of subsidiaries after values have been
 orgnrm, orgnrd*                winsorized at 1%.
                                  The natural logarithm of the number of countries in which the firm operates
 ln(Countries)
                                  after values have been winsorized at 1%. Constructed using AI.
                                   The natural logarithm of the number of cities in which the firm operates after
 ln(Cities)
                                 values have been winsorized at 1%. Constructed using AI.
* From Serrano KNC, a specialised sub-file of the Serrano Database

                                     35
                          Prompt Given to ChatGPT
I will submit four consecutive annual reports for a Swedish firm. Please scan the annual
reports. For each year, report the number of countries in which the firm has operations. Do
the same for the number of cities in which the firm has operations. If the annual report does
not mention any such information, leave it blank. Use the same definition of “operations” for
the same company’s annual reports for all years. For example, do not report the number of
locations the firm has offices in year one and the number of locations the firm’s customers
reside in year two. In other words, be consistent with the definition of locations the firm
operates in for all four reports per firm. Do not make assumptions regarding the number of
locations. For example, if the annual report mentions operations in “all European
countries”, do not report the number of countries in Europe. If the annual report states that
the firm operates in “more than X countries/cities”, give me the value X.

AI-Disclosure

Apart from using artificial intelligence in our methodology to extract data from annual
reports, as discussed in Section 3.4., ChatGPT has been used as a supporting tool when
writing codes for Stata.

                                     36