QUANTIFYING SOURCES OF
FIRM-LEVEL RISK
THROUGH CONFERENCE
CALL TRANSCRIPTS

A BERTOPIC APPROACH

ANDREW KAPLAN

ANNA KORSUNOVA

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2024
Quantifying Sources of  Firm-Level  Risk  Through Conference Call Transcripts: a
BERTopic Approach

Abstract:

   We use BERTopic to develop an alternative approach to measuring topic-specific risk
   for firms from quarterly earnings conference calls. This approach allows us to both
   discover and quantify sources of firm risk based on statements made by company
   executives. We show the topics identified by the model are coherent and that the
   aggregate risk patterns for each are intuitive based on historical context. Seven out of
   the thirteen risks we study are significant and positively correlated with future realised
   stock volatility. After controlling for firm fixed effects, only two remain significant,
   suggesting that our measure may primarily reflect permanent differences in firm risk.
   We decompose the variance structure of each risk and find that global economy,
   inflation, and supply chain risk are the most systematic. We also find that for
   cybersecurity, firms exhibit heterogeneous exposure to the aggregate risk along with
   large and persistent differences in firm-specific risk levels.

Keywords:

   Firm risk,  systematic risk,  earnings conference call transcripts,  topic modeling,
   BERTopic, natural language processing

Authors:

   Andrew Kaplan  (25622)
   Anna Korsunova  (25564)

Tutor:

   Zoltan  Racz,  Postdoc Fellow, Department of  Finance

Examiner:

   Ramin Baghai, Associate Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in  Business and Economics
Stockholm School of  Economics
© Andrew Kaplan and Anna Korsunova, 2024
1   Introduction

For firms with publicly traded stock options, we can estimate the level of risk the firm is
                                               1
exposed to by using its implied volatility.   Alternatively, historical volatility in the stock
price itself may provide some useful indication.  However, beneath this volatility figure lie
many di↵erent sources of risk: firms can be exposed to changes in interest rates, aggregate
fluctuations in the economy, supply chain pressures, or an array of other topics. This study
focuses on measuring precisely these underlying sources of uncertainty.   We analyse the
discussions of risk by firm executives during quarterly earnings conference calls using a state-
of-the-art large language model called BERT. In this analysis, we are able to automatically
detect topics relating to risk, and build a quantitative measure of firm-level risk on a quarterly
basis for 13 di↵erent sources of risk. A primary goal is to measure topic-specific risk without
the need to define exogenously what a topic is. We also want to study the extent to which
these conference calls provide a useful signal for a partially new set of risks previously not
researched.  Finally, we decompose the variance of each risk measure to understand their
behaviour in the economy such as which risks emerge systematically, and which are the most
heterogeneous between firms and sectors.
   An existing strand of literature looks at corporate risk disclosures from annual reports
to build a similar measure (e.g. Zhu, Yang, and Moazeni, 2016; Yang, 2013). However, the
information content in these disclosures is limited as they are often boilerplate statements
(Schrand and Elliott, 1998).   They list all possible risks regardless of their actual impact
on the firm, which inevitably washes out any helpful signal.   In fact, when Yang (2013)
tested 30 risks using a Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model on 10-K filings, only 8 were
significantly associated with realised stock volatility in the two months after the filing.
   Instead, we look at earnings conference calls as they o↵er a promising alternative to
annual reports for studying firm risk.   During the calls, executives discuss not only past
performance but also the future outlook of the firm.   Matsumoto, Pronk, and Roelofsen
(2011) argue that they should hold more material information than the aforementioned risk
disclosures as they are less scripted and a large portion is prompted by outside analyst
questions.   They also benefit from being released at shorter intervals — quarterly rather
than annually. Due to these advantages, earnings calls have recently attracted attention as
a data source for measuring firm risk. Several papers have established empirically that such
calls do hold material information predictive of future outcomes (e.g. Hassan, Hollander, van
Lent, and Tahoun, 2019; Kim, Muhn, and Nikolaev, 2023; Wu, 2024; Nazli, Karagozoglu, and
Zhou, 2021). This line of research is still nascent, however, so we o↵er several contributions.
   Firstly, to the best of our knowledge, the only risk topics that have been covered pre-
viously using earnings conference calls from the 13 we study are supply chain (Wu, 2024
and Ersahin, Giannetti, and Huang, 2024), cybersecurity (Nazli et al., 2021), regulatory
(Calomiris, Mamaysky, and Yang, 2020), interest rates (Ying, 2023), tax (Hassan et al.,
2019), and inflation (Chava, Du, Shah, and Zeng, 2022).  That would mean the extension
of this literature to the following risks is in itself a contribution: global economy, loans, oil
& gas, litigation, contracts, foreign exchange, and banking risk. Furthermore, our measure
allows us to build an aggregate index of risk for each topic. Many of these risks do not have
such a measure even outside the literature that studies conference calls.
    Additionally, most of the existing literature relies on predetermined dictionaries of text

   1
    Risk here refers to the risk the firm faces, not the risk an investor has by holding the firm’s stock.

                                        1
to define a topic.  Whilst they proved to be robust and e↵ective, such a requirement can
be problematic if topics change over time; predefined topics can easily become outdated
especially if they deal with current events.  It also raises the potential for bias, favouring
whatever the researcher decides is a topic, which can vary between disciplines, countries,
and languages.  Our approach, on the other hand, defines topics based exclusively on the
contents of the conference calls we study. New topics that emerge, or those that evolve over
time, can be easily included in the analysis by retraining the model on the most recent calls.
Furthermore, training requires very few exogenous parameters and is easy to replicate. Two
exceptions to the reliance on predefined topics are Kim et al. (2023), who use a ChatGPT
approach instead, and Chava et al. (2022), who use a di↵erent variation of BERT. Our
method still adds to this analysis because it is able to  discover  topics.  Furthermore, the
standard BERT approach requires the manual construction of a large sample of data which
still requires someone to implicitly define a topic.
   Thirdly, the literature is currently very fragmented with many papers covering a single
risk in isolation. A notable exception is again Kim et al. (2023) who study three at a time.
Still, we measure more (13 in total), all using the same methodology on the same sample.
We argue that this strand of research would benefit from a consolidated approach that can
be applied to all risk topics. This is motivated in part because any measure that extracts
quantitative information from conference calls will have a large amount of measurement
noise.  We rely on conference calls being unscripted, but this also means that a lot of the
variation between firms in measured risk might come from randomness in what questions are
asked and how they are answered. Furthermore, any textual information that is quantified
will inherently contain measurement noise, the extent of which can depend a lot on the
methodology.   We wish to answer questions such as which risks systematically appear in
the economy, but measurement noise may cause all risks to appear idiosyncratic. What is
needed then is a measure of many risks, where it is not the absolute values that matter but
their relative ones. For example, we find that 1.17% of supply chain risk is explained by time
fixed e↵ects, but this result is di cult to interpret on its own.  However, noting that this
figure is larger than for all but two other risks suggests that exposure to the risk is relatively
systematic.
   Finally, to the best of our knowledge, we are the first to apply BERTopic to earnings
conference calls to measure risk. A well-established but older approach for topic analysis uses
the Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) model. This model relies on a bag-of-words approach
which means word order is ignored. BERTopic is based on Google’s recent pre-trained large
language model BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers) which
transforms text into a continuous vector representation that captures its meaning (Kenton
and Toutanova, 2019).  Unlike traditional approaches, the model can understand context
by allowing the meaning of words to be influenced by those around them.  As mentioned,
Chava et al. (2022) use another variation of BERT that is specifically tasked with classifying
text snippets as inflation risk, but again, this model requires new training data for every
topic which can be di cult to scale. Some papers have employed BERTopic for stock market
prediction using sentiment in social media posts (Zhu and Yen, 2024) and to predict corporate
bond defaults using news headlines (Tang, Bu, Zuo, and Wu, 2024). We contribute here by
finding a new application for the model.  An interesting result then will be the extent to
which it holds promise for future research.
   Some discussion is warranted as to exactly what we are able to measure using conference
calls. We measure the  perceived  risk of the firm management which naturally could deviate

                                        2
from actual risk. Some risks are generally unforeseen by the public, for example, few noticed
the impending collapse of mortgage-backed securities in the early 2000s yet it was obvious
the risk was there in hindsight. There are also many reasons a firm might discuss risk and
not all of them signal actual risk. For example, the fact that executives bring the subject
up might indicate that the company is prepared to deal with the risk. It could be that firms
discuss topics only after shocks take place, even if they do not expect the heightened risk
to continue. Nevertheless, as discussed previously, there are empirical results that show at
least in some cases that this measure is a good proxy for actual risk.
    In order to measure topic-specific risk, we begin by identifying all discussions of any risk in
a transcript. These discussions are then grouped together based on their semantic similarity,
with the resulting groups forming topics.  That is, a topic forms when enough discussions
of risk are similar enough to each other. Forty-eight of these topics emerged based on our
sample and hyper-parameters, of these the thirteen previously mentioned were selected to
be evaluated.   We then establish a set of requirements for a topic to be valid.   Firstly, it
must be coherent — the words associated with the topic should make sense.  Second, the
model we use should accurately classify documents into the correct topic. Third, aggregate
patterns in risk for each source should be intuitive and justified by real-world events. Finally,
as would be expected of any measure of risk, increased risk should correlate with increased
stock volatility on a firm level. After evaluating and validating each of our topics with these
four steps, we analyse their variance decomposition to help answer questions such as which
risks are systematic.
   We find that BERTopic is able to discover interesting and coherent topics, and the major-
ity of documents are correctly classified according to their risk. Furthermore, when evaluated
against existing indices of topic-related events, our aggregate measures of risk provide intu-
itive variations over time.
   We further find that when controlling for time and sector fixed e↵ects, 7 out of 13 of
our measures are positive and significantly associated with realised stock volatility during a
90-day holding period. However, adding firm fixed e↵ects leads to only 2 remaining positive
and significant.  This suggests that our measure of risk primarily accounts for permanent
di↵erences in risk exposures between firms. The existing literature has, at times, included
                                                             2
or omitted firm fixed e↵ects in the main specification,   but we argue that these can sub-
stantially impact the estimates. We also find that discussion of some sources of risk leads
to  lower  volatility. This might indicate that for some topics, acknowledgement of a risk in
an earnings call signals that the firm is prepared for it, rather than predicting future un-
certainty. Nevertheless, the aggregate measures for these risks provide intuitive patterns so
they are indicative of the overall risk for that topic in the economy.
   When decomposing the variance of each of our measures, we find that global economy,
inflation, and supply chain risk are the most systematic out of the 13 studied. We also find
that for cybersecurity, firms exhibit large heterogeneity in the levels of risk  and  exposure to
the aggregate risk. In fact, it is the only topic where a model of stable firm-specific exposure
to aggregate risk can explain a significant portion of variance.
   Despite promising findings, our approach has a limitation. Not every topic can be easily
discovered. In particular, those with a diverse vocabulary are hard for the model to cluster
into a single topic. For example, politics as a topic covers everything from healthcare, wars,

   2
    Hassan et al. (2019) include them but some follow-up papers (e.g. Kim et al., 2023; Nazli et al., 2021;
Wu, 2024) do not.

                                        3
taxes, regulation, and much more. We do isolate some of these, but the model is not able
                                                                   3
to distinguish (automatically) that they all relate to politics.   What we can capture then is
very specific topics, because, in reality, whilst these all clearly relate to politics, they also
relate to many other risks. The model can discover the most basic components of a topic, in
our case, we capture taxes and regulation in our risks because these are harder to subdivide.
   Aside from the specific contributions, what our paper aims to o↵er is a robustness check
to the recent literature that studies topic-specific risk in conference call transcripts. We do
                                                                              4
not define the risks ourselves, nor do we filter any that do not work.  We aim to see the
extent to which the data in these calls can generalise to more risks, and we explore the
potential issues with the interpretation of findings.

2   Data

In order to measure the perceived risk of firm executives, we use quarterly earnings confer-
ence calls. These are calls where executives present a discussion of the past quarter’s results,
and outside analysts can ask questions. Several databases provide transcripts of these calls.
We use Seeking Alpha which is a website that publishes much more than just transcripts,
including market news and investment reports. We retrieved every available transcript be-
tween the start of their data (April 2004) and when we downloaded them (October 2024).
The transcripts also include metadata such as the firm name and ticker.
    To validate our measure of risk, we analyze its relationship with the firm’s stock volatility
and returns. For this, we use daily security data from the Center for Research in Security
Prices (CRSP). We use the adjusted returns to investors (ret) which account for stock splits
and dividends.  Forward-looking volatility is calculated based on a 90-day holding period
beginning the day when the conference call was held. For lagged volatility, we use a 90-day
holding period that ends the day before the call. The same applies to average returns.
    We also need data on each firm’s sector and the value of assets as controls in our regres-
sions. Di↵erent firms have di↵erent fiscal quarters, so Q1 for one firm might happen at the
same time as Q3 for another. To align the conference calls with the correct (calendar) time
period, we need this information. For all of this, we use Compustat’s quarterly fundamentals
data. Namely, for sector we use the SIC code and for assets we use the variable  atq. The
dataset also provides the calendar quarter that corresponds to each fiscal quarter.
   Transcript coverage by quarter is summarised in Figure A.1.  Near the beginning and
end of our data, there are very few transcripts, so these quarters are excluded for plotting
purposes as they can make the results very volatile. The original sample contained 238,420
transcripts. 14,939 were filtered out because they were less than 100 words, not a transcript,
a duplicate, or were missing information in the title.  A further 107,109 were lost because
we could not reliably match them to Compustat or they were not in the intersection with
       5
CRSP.   Given that Seeking Alpha covers non-American firms and CRSP does not, this is
to be expected. 15,361 of these are also because the CRSP data ends in 2023 so we lose all

   3
    Hassan et al. (2019) themselves note that topic models likely lack the power to discern politics as its own
topic. Topics can be merged manually using the model, but this partially defeats the purpose of endogenously
defining them.
   4
    Although we do select topics that make sense in the context of risk after obtaining them from the BERT
model, this selection occurs before conducting any further validation exercises.
   5
    We rely on the stnd compname package in Stata for matching.  This package standardises and cleans

                                        4
transcripts from 2024. In any remaining cases, the attrition should be random so we have no
reason to suspect this will cause any issues other than loss of statistical power in our tests.
   This leaves 122,710 transcripts with an average of 6,949 words each covering 4,808 U.S.
             6
listed firms.   The 107,109 transcripts lost to merging were still included in training BERTopic
as more documents can make the detection of topics easier.
   In our measure, we look for discussions of risk. The terms “risk o cer” and “risk credit
o cer” can confound this as they are commonly listed at the beginning of transcripts along
with the call participants’ names.  Following the methodology of Hassan et al. (2019), we
remove these.

3   Empirical Approach

3.1   Classifying Topics

The first part of creating our risk measure requires us to identify and define which topics
exist in our conference calls. This is done in four steps: 1) extract and limit attention to only
the few lines in a transcript that are dedicated to discussing risk, 2) convert these discussions
into a vector of continuous values that captures the meaning of the text, 3) identify clusters
of similar discussions, and 4) label the clusters and set key terms that define them as a topic.
    To identify snippets of text pertaining to risk specifically, we follow the same approach as
Hassan et al. (2019). We take the 10 words on either side of synonyms for “risk” or “uncer-
tainty” found in the transcript as defined by the Oxford Dictionary. Each resulting 21-word
                                                 7
snippet is what we consider one document.  Note, we use “snippet” and “document” in-
terchangeably throughout this paper.  We also filter out the so-called harbour statements
— boilerplate statements about how the conference call is forward-looking and that actual
results may di↵er materially. These are generic and do not hold any topic-specific informa-
tion, nor do they convey any information on the overall risk of the firm. So, if a risk snippet
comes from the first half of the transcript and contains two or more of the following words
— safe, harbour, forward, looking, actual, statements, statement, future, events, SEC, or
results, — it is filtered out. The result is that a transcript will have just over 5 risk snippets
on average.
   In order to be able to cluster similar documents together, we must define what “similar”
means. A simple approach would be to group topics that share similar words, however, this
ignores the possibility that context influences the meaning of words (for example, “interest”
might refer to either the cost of borrowing money or someone’s curiosity about a certain
subject).   We use what is known as an embedding model based on BERT (Bidirectional
Encoder Representations from Transformer) (Kenton and Toutanova, 2019).   This allows
text to be converted into a high-dimensional vector of continuous values.  The position in

names so for example, “North America” becomes “NA”.
   6
    Some additional small number of transcripts are filtered out in regressions depending on the variables
being used and their availability. Furthermore, 1,400 transcripts that do not contain the exact conference
call date are filtered out of regressions. The total number of transcripts in each regression is available at the
bottom of every table.
   7
    “Document” is the typical term used to describe a given piece of text in the natural language processing
literature.

                                        5
the vector space captures the text’s meaning, and two sets of text close to each other in said
space are thought to mean similar things.  The embedding model has been pre-trained on
large quantities of text and shown empirically to capture meaning very well. Every document
is first passed through this model and the steps that proceed use the vector representations
produced.

                                                                                                              8
   There are many approaches to clustering the vectors. We use a model known as BERTopic
(Grootendorst, 2022). It includes a series of algorithms that reduce the dimensions of the
vectors produced by the embedding model and then group them in a way similar to K-means
           9
clustering.  For a topic to form, there need to be enough documents that are similar enough
to each other. Not all documents are assigned a topic — if they are not close enough to a
cluster, they are considered outliers.
    Once clusters are formed, that is, topics have been identified, they need to be labelled so
humans can actually interpret what they represent. Two steps are involved in this. Firstly,
to determine which words and terms constitute a topic, a term-frequency inverse-document-
frequency algorithm is used. Formally, this calculates the following for each term  i  in each
                           10
topic  t:  tf it ⇥ log(N/df i )   where  tf it  is the count of that term in the topic,  N  is the number
of topics, and  df  is the number of topics that contain the term  i. This places higher weight
on words that appear more often within a topic, but do not appear in others.  So words
like “quarter” or “question” appear a lot in each topic but also are present in every topic,
so they have low information content. Conversely, “supply chain” is unlikely to appear in
any topic other than supply chain, so it has high information content. Then another model
called KeyBERT selects the top 10 key terms from all those with high information content
which are collectively known as the topic’s representation.
   Importantly, the algorithm uses not just words, but also  bi-grams  and  tri-grams  — terms
composed of 2 or 3 words. These  n-grams  only form from combinations of words that appear
together very often, so using the same example, “supply chain” is a term that commonly is
together. When the model is evaluating a snippet with this term in it, it evaluates the two
words together rather than looking at “supply” and “chain” separately.  This approach is
common in the natural language processing literature since words in combination may have
a di↵erent meaning than individually. Furthermore, to avoid noise in the topics, we remove
            11
stop-words  and the actual synonyms for risk since these appear in all documents.
   One key assumption that sets this model apart from, for example, the more typical Latent
Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) approach is that each document pertains only to a single topic.
Given how short our documents are, this is a close approximation to the truth, however, it
does not always hold and so this is a limitation of the model.

3.2   Quantifying Risk

At this point, every risk snippet from every transcript has been used to train the BERTopic
model and is now assigned a topic (or is an outlier). The original goal, however, was to get a
firm-quarter-level measure of risk for every topic. Since a transcript can have many of these

   8
    For documentation on the library used visit: https://maartengr.github.io/BERTopic/api/bertopic.html
   9
    In fact, K-means clusters can be used as a substitute for the default algorithm.
  10
    There are many variants that achieve a similar goal.  This is also not the standard version as we use
topic frequencies rather than document frequencies.
  11
    Stop-words are words like “a”, “the”, and “are” which are common and hold very little meaning.

                                        6
risk snippets, we need a way to aggregate them together so the transcript as a whole has a
score. For this, we have two approaches:
   The discrete measure.  The first measure classifies each snippet as a single topic and then
counts the number of occurrences of each topic in a given transcript. So, if two of the risk
snippets in a transcript mention regulatory risk, the score for that quarter would be two.
The score can range from zero to the number of risk snippets that are in a document. This
approach has a very simple interpretation — more mentions of a risk equals more of that
risk.   The drawback of this approach is that it has limited power to detect topics, and a
snippet is allowed to only contain a single topic. So, a firm discussing inflation as a result
of the pandemic may be classified as pandemic risk rather than inflation, even though it is a
clear signal of both. Also, more ambiguous discussions that signal some amount of a given
risk may go unclassified. We evaluate later to what extent this might be an issue.
   The continuous measure.  Even though BERTopic is a classification algorithm, it also
outputs the probability that a given document pertains to each topic (for an example of how
the model compares topics for a particular document, see Figure A.3). In theory, a higher
probability indicates that the document is more similar to that topic. Instead of classifying
each of the snippets directly, the continuous measure uses the probability distribution of all
topics for a single document; each risk snippet has an  n-dimensional  vector, where  n  is the
number of topics and each element is the probability that that snippet pertains to that topic.
To obtain a measure for each transcript, we compute the average of the probability vectors for
all its snippets, with each value in the resulting vector representing the average probability
that each snippet pertains to a given topic. This inherently controls for the overall risk level
because we are taking an average rather than a sum (dividing by the number of mentions of
risk). In cases when there are no risk snippets, each risk is given its average probability. We
justify this because a low probability directly signals a lack of a given topic. Contrarily, if a
topic scores an average probability it indicates ambiguity. In other words, a low score will
not arise simply because the topic in question is not in the snippet, it is also a requirement
that another topic is clearly there. Without any mentions of risk, we have no such signal.
Of course, the (reasonable) assumption here is that a firm still has risk even if it does not
mention it, and that the composition of risk is only revealed if management chooses to discuss
it. We further justify this assumption and our approach of averaging vectors by testing an
alternative where we add together the probability vectors instead, or impute zero when there
are no snippets. In both cases, we obtain very unintuitive aggregate patterns of topic-specific
risks, which are highly correlated with each other and/or the aggregate patterns in total risk.
This means we are not actually measuring each particular topic. The fundamental issue with
creating a continuous measure like this is the model is not designed to allow for more than
one topic per document, so it is very di cult to evaluate topics in isolation. The resulting
interpretation of this measure is that a higher score for a given topic does not equate to more
risk overall, but simply more of the firm’s risk is related to that topic. The relationship is
likely not perfect or proportional, however, as otherwise simply interacting the percentage of
                                                                                                            12
each risk with the total risk should have worked but it too su↵ered from the same issues.
It is instead just an indication of the tilt a firm faces towards a particular risk. Due to the

  12
    Words that have high information content for one topic tend to do so in several. This means that the
raw  n-gram  scores produced by the model are highly correlated between topics in a document. We also tried
controlling for this by demeaning the  n-gram  score sums but this results in something very similar to simply
averaging the probabilities. Indeed one is still inherently controlling for the overall level of risk this way. We
use the simpler and easier-to-interpret approach of averaging them. For more details on how these  n-gram
scores are calculated see Figure A.3.

                                        7
di culties in interpreting this measure, our focus throughout the analysis is on the discrete
version. However, we include this here still as an interesting exercise and because in some
cases it does provide insightful results.
   Measurement noise must be addressed as well for any measure that quantifies textual
data, especially this one. There are many sources of this noise, first, the transcripts them-
selves are a noisy signal of firm risks.   A lot is dependent on the choices of management
to mention or not to mention a particular risk, or for an analyst to ask a certain question.
Much cross-sectional variation originates from this or subtle di↵erences in wording that may
a↵ect the measure. Furthermore, whilst the number of mentions of a given risk seems to be
a fair proxy for the level of that risk, it certainly is not a perfect correlation. Finally, there
could be classification errors, and two documents both classified as a given topic may not
indicate equivalent levels of that risk.
   What we measure is also not exactly risk, it is the risk  perceived  by management. This
does not mean it is wrong per se but it may be biased and it does not measure unforeseen
risks. It also will not be as precise as other measures such as implied volatility that relies
on the extensive research of many hundreds or thousands of market participants.

4   Risk Measures & Validation

4.1   Topics

We now present the topics that the model has discovered in our data. The first step is to
evaluate whether they are coherent, and then we will test to what extent the model is able
to sort documents into the correct topics. Naturally, these two are minimum requirements
for a measure of topic-specific risk.
   Based on our training sample and model hyperparameters, 48 topics emerged, all of which
can be viewed in Table A.1. We chose the 13 which can most clearly be related to a source
of risk and broad enough to be interesting.   For example of those we excluded, topic 32
seems to discuss business management and strategy, which is a reasonable topic, but there
is no clear connection to what such a risk would represent. Topic 38 exclusively discusses
pipelines which is too specific. All topics can be viewed in Table 1, along with their 10-term
representations. The representations are not the only words used to define a topic, in fact,
most words have some value associated with every topic, but the representations capture
the meaning of the topic. We argue that they do this very well — with few exceptions, all
terms in the table have a clear connection to the topic, and in turn, the topic is well-defined
based on the terms in the table.

                                        8
Table 1: Topic Representations
This table shows the top 10 terms associated with each topic, known as the topic representations. Topic
representations are the terms most associated with each topic, endogenously generated by a combination of
the term-frequency inverse-document-frequency algorithm and the model KeyBERT after the topic clusters
have been identified. A term may consist of up to three words.

   Topic Name       Representation

   Cyber Security     cybersecurity, cyber security, cyber, cyber attacks, security indus-
                      try, security systems industry, security systems, cloud based, sys-
                      tems industry, data security
   Global Economy   global  economies,   global  economy,   global  economic,   economic
                      growth, global economic conditions, global growth, global macroe-
                     conomic, gdp growth, global economic environment, world economy
   Loans             loans loans, total loans, loans, higher loans, performing loans, loans
                      loan, loans higher, nonperforming loans, consumer loans, loan port-
                          folios
   Oil & Gas         oil gas industry, oil demand, crude oil prices, business oil, gas in-
                       dustry, gas markets, gas service industry, oil prices, oil companies,
                      oil market
   Supply Chain      demand inventory, inventory supply chain, inventory supply, sup-
                      ply chains, inventory levels, supply chain challenges, supply chain
                      constraints, higher inventory, inventory management, supply chain
                      disruptions
   Interest Rates      rising rate environment, rising rates, rates economic, market rates,
                       rates going, lower rates, rising rate, higher rates, term rates, in-
                       crease rates
   Litigation          court decision, courts, court case, future litigation proceedings, lit-
                        igation subject discuss, court, litigation proceedings, future litiga-
                       tion, future litigation pertaining, settlement agreement
   Regulation        regulatory requirements, conditions future regulatory, obtain nec-
                      essary regulatory, future regulatory, include company failure, reg-
                      ulatory process, regulatory authorities, company failure, necessary
                      regulatory, operations include company
   Contracts         contracts think, contracts believe, contracts contracts, contract ne-
                        gotiations, long term contracts, limitation contracts, limitation con-
                       tracts terminated, think contracts, large contracts, longer term con-
                       tracts
   Taxes            e↵ective tax rate, tax rate quarter, tax rates, tax rate, tax rate
                    going, e↵ective tax, tax rate approximately, tax positions quarter,
                      reduction tax, tax provision

                                                            Continued on next page

                                        9
Table 1: Topic Representations

   Topic Name       Representation

   Inflation           inflationary pressures, economy inflation, continued inflation, eco-
                      nomic inflation, inflation recession, inflation economic, regarding
                         inflation, rising inflation, inflation going, increase inflation
   Foreign Exch.      foreign currencies, impact foreign currency, currencies detailed sec,
                      foreign currency, foreign currency exchange, foreign countries cur-
                       rencies, foreign currency fluctuations, conducting business foreign,
                       business foreign countries, foreign currency translation
   Banking          banking industry, banking business, banking environment, corpo-
                    rate banking, commercial banking, banking management, banking
                     sector, banking lines business, community banking, banking rela-
                       tionships

    Topic representations are just one aspect, and it very well could be that the top 10 terms
look promising but the topic as a whole is not coherent. As an additional validation step,
we evaluate to what extent each pair of topics are similar. If indeed we have a good measure
of meaning, then we should be able to see intuitive relationships between the topics. That
is, two topics we know are similar should also be similar in the eye of the model.
   There are di↵erent ways to measure the similarity of topics, a simple one is based on
the continuous measure. Each document that the model analyses gets assigned a vector of
probabilities for each topic. So, every document has  some  probability of being every topic,
even if it is very low. What we do is correlate the probabilities for each topic within each
document. A particular document might score high on the banking topic, the question we are
exploring here is what other topics are scoring highly in that same document? More generally,
which topics tend to have a high probability when banking risk does? Extend this to every
pair of topics and the results are in Figure 4. Again, we should note that an assumption of
the model is one topic per document. In so far as this is violated, these correlations could
also capture correlations in the risks themselves.   In other words, if a single risk snippet
contains more than one risk, then these probabilities may also be correlated because the two
risks appear at the same time. However, we are assuming for our analysis that the one-topic
assumption is a reasonable approximation, given documents are only 21 words long.
    Topics that have a high correlation are similar in the sense that they have a shared
language. We previously asked which risks’ probabilities co-move with banking, and we find
reassuringly that the top three are loans, interest rates, and foreign exchange. Some more
examples that are positively correlated are regulation and litigation; the global economy and
inflation; and banking and loans. There are more examples, but these findings indicate that
the similarity between topics is intuitive.
    This exercise in itself has an interesting finding. Namely, cybersecurity is most related
to regulation. This would seem to indicate that the cybersecurity topic has a lot to do with
the actual regulation surrounding it (e.g. GDPR in the EU) and is not exclusive to actual
risks of hacking and data breaches.

                                       10
Figure 1: Topic Similarities
This figure shows the similarities between topics. Every risk snippet has a probability vector with an
element for every topic. We correlate these probabilities within each risk snippet. A higher probability
indicates shared language between topics.

   The next step is we must establish that the model is actually able to classify documents
into the correct topic.  To do this, we manually validated 320 risk snippets.  260 of these
pertain to potential false positives, i.e. they are classified as one of our 13 topics, and 60 are
those that were classified to topics other than the 13 we selected (possible false negatives).
Table 2 shows the results.
   Let us assume for this analysis that the error rates are on the model level and do not
change from topic to topic.   Then, we can estimate what the actual model error rate is
using the Wilson score to calculate a confidence interval. In our sample, 21/260 were false
positives, so our true error rate lies within 5.3% and 12.0% to a 95% confidence level. We
found 7/60 false negatives, since this is a much smaller sample the interval is larger at 5.8%
to 22.2%.
    These error rates are not trivial. In particular, we must be concerned about the selection
of which documents are incorrectly classified. If documents from one topic are systematically
being classified in another topic, then the latter will be biased with whatever e↵ects the
former risk has. Even if it is random which topic is misclassified, average e↵ect sizes of other
risks are unlikely to be the same as that for the topic the documents are being wrongly
assigned to. This may introduce some bias in the coe cients towards the average of all risks
as the measure is not a pure signal of one topic.  For the false negatives, we worry about

                                       11
which types of documents go unclassified. It is highly likely not to be random, but instead,
it is the topics that o↵er a slightly weaker signal and/or mention other topics as well. This
could mean we only lose power, or if subtle mentions of risk signal something di↵erent then
we could be missing out on part of the measure of risk.

Table 2: Manual Quality Sample Results
This table shows the results from 320 manually validated randomly generated samples. One sample here
corresponds to a single risk snippet. 260 samples are from documents the model classified as one of the risk
topics we study (20 per topic), 60 correspond to cases when the model classified them as a topic other than
the thirteen being studied (“None”). # are the number that were incorrectly classified. % is this number
divided by total sampled in that category.

   Cyber   Globeco   Loan   Oilgas   Supch   Intrts   Litig   Reg   Contr.   Tax   Infl   Forex   Bank   None
#     6        0       0      2       0       0      1     3      1      6     0      1      1      7
%   30%     0%     0%    10%     0%     0%    5%   15%    5%    30%   0%    5%    5%    12%

   We also decompose the percentage of transcripts that registered as having some exposure
to each of the risks in Table 3. In line with the previous concerns over false negatives, most
risks are in less than 5% of transcripts. Just under a third of the transcripts have mentioned
at least one source of (our thirteen) risks. There are two possible explanations. The first is
that there are simply not that many discussions that are a clear signal of a certain topic.
Many might be ambiguous or only loosely related which would (and should) not be classified
as a certain topic. This could be an issue if these still o↵er  some  information about the topic.
Another source of this error is when the one topic per document assumption is violated. In
this case, it might be a clear signal of two topics but of course, only one can be chosen.
   Nevertheless, the vast majority of documents are correctly classified.   Hence, we feel
comfortable moving on with the analysis but need to keep in mind how these factors might
a↵ect the interpretation of our results.

Table 3: Percentage of Transcripts with Discrete Risk
This table shows how many transcripts have at least one mention of each risk using the discrete measure.
Total represents how many transcripts have at least one of  any  risk, since transcripts can mention more
than one risk, this total is not the sum of topic specific percentages.

                   Risk                 Percentage  >  0
                      cyber dis               4.33 %
                      globeco dis             5.91 %
                      loan dis                3.43 %
                      oilgas dis               5.38 %
                     supch dis              4.07 %
                      intrts dis               2.27 %
                       litig dis                 2.51 %
                      reg dis                 1.97 %
                      contract dis            2.02 %
                      tax dis                 2.92 %
                       infl dis                 1.55 %
                      forex dis               1.50 %
                     bank dis               1.01 %
                     Total                  30.73 %

                                       12
4.2   Aggregate Risk

We now aggregate the risk across transcripts for each quarter.  These aggregate patterns
are interesting contributions on their own given many topics do not have existing measures
of risk. We will also analyse the co-movements between risks on the aggregate level. More
importantly, however, this serves as another validation check.  Aggregate patterns in risk
should be intuitive, as an obvious example we should see loan and banking risk increase
around 2008. To facilitate this sort of analysis, we selected outside validation indices for most
topics that establish some historical context. To aggregate them, we averaged together the
topic measures across all transcripts in a given quarter. Averaging rather than adding them
controls for the amount of data we have in each period. Both the discrete and continuous
aggregate measures of risk can be found in Figure A.4.
    We find that, in general, both the discrete and continuous variations of the measure
qualitatively complement each other.   We will reiterate here that the two are measuring
slightly di↵erent things: the discrete measure describes the overall  level  of risk, whereas its
continuous counterpart measures the  relative  level. This is why, for example, supply chain
and many other risks that spiked in 2020 in the discrete measure, dipped in the continuous
one; there was a much stronger signal of other risks such as the pandemic or the global
economy (sub-figure (d)) which mechanically brought down all other risks.
   Without being a subject matter expert, it is di cult to judge whether the aggregate
patterns are in fact intuitive. The validation measures in Table 4 were plotted alongside our
discrete aggregate indices in Figure 2. Contract and litigation risk do not have a measure
because, to the best of our abilities, we could not find one that was representative of the risk
and covered any significant period of time. The remaining measures are intended to reflect
some aspect of the topic that we deem informative of the aggregate risk. This means that
most are not (and certainly should not be) directly correlated with our measures of risk.

Table 4: Validation Indices
This table outlines the validation measures we use at the aggregate level. Figure 2 plots these alongside
our discrete measure of risk. Not all measures are intended to be perfectly correlated with our risk
measures, but they reflect  some  aspect of the topic that is useful to compare to. Two are missing a
measure due to lack of available data.

  Risk            Validation Measure   Definition              Reference
  Cybersecurity     Nasdaq CTA          Tracks the performance   Nasdaq (2024)
                     Cybersecurity Index    of cybersecurity
                                          companies.
   Global economy   Cboe Volatility Index   Implied volatility of the   Cboe Global
                   (VIX Index)           S&P 500 index.           Markets (2024)
   Loans            Delinquency rate on    Delinquency rate for all   Federal Reserve
                      all loans, all             loans and all commercial   Bank of St.
                    commercial banks      banks in the U.S.         Louis (2024a)

                                                            Continued on next page

                                       13
Table 4: Validation Indices

  Risk            Validation Measure   Definition              Reference

   Oil & gas         Global price of WTI    Crude oil prices.           Federal Reserve
                     crude, U.S. dollars                                 Bank of St.
                     per barrel                                         Louis (2024c)
   Supply chain      Global Supply Chain   Combines data on         Federal Reserve
                   Pressure Index         transportation costs and   Bank of New
                  (GSCPI)              manufacturing to         York (2024)
                                             measure the state of
                                            supply chains worldwide.
   Interest rates      Federal Funds          Federal Funds rate in      Federal Reserve
                    e↵ective rate           the U.S.                  Bank of St.
                                                                     Louis (2024b)
   Regulatory       U.S. Economic Policy   Measures policy-related   Economic Policy
                    Uncertainty Index      economic uncertainty.     Uncertainty
                                                                     (2024)
   Tax              U.S. federal corporate  Historical U.S. federal     Trading
                    tax rate                corporate tax rates.       Economics
                                                                     (2024)
   Inflation          Consumer Price        Tracks inflation by        U.S. Bureau of
                    Index (CPI)            measuring changes in      Labor Statistics
                                              the price level of a         (2024)
                                            market basket of goods.
   Forex            U.S. Dollar Index       Measures the value of     The Wall Street
                   (DXY)                the U.S. dollar relative    Journal (2024b)
                                                to a basket of currencies.
  Banking          Dow Jones U.S.        Tracks the performance   The Wall Street
                    Banks Index           of companies in the       Journal (2024a)
                                             banking sector.

                                       14
Figure 2: Aggregate Measures with Validation Indices
This figure shows the aggregate discrete measures of risk broken down by individual risk types including
the validation measures outlined in Table 4. Our measure always uses the left axis, the validation index on
the right one. Aggregate measures of risk are calculated by averaging the level of risk across transcripts.
They are then standardised on the aggregate level.

              (a)  Cybersecurity

             (b)  Global economy

             (c)  Loans

                                       15
Figure 2
Continued

              (d)  Oil, gas, & energy

              (e)  Supply chain

                (f )  Interest rates

                                       16
Figure 2
Continued

              (g)  Regulation

             (h)  Tax

               (i)  Inflation

                                       17
Figure 2
Continued

               (j)  Foreign exchange rates

             (k)  Banking

                                       18
We now dedicate a discussion to each of the aggregate measures in Figure 2 to provide more
historical context when needed and observe when the risk measures do and do not line up
with their validation counterparts.
Cybersecurity  is of recent interest which is why data is more limited. Nazli et al. (2021)
apply the methodology in Hassan et al. (2019) to create a cybersecurity risk measure. They
note that ransomware attacks have become more frequent in recent years. Governments have
also started enacting new policies as concerns grow. This is reflected in the trend of perceived
cybersecurity risk, up until recently. We also notice that the shares of cybersecurity firms
rallied amongst the spike in risk in late 2020 and early 2021. Afterwards, as risk began to
trend downwards again, we see these firms have a drop in share price, presumably because
the risk of cybersecurity attacks diminished and the market for their services was expected
to have less demand.
The global economy  needs less introduction; there was a major spike in 2008 and in the
subsequent Eurozone crisis.  Another spike is at the onset of the pandemic, and the next
spike is during 2022 and 2023 when there were fears of a recession (Washington Post, 2023).
In general, most spikes in the VIX correlate with the risk measure, as expected, since in this
case the measures are very similar. In fact, using the quarterly measures of the VIX the two
have a correlation coe cient of about 0.7.
Loan  shows a clear spike in 2010, as is expected since in the aftermath of the 2008 crisis
delinquency rates reached their highs for this period. The spike in 2020 is a good example
                                                            13
of when perceived risk may not necessarily be realised.    Whilst there was a small uptick in
delinquency rates after the pandemic, it was much smaller than might have been expected.
Oil & gas  risk at first glance appears not to correlate well with oil prices.  One should
observe, however, that spikes in the risk index are almost always correlated with large  move-
ments  in price, not necessarily in any one direction. The spikes in 2011, and 2022 correlate
with large upward movements in oil, whereas 2008, 2014, 2016, and 2020 come with large
downward movements. Indeed then this is a very pure indication of uncertainty.
Supply chain  risk has been a major issue thrice in recent years. Once around 2010, 2020
with the pandemic, and another time during the global supply chain crises of 2021-2022.
The risk measure fits this narrative perfectly, even the relative levels of the measure line up
well with the validation index. That is, the size of the spikes is correct, which is not always
true in our other measures.
Interest rates  in the latter half of the period correlate well with our measure of risk.
One might note that the large spike ahead of 2012 is not proceeded by any changes in
interest rates, which, as mentioned previously, is not incompatible with our measure.  We
are measuring the  perceived  risk of changes in the interest rate, but the very fact that we
measure uncertainty means that the risk may never be realised. It is very plausible that firms
expected rate increases after the dramatic drop in 2008, but over the years, as the Federal
Reserve kept rates low, such perception began to dissipate. Confirming this is a study by
Qadan, Shuval, and David (2023) where they created “a VIX-style measure of forward-
looking volatility about Treasury yields to capture uncertainty about interest rates”. Indeed
their measure spikes in 2009 and then again in 2010 and 2011, decreasing after that and
                                 14
increasing again only in 2020.   Conversely, Ying (2023) in their study of earnings calls find

  13
    This is true for any type of risk, but especially when what we measure can be an incorrect perception
of risk.
  14
    Ideally we would use this measure to compare to ours instead, but the data was not available for our

                                       19
that perceived interest rate risk has steadily decreased between 2003 and 2021 until it spikes
again, so we might have a reason to be less confident in this result.
Regulation  until 2018 exhibits a similar trend to the U.S. Economic Policy Uncertainty
Index.   Amidst new banking regulations imposed after the 2008 crises, the rise and then
gradual decline of this risk makes sense. In 2020, however, the EPU index spikes whereas
our measure remains flat. One obvious explanation is that the EPU is not regulatory risk and
that the uncertainty here pertained to other political issues (such as the election). What this
confirms is that this risk indeed is a narrow measure of specifically regulatory risk, and does
not reflect broader political uncertainty per se like that of Hassan et al. (2019). Calomiris
et al. (2020) built their own measure of aggregate regulatory risk using conference calls and
found a similar trend, although the actual fluctuations are di↵erent.  However, they also
compare their measure to others in the literature and find that they all di↵er dramatically.
Tax  risk spikes just before the only major related event that occurred in our sample, that
is the  Tax Cuts and Jobs Act  of 2018.  This cut the corporate from as high as 39% to a
flat 21%. Clearly, there was a lot of uncertainty preceding the act which is reflected in the
aggregate plot, and all the uncertainty was resolved after the policy was enacted. Of course,
one might be concerned over when the law was  passed  not when it was enacted. To this end,
it was not even introduced until November 2nd, 2017, around the first spike.
Inflation  figures seem to correlate closely with the aggregate risk measure, with the ex-
ception being in 2008.  Chava et al. (2022) built their own measure of inflation risk using
conference call transcripts, and our aggregate measure lines up very closely with theirs with
the exception again in 2008. This may be because firms exclusively discussed the issue in
conjunction with another topic.   In this case, we might have some documents that were
not classified as inflation even though they mentioned it. Indeed in Figure A.4, we do see
that the continuous measure rose around that time which would indicate that there were
discussions of inflation even if they were not classified as such by the discrete approach.
Foreign exchange rate  risk seems to spike when there are sudden or large movements in
the value of the US dollar. Notably, 2008, 2010, 2012, 2015, and 2023. We will note though
that whilst there seems to be a relationship here, it is not perfect.  Interestingly, the risk
is trending downward, one explanation is that despite there still being large movements in
the dollar after 2015, there are also extended periods of relative calm.  Before 2015, when
risk on average was higher, the dollar appeared to be more volatile. If we split the period
into before and after 2015, we find that the standard deviation of the per cent daily index
changes in earlier years is 20-25% higher than in later years.  This is robust regardless of
whether we set the split to 2014, 2015, or 2016, so it is not explained by the sudden break
in 2015.
Banking  risk spikes appear to be highly correlated with drops in the banking stock index.
Furthermore, the risk spikes as expected in 2008, and again in 2023 around the collapse of
Silicon Valley Bank and First Republic Bank, and rising fears of further contagion.
   Figure 4 also notes the correlation between the aggregate (discrete) risks. We find here
that banking risk is positively correlated with the global economy, loan risk, interest rates,
and contract risk. Contract risk is likely to be in large part counter-party risk, and indeed
we saw it spike around 2008 when many firms were failing (Figure A.4).   So this result
seems justifiable. Other notable cases that are positively correlated are oil & gas and foreign

own plotting.

                                       20
exchange; inflation and supply chain; inflation and interest rates; regulation, litigation, tax,
and contracts. Given we have a relatively short time series, and this is on the aggregate level,
these correlations should only be an indication.  For example, litigation and cybersecurity
risk are negatively correlated. We do not interpret this as there being any real relationship
here, it just so happens that one is trending up whilst the other down.

Figure 3: Aggregate Topic Correlations
This figure shows the correlations between aggregate (discrete) risk measures shown in Figure A.4. Risk
was aggregated by averaging the measure for each topic across transcripts in a given quarter.

   What we have shown in this section is that the aggregate risk patterns generally reflect
real events in a way that would be expected. Furthermore, the aggregate correlations between
risks are intuitive. Combined with the topic representations and correlation exercises of the
previous sub-section, we thus argue that indeed we are able to capture events for the actual
topics which the model has produced.

4.3   Volatility & Returns

The next question that logically follows is whether we are actually measuring risk. High levels
of risk would indicate that a firm is exposed to large potential shocks that can significantly
change the value of the company. That is, we would expect riskier firms on average to have
higher volatility in their publicly traded securities.  To test this, we focus our analysis on
the relationship between each firm’s measures of risk, and the realised stock volatility over

                                       21
a 90-day holding period. If what we measure is risk, there should be a positive relationship.
    Of course, this will only apply to our discrete measure of risk, since its continuous coun-
terpart inherently controls for the overall risk. Our analysis is thus focused on the former,
but the results from the latter may still be interpreted as the relative importance of each
risk. Our main specification for either measure is as follows:

                        V ol it  =    t  +   i  +  Riskit  +  ln(A it ) + ✏ it                     (1)

   Where  V ol  represents a 90-day holding period starting on the day the conference call was
held,    t  the set of time fixed e↵ects,    i  firm fixed e↵ects,  Risk  represents the vector of either
the discrete or continuous risks variables (   is the corresponding vector of coe cients), and
ln(A) is the log of the firm’s assets. All errors are clustered on the firm level as motivated
                          15
in Hassan et al. (2019).    We also tested regressing each risk individually, but this did not
change the conclusions of the analysis. We include log of assets as a control for the size of
a firm since this is a strong predictor of its volatility and could easily be correlated with
aspects of our measure. Our set of controls is motivated by the specification in Hassan et al.
(2019), however, we will also explore other alternatives.
   We should note that several later authors (e.g. Kim et al. 2023; Wu 2024; Nazli et al.
2021) omit the firm fixed e↵ects in their main specifications. In some cases, this does not
significantly change their analysis, but for Kim et al. (2023) it turned their coe cient for
cybersecurity risk insignificant. There is a reason this might be appropriate as it is possible
that firms have di↵erent permanent exposures to risk which are revealed based on whether
they discuss the risk or not. Such an e↵ect would be omitted if we were to control for firm
fixed e↵ects. For this reason, we test this alternative specification as well where instead of
firm fixed e↵ects we use sector.
   Before analysing the topics, we should first establish that the discussions of risk them-
selves do hold information about risk and future volatility. That is, rather than introducing
any topic-specific risks, we run our main specification on just the total risk. Total risk is de-
fined as the number of times a firm discusses risk in a transcript. The results are in Table 5.
We see that indeed discussion of risk is generally followed by periods of higher volatility,
even after controlling for time and firm fixed e↵ects. This indicates that there is variance
within this measure that is informative about risk.

  15
    They run a series of falsification exercises and show that in simulations the distribution of the resulting
t-statistic is correct.

                                       22
Table 5: 90-Day Volatility Regressed on Total Risk
The following table regresses realised stock volatility over a 90-day holding period on total risk. Total risk
(context count) is defined as the number of synonyms for risk or uncertainty in a transcript, after filtering
for safe-harbour statements. Realised stock volatility is measured as the standard deviation of investor
returns over a 90-day holding period beginning on the day the conference call was held. We control for the
log of firm assets (log atq). Volatility is winsorised at the 1st and 99th percentiles and then standardised.
Sector is defined as the two-digit SIC code. All errors are clustered at the firm level.

                                                (1)           (2)
                    VARIABLES         90 Vol       90 Vol

                      context count       0.00742***   0.00267***
                                           (0.00104)    (0.000600)
                      log atq              -0.196***     -0.116***
                                           (0.00397)     (0.0111)
                      Constant            1.427***     0.851***
                                            (0.0311)      (0.0832)

                      Observations         120,869      120,894
                      R-squared             0.504        0.657
                    Time FE             Yes         Yes
                     Sector FE             Yes         n/a
                    Sector x Time FE      Yes         No
                    Firm FE             No         Yes
                         Robust standard errors in parentheses
                      *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

   We also find that firm fixed e↵ects do make a large di↵erence to the e↵ect size. In fact,
the coe cient becomes just 35% of the size when only sector fixed e↵ects are used.  This
would seem to indicate a large portion of the information signalled about risk in conference
calls pertains to permanent di↵erences between firms rather than the variation over time.
Of course, this only holds true to the extent that there are no other unobserved di↵erences
that can explain the change in coe cients. Certainly, these may exist, such as a CEO who
tends to not share much information when risks are high. Hassan et al. (2019) tested this
particular possibility with CEO fixed e↵ects but found no notable di↵erence in their results.
   With the conviction that there is risk to be measured in the conference calls, we now
move on to breaking this down by topic. Figure 4 runs our specification in Equation 1 as
well as the alternative that replaces firm with sector fixed e↵ects. Table A.2 and Table A.3
show the full regression coe cients and additional specifications as well.  For the discrete
measure, we find that with the sector fixed e↵ects, 7 out of 13 of the risks are positive and
significantly associated with realised volatility to a 5% significance level or more: loan, oil
& gas, interest, litigation, regulatory, contract, and banking risk. After controlling for firm
fixed e↵ects, only 2 remain significant: loan and banking risk. We argued though that such
a control would remove any permanent di↵erences in risk that we measure. The fact that
the majority of risks then become insignificant would suggest that what our measure picks
up is precisely these di↵erences. Of course, we cannot rule out that there is a confounding
factor as well, but much of the literature has argued for the validity of omitting firm fixed
e↵ects (e.g. Kim et al. 2023; Wu 2024; Nazli et al. 2021).

                                       23
   The discrete measure is the number of mentions of a particular risk in a transcript,
all other units are standardised. After considering measurement noise, the coe cients are
economically significant.   One mention of banking risk, before controlling for firm fixed
e↵ects, is associated with around 0.1 standard deviation increase in the firm’s volatility over
the next 90 days. Given also that banking risk is a  small  aspect of the overall risk profile
of a firm, this is large.  Additionally, this is over 13 times larger than the coe cient for
                             16
our overall risk in Table 5   . This means that either banking risk is very important, or our
overall measure has a lot of measurement noise and the topic-specific measure provides a
cleaner signal. The continuous measure tests the relative importance of a given topic, and
since banking risk is not significant in either direction, it suggests the latter result is more
likely.
   There are also some negative coe cients in both specifications, namely, global economy,
interest rates, and inflation (depending on the controls). One explanation is that for certain
risks, discussing them may signal increased risk on the aggregate level since indeed the
aggregate indices made sense, but on the firm level, they indicate that the firm is more
prepared. That is, firms will discuss a given risk more when it is more important, but the
fact that they discuss it also signals that they are more prepared and hence we would expect
volatility to be lower. The relationship between stock volatility and the risks where we find
negative coe cients has not been studied previously using conference calls. Hence, this is a
novel finding and might indicate that not all risks can be measured on the firm level using
these transcripts.
   We can also further interpret the continuous measures (Figure 4. We find that after con-
trolling for firm fixed e↵ects, loan and litigation risk are more important than the “average”
topic to a 1% significance level. The topics it is being compared to are the 48 in Table A.1.
This interpretation may not hold if these risks are correlated with the total risk, however,
because then they do reflect not just the composition but the level of risk.   We checked
this possibility, however, and found the litigation continuous measure is actually negatively
                     2
correlated (-0.06  R  ) which would make our original conclusion slightly stronger. Loan risk
                                                               2
on the other hand is positive but with a very small  R   of 0.05.  Litigation risk being of
above average importance raises the question of selection in our measure. If a lawsuit has
come to the attention of company executives and is important enough to be discussed on
an earnings call with analysts, it is likely to be a large case. We then might presume here
what we measure is not the relationships between litigation in general, but only the tail end
of the largest cases. In this case, we would certainly expect it to be a very important risk.
    In both specifications, we found supply chain and cybersecurity risk to not have significant
                                                                                     17
coe cients, contrary to the findings of Wu (2024) and Nazli et al. (2021).    Wu (2024)
actually use concurrent quarter volatility which would include on average 30 days of stock
volatility  prior  to the earnings call, and Nazli et al. (2021) use only a thirty-day window, so
it is possible that the results are highly sensitive to this assumption. Of course, this could
also indicate that classification algorithms (like ours) are not well suited for these risks. It
is possible that they violate an assumption of the model such as being commonly mentioned
in conjunction with another topic.  An alternative is that the relationship for these topics
does not hold in our time period.

  16
    These can be directly compared because total risk is the number of mentions of risk, and the discrete
measure is the number of mentions of a particular risk, hence we have the same units.
  17
    Note that for the other risks that have been covered by previous papers such a comparison is not
available.

                                       24
Figure 4: Realised Volatility Regression Coe cients
This figure summarises the 95% confidence intervals for the regression of a 90-day holding period volatility
on each of the risk factors. Exact coe cients and standard errors can be found in Figure A.2 (discrete) and
Figure A.3 (continuous). Sub-figure (a) includes time, and sector fixed e↵ects as well as their interaction.
Sector is defined by the two-digit SIC code. Sub-figure (b) is the specification in Equation 1 and includes
firm and time fixed e↵ects. Both specifications include the logarithm of firm assets as a control. Volatility
is calculated as the standard deviation of daily returns over a 90-day holding period beginning on the day
of the conference call. It is winsorised at the 1st and 99th percentiles and then standardised. The
continuous measure is standardised, the discrete measure is the number of mentions of that topic in a
transcript. All errors are clustered on the firm level.

         (a)  Sector and time fixed e↵ects

                  CyberRisk
              GlobalEcoRisk
                  LoanRisk
                 OilGasRisk
                SupChRisk
                   InterestRisk
                  LitigationRisk
              RegulatoryRisk
                 ContractRisk
                    TaxRisk
                    InflationRisk
                  ForexRisk
                  BankRisk
                             -.1         -.05         0         .05         .1         .15

                                               Discrete      Continuous

         (b)  Firm and time fixed e↵ects

                  CyberRisk
              GlobalEcoRisk
                  LoanRisk
                 OilGasRisk
                SupChRisk
                   InterestRisk
                  LitigationRisk
              RegulatoryRisk
                 ContractRisk
                    TaxRisk
                    InflationRisk
                  ForexRisk
                  BankRisk
                            -.05                0                .05                .1

                                               Discrete      Continuous

                                       25
   We need to investigate further why the firm fixed e↵ects made such a large di↵erence.
If it the case that firms have large permanent di↵erences in risk exposure, and this is what
we are measuring, it would be a mistake to add this control. Conversely, if we are missing
some confound that is not accounted for by firm size or sector di↵erences, then our results
are spurious.
    One possibility is that our measure is a lagging indicator of risk. That is, firms discuss
a risk only after it has already had a chance to a↵ect the firm in some way.  This would
mean that a recent previous period could see higher volatility, and only then our measure
would increase.  In this case, we might still see a positive relationship in future volatility
because it is auto-correlated (Mandelbrot, 1967). It is also possible this relationship is only
one-sided in that firms discuss risk after a negative shock.   To test these possibilities we
ran two regressions in Table 6. The first repeats our main specification in Equation 1 but
substitutes future volatility for past volatility. The second does the same but with previous
90-day average returns.

                                       26
Table 6: Regression Test for Lagging Risk
The following regressions test lagged volatility and returns on our risk measures. Regression (1) regresses
the previous 90-day volatility on each risk measure, including firm and time fixed e↵ects. Regression (2) is
the same but with previous 90-day returns. Lagged returns and volatility are calculated using a 90-day
holding period ending the day prior to the earnings call. All errors are clustered on the firm level.
Volatility is winsorised at the 1st and 99th percentiles and then standardised. Returns is also standardised.
“volatilityL” is the previous 90-day volatility. “log atq” is the log of assets.

                                         (1)                   (2)
               VARIABLES   Previous 90-day vol   Previous 90-day ret

                cyber dis            -0.00150              0.00551
                                     (0.00440)            (0.00434)
                globeco dis           0.00711             -0.0141**
                                     (0.00483)            (0.00701)
                loan dis            0.0298***            -0.0275***
                                     (0.00828)            (0.00820)
                oilgas dis            -0.0108*             -0.0305***
                                     (0.00643)            (0.00930)
                supch dis            -0.00495             -0.0291**
                                     (0.00674)             (0.0123)
                intrts dis           -0.0189***             0.00577
                                     (0.00713)            (0.00927)
                 litig dis             0.0287***            -0.0245**
                                     (0.00977)             (0.0124)
                reg dis              -0.00458              0.00709
                                      (0.0107)              (0.0149)
                contract dis          0.0112              -0.0338**
                                      (0.0140)              (0.0159)
                tax dis              0.00450               0.0158
                                     (0.00836)             (0.0117)
                 infl dis               -0.00771              -0.00865
                                     (0.00774)             (0.0132)
                forex dis            -0.0274***             -0.00857
                                     (0.00993)             (0.0142)
                bank dis            0.0493***             -0.0360*
                                      (0.0171)              (0.0211)

                Observations         120,892              120,892
                R-squared            0.668                0.189
               Controls              Yes                 Yes
               Time FE             Yes                Yes
               Firm FE             Yes                Yes
                         Robust standard errors in parentheses
                      *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                       27
    We will discuss two potential interpretations of the results in Table 6. First, as mentioned,
conference calls may represent a lagging indicator of risk or shocks.   The second is that
markets might incorporate the information about increased risk before the conference call.
   If we had a lagging indicator of risk, there would be a much clearer relationship between
risk and previous 90-day volatility.   However, only 3 are significant and positive to a 1%
level, and 3 are also negative and significant (with an additional one to a 10% level). On the
other hand, 6 of the risks are significant and negatively related to previous 90-day returns.
Since those that are positive are not significant, it seems most measures are associated with
negative returns in the previous quarter. It might be then that firms only discuss risks after
di cult times when returns have been low or a negative shock has occurred. Still, it is not
clear whether this would necessarily confound our estimate of future volatility.
   The alternative interpretation is that markets recognise the increased risk the firm is
exposed to before the conference call. This could be the case if the risks we measure correlate
with negative changes in the firm’s expected return. For example, a firm discussing a large
litigation case against them now faces a chance of a large loss with no potential upside —
even in the state of the world where they win, they would have had to pay large legal fees
and possibly lost customers as the company’s reputation worsened. It would thus be the case
that any amount of this risk decreases the expected return of the firm. If investors realise
this, the firm’s valuation should (and does) fall even before the conference call has a chance
to discuss it.
   In any case, as a robustness check, we repeat our specification in (a) from Figure 4
with sector and time fixed e↵ects, but additionally, control for previous 90-day returns and
volatility to see if this has the same e↵ect as controlling for the firm. The results are plotted
in Figure 5 and the full regressions are in Table A.2 and Table A.3. Naturally, we do find
attenuated coe cients, however, 4 remain positive and significant.   This would seem to
indicate two things. Firstly, part of the firm fixed e↵ect di↵erence may come from partially
controlling for some lagged e↵ect. However, we have also ruled out the possibility that this
explains  all  the di↵erences.   After controlling for previous returns and volatility, we still
find that 4 of our coe cients are significant and positive.  It might be that the remaining
di↵erences are due to permanent exposures between firms, in which case we are in fact
measuring risk.
    We should argue that the reason this is not our primary specification is that by controlling
for previous period risk, we are inherently restricting ourselves to only the initial variance
of a stock during a period of elevated risk.  If a rise in risk a↵ects the volatility of more
than one subsequent period, we can only exploit the e↵ect of the first. This is because, after
that initial rise in volatility, future periods will control for past volatility, and attenuate the
e↵ect of the risk itself. We also would not want to control for previous negative returns if
the higher risk was being priced in by the market since this would again confound the e↵ect
of the risk itself.

                                       28
Figure 5: Realised Volatility Regression Coe cients With Additional Controls
This figure summarises the 95% confidence intervals for the regression of a 90-day holding period volatility
on each of the risk factors. Exact coe cients and standard errors can be found in Figure A.4 (discrete) and
Figure A.5 (continuous). The regression includes time, sector, and their interaction fixed e↵ects. Sector is
defined by the two-digit SIC code. We additionally control for the size of firm assets, previous 90-day
average returns, and previous 90-day average volatility. Previous 90-day implies a 90-day holding period
ending on the day prior to when the conference call was held. Volatility is winsorised at the 1st and 99th
percentiles and then standardised. The continuous measure is standardised, the discrete measure is the
number of mentions of that topic in a transcript. All errors are clustered on the firm level.

                  CyberRisk
              GlobalEcoRisk
                  LoanRisk
                 OilGasRisk
                SupChRisk
                   InterestRisk
                  LitigationRisk
              RegulatoryRisk
                 ContractRisk
                    TaxRisk
                    InflationRisk
                  ForexRisk
                  BankRisk
                            -.05                0                .05                .1

                                               Discrete      Continuous

5   Variance Decomposition

In so far as one is confident in our measure of risk, the next question we ask is where do
fluctuations in each risk come from. Namely, how much of the variance comes from di↵erences
across time or sectors, and how much remains to be di↵erences between firms. To answer
this, we decompose the variance of each topic into time, sector, and their interaction fixed
e↵ects.  A primary motivation is to evaluate the extent to which each risk is systematic.
This is the same analysis that has been performed in Hassan et al. (2019) and Kim et al.
(2023) and so we also wish to compare findings. Our results will lead to the conclusion that
independently performing this variance decomposition on a single risk can be di cult to
interpret, and we suggest that the results only be compared  between  risks.

                                                                                                             2
   The approach is simple, begin by controlling for only time fixed e↵ects and record the  R
of the regression. Add sector fixed e↵ects to the same regression and record the incremental
  2
R  . We then do the same for their interaction and for firm fixed e↵ects. Each of these incre-
ments represents the share of variance that the fixed e↵ect can explain. Residual variance
is referred to as “firm level”. This consists of a permanent component (firm FE), and one
that varies over time. Table 7 shows the results of this for our 13 measures of risk.
   We find remarkably low levels of variation explained by time fixed e↵ects. However, this

                                       29
Table 7: Variance Decomposition of Risk
This table shows the variance decomposition of each risk using its discrete measure. In the standard model,
                                           2
the percentages represent the incremental  R   for each fixed e↵ect (time, sector, and their interaction), and
firm level is the residual variance after including all fixed e↵ects. Breakdown decomposes the firm level
variation into a permanent component (firm fixed e↵ect) and the remaining residual is the variation of a
firm across time, after controlling for all fixed e↵ects. The beta model is constructed by regressing for each
firm its risk on the quarterly mean, and then including the interaction of the estimated beta for each
firm-topic pair with its quarterly mean in the standard model. The idiosyncratic component corresponds to
the remaining firm level variance in the standard model that still cannot be explained. In calculating the
beta model, around 6% of firms with only one observation are dropped. This can account for why
idiosyncratic variation is marginally higher in some cases than in the standard model. Sector is defined as
the two-digit SIC code.

                             Standard                  Breakdown       Beta model
 Risk           Time    Sector   S  ⇥  T   Firm Level   Firm FE    Resid    Idiosyncratic
 Cyber.         0.11%   3.97%    1.17%     94.75%     45.38%    44.92%     84.13%
 Global econ.    2.73%   1.05%    5.15%     91.07%      9.30%    73.44%     91.06%
 Loan          0.22%   15.64%   2.34%     81.80%     19.77%    44.07%     81.82%
 Oil & gas       0.36%   11.18%   4.00%     84.45%     10.93%    58.81%     84.43%
 Supply chain    1.17%   2.70%    5.95%     90.18%      8.11%    73.09%     90.17%
 Interest rates   0.28%   6.43%    2.54%     90.76%     12.80%    68.95%      90.77%
 Litigation      0.25%   2.20%    3.51%     94.05%     18.93%    70.32%     94.04%
 Regulation     0.14%   1.23%    3.74%     94.89%      8.23%    82.00%     94.91%
 Contract       0.13%   1.14%    5.00%     93.73%     10.41%    77.65%     93.72%
 Tax           0.57%   0.53%    3.81%     95.09%      8.44%    82.02%     95.08%
 Inflation        3.03%   0.84%    5.59%     90.54%      5.75%    76.55%      90.56%
 Foreign Exch.   0.55%   0.26%    3.15%     96.04%     10.74%    81.63%     96.03%
 Bank          0.33%   3.78%    2.52%     93.37%      7.81%    79.20%     93.35%

is in line with the previous literature who repeat the same analyses on their set of risks
(Hassan et al. (2019) for political risk, Calomiris et al. (2020) for regulatory risk, and Kim
et al. (2012) for AI, climate, and again political risk). We reassuringly still find that global
economy and inflation have by far the largest time e↵ects. After these two, it is supply chain
risk; this is not surprising in light of the recent (global) supply chain crisis. It is possible,
however, that the results are primarily driven by just this event. To probe this theory we
split the sample before and after (including) 2020, and found the latter to have nearly twice
as much variance explained by time fixed e↵ects despite it being a much shorter time period.
Of course, more research would be needed to establish this as fact, however, it is worth
noting that the systematic nature of a risk may change over time.
   On the other hand, cybersecurity and contract risk comparatively have small systematic
components. The former also has the lowest sector and time interaction variance. This would
indicate that overall exposure to cybersecurity risk is fairly constant over time, relative to
how much it varies permanently between firms and sectors. Given that our aggregate trend
in Figure 2 is relatively steady with few sudden spikes, this would make sense. For contract
risk we see a very high interaction e↵ect, this means that the risk is still somewhat systematic
but disproportionally a↵ects key sectors.
   Cybersecurity, interest rate, loan, and oil & gas risk have large sector e↵ects. This would
indicate that certain sectors for these risks are permanently exposed to di↵erent levels of this

                                       30
risk. Conversely, for systematic issues like the global economy or inflation the sector fixed
e↵ects are small, suggesting few permanent di↵erences across sectors. However, their time
and sector interacted e↵ects are the largest so certain sectors are disproportionately a↵ected
across time.
   We also find that cybersecurity risk has by far the largest permanent di↵erence in risk
exposure between firms.  In fact, nearly half of all topic-related risk can be explained this
way. In line with our previous finding that there is little variation across time, this makes
sense. The next highest is loan risk, since loan holdings are concentrated among few firms,
this seems intuitive.  On the other end, inflation has the lowest di↵erence between firms.
This is because the risk is very time-dependent, a firm in the middle of 2016, when inflation
was low and there was little reason to suspect this would change, would have no reason to
be talking about this. Hence, the variance is mostly across time.
   Our time fixed e↵ects are intended to capture systematic risk.  However, if firms have
heterogeneous exposure to the aggregate level of risk, this might fail to capture the full extent
of how systematic a risk is. In order to investigate this possibility, we also test an alternative
model of systematic risk exposure as described in Hassan et al. (2019). Namely, we create
a firm-level beta for each risk and firm pair by regressing firm-level risk on its quarterly
mean, and then including the interaction of the beta for each firm with the quarterly mean
of each risk into the standard specification with full time and sector fixed e↵ects. We find, as
did they, that such a model does not explain well the variation in risk, with one exception,
cybersecurity risk. In fact, for all other risks the firm level variation is almost identical to
the “idiosyncratic” one. For cybersecurity, the model explains 10% of the variance which in
                                    18
comparison is a very large e↵ect.   Combined with the fact that a large part of cybersecurity
risk can be explained by permanent firm di↵erences, it would seem to indicate there is much
larger heterogeneity between firms with regard to this risk than the others.   Specifically,
firms have very di↵erent but relatively constant exposures to the aggregate risk, on top of
the fact that each firm has a di↵erent level of the risk itself at all times. However, we cannot
conclude that such heterogeneity in exposures does not also exist for the other risks as if the
true betas were to vary over time, the model would also fail to explain very much variance.
   As a final point, we argue that because all studies thus far have found similarly low
levels of time variation across risks, interpreting the results in absolute terms is di cult.
Measurement noise will mechanically present itself in the firm-level variation. However, we
might assume that the amount of measurement noise is constant across di↵erent risk types,
in which case the relevant values of variance still are informative.   For example, Hassan
et al. (2019) found that time fixed e↵ects explain only 0.81% of the variation in political
risk. They concluded that this was lower than what the theoretical literature would predict,
however, this is higher than what most of our risks have, indicating it is a more systematic
risk.   Of course, our measure could have more measurement noise, but this is the very
reason why a single methodology is needed across risk. Indeed, Kim et al. (2023) found for
their measure(s) of political risk found time fixed e↵ects to explain 1-5% of the variation.
Even within the same paper, the results can be very di↵erent between similar measures.
Therefore, the absolute values are not very informative, so a repeated study that included
explicit political risk alongside other measures could then present more compelling evidence.

  18
    As outlined in the table, idiosyncratic risk for some topics exceeds standard risk by a small margin. This
can be explained by around 6% of firms with only one observation being dropped in the calculation of the
betas. We tested the standard model with these dropped as well and this increases the explanatory power
of all the beta models by around 1%, but makes no di↵erence to the conclusions of the analysis.

                                       31
The closest risk we have is regulation, which is a subset of political risk, but here we do
confirm their findings as we find the time fixed e↵ect portion to be one of the lowest, on par
with contract and cybersecurity risk.

6   Discussion

We have established in this paper that BERTopic can e↵ectively extract topics from confer-
ence calls. We also find that in building our aggregate measures of risk they show intuitive
patterns over time. Our regression analysis provided support for 7 of the measures of risk,
contingent on there being no significant di↵erences between firms that are not controlled for
by sector or size e↵ects. Even after controlling for firm fixed e↵ects, we find that loan and
banking risk are still significant and positively correlated with future volatility.
   The fact that only 2 risks remain significant and positive when adding firm fixed e↵ects
is suggestive of a few things. First, our approach might only measure permanent di↵erences
between firms. We discussed in the construction of our topics that the model lacks power
for subtle signals of topics. It might then be the case that clear indications of a certain topic
primarily reveal these permanent di↵erences, whereas all time variation originates from more
subtle statements. Second, future research should carefully consider controlling for firm fixed
e↵ects only when necessary. We argue that it is not always appropriate as this also controls
for di↵erences in permanent levels of risk between firms.  However, it is di cult to assess
what confounding factors may also play a role, so they should always be used as a robustness
check.
   Furthermore, depending on the specification, 3 of our topics (global economy, inflation,
                                                                          19
and interest rates) are negatively correlated with future volatility.    This indicates that in
some cases, discussion of risk in a conference call is not a good measure of that firm’s risk
because it instead signals that it is well prepared. Since the aggregate indices still appear
convincing, however, we argue it is still a good proxy for the aggregate level of risk.  One
might wonder what makes these risks di↵erent. It would seem that all three of these topics
are macroeconomic, whereas the majority of others deal in micro issues. An exception might
be foreign exchange, but if one refers to the regressions in Figure 4, forex risk is also negative,
and we could lack the power to detect a significant e↵ect. Might it be then, that these types
of risks are not well suited to the analysis of conference calls? Future research is needed to
evaluate this question more.
   Due to the availability of data, the time period we and other authors are able to study
is very short.   Nevertheless, we cover some years that others do not.   It is possible that
the relationship observed between topic risk discussions in earnings calls is time-varying.
The COVID-19 pandemic was quite an unprecedented time, with many unforeseen events
impacting firms all at once. It could have diverted management’s attention during the calls
to the pandemic itself. It is not inconceivable that this could a↵ect our measures. We tested
the main regression specification in Equation 1 with firm fixed e↵ects using only data prior
to 2020Q1, the results show that 7 coe cients are positive but were not significant enough
to confirm the hypothesis; we may lack the statistical power given the large truncation of
the data.

  19
    We cannot compare findings with Chava et al. (2022) and Ying (2023) because they do not repeat a
similar regression of future volatility.

                                       32
   In our variance decomposition, we also found evidence that an analysis of risk in the
context of conference calls would benefit from being applied to many risks at once. Measures
of risk in conference call transcripts mechanically have noise which makes interpretations of
the absolute value of results di cult. We found interesting results, however, by comparing
risks to each other. Included in this, we found that supply chain risk tends towards being
systematic, and cybersecurity risk presents itself very heterogeneously in terms of exposure
to aggregate risk and permanent di↵erences between firms.
    Our analysis is not without its limitations. In the validations of risk snippets, we noticed
some do discuss more than one risk, which violates a central assumption of the model.
Furthermore, the model has a non-trivial error rate in classifying risks. We conclude that
whilst BERTopic is an interesting method for discovering topics and it does seem to e↵ectively
measure some sources of firm risk, further research should look to bridge the gap between
our model and the existing literature. Namely, we need a convincing continuous measure of
risk that can both account for subtleties in the level of risk a snippet signals and still allow
endogenous definitions of topics.

                                       33
References

Calomiris, C. W., Mamaysky, H., Yang, R., 2020. Measuring the cost of regulation:  A
  text-based approach. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Cboe Global Markets, 2024. Historical Data for Cboe VIX Index and Other Volatility In-
  dices. Available at:  https://www.cboe.com/tradable_products/vix/vix_historical_
  data/.

Chava, S., Du, W., Shah, A., Zeng, L., 2022. Measuring firm-level inflation exposure: A deep
  learning approach. SSRN.

Economic   Policy   Uncertainty,    2024.   U.S.   EPU.   Available   at:     https://www.
  policyuncertainty.com/us_monthly.html.

Ersahin, N., Giannetti, M., Huang, R., 2024. Supply chain risk: Changes in supplier com-
  position and vertical integration. Journal of International Economics 147, 103854.

Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2024. Global Supply Chain Pressure Index (GSCPI).
  Available at:  https://www.newyorkfed.org/research/policy/gscpi#/interactive.

Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, 2024a. Delinquency rate on all loans, all commercial
  banks. Available at:  https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/DRALACBN.

Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, 2024b. Federal Funds E↵ective Rate. Available at:  https:
  //fred.stlouisfed.org/series/FEDFUNDS.

Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, 2024c. Global price of WTI Crude. Available at:  https:
  //fred.stlouisfed.org/series/POILWTIUSDM.

Grootendorst, M., 2022. Bertopic: Neural topic modeling with a class-based tf-idf procedure.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.05794 .

Hassan, T. A., Hollander, S., van Lent, L., Tahoun, A., 2019. Firm-level political risk:
  Measurement and e↵ects. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134, 2135–2202.

Kenton, J. D. M.-W. C., Toutanova, L. K., 2019. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
  transformers for language understanding. In:  Proceedings of naacL-HLT , Minneapolis,
  Minnesota, vol. 1, p. 2.

Kim, A., Muhn, M., Nikolaev, V., 2023. From transcripts to insights: Uncovering corporate
  risks using generative ai.

Kim, C. F., Pantzalis, C., Park, J. C., 2012. Political geography and stock returns: The value
  and risk implications of proximity to political power. Journal of Financial Economics 106,
  196–228.

Mandelbrot, B., 1967. The variation of some other speculative prices. The Journal of Business
  40, 393–413.

Matsumoto, D., Pronk, M., Roelofsen, E., 2011. What makes conference calls useful?  the
  information content of managers’ presentations and analysts’ discussion sessions. The Ac-
  counting Review 86, 1383–1414.

                                       34
Nasdaq,   2024.   Nasdaq   cybersecurity   index   (nqcybrt)   -   historical   data.   Available
  at:  https://www.nasdaq.com/market-activity/index/nqcybrt/historical?page=1&
  rows_per_page=10&timeline=y10.

Nazli, S. A., Karagozoglu, A. K., Zhou, T., 2021. Firm-level cybersecurity risk and idiosyn-
  cratic volatility. Journal of Portfolio Management 47, 110–140.

Qadan, M., Shuval, K., David, O., 2023. Uncertainty about interest rates and the real
  economy. The North American Journal of Economics and Finance 68, 101978.

Schrand, C. M., Elliott, J. A., 1998. Risk and financial reporting: A summary of the discus-
  sion at the 1997 aaa/fasb conference. Accounting Horizons 12, 271.

Tang, W., Bu, H., Zuo, Y., Wu, J., 2024. Unlocking the power of the topic content in
  news headlines: Bertopic for predicting chinese corporate bond defaults. Finance Research
  Letters 62, 105062.

The Wall Street Journal, 2024a. Dow jones u.s. banks index (djusbk). Available at:  https:
  //www.wsj.com/market-data/quotes/index/DJUSBK/historical-prices.

The Wall Street Journal, 2024b. U.S. Dollar Index (DXY). Available at:  https://www.wsj.
  com/market-data/quotes/index/DXY/historical-prices.

Trading  Economics,  2024.  United  states  corporate  tax  rate.  Available  at:   https://
  tradingeconomics.com/united-states/corporate-tax-rate.

U.S.   Bureau   of   Labor   Statistics,   2024.   12-month   percentage   change,   Consumer
  Price   Index,   selected   categories.   Available   at:     https://www.bls.gov/charts/
  consumer-price-index/consumer-price-index-by-category-line-chart.htm.

Washington   Post,   2023.   Sharp   economic   slowdown   triggers   new   recession   fears.
  Available      at:          https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2023/04/27/
  recession-gdp-slow-economy/".

Wu, D., 2024. Text-based measure of supply chain risk exposure. Management Science 70,
  4781–4801.

Yang, B., 2013. Extending topic models for text analysis of corporate risk disclosures.

Ying, S., 2023. Measuring macroeconomic uncertainty. Ph.D. thesis, Macquarie University.

Zhu, E., Yen, J., 2024. Bertopic-driven stock market predictions:   Unraveling sentiment
  insights. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02053 .

Zhu, X., Yang, S. Y., Moazeni, S., 2016. Firm risk identification through topic analysis of tex-
  tual financial disclosures. In:  2016 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence
  (SSCI), IEEE, pp. 1–8.

                                       35
A   Appendix

A.1   AI Appendix

We used ChatGPT to help with bibtex citations, some coding tasks, and formatting tables
in LaTeX.

                                       36
A.2   Figures

Figure A.1: Filtered Data Coverage Quarterly
This figure shows total transcripts and risk mentions in our data each quarter. Results are filtered
according to the steps in section 2. Sub-figure (a) shows the total number of earnings conference call
transcripts, sub-figure (b) the total number of risk mentions, and sub-figure (c) takes the total number of
risk mentions and divides it by the number of transcripts in that quarter. A risk mention is defined as the
occurrence of one of the filtered Oxford Dictionary synonyms of “risk” or “uncertainty”, not including
those in safe-harbour snippets.

         (a)  Number of transcripts

         (b)  Number of risk mentions

                                       37
Figure A.1
Continued

         (c)  Risk mentions normalised

                                       38
Figure A.2: Distribution of Continuous Risk
The following histograms show the distribution of our continuous measures of risk on the transcript level.
The continuous measure is constructed as the average across all risk snippet probability vectors in a
transcript, and it has been standardized to a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1. For transcripts
without any risk snippets, the mean of each measure is used instead.

                                       39
        ects the value of a word, so high information words such as “supply” raise the score of the surrounding words.
      ↵

Figure A.3: Example Output From BERTopicThe following figure shows an example of what BERTopic sees when evaluating a topic. The left column shows a subset of the topics, filtered for conciseness.Each column represents one of the words in the snippet, the top row shows what this word is. Each cell is the value associated with the word-topic pair. Highervalues indicate a stronger association. Context aWhen calculating probabilities, the model evaluates the scores across all terms for all topics. The snippet selected comes from an actual conference calltranscript.

             40
Figure A.4: Aggregate Measures of Firm Risk
This figure shows the aggregate measures of risk. Sub-figure (a) shows all the risks in a single plot.
Sub-figures (b)-(h) break this down by individual risk types. The discrete measure is the total number of
risk snippets classified as a particular topic divided by the number of transcripts. The continuous measure
on the transcript level is the average of the probabilities across snippets in a transcript for a particular
topic, on the aggregate level it is the average across all transcripts. The measures are standardised on the
aggregate level.

              (a)  All risks discrete measure

              (b)  All risks probabilistic measure

              (c)  Cyber security

                                       41
Figure A.4
Continued

             (d)  Global economy

             (e)  Loans

               (f )  Oil & gas

                                       42
Figure A.4
Continued

              (g)  Supply chain

              (h)  Interest rates

               (i)  Litigation

                                       43
Figure A.4
Continued

              (j)  Regulation

             (k)  Contracts

              (l)  Tax

                                       44
Figure A.4
Continued

             (m)  Inflation

              (n)  Foreign exchange rates

             (o)  Banking

                                       45
A.3   Tables

Table A.1: All Topics Generated
 This table shows the top 10 terms associated with each topic, known as the topic representations. These
 terms were endogenously generated by the BERTopic model. The name of each topic is the first four terms
 in the topic representation. A term may consist of up to three words. -1 is the “topic” for outliers, that is
 documents that do not fit well into any of the other topics.

 Name                        Representation

 -1-factors including-involve         factors including, involve known factors, annual report
 known factors-annual report       form, factors a↵ect, factors cause, company filings, man-
 form-factors a↵ect                agement current expectations, report form, annual re-
                                   port, factors company
 0-patients-patients high-patient    patients, patients high, patient population, high pa-
 population-high patients           tients, indications, clinical, patient, clinical trials, med-
                                            ical, clinical trial
 1-factors annual report-factors     factors annual report, factors section annual, annual re-
 section annual-annual report       port form, discussed factors section, section entitled fac-
 form-discussed factors section      tors, company sec filings, sec filings including, factors
                                     section company, quarterly report form, sec filings
 2-associated covid                 associated  covid  pandemic,   related  covid  pandemic,
 pandemic-related covid            covid pandemic factors, ongoing covid pandemic, covid
 pandemic-covid pandemic         pandemic,   surrounding   covid   pandemic,   pandemic
 factors-ongoing covid pandemic    covid, impact covid pandemic, e↵ects covid pandemic,
                                  caused covid pandemic
 3-thank operator                  thank  operator  question,   thanks  operator,   operator
 question-thanks                   thank question, thank operator instructions, thank op-
 operator-operator thank           erator thank, operator thank operator, question opera-
 question-thank operator           tor, operator question come, operator instructions ques-
 instructions                        tion, operator question line
 4-potential customers-customer    potential customers, customer base, customer concen-
 base-customer                    tration, customers business, customers customers, cus-
 concentration-customers business  tomers need, customers want, business customers, sup-
                                    port customers, lot customers
 5-point think-say think-really      point think, say think, really think, people think, think
 think-people think                 point, obviously think, think say, think mean, think fo-
                                    cus, view think
 6-cybersecurity-cyber              cybersecurity, cyber security, cyber, cyber attacks, se-
 security-cyber-cyber attacks        curity industry, security systems industry, security sys-
                                     tems, cloud based, systems industry, data security

                                                               Continued on next page

                                       46
Table A.1: All Topics Generated

 Name                        Representation

 7-like adjusted returns-attractive   like adjusted returns, attractive adjusted returns, ad-
 adjusted returns-adjusted          justed returns market, good adjusted returns, returns
 returns market-good adjusted      market, think adjusted returns, best adjusted returns,
 returns                            better adjusted returns, strong adjusted returns, high
                                   adjusted returns
 8-global economies-global          global  economies,   global  economy,   global  economic,
 economy-global                   economic growth,  global economic conditions,  global
 economic-economic growth        growth, global macroeconomic, gdp growth, global eco-
                                 nomic environment, world economy
 9-loans loans-total                 loans loans, total loans, loans, higher loans, perform-
 loans-loans-higher loans            ing loans, loans loan, loans higher, nonperforming loans,
                                    consumer loans, loan portfolios
 10-leases-long term                 leases, long term leases, leasing, lease terms, lease space,
 leases-leasing-lease terms           commercial real estate, leases signed, term leases, lease
                                    maturities, new leasing
 11-strong credit quality-credit      strong credit quality, credit quality metrics, credit qual-
 quality metrics-credit              ity, quality credit, credit metrics, credit performance,
 quality-quality credit               credit environment, credit perspective, credit ratings,
                                   maintaining credit
 12-oil gas industry-oil              oil gas industry, oil demand, crude oil prices, business
 demand-crude oil prices-business   oil, gas industry, gas markets, gas service industry, oil
 oil                                     prices, oil companies, oil market
 13-based capital ratio-capital       based capital ratio, capital ratio total, based capital ra-
 ratio total-based capital            tios, capital total based, capital ratios, total based cap-
 ratios-capital total based           ital, capital ratio, tier capital ratio, capital weighted as-
                                        sets, capital total
 14-price increases-price             price increases, price increase, pricing increases, higher
 increase-pricing increases-higher    pricing, cost increases, increase cost, higher price, prices
 pricing                              going, lower prices, say pricing
 15-demand inventory-inventory    demand inventory, inventory supply chain, inventory
 supply chain-inventory            supply, supply chains, inventory levels, supply chain
 supply-supply chains              challenges, supply chain constraints, higher inventory,
                                  inventory management, supply chain disruptions
 16-portfolio                         portfolio   overall,   portfolios,   portfolio   opportunities,
 overall-portfolios-portfolio          portfolio say, portfolio positioned, portfolio companies,
 opportunities-portfolio say         portfolio  provides,   portfolio  diversification,   portfolio
                                      perspective, overall portfolio

                                                              Continued on next page

                                      47
Table A.1: All Topics Generated

 Name                        Representation

 17-drilling wells-wells drilled-drill   drilling wells, wells drilled, drill wells, currently drilling,
 wells-currently drilling              exploration wells, drilling activity, additional wells, ad-
                                        ditional drilling, start drilling, exploration drilling
 18-managing capital-increase       managing capital, increase capital, capital generation,
 capital-capital                      approach capital, capital management, use capital, cap-
 generation-approach capital        ital business, capital work, capital needs, capital flexi-
                                          bility
 19-say market-understand         say market, understand market, market market, mar-
 market-market market-market     ket like, markets think, market people, markets market,
 like                              markets want, like market, di↵erent market
 20-build projects-development     build projects, development projects, projects construc-
 projects-projects                   tion,  project development,  project projects,  projects
 construction-project              projects, projects built, di↵erent projects, construction
 development                      projects, types projects
21-chief financial o cer-financial  chief financial o cer, financial o cer executive, execu-
o cer executive-executive       tive vice, o cer executive vice, chief executive o cer,
vice-o cer executive vice         chief financial, goldman sachs, president chief financial,
                           o cer executive, executive vice president
 22-gross margin-margin           gross margin, margin gross, gross margin rate, gross
 gross-gross margin rate-gross      margins, gross margins depending, quarter gross mar-
 margins                          gins, expect gross margin, gross margin expansion, mar-
                                     gin year, profit margin
 23-reinsurance contracts           reinsurance contracts objective,  reinsurance business,
 objective-reinsurance              reinsurance market, reinsurance, insurance reinsurance,
 business-reinsurance               reinsurance  segment,   investment  reinsurance,   profile
 market-reinsurance                reinsurance, reinsurance program, property reinsurance
 24-second quarter revenue-year    second quarter revenue, year revenue growth, quarter
 revenue growth-quarter quarter    quarter revenue,  quarter revenue,  quarterly revenue,
 revenue-quarter revenue           revenue growth, revenue quarter, quarter revenues, year
                                   revenue, near term revenue
 25-quarter fourth quarter-fourth   quarter fourth quarter, fourth quarter quarter, think
 quarter quarter-think fourth       fourth quarter,  fourth quarter think,  quarter second
 quarter-fourth quarter think       quarter,  going quarter quarter,  fourth quarter little,
                                    quarter quarter just, quarter quarter think, just quar-
                                     ter quarter

                                                              Continued on next page

                                      48
Table A.1: All Topics Generated

 Name                        Representation

 26-strong balance sheet-balance    strong balance sheet, balance sheet strong, strengthen
 sheet strong-strengthen balance    balance sheet, balance sheet good, strengthened balance
 sheet-balance sheet good           sheet, balance sheet think, balance sheets, balance sheet
                                    robust, robust balance sheet, improving balance sheet
 27-acquisitions dispositions         acquisitions dispositions competition, acquisitions com-
 competition-acquisitions           petition, acquisition market, acquisition market view,
 competition-acquisition            acquisitions dispositions, associated acquisitions dispo-
 market-acquisition market view    sitions, expansion acquisitions competition, acquisitions
                                      including, acquisitions acquisition, future acquisitions
 28-executive chinese-chinese        executive chinese, chinese economy, chinese angie chang,
 economy-chinese angie            executive chinese angie, change china, china growth,
 chang-executive chinese angie      china economy, growth china, china business, business
                                  china
 29-rising rate environment-rising   rising rate environment, rising rates, rates economic,
 rates-rates economic-market        market rates, rates going, lower rates, rising rate, higher
 rates                                rates, term rates, increase rates
 30-court decision-courts-court      court decision, courts, court case, future litigation pro-
 case-future litigation proceedings   ceedings, litigation subject discuss, court, litigation pro-
                                      ceedings, future litigation, future litigation pertaining,
                                  settlement agreement
 31-regulatory                      regulatory requirements, conditions future regulatory,
 requirements-conditions future     obtain necessary regulatory, future regulatory, include
 regulatory-obtain necessary        company failure, regulatory process, regulatory author-
 regulatory-future regulatory        ities, company failure, necessary regulatory, operations
                                include company
 32-business continue-manage       business continue, manage business, business strategy,
 business-business                  managing business,  grow business,  growing business,
 strategy-managing business        business manage, future business, business business, im-
                                   pact business
 33-contracts think-contracts        contracts think, contracts believe, contracts contracts,
 believe-contracts                   contract negotiations, long term contracts, limitation
 contracts-contract negotiations     contracts, limitation contracts terminated, think con-
                                     tracts, large contracts, longer term contracts
 34-e↵ective tax rate-tax rate      e↵ective tax rate, tax rate quarter, tax rates, tax rate,
 quarter-tax rates-tax rate         tax rate going, e↵ective tax, tax rate approximately, tax
                                     positions quarter, reduction tax, tax provision

                                                              Continued on next page

                                      49
Table A.1: All Topics Generated

 Name                        Representation

 35-range million million-million    range million million, million increase, million million
 increase-million million             million, million million range, million million, million
 million-million million range        million billion, say million, billion million million, mil-
                                    lion compared million, million quarter million
 36-inflationary                     inflationary pressures, economy inflation, continued in-
 pressures-economy                 flation, economic inflation, inflation recession, inflation
 inflation-continued                 economic, regarding inflation, rising inflation, inflation
 inflation-economic inflation         going, increase inflation
 37-hedges hedge-hedge            hedges hedge, hedge rate, hedge mitigate, hedge po-
 rate-hedge mitigate-hedge         sition, hedge hedge, continue hedge, hedge portfolio,
 position                           hedge positions, management hedge, hedge
 38-plains american                 plains american pipeline,  american pipeline,  pipeline
 pipeline-american                  projects, pipeline opportunities, pipelines, pipeline say,
 pipeline-pipeline                    pipeline  pipeline,   pipeline  including,   pipeline  going,
 projects-pipeline opportunities     higher pipeline
 39-unidentified analyst             unidentified  analyst  okay,   unidentified  analyst  just,
 okay-unidentified analyst           unidentified   analyst   got,   unidentified   analyst   right,
 just-unidentified analyst            unidentified   analyst   yes,   yes   unidentified   analyst,
 got-unidentified analyst right       unidentified analyst thanks, unidentified analyst, ques-
                                     tion unidentified analyst, unidentified analyst helpful
 40-economic volatility-volatility    economic volatility, volatility economic, market volatil-
 economic-market volatility         ity economic,  market volatility production,  economy
 economic-market volatility         volatility, markets high volatility, volatility particularly,
 production                         markets volatility, volatility currently, volatility business
 41-beginning year-year beginning  beginning year, year beginning year, think end year, year
 year-think end year-year end       end year, year early, year going year, year going, early
 year                                year, just year, start year
 42-foreign currencies-impact       foreign currencies, impact foreign currency, currencies
 foreign currency-currencies         detailed  sec,   foreign  currency,   foreign  currency  ex-
 detailed sec-foreign currency       change, foreign countries currencies, foreign currency
                                     fluctuations, conducting business foreign, business for-
                                     eign countries, foreign currency translation
 43-free cash flow-free cash          free cash flow, free cash flows, cash flow think, cash flow
 flows-cash flow think-cash flow     results, cash flows, cash flow perspective, cash flow year,
 results                               cash flow generation, positive cash flow, strong cash flow

                                                              Continued on next page

                                      50
Table A.1: All Topics Generated

 Name                        Representation

 44-brazil market-brazilian          brazil  market,   brazilian  market,   brazilian  economy,
 market-brazilian economy-brazil   brazil cost, business brazil, brazil situation, situation
 cost                                 brazil, brazil terms, revenues brazil, brazilian real
 45-program cars-new              program cars, new vehicles, cars, automotive, vehicles,
 vehicles-cars-automotive           automakers, automobile, automotive markets, car com-
                                  panies, automotive market
 46-banking industry-banking      banking industry, banking business, banking environ-
 business-banking                 ment, corporate banking, commercial banking, bank-
 environment-corporate banking    ing management, banking sector, banking lines business,
                                  community banking, banking relationships
 47-subject certain                 subject certain assumptions, assumptions subject cer-
 assumptions-assumptions subject  tain, based assumptions subject, certain assumptions
 certain-based assumptions         subject, underlying assumptions, involve assumptions,
 subject-certain assumptions        subject  assumptions  known,  based  assumptions,  as-
 subject                           sumptions subject inherent,  certain assumptions de-
                                    scribed

                                      51
Table A.2: Regression of Volatility on Discrete Risk
The following table shows the regressions of realised stock volatility on all discrete risk measures. Controls
include just the logarithm of firm assets. Volatility is defined as the standard deviation in investor returns
for a 90-day holding period beginning on the day the conference call was held. Sector is defined as the
two-digit SIC code. Volatility is winsorised at the 1st and 99th percentiles and then standardised. All
errors are clustered on the firm level.

                                   (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)
          VARIABLES         90 Vol       90 Vol       90 Vol       90 Vol

          cyber dis            -0.0171**    -0.0181***    -0.00446     -0.000696
                               (0.00810)    (0.00595)    (0.00682)    (0.00473)
          globeco dis         -0.0447***   0.0566***   -0.0263***    0.00533
                                (0.0109)     (0.00971)    (0.00784)    (0.00509)
          loan dis            -0.0471***   0.0835***    0.0513***    0.0294***
                                (0.0138)     (0.0153)     (0.0111)     (0.00789)
          oilgas dis             -0.0161     0.0922***    0.0239**     -0.00770
                                (0.0157)     (0.0119)     (0.0100)     (0.00620)
          supch dis           0.0457***    0.0755***    -0.00813     -0.00191
                                (0.0141)     (0.0129)     (0.0112)     (0.00671)
          intrts dis            -0.194***     -0.00698     0.0414***   -0.0205***
                                (0.0135)     (0.0153)     (0.0120)     (0.00700)
          litig dis             -0.0660***     -0.0123      0.0342**      0.0149
                                (0.0219)     (0.0175)     (0.0156)     (0.00964)
          reg dis             -0.0667***     0.00233     0.0370**     -0.00225
                                (0.0204)     (0.0179)     (0.0157)     (0.0103)
          contract dis           0.0183     0.0695***    0.0595***     0.0172
                                (0.0229)     (0.0233)     (0.0164)     (0.0131)
          tax dis              -0.158***    -0.0838***     -0.0183      0.00401
                                (0.0166)     (0.0141)     (0.0117)     (0.00819)
          infl dis              -0.143***     0.00222     -0.0649***    -0.0210**
                                (0.0162)     (0.0150)     (0.0141)     (0.00882)
          forex dis            -0.170***    -0.0852***     -0.0234      -0.0104
                                (0.0218)     (0.0216)     (0.0198)     (0.0102)
          bank dis             -0.0202     0.186***     0.107***    0.0582***
                                (0.0317)     (0.0295)     (0.0230)     (0.0159)

          Observations         121,309      121,161      120,869      120,894
          R-squared             0.006        0.170        0.504        0.657
         Controls              No         Yes         Yes         Yes
         Time FE             No         No         Yes         Yes
         Sector FE            No         No         Yes         n/a
         Sector x Time FE      No         No         Yes         No
         Firm FE             No         No         No         Yes
                         Robust standard errors in parentheses
                      *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                       52
Table A.3: Regression of Volatility on Continuous Risk
The following table shows the regressions of realised stock volatility on all continuous risk measures.
Controls include just the logarithm of firm assets. Volatility is defined as the standard deviation in investor
returns for a 90-day holding period beginning on the day the conference call was held. Sector is defined as
the two-digit SIC code. Volatility is winsorised at the 1st and 99th percentiles and then standardised. All
errors are clustered on the firm level.

                                    (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)
          VARIABLES         90 Vol       90 Vol       90 Vol      90 Vol

          cyber prob          0.0187**     -0.00603     0.00664     0.00563*
                               (0.00746)    (0.00580)    (0.00463)    (0.00311)
          globeco prob        -0.0321***    -0.0137**    -0.0288***    0.00452
                               (0.00740)    (0.00613)    (0.00507)    (0.00341)
          loan prob           0.0382***    0.0340***    0.0199***   0.0175***
                               (0.00915)    (0.00782)    (0.00639)    (0.00424)
          oilgas prob          -0.00683    0.0175***     0.00623     -0.00179
                               (0.00782)    (0.00608)    (0.00496)    (0.00294)
          supch prob          0.0305***    -0.00674    -0.0124***    0.00153
                               (0.00573)    (0.00483)    (0.00403)    (0.00263)
           intrts prob           -0.0147      -0.0114      -0.0134*     -0.00497
                                (0.0104)     (0.00870)    (0.00693)    (0.00458)
          litig prob           0.0624***    0.0364***    0.0174***   0.0228***
                               (0.00837)    (0.00696)    (0.00588)    (0.00395)
          reg prob            0.125***    0.0503***    0.0275***    -0.00692*
                               (0.00858)    (0.00679)    (0.00587)    (0.00386)
          contract prob       -0.0762***   -0.0399***   -0.0161***    -0.00165
                               (0.00606)    (0.00490)    (0.00425)    (0.00275)
          tax prob           -0.0424***   -0.0568***   -0.0167***    0.00137
                               (0.00759)    (0.00639)    (0.00560)    (0.00367)
          infl prob            0.0223**    0.0262***     0.00287      0.00289
                               (0.00878)    (0.00744)    (0.00634)    (0.00416)
          forex prob          0.0207***     0.0110     0.0199***    0.00389
                               (0.00793)    (0.00668)    (0.00554)    (0.00364)
          bank prob          -0.0320***    -0.00218     -0.00107    -0.000369
                               (0.00753)    (0.00618)    (0.00509)    (0.00342)

          Observations         121,309      121,161      120,869     120,894
          R-squared             0.027        0.171        0.505        0.657
          Controls              No         Yes         Yes         Yes
         Time FE             No         No         Yes        Yes
         Sector FE            No         No         Yes        n/a
         Sector x Time FE      No         No         Yes        No
         Firm FE             No         No         No        Yes
                         Robust standard errors in parentheses
                      *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                       53
Table A.4: Regression of Volatility on Discrete Risk With Additional Controls
The following table shows the regression of 90-day volatility on each discrete measure of risk. 90-day
volatility is the standard deviation of investor returns for a 90-day holding period that begins on the day
the conference call was held. We control for the size of firm assets, previous 90-day average returns, and
previous 90-day average volatility. Sector is defined by the two-digit SIC code. Volatility is winsorised at
the 1st and 99th percentiles and then standardised. The continuous measure is standardised, the discrete
measure is the number of mentions of that topic in a transcript. All errors are clustered on the firm level.

                                                       (1)
                      VARIABLES           90 Vol

                          cyber dis                -0.00233
                                                 (0.00306)
                          globeco dis             -0.0107**
                                                 (0.00483)
                         loan dis                0.0228***
                                                 (0.00593)
                          oilgas dis                0.00505
                                                 (0.00604)
                         supch dis               -0.00232
                                                 (0.00715)
                          intrts dis                0.0145**
                                                 (0.00634)
                           litig dis                  0.00903
                                                 (0.00961)
                          reg dis                   0.0161
                                                  (0.0109)
                         contract dis             0.0275**
                                                  (0.0112)
                          tax dis                  -0.00247
                                                 (0.00795)
                           infl dis                 -0.0318***
                                                 (0.00867)
                          forex dis                -0.00277
                                                  (0.0109)
                         bank dis               0.0497***
                                                  (0.0151)

                         Observations            120,867
                         R-squared               0.669
                        Controls+                Yes
                       Time FE                Yes
                        Sector FE                Yes
                        Sector x Time FE         Yes
                     Firm FE               No
                         Robust standard errors in parentheses
                      *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                       54
Table A.5: Regression of Volatility on Continuous Risk With Additional
Controls
The following table shows the regression of 90-day volatility on each continuous measure of risk. 90-day
volatility is the standard deviation of investor returns for a 90-day holding period that begins on the day
the conference call was held. We control for the size of firm assets, previous 90-day average returns, and
previous 90-day average volatility. Sector is defined by the two-digit SIC code. Volatility is winsorised at
the 1st and 99th percentiles and then standardised. The continuous measure is standardised, the discrete
measure is the number of mentions of that topic in a transcript. All errors are clustered on the firm level.

                                                       (1)
                      VARIABLES           90 Vol

                         cyber prob              0.00295
                                                 (0.00293)
                         globeco prob           -0.0117***
                                                 (0.00314)
                         loan prob              0.00741*
                                                 (0.00405)
                          oilgas prob              -0.00151
                                                 (0.00291)
                         supch prob             -0.00427*
                                                 (0.00258)
                          intrts prob              -0.00393
                                                 (0.00435)
                          litig prob               0.00658*
                                                 (0.00378)
                         reg prob               0.0107***
                                                 (0.00353)
                         contract prob           -0.00491*
                                                 (0.00266)
                         tax prob               -0.00617*
                                                 (0.00329)
                          infl prob                0.00214
                                                 (0.00396)
                         forex prob             0.00984***
                                                 (0.00351)
                         bank prob              -0.00230
                                                 (0.00328)
                         returnL                -0.103***
                                                 (0.00396)

                         Observations            120,867
                         R-squared               0.670
                        Controls+                Yes
                       Time FE                Yes
                        Sector FE                Yes
                        Sector x Time FE         Yes
                     Firm FE               No
                         Robust standard errors in parentheses
                      *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                       55