DEALS ON HOLD

A STUDY ON THE IMPACT OF POLICY UNCERTAINTY ON
MERGER AND ACQUISITION ACTIVITY IN SWEDEN

ERNESTO CELIKER

MUHAMET RRAHMANI

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2024
Deals on Hold: A Study on the Impact of Policy Uncertainty on Merger and
Acquisition Activity in Sweden

Abstract:

   Policy uncertainty is significantly negatively correlated with merger and acquisition
   (M&A) activity in Sweden. Consistent with the real options channel theory, the
   effect is weaker in competitive industries, where delays are costly, and stronger in
   industries sensitive to government spending, where uncertainty about future
   profitability is greater. However, we find no evidence that irreversibility amplifies
   this effect. The negative effect is lasting, with no indication that delayed deals are
   completed later, highlighting the long-term costs of policy uncertainty for corporate
   investments.

Keywords:

   Mergers and acquisitions, Policy uncertainty, Real options

Authors:

   Ernesto Celiker (25689)
   Muhamet Rrahmani (25349)

Tutors:

   Ran Guo, Visiting Teacher, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Ramin Baghai, Associate Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Ernesto Celiker and Muhamet Rrahmani, 2024

                                   1
    1. Introduction

The relation between policy uncertainty and economic activity has gained increasing
attention from academia and policymakers, particularly in the context of corporate
investment decisions such as mergers and acquisitions (M&A). M&As are critical in
reallocating resources, with an average annual deal value of approximately USD 2.6
trillion and approximately 36,700 deals on a yearly average globally between 1990 and
2023 (Statista Search Department, 2024). However, they are also complex and capital-
intensive, making them sensitive to external macroeconomic conditions, including policy
uncertainty. The past few decades have witnessed several global events, such as the global
financial crisis in 2008, the Covid-19 pandemic and the Russia-Ukraine War, which have
contributed to high levels of policy uncertainty worldwide. In fact, policy uncertainty, as
measured by the Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016) (henceforth, BBD) index, reached an
all-time global high in April 2020, the highest level recorded since the index’s earliest
measurable data from 1996, driven by the uncertainty surrounding the Covid-19
pandemic. These developments underscore the importance of understanding how such
uncertainty influences corporate decision-making - in this case, M&A activity.

Prior literature investigating the relation between policy uncertainty and M&A activity
has primarily focused on large economies, particularly the US, and has been conducted
prior to the recent years’ record high levels of uncertainty. Studies like Bonaime, Gulen,
and Ion (2018) and Nguyen and Phan (2017), covering M&A activity until 2014 and 2012
respectively, find that policy uncertainty is negatively correlated with M&A activity in
the US. However, there is a lack of research exploring this relation in small open
economies (SOEs), like Sweden. This paper addresses this gap by examining how policy
uncertainty influences the firm acquisitiveness in Sweden. The Swedish and US
economies are different regarding several important economic dimensions, such as
political stability and government spending. According to the World Bank Political
Stability Index (n.d.), Sweden ranked 34th globally compared to the US at 100th in 2022.
Regarding government spending, Sweden’s government expenditure as a share of the
GDP was 47.3% in 2022, compared to 36.3% in the US (International Monetary Fund,
2022). By analysing the relation between policy uncertainty and M&A activity in
Sweden, we provide new insights into how policy uncertainty impacts M&A activity
outside the US, in a context with a fundamentally different political context. Our paper
further contributes to the literature by examining if this relation holds across an extended
dataset up until 2023, which includes new periods of record levels of policy uncertainty.

In this paper, we address the research question:

Does policy uncertainty reduce firm acquisitiveness in Sweden?

We hypothesise that periods of high policy uncertainty lead to a reduction in firm
acquisitiveness in Sweden. To test this, we analyse the relation between policy
uncertainty and M&A activity over the period 1991 to 2023, using the BBD (2016) index
for Sweden as our measure of policy uncertainty. The BBD (2016) index is a weighted
average of (i) the frequency of articles related to policy uncertainty in leading newspapers,
(ii) tax code change uncertainty, and (iii) economic forecast disagreements. For Sweden,
the index is constructed using article frequency data from four major Swedish

                                   2
newspapers. It captures policy uncertainty specific to Sweden, with notable spikes during
key events like the Nordic Banking crisis, the global financial crisis and the Covid-19
pandemic (see Fig. 1).

We begin our empirical analysis by investigating how policy uncertainty affects firm
acquisitiveness using a probit model, where the dependent variable is an indicator for
whether a firm announces at least one acquisition in a given year. The independent
variable is the natural logarithm of the BBD (2016) index, capturing policy uncertainty,
with controls for firm-level data and industry fixed effects. We find a significant negative
relation between policy uncertainty and firm acquisitiveness, consistent with prior studies
such as Bonaime et al. (2018) and Nguyen and Phan (2017). Our results suggest that a
one-standard-deviation increase in the BBD (2016) index value above its mean reduces
the probability of making an acquisition by 2.3%. This effect is economically important,
given the sample's unconditional M&A probability of 17.6%.

To investigate a potential explanation to why policy uncertainty affects firm
acquisitiveness negatively, we turn to the real options channel, which suggest that higher
levels of uncertainty increase the value of delaying investments (e.g. Bloom, 2009),
incentivising firms to postpone acquisitions. We use the framework outlined by Bonaime
et al. (2018) and test three predictions related to this theory. First, the effect of policy
uncertainty should be stronger for investments that are harder to reverse. Using durable
industries as a proxy for irreversibility, we find no significant evidence that policy
uncertainty has a stronger negative effect on acquirers operating in durable industries.
This contrasts with findings by Bonaime et al. (2018) who conducted their analysis at the
target level and found support for this hypothesis. Second, the option to delay should play
a smaller role in acquisitions where postponement is costly. Consistent with this
prediction, we find that policy uncertainty has a weaker effect in competitive industries,
where the threat of losing strategic opportunities to competitors makes delays more
costly. Third, the degree to which policy uncertainty increases the value of the option to
delay should depend on how strongly policy uncertainty translates into uncertainty about
the acquirer's profitability. Supporting this prediction, we find that policy uncertainty has
a stronger negative effect on firms operating in industries sensitive to government
spending, whose profits are likely tied more closely with government policies. Our
findings suggest that the real options channel partially explains the negative relation
between policy uncertainty and firm acquisitiveness. However, the lack of support for the
irreversibility prediction may reflect limitations in our proxies or the acquirer-focused
analysis, which might not capture constraints faced by acquiring more irreversible targets.

To fully understand the economic impact of these findings, it is important to ask whether
the deals delayed during periods of high policy uncertainty get completed at a later time.
We extend our analysis to examine the long-term effects of policy uncertainty on firm
acquisitiveness, assessing its impact up to four years into the future. The results show
consistently negative, statistically insignificant coefficients, indicating no reversal of the
negative effect over time. This suggests that a sufficient portion of deals may be
permanently forgone rather than simply delayed.

Policy uncertainty is often countercyclical (e.g. Bloom et al., 2018), raising concerns that
high levels of uncertainty may coincide with weaker economic conditions and distort the

                                   3
results. To address this, we conduct robustness checks with macroeconomic controls;
GDP growth, yield spreads and the consumer confidence indicator. After controlling for
the mentioned variables, we find that the negative relation between policy uncertainty and
firm acquisitiveness remains robust. Additionally, we test the robustness of our findings
by substituting the BBD (2016) index with the World Uncertainty Index (WUI), which
captures broader uncertainty. The results show no significant relation between the WUI
and firm acquisitiveness, reinforcing that policy-related uncertainty, as measured by the
BBD (2016) index, plays a more critical role in influencing M&A activity than a broader
measure of uncertainty.

                                   4
    2. Literature review

Our study contributes to two main strands of literature: (i) the drivers of M&A activity;
and (ii) the impact of policy uncertainty on economic outcomes.

Starting with the first research area, i.e. the drivers of M&A activity, prior literature have
highlighted several key determinants that influence M&A activity. This includes
misvaluations (Dong et al., 2006), business cycles (Maksimovic and Phillips, 2001),
product market considerations (Hoberg and Phillips, 2010), risk management (Garfinkel
and Hankins, 2011), corporate liquidity (Almeida and Campello, 2007) and CEO traits
and preferences (Jenter and Lewellen, 2015).

Beyond these drivers, recent studies have increasingly focused on the role of uncertainty
in shaping M&A activity. Some studies argue that future cash flow uncertainty
encourages vertical integration as a risk management strategy (Garfinkel and Hankins,
2011), which is consistent with other studies suggesting that merger waves increase firm-
level uncertainty, which in turn drives mergers fuelled by empire-building motives
(Duchin and Schmidt, 2013). Our study differs from these by focusing on macro level
uncertainty, particularly uncertainty related to government regulations and fiscal policies,
rather than firm-level.

Papers that are closer to our thesis are thus papers looking at how macro level uncertainty
affects M&A activity, such as (Bhagwat, Dam, and Harford, 2016) and (Cao, Li, and Liu,
2019). Bhagwat, Dam, and Harford (2016) show that increases in market-wide
uncertainty, as measured by market-wide implied volatility (VIX), are associated with
weaker M&A activity. Cao, Li, and Liu (2019) studies how political uncertainty, proxied
as national elections, affects the volume and outcome of cross-border acquisitions. Our
paper differs by focusing specifically on the narrower impact of policy uncertainty on
M&A activity.

The second literature strand explores how policy uncertainty impacts economic outcomes.
For example, Baker et al. (2016) find that higher policy uncertainty correlates with
increased stock price volatility and declines in industrial production and employment,
while Gulen and Ion (2016) demonstrate a significant negative relation between capital
expenditures and policy uncertainty - both studies using the BBD (2016) index, as we do
in our analysis. Our study extends this literature by focusing on how policy uncertainty
influences M&A activity specifically.

Studies that focus more narrowly on policy uncertainty and its impact on M&A activity
are as such closer to our thesis, with a few recent studies fitting this frame. Bonaime et
al. (2018) find that policy uncertainty is strongly negatively associated with M&A activity
at the macro and firm level. Nguyen and Phan (2017) reach similar conclusions, while
also finding that policy uncertainty is positively related to the time it takes to complete
M&A deals as well as that it motivates acquirers to use stock for payment and to pay
lower bid premiums. While both studies focus exclusively on the US, our research extends
this literature by examining the impact of policy uncertainty on M&A activity in Sweden,
contributing to the understanding of the effect in a SOE and fundamentally more stable
political context. Moreover, as these papers cover M&A activity until 2014, our paper

                                   5
helps understand this relation by using a larger dataset spanning until 2023 and including
periods of record-high policy uncertainty.

    3. Data and variables

In this section, we present the three main datasets used: (i) The Baker, Bloom, and Davis
(BBD, 2016) policy uncertainty index; (ii) M&A data from the Refinitiv Eikon Database;
and (iii) Firm-level data from Compustat Global, used as control variables.

    3.1. Policy uncertainty data

We use the BBD (2016) index to proxy for policy uncertainty. Developed by Baker et al.
(2016), this index is a weighted average of three components: (i) the frequency of news
articles containing terms related to economic and policy uncertainty; (ii) uncertainty
regarding future federal tax code changes; and (iii) dispersion in economic forecasts
concerning government spending and inflation. The authors construct the index by
normalizing each component and assigning weights of 1/2 for the news-based component,
1/6 for tax-related uncertainty and 1/3 for forecaster disagreement. This follows for each
country measured and is, to the extent possible, constructed relative to the respective
economy, including for Sweden. Consistent with prior literature, we construct the policy
uncertainty variable as the natural logarithm of the weighted average of the BBD (2016)
index values over the last three months of the preceding year for each firm.

We use the BBD (2016) index for Sweden for our tests. It is constructed by using the
National Library of Sweden's online archives for analysing article frequency in four major
Swedish newspapers: Aftonbladet, Expressen, Dagens Industri and Svenska Dagbladet.
Articles are counted if they include terms related to the economy (ekonomi or
ekonomisk), policy (riksbank, centralbank, regering, departement, or reglering) and
uncertainty (osäker or oro). These counts are scaled by the total number of economic
articles for each newspaper and standardized. The standardized counts are averaged
across the four newspapers monthly to form the Swedish policy uncertainty index, which
is normalized to have a mean of 100 over the baseline period (1985–2009). Given this
country-specific construction, this index provides a focused measure of policy uncertainty
specific to the Swedish economy. Fig. 1 shows clear increases around events which are
expected to increase policy related uncertainty in Sweden, including: the Nordic Banking
crisis in the early 1990s; the IT bubble crash and 9/11 terrorist attacks in the early 2000s;
the global financial crisis in 2008; the European sovereign debt crisis in 2011; the Covid-
19 pandemic in 2020; and the Russia-Ukraine war in 2022.

Moreover, Table 1 highlights the differences in level and volatility between the Global,
US, and Swedish BBD (2016) indices, clearly demonstrating that Sweden exhibits lower
mean and median values, as well as reduced fluctuations, compared to the two indices.
This suggests that Sweden experiences more stable levels of policy uncertainty relative
to these other regions.

                                   6
Table 1
Summary statistics on the Baker et al. (BBD, 2016) policy uncertainty index and M&A data
The table presents summary statistics on the BBD (2016) policy uncertainty index and M&A data. The
summary statistics on the BBD (2016) index are presented in the first panel and cover the global, US and
Swedish statistics during our sample period (1990-2023). The summary statistics on M&A data are
presented in the second panel and covers M&A announcements reported in Refinitiv Eikon between 1991
and 2023. To be included in our sample, deals must have a minimum value of USD 1 million and the
acquirer must hold less than 50% of the target’s shares six months prior to the announcement and achieve
100% ownership post-acquisition. The statistics cover deals by Swedish acquirers, public Swedish acquirers
and public Swedish acquirers merged with Compustat Global.

Fig. 1. Policy uncertainty index. This figure presents the monthly Baker et al. (BBD, 2016) policy
uncertainty index for Sweden over the period 1990-2023.

   3.2. M&A Data

                                   7
We obtain the M&A data from the Refinitiv Eikon database. The sample covers the period
from 1991 to 2023 to match the availability of accounting data from Compustat Global.
We categorise deals into major industry groups using the 2-digit SIC code and restrict our
sample to transactions involving Swedish acquirers. We focus on deals with a minimum
value of USD 1 million and those where the acquirer held less than 50% of the target’s
shares six months prior to the announcement and achieved 100% ownership post-
acquisition. Following prior literature, we also exclude deals from the Utility (SIC 4900-
4999) and Financial (SIC 6000-6999) industries, as these sectors are highly regulated and
may exhibit different acquisition patterns. Table 1 presents summary statistics for our
sample of M&A deals. The full sample of M&A deals involving Swedish acquirers
reports an average annual deal value of USD 14.5 billion, while the subset focusing on
public Swedish acquirers averages USD 6.6 billion annually.

In Fig. 2, we focus on deals involving Swedish public acquirers and plot the annual total
deal volume alongside the yearly BBD (2016) policy uncertainty index for the period
1990-2023. The figure indicates that higher levels of policy uncertainty are generally
associated with lower M&A activity.

Fig. 2. Aggregate volume of M&As by Swedish public acquirers alongside the BBD index. This figure
illustrates the aggregate M&A volume undertaken by Swedish public firms alongside the Baker et al. (2016)
policy uncertainty index for the period 1990-2023. The solid lines (left axis) represent M&A volume, while
the dashed lines (right axis) depict policy uncertainty.

    3.3. Firm-level data for control variables

                                   8
To obtain firm-level data for our control variables, we use the Compustat Global database
for annual accounting and daily price data, ranging from 1989-2023 (two years earlier
than the M&A data given the construction of the analysis). To link the M&A data from
Refinitiv Eikon with firm-level data from Compustat Global, we use the Global Company
Key (GVKEY) as the unique identifier, which is a six-digit number assigned to each
company in the Capital IQ Compustat database. However, since GVKEYs are not directly
available in the Refinitiv Eikon dataset, we use several manual methods to match the
companies in the Refinitiv Eikon dataset to their respective GVKEYs. We first use ISIN
codes to convert them into GVKEYs, which was provided from the Refinitiv support desk
for part of the data. For the remaining dataset, we rely on company tickers to match them
to GVKEYs. This process involves manually checking the output to make sure the correct
companies are linked accurately.

Appendix A provides a detailed description of all variables used in this study.

    4. Empirical analysis of policy uncertainty and firm acquisitiveness

We begin our empirical analysis by investigating how policy uncertainty affects firm
acquisitiveness. We use a probit model with the following specification:

  𝑀&𝐴_𝑑𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦𝑖,𝑡 = + 𝐵𝐵𝐷𝑡−1 + 𝐶𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝛾𝐼𝑁𝐷𝑈𝑆𝑇𝑅𝑌_𝐹𝐼𝑋𝐸𝐷_𝐸𝐹𝐹𝐸𝐶𝑇𝑆 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡

where M&A_dummy is a dummy variable equal to 1 if firm 𝑖 announces at least one
acquisition in year 𝑡, and 0 otherwise. BBD represents the policy uncertainty variable,
measured as the natural logarithm of the weighted average of the BBD (2016) index over
the last three months of the preceding year relative to the deal. C is a vector of control
variables. Following prior literature, we include firm characteristics known to influence
acquisitiveness as controls, including Size, Firm_age, Sales_growth, Book_leverage,
                                                                               1
Non_cash_working_capital, Past_12_month_return and Market-to-book.  We include
industry fixed effects to control for common industry factors that could affect
                 2
acquisitiveness. We provide definitions of the variables in Appendix A.

The estimates of our probit model are presented in Table 2. Column 1 shows that the
coefficient for BBD is negative (-0.555) and statistically significant at the 1% level. These
results are in line with our predictions and affirm that, consistent with Bonaime et al.
(2018) and Nguyen and Phan (2017), there is a significant negative relation between
policy uncertainty and firm acquisitiveness. Furthermore, our results contribute to the
existing literature by demonstrating that this negative relation persists in a SOE like
Sweden and with an extended dataset that captures record high levels of policy
uncertainty. To assess the economic impact of policy uncertainty, we calculate the effect

1
 Although some control variables are not statistically significant in our baseline regression, we include
them because prior literature has identified their explanatory power. Furthermore, when these variables
are tested independently of the other controls, they demonstrate statistical significance, justifying their
inclusion in the model.
2
 Since all firms experience the same level of policy uncertainty within a given year, we exclude year
fixed effects from our regressions to avoid capturing most of the explanatory power of the policy
uncertainty variable. Instead, we account for time-varying macroeconomic conditions by incorporating
proxies for macroeconomic forces in the robustness checks section.

                                   9
of a one-standard-deviation increase in BBD (2016) index value above its mean. Holding
all other variables constant at their sample means, this increase corresponds to a 2.3%
decrease in the probability of making an acquisition. This effect is economically
important, given that the sample's unconditional probability of engaging in M&A activity
is 17.6%.

Table 2
Policy uncertainty and firm acquisitiveness.
The table present results from the M&A probit regression on policy uncertainty and firm acquisitiveness.
The dependent variable is M&A_dummy, which takes a value of 1 if a firm makes at least one M&A
announcement in a given year, and 0 otherwise. BBD denotes the policy uncertainty variable, calculated
as the natural logarithm of the weighted average of the BBD (2016) index over the last three months of
the preceding year. Definitions of other variables are provided in Appendix A. Z-statistics, based on
heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors clustered by year, are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and *
denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                  10
    5. Why does policy uncertainty affect firm acquisitiveness and is the effect
      temporary?

    5.1. The real options channel

In this section, we investigate a potential explanation to why policy uncertainty affects
firm acquisitiveness negatively: the real options channel. According to this theory, higher
levels of uncertainty increase the value of delaying an investment, as firms benefit from
waiting for more information before committing to irreversible decisions (Bloom, 2009).
In the context of M&A, this implies that periods with higher levels of uncertainty could
lead firms to postpone acquisitions. To test this hypothesis, we use the framework
outlined by Bonaime et al. (2018), examining three key predictions of the real options
theory: (i) the irreversibility of the investment; (ii) the cost of delaying the acquisition;
and (iii) the firm's exposure to policy uncertainty.

    5.1.1. Investment irreversibility

The hypothesis is that if policy uncertainty influences firm acquisitiveness by increasing
the value of the option to wait, this effect should be stronger (more negative) for
irreversible investments. To test this, we investigate if the negative effect of policy
uncertainty on firm acquisitiveness is stronger for firms operating in industries where
investments are difficult to reverse. As a proxy for irreversibility, we classify acquirers
based on whether they operate in durable or nondurable industries. Industries producing
durable goods are highly cyclical (Sharpe, 1994), and firms in highly cyclical industries
are in turn less likely to be able to sell their assets to other firms in the industry during
poor economic times, as potential buyers are often similarly affected by the same
economic conditions (Shleifer and Vishny, 1992) and (Almeida and Campello, 2007).
Bonaime, Gulen, and Ion (2018) identify the industries with the highest irreversibility
scores, based on the Fama-French 48 classification, as steel works, rubber and plastic
products, fabricated products, automobiles and trucks, transportation, restaurants, hotels
and motels, business supplies, mining, and petroleum and natural gas. We include these
industries in our proxy for irreversibility, mapping them to their corresponding 4-digit
SIC codes based on the Fama–French classification.

We rerun our probit model for two subgroups: (i) firms operating in durable industries;
and (ii) firms operating in nondurable industries. The results, presented in Table 3, do not
show a statistically significant relation between policy uncertainty and firm
acquisitiveness for firms in durable industries. Consequently, we find no evidence to
support the hypothesis that the negative effect of policy uncertainty on firm
acquisitiveness is stronger for irreversible investments, as observed in Bonaime et al.
(2018). As we do not identify any country-specific differences between Sweden and US
explaining the differences in the results regarding irreversible investments, we shift the
focus to the difference in the analytical perspectives. Our study examines the acquirer
level given our access to data, whereas Bonaime et al. (2018) focus on the target level
and find support for their hypothesis. Analysing targets provides the advantage of directly
observing the investment in question, allowing for irreversibility to be measured with
greater precision at the target level. This distinction suggests that the relation between

                                  11
policy uncertainty, irreversibility, and M&A activity may vary based on the perspective
of the analysis.

Table 3
Investment irreversibility.
The table presents the results of the probit regressions examining the effect of policy uncertainty on firm
acquisitiveness for two subgroups: (i) firms operating in durable industries (called “Durable”); and (ii) firms
operating in non-durable industries (called “Non-durable”). For the respective group’s regression, the
dependent variable equals 1 if a firm announces at least one M&A deal in a given year and 0 otherwise.
Variable definitions are provided in Appendix A. Z-statistics, based on heteroscedasticity-robust standard
errors clustered by year, are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels, respectively.

    5.1.2. Cost of delaying

The hypothesis is that if policy uncertainty influences firm acquisitiveness by increasing
the value of the option to wait, this effect should be reduced when the cost of delaying a
deal is high. To test this, we investigate if the negative effect of policy uncertainty on firm
acquisitiveness is weaker (less negative) where the cost of delaying is high. We use
industry competitiveness as a proxy for the cost of delaying, classifying acquirers’
industries as either competitive (proxy for high cost of delaying) or non-competitive
(proxy for low cost of delaying). Grenadier (2002) argues that the costs of delaying
investments can be significantly higher in competitive industries, where the threat of
rivals seizing share of the project’s value is higher. Our measure for competition is deal
volume, defined in Appendix A.

                                  12
We rerun our probit model for two subgroups: (i) firms operating in competitive
industries; and (ii) firms operating in non-competitive industries. The results, reported in
Table 4, show that there is a negative and statistically significant (at the 5% level) relation
between policy uncertainty and firm acquisitiveness for firms operating in competitive
industries. Moreover, consistent with the real options channel as well as Bonaime et al.
(2018), the negative effect is weaker (less negative) for firms in these industries. This
suggests that in competitive industries, the higher cost of delaying investments reduces
the impact of policy uncertainty on firm acquisitiveness. Firms in these industries may
feel greater pressure to act quickly, even under uncertain conditions, to avoid losing
strategic opportunities to competitors. These findings are consistent with the explanation
that policy uncertainty decreases firm acquisitiveness primarily by increasing the value
of the option to delay.

Table 4
Cost of delaying (Competition).
The table presents the results of the probit regressions examining the effect of policy uncertainty on firm
acquisitiveness for two subgroups: (i) firms operating in competitive industries (called “Competition”); and
(ii) firms operating in non-competitive industries (called “Non-competition”). For the respective group’s
regression, the dependent variable equals 1 if a firm announces at least one M&A deal in a given year and
0 otherwise. Variable definitions are provided in Appendix A. Z-statistics, based on heteroscedasticity-
robust standard errors clustered by year, are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                  13
    5.1.3. Exposure to policy uncertainty

The hypothesis is that if policy uncertainty influences firm acquisitiveness by increasing
the value of the option to wait, then the magnitude of this effect should depend on how
strongly policy uncertainty translates into uncertainty about the acquirer's profitability.
To test this, we investigate if the negative effect is stronger (more negative) for firms with
higher exposure to policy uncertainty. We use the industries where firm’s revenues are
sensitive to government spending as a proxy for exposure to policy uncertainty. Baker et
al. (2016) show that defence, health services, engineering & management (E&M) services
and heavy construction are especially sensitive to uncertainty relating to government
spending. Bonaime et al. (2018) also find that the aircraft industry is sensitive to
government spending. We include all the mentioned industries in our proxy for exposure
to policy uncertainty.

We rerun our probit model for two subgroups: (i) firms operating in industries sensitive
to government spending; and (ii) firms operating in industries less sensitive to
government spending. The results, reported in Table 5, show that there is a negative and
statistically significant (at the 1% level) relation between policy uncertainty and firm
acquisitiveness for firms operating in government sensitive industries. Moreover,
consistent with the real options channel as well as Bonaime et al. (2018) and Nguyen and
Phan (2017), the negative effect is stronger (more negative) for firms with higher
exposure to policy uncertainty. This suggests that firms in government-sensitive
industries face higher uncertainty about their profitability during periods of high policy
uncertainty, increasing the value of delaying acquisitions, providing further support for
the hypothesis that policy uncertainty affects firm acquisitiveness through the real options
channel.

                                  14
Table 5
Government sensitivity.
The table presents the results of the probit regressions examining the effect of policy uncertainty on firm
acquisitiveness for two subgroups: (i) firms operating in industries sensitive to government spending (called
“Government sensitive”; and (ii) firms operating in industries not sensitive to government spending (called
“Less government sensitive”). For the respective group’s regression, the dependent variable equals 1 if a
firm announces at least one M&A deal in a given year and 0 otherwise. Variable definitions are provided
in Appendix A. Z-statistics, based on heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors clustered by year, are
reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

    5.2. Temporary or lasting impact of policy uncertainty

If policy uncertainty leads firms to delay rather than forgo acquisitions, we would expect
the negative relation between policy uncertainty and firm acquisitiveness to reverse over
longer time horizons as delayed deals are eventually completed. To examine this, we
extend our analysis to predict firm acquisitiveness up to four years into the future. Using
our baseline probit model, we modify the dependent variable to capture M&A activity
not only in the year immediately following the policy uncertainty, but also in subsequent
years up to the fourth year.

The results, presented in Table 6, show consistently negative coefficients for policy
uncertainty across all future horizons up to four years. None of these coefficients are
statistically significant, suggesting they do not differ meaningfully from zero. These
findings indicate that the observed negative effect of policy uncertainty on firm
acquisitiveness is not offset in later years. While this does not imply that all deals are
permanently forgone, it suggests that a sufficient number are, such that no long-term
reversal in the effect is observed up to four years.

                                  15
Table 6
Temporary or lasting impact of policy uncertainty.
The table presents the results of the probit regressions examining the effect of policy uncertainty on firm
acquisitiveness. The dependent variable equals 1 if a firm announces at least one M&A deal in year t, t+1,
t+2 or t+3, and 0 otherwise. All independent variables are measured at time t-1. Variable definitions are
provided in Appendix A. Z-statistics, based on heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors clustered by year,
are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

    6. Robustness and additional discussion

In this section, we acknowledge and address several potential limitations and alternative
explanations to strengthen the robustness of our findings, as well as directions for future
research.

First, given that findings from prior literature suggest that policy uncertainty tends to be
countercyclical (e.g. Bloom et al., 2018), we acknowledge the potential concern that high
levels of policy uncertainty coincide with weaker investment opportunities and economic
conditions, distorting the estimated impact of policy uncertainty. To address this, we
rerun our model while including controls for macroeconomic factors to proxy for
expectations about future investment opportunities and economic conditions: GDP
growth rate, yield spreads and the consumer confidence indicator. The proxies are defined
in Appendix A. The results, presented in Table 7, show that the negative correlation
between policy uncertainty and firm acquisitiveness remains statistically significant, at
the 5% level, demonstrating the robustness of our findings to these alternative
explanations.

                                  16
Table 7
Policy uncertainty and firm acquisitiveness with macroeconomic control variables.
The table present results from the M&A probit regression on policy uncertainty and firm acquisitiveness
while controlling for macroeconomic variables. The dependent variable is M&A_dummy, which takes a
value of 1 if a firm makes at least one M&A announcement in a given year, and 0 otherwise. BBD denotes
the policy uncertainty variable, calculated as the natural logarithm of the weighted average of the BBD
(2016) index over the last three months of the preceding year. Definitions of other variables are provided
in Appendix A. Z-statistics, based on heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors clustered by year, are
reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Second, we explore the robustness of our results to alternative measures of uncertainty.
We start by replacing the BBD (2016) index with the World Uncertainty Index (WUI).
The WUI is based on the frequency of the term "uncertainty" in quarterly Economist
Intelligence Unit country reports (Ahir, Bloom, and Furceri, 2022). Unlike the BBD
(2016) index, which focuses on policy-related uncertainty, the WUI captures broader
uncertainty from various sources, such as geopolitical risks and natural disasters. This
distinction allows us to assess whether policy-specific uncertainty is the driving factor
behind the observed negative relation or a broader measure of uncertainty. The results,
presented in Table 8, show no significant relation between WUI and firm acquisitiveness,
reinforcing that the BBD (2016) index provides a more relevant measure for analysing

                                  17
the impact on M&A activity. We also test political uncertainty using national election
years as a proxy, inspired by Cao et al. (2019), which is a more narrow measure than
policy uncertainty, focusing on the political aspect. The results are presented in Appendix
B, showing no significant relation. While election-based proxies have merit, the BBD
index captures both election-related and non-election-related uncertainty and quantifies
the relation. This ability likely explains why the BBD index gives significant results,
making it a more comprehensive measure, especially when taking into account M&A
variation in non-election years.

Table 8
World Uncertainty Index and firm acquisitiveness.
The table presents results from the M&A probit regression on the World Uncertainty Index (WUI) and firm
acquisitiveness. The dependent variable is M&A_dummy, which takes a value of 1 if a firm makes at least
one M&A announcement in a given year, and 0 otherwise. WUI denotes the uncertainty variable, calculated
as the natural logarithm of the weighted average of the WUI index over the last three months of the
preceding year. Definitions of other variables are provided in Appendix A. Z-statistics, based on
heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors clustered by year, are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and *
denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                  18
Third, we consider potential sample biases and omitted variable concerns. Our dataset
includes Swedish acquirers only, which raises the possibility that unobservable
characteristics unique to Swedish firms may influence our results. Future research could
incorporate cross-country comparisons or examine how the effects of policy uncertainty
vary across different types of firms, such as private versus public acquirers, or across
industries beyond those explicitly included in our subsample analyses.

Additionally, the scope of our analysis at the acquirer level might limit the interpretation
of results. For example, Bonaime et al. (2018) found support for the real options channel
at the target level, whereas our acquirer-focused study did not identify significant effects
for irreversibility. Incorporating data on both acquirers and targets in future research may
provide a more nuanced understanding of the interplay between policy uncertainty and
irreversibility.

Finally, the time frame of our dataset, spanning from 1991 to 2023, includes periods of
record high levels of policy uncertainty. These extreme spikes may increase or mask the
typical relation between policy uncertainty and firm acquisitiveness. Although our
extended dataset strengthens the generalisability of our findings, the role of such outlier
events calls for further investigation. For example, future research could examine whether
the magnitude of policy uncertainty's impact varies between "normal" and "crisis"
periods.

    7. Conclusion

This study investigates the relation between policy uncertainty and firm acquisitiveness
in Sweden, a small open economy with high political stability and government spending.
Using the BBD (2016) index as a proxy for policy uncertainty and data from 1991 to
2023, we find a robust and significant negative relation between policy uncertainty and
firm acquisitiveness, consistent with prior findings in larger economies like the US. The
economic impact is significant, with a one-standard-deviation increase in the BBD (2016)
index reducing the probability of making an acquisition by 2.3%, compared to the
sample's unconditional M&A probability of 17.6%. Our exploration of the real options
channel provides partial support for its role in explaining this negative relation. Policy
uncertainty has a weaker effect in competitive industries where delays are costly and a
stronger effect in industries sensitive to government spending. However, we find no
evidence that irreversibility strengthens the effect, suggesting that the influence of this
mechanism may differ depending on whether the analysis is conducted at the acquirer or
target level. Further analysis shows no reversal of the negative effect over time, indicating
that many acquisitions are likely forgone rather than delayed during periods of high policy
uncertainty. Robustness checks using macroeconomic controls and alternative measures
of uncertainty reinforce the validity of our findings, highlighting the specific impact of
policy-related uncertainty on M&A activity. These results underscore the lasting
economic impact of policy uncertainty and offer important insights for policymakers
aiming to reduce its negative effects on corporate investments.

                                  19
References

Literature

Ahir, Hites, Nicholas Bloom, and Davide Furceri. 2022. ‘The World Uncertainty
       Index’. Working Paper. Working Paper Series. National Bureau of Economic
       Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w29763.
Almeida, Heitor, and Murillo Campello. 2007. ‘Financial Constraints, Asset Tangibility,
       and Corporate Investment’. The Review of Financial Studies 20 (5): 1429–60.
       https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhm019.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis. 2016. ‘Measuring Economic
       Policy Uncertainty*’. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (4): 1593–1636.
       https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjw024.
Bhagwat, Vineet, Robert Dam, and Jarrad Harford. 2016. ‘The Real Effects of
       Uncertainty on Merger Activity’. The Review of Financial Studies 29 (11):
      3000–3034. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhw061.
Bloom, N. 2009. ‘The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks’. Econometrica 77 (3): 623–85.
       https://doi.org/10.3982/ECTA6248.
Bloom, Nicholas, Max Floetotto, Nir Jaimovich, Itay Saporta-Eksten, and Stephen J.
       Terry. 2018. ‘Really Uncertain Business Cycles’. Econometrica 86 (3): 1031–
       65. https://doi.org/10.3982/ECTA10927.
Bonaime, Alice, Huseyin Gulen, and Mihai Ion. 2018. ‘Does Policy Uncertainty Affect
       Mergers and Acquisitions?’ Journal of Financial Economics 129 (3): 531–58.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2018.05.007.
Cao, Chunfang, Xiaoyang Li, and Guilin Liu. 2019. ‘Political Uncertainty and Cross-
       Border Acquisitions*’. Review of Finance 23 (2): 439–70.
        https://doi.org/10.1093/rof/rfx055.
Dong, Ming, David Hirshleifer, Scott Richardson, and Siew Hong Teoh. 2006. ‘Does
       Investor Misvaluation Drive the Takeover Market?’ The Journal of Finance 61
       (2): 725–62.
Duchin, Ran, and Breno Schmidt. 2013. ‘Riding the Merger Wave: Uncertainty,
       Reduced Monitoring, and Bad Acquisitions’. Journal of Financial Economics
       107 (1): 69–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2012.07.003.
Garfinkel, Jon A., and Kristine Watson Hankins. 2011. ‘The Role of Risk Management
       in Mergers and Merger Waves’. Journal of Financial Economics 101 (3): 515–
        32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2011.03.011.
Grenadier, Steven R. 2002. ‘Option Exercise Games: An Application to the Equilibrium
       Investment Strategies of Firms’. The Review of Financial Studies 15 (3): 691–
        721. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/15.3.691.
Gulen, H., and M. Ion. 2016. ‘Policy Uncertainty and Corporate Investment’. Review of
       Financial Studies 29 (3): 523–64. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhv050.
Hoberg, Gerard, and Gordon Phillips. 2010. ‘Product Market Synergies and
       Competition in Mergers and Acquisitions: A Text-Based Analysis’. The Review
       of Financial Studies 23 (10): 3773–3811. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhq053.
Jenter, Dirk, and Katharina Lewellen. 2015. ‘CEO Preferences and Acquisitions’. The
       Journal of Finance 70 (6): 2813–51.
Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Gordon Phillips. 2001. ‘The Market for Corporate Assets:
       Who Engages in Mergers and Asset Sales and Are There Efficiency Gains?’ The
       Journal of Finance 56 (6): 2019–65.
Nguyen, Nam H., and Hieu V. Phan. 2017. ‘Policy Uncertainty and Mergers and
       Acquisitions’. The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 52 (2): 613–
       44.
Sharpe, Steven A. 1994. ‘Financial Market Imperfections, Firm Leverage, and the
       Cyclicality of Employment’. The American Economic Review 84 (4): 1060–74.

                                  20
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny. 1992. ‘Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity:
       A Market Equilibrium Approach’. The Journal of Finance 47 (4): 1343–66.
       https://doi.org/10.2307/2328943.

Databases and websites

International Monetary Fund (IMF). (n.d.). Government expenditure, percent of GDP.
            Retrieved November 21, 2024, from
            https://www.imf.org/external/datamapper/exp@FPP/USA/FRA/JPN/GBR/
          SWE/ESP/ITA/ZAF/IND
Statista Search Department. (2024). Number of merger and acquisition (M&A)
            transactions worldwide from 1985 to May 2024. Retrieved November 21,
              2024, from https://www.statista.com/statistics/267368/number-of-mergers-
              and-acquisitions-worldwide-since-2005/
Statista Search Department. (2024). Value of mergers and acquisition (M&A)
            transactions worldwide from 1985 to May 2024. Retrieved November 21,
              2024, from https://www.statista.com/statistics/267369/volume-of-mergers-
              and-acquisitions-worldwide/
TheGlobalEconomy.com. (n.d.). Political stability - Country rankings. Retrieved
            November 21, 2024, from
            https://www.theglobaleconomy.com/rankings/wb_political_stability/

Appendix A. Variables definition

A.1. Firm-level variables for controls

All firm-level variables are constructed using data from the Compustat Global database,
with data ranging from 1989-2023. We winsorize each variable at the 1st and 99th
percentiles.

    • Size: Natural logarithm of total assets (Compustat Global annual item AT).
    • Firm_age: Number of years that a firm appears in Compustat Global.
    • Sales_growth: Year over year percentage change in sales (Compustat Global
       annual item SALE).
    • Book_leverage: Long-term debt (Compustat Global annual item DLTT) plus debt
        in current liabilities (item DLC), all divided by total assets (item AT).
    • Non_cash_working_capital: Working capital (Compustat Global annual item
       WCAP) minus cash and short-term investments (item CHE), all divided by the
       book value of assets (Compustat Global annual item AT).
    • Market-to-book: Market value of equity divided by book value of equity. Market
       value of equity is share price (Compustat Global Security Daily item PRCCD)
      times common shares outstanding (item CSHOC). Book value of equity is
       common equity (Compustat Global annual item CEQ).
    • Past_12_month_return: The buy-and-hold 12-month stock return of the year prior
       to an acquisition announcement. Measured as share price at the end of the period
       (Compustat Global Security Daily item PRCCD) times adjustment factor at the
        end of the period (item AJEXDI) minus share price at the start of the period (item
       PRCCD) times adjustment factor at the start of the period (item AJEXDI), all

                                  21
       divided by share price at the start of the period (item PRCCD) times adjustment
        factor at the start of the period (item AJEXDI).

A.2. Proxies used in the real options channel theory

    • Durable goods industry: A binary variable equal to 1 if the target’s industry is
       classified as a durable goods industry, determined by its corresponding SIC code.
       Industries classified as durable are steel works, rubber and plastic products,
       fabricated products, automobiles and trucks, transportation, restaurants, hotels
       and motels, business supplies, mining, and petroleum and natural gas (Bonaime
        et al., 2018).
    • Deal volume: Measured as the number of public firms announcing acquisitions in
        the same industry divided by the total number of firms in the industry. Industries
        are classified as having low competition if their deal volume in the previous year
       falls below the previous year's average deal volume across all industries.
    • Government spending sensitivity: A binary variable equal to 1 if the target’s
       industry is classified as sensitive to government spending, determined by its
       corresponding SIC code. Industries classified as sensitive to government spending
       are defense, health services, engineering & management (E&M) services, and
       heavy construction (Baker et al., 2016) and aircraft (Bonaime et al., 2018).

A.3. Proxies for investment opportunities and economic conditions used in robustness
check

    • GDP growth: The average one-year Swedish GDP growth (available from the
       World Bank Database).
    • Yield spread: We calculate the yield spread as the difference between long-term
        interest rates, represented by the 10-year Swedish government bond yield, and
        short-term interest rates, represented by the 90-day interbank rate (available from
        the St. Louis FED). To align with the annual frequency of the firm-level data, we
        use calendar-year averages of this monthly spread variable.
    • Consumer confidence: The consumer confidence indicator reflects households’
       perceptions of their personal finances and the Swedish economy (available from
       the National Institute of Economic Research). It is calculated using the formula:
       confidence indicator = financial situation of the household now + financial
       situation of the household within 12 months + Swedish economy now + Swedish
       economy within 12 months + good time to buy consumer durables now.

                                  22
Appendix B. Additional regressions

Appendix B.1.
Political uncertainty (national elections) and firm acquisitiveness.
The table presents results from the M&A probit regression on the political uncertainty (national elections)
and firm acquisitiveness. The dependent variable is M&A_dummy, which takes a value of 1 if a firm makes
at least one M&A announcement in a given year, and 0 otherwise. Binary_pre_election_year denotes the
political uncertainty variable, which is a binary variable that takes value 1 if it is the year before an election,
and 0 otherwise. Definitions of other variables are provided in Appendix A. Z-statistics, based on
heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors clustered by year, are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and *
denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Appendix C. AI disclosure

We have used ChatGPT to assist us during the writing and coding process. The AI tool
has been employed to review text, suggest alternative phrasing, and enhance clarity and
conciseness throughout the document. It has also been used to to assist in identifying
coding errors and suggesting alternative approaches for completing programming tasks.

                                  23