PRIVATE EQUITY’S APPETITE
FOR ENGINEERING

INVESTIGATING THE PERFORMANCE EFFECTS OF PRIVATE
EQUITY OWNERSHIP DURING EXOGENOUS SHOCKS

JACOB LINDER

CARLO MICHAEL

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm  School of Economics

2024
Private Equity’s Appetite for Engineering: Investigating the performance effects of
private equity ownership during exogenous shocks

Abstract:

This paper examines the performance of European small and medium-sized enterprises
(SMEs) backed by private equity (PE) firms compared to non-PE-backed counterparts
during two consecutive, unrelated crises: the COVID-19 pandemic and the Ukraine war.
Our findings reveal that PE-backed SMEs underperform in terms of profitability,
although this divergence only occurs in 2022. We further analyze two key value drivers
of PE portfolio companies’ profitability: operational engineering and financial
engineering. Over the course of the crises, PE-backed SMEs face challenges stemming
from initial heavy financial engineering at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and
exhibit signs of reduced operational efficiency. Combined, what should have created
value for the companies, leads to reduced profitability short-term.

Keywords:

Private Equity, Performance,  SME, COVID-19 Pandemic, Ukraine War

Authors:

   Jacob  Linder  (25762)
   Carlo  Michael  (25548)

Tutors:

   Alvin  Chen,  Assistant  Professor, Department of  Finance

Examiner:

   Ramin Baghai,  Associate  Professor,  Department of  Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Jacob Linder and Carlo Michael, 2024

                                   1
1.  Introduction:

       The  contribution  of  private  equity  (PE)  ownership  has  been  shown  to  improve
performances  of  portfolio  companies  relative  to  non-PE  backed  firms  during  financial  crises
(Bernstein,  Lerner,  and  Mezzanotti,  2019)  and  significant  exogenous  shocks  such  as  COVID-19
(Wilson  &  Lavery,  2022).  In  this  thesis  paper,  we  aim  to  evaluate  whether  PE  ownership  is  a
source  of  increased  value  creation  and  resiliency  among  small-  and  medium-enterprises  (SMEs)
throughout  two  consecutive  crises:  the  COVID-19  pandemic  followed  by  the  Ukraine  war.

       PE  is  a  major  and  growing  industry  of  today’s  economies.  Globally,  assets  under
management  by  PE-funds  reached  around  $8  trillion  in  2023  (Aliaj,  Learner,  Arenas,  Joiner,
Louch,  and  Wiggins,  2024),  while  about  10.5  million  people,  or  5%  of  the  total  European
workforce,  were  employed  by  PE-owned  companies  in  2019  (Invest  Europe,  2024).  The
performance  of  PE  firms  and  respective  portfolio  companies  thus  poses  wider  implications  on
the  financial  and  economic  stability  of  the  EU.  This  is  particularly  true  during  times  of  economic
turmoil.

       The  back-to-back  shocks  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  and  the  Ukraine  war  posed
considerable  stress  tests  to  firms'  adaptability  to  the  changing  macroeconomic,  geopolitical,  and
sociological  conditions.  Strict  lockdowns  and  travel  restrictions  across  the  European  Economic
Area  (EEA)  saw  private  consumption  and  average  Gross  Domestic  Product  face  a  sharp  decline
in  2020  (Eurostat,  2024).  As  the  European  economy  appeared  to  recover  from  a  second  wave  of
COVID-19  cases  and  related  restrictions  in  2021,  a  Russian  invasion  of  Ukraine  broke  out  only  a
few  months  later,  in  February,  2022.  Immediate  sanctions,  travel  bans,  and  freezing  of  Russian
held  foreign  assets  evolved.  Subsequent  reprisals  took  place  towards  the  EU,  and  natural  gas
trade,  with  Russia  being  by  far  the  biggest  provider  to  the  EU,  almost  nullified.  This  halting  of
natural  gas  supply  caused  an  energy  crisis  in  the  EU,  contributing  to  historic  inflation  rates
across  the  continent  in  2022  and  2023  (Eurostat,  2024).  As  such,  corrective  measures  were
imposed  to  return  inflation  rates  to  the  long-run  target  of  2%,  with  the  ECB  and  central  banks
across  the  EEA’s  member  states  significantly  increasing  benchmark  interest  rates  that  year.

       The  three  years,  2020  to  the  end  of  2022,  can  thus  be  characterized  as  a  ‘cocktail’  of
challenges  for  European  businesses.  This  holds  particularly  true  among  SMEs,  defined  by  the
EU  as  companies  with  fewer  than  250  employees  and  either  annual  revenues  of  up  to  €50  million
or  total  assets  of  up  to  €43  million.  Companies  in  this  bracket  constitute  99%  of  all  businesses  in
the  EU  (European  Commission,  2024).  Among  the  27,645  companies  owned  by  private  equity  in
Europe  in  2022,  20,349  were  SMEs,  employing  nearly  950,000  people  (Invest  Europe,  2024).  By
their  nature,  SMEs  tend  to  be  more  vulnerable  during  crises,  as  they  typically  have  smaller
liquidity  buffers,  less  access  to  capital  markets,  and  thus  greater  exposure  to  financial  distress
and  liquidation  risks  (Kalemli-Ozcan,  Gourinchas,  Penciakova,  and  Sander  2020).  Due  to  the
sheer  reach  in  economic  size  and  employment,  their  performances  during  times  of  crisis  become

                                          2
particularly  crucial  to  wider  macro-economic  stability.  This  therefore  presents  an  interesting  case
as  to  whether  PE  ownership  of  these  enterprises  can  act  as  a  foundation  for  better  resiliency
through  economic  downturns.

       PE’s  role  in  value  creation  has  nonetheless  been  viewed  with  skepticism.  This  was
particularly  true  to  the  2008  financial  crisis.  Critics  argue  that  PE’s  obsession  in  financing
acquisitions  with  high  debt  relative  to  equity,  so  called  Leveraged  Buyouts  (LBO),  causes  the
overlevering  of  portfolio  companies,  thereby  increasing  their  vulnerability  to  systemic  shocks
and  defaults  (Haque,  2023).  Recent  studies,  however,  challenge  this  perception.  Bernstein  et  al.
(2019)  demonstrate  that  PE-backed  firms  outperformed  non-PE-backed  firms  during  the  2008
financial  crisis  through  alleviating  portfolio  firms’  financing  constraints.  Similarly,  Lavery  and
Wilson  (2022)  found  that  PE-backed  firms  exhibited  greater  operational  resilience  during  the
COVID-19  pandemic.  Research  outside  of  crises  also  suggests  PE-ownership  provides  a
foundation  for  value  creation  (Boucly,  Sraer,  and  Thesmar,  2011;  Kaplan  and  Strömberg,  2009;
Gompers,  Kaplan,  and  Mukharlyamov,  2016),  providing  an  alternative  viewpoint  to  what  is  a
common  criticism  to  the  industry.

       Significant  gaps  in  research,  however,  remain  in  modern  literature,  which  we  address  in
this  study.  First,  existing  research  often  focuses  on  regions  with  high  PE  activity  and  accessible
data,  such  as  the  United  States,  the  United  Kingdom,  and  France  (Bernstein  et  al.,  2019;  Lavery
and  Wilson,  2022;  Boucly  et  al.,  2011).  Broader,  significant  economic  areas,  like  the  EEA,  have
meanwhile  been  overlooked.  Created  as  an  extension  of  the  European  Union’s  single  market  to
include  members  of  the  European  Free  Trade  Association,  the  EEA  provides  a  diverse
environment  for  examining  the  effects  of  PE-backing  throughout  2020  and  2022.  Secondly,  the
combined  impacts  of  two  consecutive  unrelated  crises  –  such  as  the  COVID-19  pandemic  and
the  invasion  of  Ukraine  –  on  PE-backed  SMEs  has  yet  to  be  sufficiently  explored.  Together,
these  crises  provide  unique  conditions  to  better  evaluate  the  adaptability  and  resiliency  of
PE-backed  SMEs.  Lastly,  research  analysing  the  impact  of  PE-ownership  in  times  of  crises  is
skewed  towards  larger,  mid-cap  firms,  thereby  overlooking  SMEs  (Bernstein  et  al.,  2019;  Lavery
and  Wilson,  2022).  Conversely,  SMEs  constitute  99%  of  all  companies  in  the  EU  and  are
primary  drivers  of  economic  growth  (Autio,  Kenney,  Mustar,  Siegel,  and  Wright,  2014).  These
considerations,  along  with  the  contention  regarding  value  creation  from  PE,  bring  forward  a  case
yet  to  be  answered.  As  such,  we  form  our  first  research  question:

RQ1:  How  did  PE-backed  SMEs  perform  compared  to  non-PE-backed  SMEs  upon  the  onset  of
the  COVID-19  pandemic  and  the  Ukraine  war?

       Prior  research  suggests  that  PE  backing  can  mitigate  firm  vulnerability  in  times  of  crisis.
PE  firms  provide  two  primary  value  drivers,  financial  engineering  and  operational  engineering
(Kaplan  and  Strömberg,  2009).  With  financial  engineering  and  operational  engineering,  the

                                       3
investment  firms  seek  to  increase  performance,  support  growth,  and  improve  efficiency  among
their  portfolio  companies.  In  consideration  of  these  points  and  the  mentioned  research  gaps,  our
second  research  question  therefore  addresses  PE-firms’  potential  value  drivers:

RQ2:  Did  operational  and  financial  engineering  comparatively  improve  the  performances  of
PE-backed  SMEs  during  the  COVID-19  pandemic  and  the  Ukraine  war?

       Through  a  matched  Difference-in-Differences  analysis,  we  present  puzzling  findings
challenging  prior  research  (Bernstein  et  al.,  2019;  Lavery  and  Wilson,  2022).  Contrary  to  our
hypothesis,  results  suggest  that  PE-ownership  does  not  create  additional  value  during  periods  of
crisis.  An  extension  into  operational  and  financial  engineering  illustrates  the  complexity  of  the
general  argument  that  PE  firms  provide  a  foundation  of  value  creation.  While  the  use  of  financial
engineering  is  greater  among  PE-backed  SMEs  throughout  the  overall  crisis,  these  findings  were
driven  by  the  extensive  use  of  debt  financing,  in  2020,  to  alleviate  liquidity  constraints  among
portfolio  firms.  An  overleveraging  of  firms  upon  the  onset  of  COVID-19  left  them  more
vulnerable  to  the  oncoming  Ukraine  war,  and  unable  to  obtain  further  external  financing  when
the  macroeconomic  environment  faced  its  second  downturn  in  2022.  PE-backed  companies  were
also  unable  to  take  advantage  of  greater  operational  engineering  by  their  investors,  with  smaller
SMEs  most  negatively  affected  by  this.  The  findings  from  a  multiphase  crisis  period  therefore
imply   that   the   previously   found   advantages   of   PE-ownership   should   be   taken   into
reconsideration.  What  research  finds  to  be  value  creating  towards  SMEs  is  also  what  leaves  them
more  vulnerable  to  value  destruction,  thereby  explaining  the  underperformance  we  find  from
PE-ownership.

2. Theoretical Framework and Literature Review

       This  chapter  assesses  prior  literature  on  PE  and  its  role  in  value  creation,  focusing  on  two
primary  engineering  strategies,  namely,  operational  and  financial  engineering.  We  touch  upon
criticisms  and  contrasting  theories  to  these  channels  of  growth  to  provide  insights  into  the
complexity  of  the  impacts  of  PE-ownership  on  portfolio  companies.  Lastly,  we  discuss  how  we
contribute  to  existing  research  by  Bernstein  et  al.  (2019)  and  Lavery  and  Wilson  (2022).

2.1  Private  Equity

       PE  refers  to  investment  firms,  generally  listed  as  a  partnership  or  limited  liability,  that
acquire  private  as  well  as  public  companies  with  the  goal  of  enhancing  the  companies’  growth
and  performance.  PE  firms  invest  and  acquire  companies  using  an  alternative  form  of  capital
investing,  a  leveraged  buyout  (LBO).  The  LBO  refers  to  an  acquisition  with  a  financing  structure
split  between  debt  and  equity,  with  the  former  generally  making  up  60%  to  90%  of  the  financing
and  the  latter  generally  between  10%  to  40%  (Kaplan  and  Strömberg,  2009).  The  investment
firms  form  PE  funds,  run  by  general  partners,  which  pool  equity  from  institutional  investors  and

                                       4
wealthy  individuals.  Debt  is  generally  financed  by  banks,  but  more  recently  there  has  been  a  shift
towards   issuing   loans   to   institutional   investors.   PE-funds   traditionally   invest   in   mature
companies  with  an  average  investment  horizon  of  5.89  years,  as  of  2023  (Asif  and  Sabater,
2023).  The  investors  aim  to  exit  an  investment  when  its  enterprise  value  has  increased,  referred
to  as  a  ‘buy-and-build  strategy’.

2.2 Value Creation from Private Equity

       The  general  consensus  is  that  PE-funds  create  additional  value  to  portfolio  companies.
Research  finds  that  target  firms  of  LBOs  in  France  exhibited  increased  performance  four  years
post-transaction  in  terms  of  sales,  assets,  and  employment  growth  at  12%,  12%,  and  18%
respectively  (Boucly  et  al.,  2011).  This  was  particularly  true  for  private-to-private  transactions,
in  which  the  target  company  was  previously  privately  owned.  Contrary  research  challenges  that,
in  the  case  of  public-to-private  transactions  (where  the  prior  legal  status  of  the  target  firm  was  a
publicly  listed  corporation),  post  LBO  performance  is  not  improved  in  portfolio  companies.
These  findings  have,  however,  been  disputed,  and  research  has  shown  even  public  ownership  to
be  outperformed  by  PE-backing  (Moon,  2006).

       Overperformance  of  PE-backed  companies  is,  to  a  degree,  a  reflection  of  selection
capabilities  of  PE  funds  towards  firms  that  would  create  operational  and  performance
improvements  regardless  of  a  LBO  finalization  (Biesinger,  Bircan,  and  Ljungqvist,  2023).
Biesinger  et  al.  (2023)  claim  that  the  effects  of  “treatment”,  that  is,  the  influence  of  ‘value
creating’  activities  by  PE-firms,  are  overemphasized  in  regards  to  portfolio  overperformance.
Critics  rather  attribute  this  to  previously  mentioned  selection  capabilities  as  well  as  information
asymmetries  in  acquisitions  towards  PE  investors  and  their  ability  to  take  advantage  of  tax
breaks,  thereby  increasing  returns  to  investors.  There  is  extensive  research,  however,  finding  that
PE  firms  themselves  support  portfolio  companies  in  driving  value  creation  at  the  company-level
(Boucly  et  al.,  2011;  Bernstein  et  al.,  2019;  Gompers  et  al.,  2016;  Kaplan  and  Strömberg,  2009).
The  question  then  remains:  how  do  PE-firms  create  value?

       Traditionally  operating  as  active  owners,  PE  firms  are  shown  to  implement  value-creating
change  in  portfolio  companies  through  three  primary  channels:  financial  engineering,  operational
engineering,  and  governance  engineering.  Financial  engineering  refers  to  the  accessing  of
liquidity  through  equity  injections  and  debt  financing,  using  leverage,  and  facilitating  high-value
exits.  Operational  engineering  refers  to  a  PE  firm’s  industry  and  operating  expertise  used  to
implement  strategic  plans  including  cost-cutting  measures,  productivity  improvements,  strategy
alterations,  and  potential  mergers  or  acquisitions.  Governance  engineering  encompasses  changes
made  within  the  senior  management  and  board,  and  the  recruitment  of  new  management  (Kaplan
and  Strömberg,  2009).

                                       5
       The  extent  of  the  influence  on  portfolio  company  performance  from  the  three  engineering
methods  is  a  topic  widely  under  contention,  particularly  between  financial  and  operational
engineering.  However,  the  use  and  utility  of  one  of  these  methods  does  not  imply  a  negligibility
in  the  other  two  engineering  methods,  rather,  they  work  together  (Gompers  et  al.,  2016).  In  this
study,  we  focus  on  financial  and  operational  engineering,  as  the  two  most  debated  means  of
value  creation  in  portfolio  firms.

2.2.1  Financial  Engineering

       Boucly  et  al.  (2011)  conducted  a  study  on  839  LBO  targets  in  France,  focusing  on
changes  in  corporate  behavior  and  the  respective  impact  on  PE  portfolio  company  performances
post-transaction.  PE-firms  were  found  to  contribute  to  an  easing  of  credit  constraints  faced  by
portfolio  companies,  particularly  within  vulnerable  firms,  thereby  increasing  their  operational
performances  up  to  4  years  after  the  LBO.  External  financing  was  most  prominent  through  debt
contribution,  and  its  effects  are  highly  notable.  One-third  of  the  12%  increased  growth  in  assets
post-acquisition  was  attributable  to  the  contribution  of  debt  financing.  The  findings  are  supported
by  Ivashina  and  Kovner  (2011)  who  highlight  that  PE  firms,  due  to  previous  and  consistent
interactions  with  banks,  are  able  to  obtain  more  debt  with  more  favorable  credit  terms.  For
example,  PE-firms  are  more  capable  of  refinancing  debt  and  extending  debt  maturity  to  aid
portfolio  companies  (Gompers,  Kaplan,  and  Mukharlyamov  2022).  These  arguments  rest  on  the
theory  that  PE  firms,  due  to  better  relationships  with  banks,  reduce  information  asymmetry  as  to
their  creditworthiness  and,  thus,  banks  are  willing  to  lend  with  better  terms  at  greater  amounts
and  lower  interest  rates  to  portfolio  firms  (Ivashina  and  Kovner,  2011).

       PE  firms  also  aid  during  liquidity  constraints  through  providing  equity  injections
(Bernstein  et  al.,  2019;  Lavery  and  Wilson,  2022).  One  primary  source  of  this  is  from
“dry-powder”,  cash  committed  by  investors  but  yet  to  be  allocated  to  a  specified  investment.  The
funding  structure  of  pooled  investor  capital  allows  PE  companies  to  intervene  when  a  portfolio
company  faces  liquidity  distress  (Bernstein  et  al.,  2019).  PE-firms  continuously  aid  with  equity
injections  throughout  the  years  post-LBO.  Around  66%  of  PE  funds  do  so  within  the  1st  year  and
78%  over  the  first  three  years  (Cohn,  Hotchkiss,  and  Towery,  2022).

       Contrary  to  these  findings,  Biesinger  et  al.  (2023)  reject  the  hypothesis  that  financial
engineering,  measured  in  their  case  through  both  leverage  and  debt  to  EBITDA,  provides  value
creation  to  portfolio  companies.  The  scope  of  defining  metrics  for  financial  engineering  here
appears  rather  limited  in  its  wider  application,  as  the  researchers  solely  focus  on  the  debt
financing  side.  As  research  indicates,  equity  injections  also  have  an  impact  of  significance  in
value  creation.  Where  the  prior  PE  model  of  high  leverage  during  the  1980s  may  have  partly
diminished,  PE  firms  still  contribute  to  portfolio  companies  through  increasing  equity  financing
in  conjunction  with  debt  financing  (Bernstein  et  al.,  2019;  Boucly  et  al.,  2011;  Lavery  and
Wilson, 2022).

                                       6
2.2.2  Operational  Engineering

       PE  firms  are  additionally  found  to  contribute  to  operational  improvements  within  their
portfolio  companies.  Private-to-private  transaction  overperformance  can,  in  part,  be  explained  by
target  firms  lacking  the  necessary  expertise  to  increase  growth  and  enhance  operational
performance.  PE-firms  bridge  this  gap  by  providing  consultation  and  intervention  services.
While  the  areas  of  improvements  vary,  PE  funds  mostly  maintain  a  focus  on  cost-reduction  and
revenue  increasing  mechanisms  as  well  as  business  model  and  strategy  alterations  (Gompers  et
al.,  2016),  though  this  varies  with  the  fund.  Such  value  creation  has  been  particularly  useful  for
operationally  weak  firms,  targets  presenting  potential  turn-around  cases  for  PE-funds,  an  ever
growing  characteristic  of  modern  PE  transactions.

       Although  Biesinger  et  al.  (2023)  maintain  skepticism  towards  the  wider  significance  of
“treatment”  effects  by  PE-funds  for  portfolio  companies,  the  study  finds  that  investments
through  capital  expenditures  (CAPEX),  as  the  sole  form  of  operational  engineering,  has  a
positive  effect  on  value  creation.  CAPEX,  they  argue,  provides  a  channel  for  firms  to  invest  into
profitable  projects  and  divest  from  unprofitable  ones.  Boucly  et  al.  (2011)  further  present  results
that  CAPEX  investments  within  PE-backed  firms  increased  greatly  comparative  to  a  control
group  at  24%  four  years  after  the  LBO.  This  comes  in  combination  with  the  improved  metrics  in
sales,  assets,  and  employment  growth  which  the  study  also  found  four  years  post-LBO.  Both
studies  indicate  a  heavy  use  of  operational  engineering  through  investments  by  PE  firms  towards
their  respective  portfolio  companies.

2.3  Private  Equity  Portfolio  Performance  and  Engineering  during  Crises

       Although  PE  is  criticized  for  overlevering  portfolio  companies  and  leaving  them
vulnerable  to  default  during  times  of  crisis,  multiple  studies  find  that  PE  firms  perform
comparatively  better  when  the  economy  is  under  distress.  In  a  survey  conducted  across  200  PE
fund  managers  regarding  the  impacts  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic,  50.8%  of  PE  portfolio
companies  were  reportedly  unaffected  in  terms  of  performance,  with  the  majority  of  time  spent
by  PE  staff  allocated  towards  assisting  current  holdings  rather  than  working  on  new  deals
(Gompers  et  al.,  2022).

       Bernstein  et  al.  (2019)  conducted  a  study  on  the  impact  of  the  2008  financial  crisis  on
PE-backed  firms  in  the  UK  compared  to  a  control  group.  More  specifically,  the  researchers
sought  to  find  whether  PE  firms  help  alleviate  capital  constraints  in  portfolio  companies  through
increasing  access  to  debt  and  equity  financing,  thereby  increasing    investments  and  the
performances  of  the  respective  companies.  A  matched  DiD  analysis  suggested  that  PE  portfolio
firms   outperform   in   terms   of   profitability,   compared  to  non-PE-backed  companies.  The
difference  in  performance  is  attributed  to  higher  investment  levels  sourced  from  the  ability  to

                                       7
obtain  greater  debt  and  equity  contributions.  Equity  injections  were  largely  reasoned  by
PE-firms’  dry-powder,  often  used  as  a  back-up  financing  method  during  financial  distress.

       Lavery  and  Wilson  (2022)  conducted  an  extending  research  paper  to  Bernstein  et  al.
(2019),  with  a  focus  on  the  impact  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  on  PE-backed  firms  in  the  UK
compared  to  a  control  group.  The  study  centralized  on  firm  performance  measured  by  earnings,
sales,  employee,  and  asset  growth,  with  follow-up  analyses  on  operational  and  financial
engineering.  The  researchers  concluded  PE-backed  firms  were  observed  to  outperform  a  control
group  during  the  crisis  period.  Financial  engineering  through  debt  and  equity  financing  provided
a  significant  source  of  value  creation  here,  whereas  operational  engineering  had  no  notable  effect
on  outperformance  of  PE-backed  firms.

2.4  Private  Equity  Ownership  of  Small  and  Medium-Sized  Enterprises

       Traditionally,  mid-cap  corporations,  with  an  employee  count  above  250  and  below  1500,
are  the  most  transacted  size-category  by  PE,  accounting  for  two-thirds  of  total  deal  value
(Hancock,  2023).  A  recent  shift,  however,  has  been  trending  towards  SME  private  equity  and
micro-cap  private  equity.  These  differ  from  venture  capital,  in  that  buyouts  remain  in  use,  where
acquisitions  of  majority  stakes  are  made  in  more  mature  companies.  Concerns  regarding
performances  of  PE  portfolios  weighted  more  towards  SME  ownership  have  arisen.  This  is
argued  to  be  a  result  of  PE  fund  employees,  becoming  spread  too  thinly,  meaning  each  employee
oversees  multiple  portfolio  companies.  A  higher  quantity  of  smaller  portfolio  companies  in  a  PE
fund  implies  more  staff  assigned  to  less  valuable  investments,  hampering  economies  of  scale  in
operations  (Humpfrey-Jenner,  2011).  Cumming,  Fleming,  and  Suchard  (2005)  argue  this  holds
implications  for  small  enterprises  in  which  value  creation  is  largely  driven  by  the  operational
expertise  and  consulting  from  the  PE  fund  managers  and  staff.

2.5  Extension  to  Prior  Research:

       The  focus  on  the  EEA,  while  not  novel,  is  an  often  understudied  area  within  the  PE
industry.  This  becomes  particularly  true  when  compared  to  the  United  States  and  the  United
Kingdom,  despite  the  EU,  the  primary  component  of  the  EEA,  being  the  second  biggest  private
equity  market  by  target  deal  valuations  (Statista,  2023).  The  EEA  presents  an  interesting  case
due  to  its  effectual  proximity  to  both  crises,  felt  through  near  continent-wide  lockdowns  to
immediate  sanctions  in  2022  on  its  biggest  natural  gas  provider.  It  additionally  provides  a  diverse
environment  for  the  study  due  to  variations  among  nations  in  their  responses  to  the  COVID-19
pandemic  and  in  their  reliances  on  Russian  natural  gas  and  trade  pre-Ukraine  war.  In  this  light,
we  argue  that  findings  from  a  more  diverse  sample  provides  greater  applicability  to  the  general
PE  industry  globally,  compared  to  one-country  studies  such  as  those  conducted  on  the  US  and
the  UK.  Additionally,  while  our  time-period  is  similar  to  that  of  Lavery  and  Wilson  (2022),  we
extend  their  study  by  adding  an  additional  year,  2022,  to  include  the  analysis  of  the  repercussions

                                       8
of  the  Ukraine  war  in  addition  to  lagged  effects  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic.  This  provides  a
lengthened,  more  comprehensive  case  to  determine  whether  PE-backed  SMEs  are  truly  more
resilient  throughout  prolonged  periods  of  volatility  and  uncertainty.  Furthermore,  the  COVID-19
pandemic,  as  argued  by  Lavery  and  Wilson  (2022),  and  the  Ukraine  war  are  best  characterized  as
unpredictable  exogenous  shocks.  This  is  in  comparison  to  the  2008  financial  crisis,  studied  by
Bernstein  et  al.  (2019).  Although  the  financial  crisis  too  categorizes  as  an  exogenous  shock,  it  is
defined  by  a  buildup  of  unstable  leverage  in  credit  markets,  which  acts  as  a  major  predictor  for
upcoming  recessions  (Greenwood,  Hanson,  Shleifer,  and  Sørensen,  2021).  Predictability  is  the
differentiator  here,  and  the  lack  thereof  provides  us  with  a  valid  stress  test  on  PE  owners,  who,  in
this  case,  are  unable  to  use  any  preemptive  measures  to  prepare  for  either  of  the  upcoming  crisis.

       We  study  solely  firms  matching  the  SME  criteria  pre-crisis,  in  2019,  as  opposed  to  prior
research  which  implements  no  such  restrictive  size  range.  Bernstein  et  al.  (2019)  make  an
explicit  exclusion  of  small-sized  firms  in  their  data  sample,  forming  a  clear  gap  in  the  research
that  we  aim  to  fill.  SMEs  were  comparatively  the  hardest  hit  size-category  of  firms  during  both
the  COVID-19  pandemic  and  the  Ukraine  war.  Furthermore,  the  said  competitive  disadvantages
of  owning  SMEs  (Humpfrey-Jenner,  2005)  as  compared  to  holding  larger  mid-  to  large-cap
corporations  present  a  potentially  alternative  hypothesis  to  the  findings  of  over-performance
among  PE-backed  firms  during  the  2008  financial  crisis  and  the  COVID-19  pandemic.  We  also
narrow  the  scope  of  our  analysis,  compared  to  Bernstein  et  al.  (2019)  and  Lavery  and  Wilson
(2022),  by  focusing  on  PE-backed  SMEs  that  underwent  a  private-to-private  transaction  to  reach
their  current  PE  ownership  profile.  In  turn,  we  compare  PE-backed  firms’  performances  to
non-PE-backed   private   enterprises.   Prior   research   strongly   supports   over-performance   of
PE-backed  SMEs  particularly  in  the  case  of  these  transactions  (Boucly  et  al.,  2011),  but  there
remains  a  gap  in  studies  towards  such  transaction  groups  during  times  of  exogenous  shocks.

3.  Hypotheses:

H1:  PE-backed  SMEs  operationally  perform  better  short-term  than  non-PE-backed  SMEs
following  exogenous  shocks

       This  hypothesis  catches  the  value  creation  component  from  PE-ownership.  We  believe
PE-backed  firms  will  prove  more  resilient  in  the  face  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  and  Ukraine
war,  considering  the  value-creating  benefits  of  PE  ownership  (Bernstein  et  al.,  2019;  Lavery  and
Wilson,  2022;  Gompers  et  al.,  2022;  Boucly  et  al.,  2011).  Despite  concerns  on  PE  firms’  ability
to  add  value  to  smaller  portfolio  companies,  we  hypothesize  that  the  general  benefits  of
PE-ownership  from  additional  financial  engineering  and  operational  engineering  outweigh  this
alternative  hypothesis.  Particularly,  in  light  of  the  extended  crisis  period,  we  believe  these
differences  will  become  more  clear.  We  hypothesise  that  PE-firms  allow  for  better  access  to

                                       9
external  financing  and  adaptation  through  multi-phase  crises  due  to  the  synergies  arising  from
PE-owners’  expertise  in  resource  management  and  operational  efficiency.

H2:  PE-backed  SMEs  use  more  financial  engineering  than  non-PE-backed  SMEs  following
exogenous  shocks

      We  hypothesize  that  PE-backed  SMEs  use  more  financial  engineering  mechanisms
through  increased  debt  and  equity  injections,  compared  to  non-PE-backed  SMEs  following  the
COVID-19  pandemic  and  Ukraine  war.  Given  the  value-creation  benefits  of  PE  ownership  in
times  of  crisis  (Bernstein  et  al.,  2019;  Lavery  and  Wilson,  2022;  Boucly  et  al.,  2011;  Ivashina
and  Kovner,  2011),  we  believe  that  PE  firms’  established  credit  relationships  and  dry  powder
provide  an  advantage  in  navigating  exogenous  shocks.  While  critics  argue  that  financial
engineering’s  value  creation  may  be  overstated,  particularly  in  the  context  of  smaller  firms
(Biesinger  et  al.,  2023),  we  believe  that  the  broader  scope  of  PE-backed  financial  interventions  –
combining  greater  debt  financing  and  equity  support  –  is  upheld  for  smaller  companies  during
extended  crises.

H3:  PE-backed  SMEs  use  more  operational  engineering  than  non-PE-backed  SMEs  following
exogenous  shocks

       Our  final  hypothesis  aligns  with  Gompers  et  al.  (2016),  suggesting  that  financial  and
operational  engineering  in  companies  with  PE  ownership  are  not  mutually  exclusive.  Operational
engineering,  as  evidenced  by  Boucly  et  al.  (2011),  includes  targeted  measures  such  as  cost
management,  revenue  optimization,  and  CAPEX.  Their  findings  highlight  the  efficiency  of
PE-firms  in  directing  resources  to  profitable  ventures  while  divesting  from  less  productive  ones.
We  believe  such  operational  interventions  to  create  additional  value  for  PE-backed  SMEs  during
the  crisis  period.

                                      10
4. Methodology

       Our  methodology  follows  that  of  Bernstein  et  al.  (2019),  with  minor  incorporations  from
Lavery  and  Wilson  (2022)  and  Boucly  et  al.  (2011).

4.1  Data  Collection:

       To  collect  the  sample  of  PE-backed  firms,  we  use  CapitalIQ  provided  by  S&P  Global  to
filter  for  all  PE-backed  transactions  of  SMEs,  within  the  EU  and  EFTA,  between  2010  and  2019.
As  2020  was  the  start  of  the  pandemic,  we  filter  for  firms  which  had  been  bought  preceding  this
crisis,  thus  2019  is  the  last  year  for  transactions.  Keywords  are  used  to  find  transactions
specifically  backed  by  PE  firms,  specifically  “Leveraged  Buyout”,  “Management  Buyout”,
“Platform”,  and  “Going  Private  Transaction.”

       Transactions  followed  by  an  investment  exit  by  the  PE  firm  are  also  filtered  out  to
prevent  the  inclusion  of  any  firms  that  may  have  been  sold  to  a  non-PE  parent  company.  While
Bernstein  et  al.  (2019)  and  Lavery  and  Wilson  (2022)  include  investment  exits  following  their
crisis  periods,  we  opt  not  to  include  investment  exits.  This  is  due  to  our  crisis  period  being
defined  as  between  2020  to  2022,  where  the  latter  year  is  the  last  available  year  for  sufficient
financial  data  for  all  sampled  companies  in  Orbis.  This  exclusion  of  investment  exits  is  done
through  an  investment  exit  filter  on  CapitalIQ  and  manually  in  excel,  to  ensure  incorrect  data  is
removed.

       Once  PE-backed  transactions  are  collected  from  CapitalIQ,  a  total  sample  of  9994
PE-backed  firms  are  left.  These  company  names  are  added  into  the  Orbis  platform,  a  Moody's
Corporation  publication  providing  company  data  from  across  the  globe.  Only  firms  with  exact
name  matches  in  Orbis  are  kept  to  prevent  any  risks  of  incorrect  firms  added  in  our  PE-backed  or
control  company  sample.  We  filter  for  firms  which  have  financial  data  required  for  a  control
group  matching  process,  explained  in  section  4.2,  and  enterprises  lacking  such  data  are  removed
from  the  sample.  Furthermore,  we  filter  for  firm  size  in  2019  to  form  an  SME  sample,  where  a
firm’s  employee  count  must  be  below  250  and  revenue  at  or  below  €50  million  or  an  asset  value
at  or  below  €43  million.  This  leaves  us  with  a  reduced  sample  of  981  PE-backed  firms.

4.2 Finding a Matched Control Group

       As  this  is  a  study  comparing  two  samples  of  enterprises,  we  further  create  a  control
group.  This  is  done  through  a  propensity  score  matching  procedure  with  each  PE-backed  SME,
based  on  observable  variables  in  2019,  the  year  before  the  defined  crisis  period.  The  end  result  is
a  one-to-one  match  between  a  control  company  and  a  PE  owned  firm.  We  start  by  selecting
potential  control  companies  in  the  Orbis  data  platform  which  match  the  SME  criteria  in  2019.
We  continue  by  following  the  methodology  and  variable  selection  of  Bernstein  et  al.  (2019)  and

                                      11
filter  out  for  firms  in  the  Orbis  platform  with  the  same  two-digit  SIC  code  for  industry,  total
assets  within  a  50%  range  of  the  PE-backed  firm,  net  income  divided  by  assets  within  a  50%
range  of  the  PE-backed  firm,  and  solvency  (equity  divided  by  assets)  within  a  50%  range  of  the
PE-backed  firm.  Solvency  was  chosen  due  to  better  data  coverage  on  Orbis,  and  illustrates  the
same  concept  as  leverage,  used  by  Bernstein  et  al.  (2019),  but  is  the  inverted  equivalent  and
measures  the  ratio  of  equity  to  assets  of  a  firm.  An  initial  choice  of  the  50%  range  for  total
assets,  net  income  divided  by  assets,  and  solvency  is  in  line  with  Boucly  et  al.  (2006).

       We  also  control  for  geographical  location  by  matching  the  nation  of  headquarters  of  the
control  and  PE-backed  company  in  2019.  This  is  necessary  to  remove  any  effects  arising  from
primarily  alternate  reporting  requirements,  impacts  from  local  legislation,  and  general  economic
discrepancies  during  the  2020  to  2023  time  period.  We  add  an  additional  filter  for  the  date  of
incorporation,  not  used  by  Bernstein  et  al.  (2019).  Companies  formed  after  2000  are  matched
within  a  range  of  365  days  due  to  concerns  regarding  survivorship  bias.  This  is  applicable  due  to
the  relative  recency  of  the  2008  financial  crisis.  We  argue  firms  founded  pre-financial  crisis  has
more  likely  learnt  how  to  adapt  operationally  and  financially  to  crises,  compared  to  a  firm
founded  around  the  booming  economy  leading  up  to  the  COVID-19  pandemic.  Companies
founded  before  2000  are  not  matched  based  on  date  of  foundation,  as  we  do  not  deem
survivorship  bias  to  be  a  concern  for  these  firms

       Lastly,  we  identify,  out  of  all  control  companies  which  match  the  specified  criteria  for
each  PE  SME,  the  firm  with  the  lowest  propensity  score.  We  replug  all  matched  companies  into
Orbis  to  collect  additional  data  on  variables  to  be  analysed  in  this  paper,  as  described  in  section
4.3.  A  few  firms  lack  all  data  outside  of  2019,  and  as  such,  these  firms  and  their  matches  are
excluded  from  the  study.  For  firms  missing  certain  financial  data  between  two  years,  we  use
imputation  to  fill  these  gaps.  We  retest  the  propensity  score  matching  for  the  final  list  of  matches,
and  finalize  the  process  with  a  one-to-one  match  for  each  PE-backed  SME.  We  conduct
robustness  checks  through  a  Welch’s  T-test,  testing  the  mean  differences  across  the  treatment  and
control  group  variables.  Results  indicate  that  the  difference  in  the  2019  solvency  ratio  value
between  the  treatment  group  (PE-backed  SMEs)  and  the  control  group,  is  statistically  significant.
We  therefore  constrict  the  range  for  solvency  by  a  further  5%,  down  to  45%,  to  remove  statistical
significance  in  the  mean  difference  of  the  treatment  and  control  groups’  solvency.  The  final
sample  consists  of  421  PE-backed  SMEs  and  421  non-PE-backed  SMEs,  bringing  the  total
number  of  sample  units  to  842.

       Despite  maintaining  less  rigorous  ranges  for  the  financial  criteria,  our  final  PE-backed
sample  size  remains  barely  larger  than  that  of  Bernstein  et  al.  (2019)  and  a  little  bit  more  than
half  of  that  of  Lavery  and  Wilson  (2022).  We  attribute  this  to  the  restrictive  size  criteria  used  to
study  SMEs,  discrepancies  in  data  availability  among  EU  and  EFTA  nations  compared  to  the
UK,  and  the  addition  of  matching  on  the  date  of  a  company’s  incorporation.

                                      12
        Panel  A  and  panel  C  of  Table  1  show  the  distribution  of  firms  across  industries  and
 countries  respectively.  Firstly,  large  portions  of  the  sample  are  represented  by  the  services  and
 manufacturing  industries,  the  two  largest  within  the  EU  respectively.  The  table  presents  potential
 industry  preferences  of  PE  investors  towards  manufacturing,  despite  the  services  industry  being
 larger.   Furthermore,  there  appears  to  be  an  underrepresentation  of  German  SMEs  and
 overrepresentation  of  nations  such  as  Finland,  Norway,  and  Sweden,  based  on  merger  and
 acquisition  (M&A)  activity  from  2010  up  to  2019  (Statista,  2023).  The  average  firm  in  our  final
 PE-backed  sample  had  an  operating  revenue  of  approximately  €12.3  million.  This  highlights  the
 alternate  focus  on  the  SME  population  in  our  study  compared  to  Bernstein  et  al.  (2019),  where
 the  average  firm  in  2007,  pre-crisis,  was  a  mid-cap  company  with  a  revenue  figure  of  USD  80
 million,  equivalent  to  roughly  USD  98  million,  or  €87  million,  in  2019  (Federal  Reserve  Bank  of
 Minneapolis,  2024).  As  seen  in  panel  B,  most  firms  are  classified  as  medium  sized-enterprises,
 although  toward  the  smaller  end  of  this  category.  In  Panel  D,  we  see  that  no  differences  among
 the  treatment  and  control  group  are  statistically  significant,  implying  a  robust  matching
 procedure  for  the  sample.  To  note,  both  revenue  and  assets,  initially  in  a  thousand  euro  format,
 are  taken  in  their  log  value  to  prevent  skewness  arising  from  larger  firms.

 Table 1. Summary Statistics

 Panel  A:  Industry  Distribution
Industry                                                     Count              (%)
Agriculture                                                           1                 0.2%
Construction                                                        30                7.1%
Manufacturing                                                    177               42.0%
Retail Trade                                                        11                2.6%
Services                                                          119               28.3%
Transportation,  Communications,  Electric,  Gas,  and  Sanitary  Services            12                 2.9%
Wholesale Trade                                                   71               16.9%
Total                                                       421              100%
  Panel  A  reports  the  distribution  of  broad  industries  based  on  the  1-digit  SIC  code  for  the  PE-sample.  Due  to
  one-on-one  matching,  the  same  distribution  applies  for  the  control  group.  We  exclude  the  industries  financial,
  insurance,  regulated,  and  public  administration  firms  from  our  sample.

 Panel  B:  Size  Distribution
    Enterprise Category    Employees            Revenue            Total Assets     Firm Count
    Micro                  < 10             ≤ €2 million           ≤ €2 million        42
    Small                  < 50      And    ≤ €10 million    Or    ≤ €10 million       128
    Medium               < 250            ≤ €50 million          ≤ €43 million       251
  Panel  B  reports  the  distribution  of  firm-size  categories  based  on  the  criteria  noted  by  employees,  revenue,  and  total
 assets. There are three categories which make up SMEs: micro, small, and medium-sized firms.

                                       13
         Panel  C:  Country  Distribution
                             Country                 Count                (%)
                                Austria                      1                   0.2%
                              Belgium                    6                  1.4%
                              Cyprus                     1                  0.2%
                               Czech Republic               7                  1.7%
                             Denmark                   3                 0.7%
                                Estonia                      3                   0.7%
                                Finland                     28                  6.7%
                               France                     109                 25.9%
                             Germany                  18                 4.3%
                              Greece                     2                  0.5%
                              Hungary                    4                  1.0%
                                 Ireland                       3                   0.7%
                                 Italy                        84                  20.0%
                                Latvia                       2                   0.5%
                                Lithuania                     2                   0.5%
                                Netherlands                   4                   1.0%
                             Norway                   15                 3.6%
                               Poland                      4                  1.0%
                                Portugal                      6                   1.4%
                             Romania                   3                 0.7%
                                Slovakia                     5                   1.2%
                                Slovenia                     1                   0.2%
                               Spain                      62                 14.7%
                             Sweden                   48                 11.4%
                             Total                     421                100%
           Panel  C  reports  the  distribution  of  firms  across  their  country  of  headquarter  prior  to  the  PE-backed  acquisition.  The
           middle  column  reports  the  absolute  number  of  firms,  while  the  right  column  reports  a  country’s  percentage
           representation  of  the  total  sample.  Due  to  one-on-one  matching,  the  same  distribution  applies  for  the  control  group.
         Panel  D:  Firms’  Characteristics  in  2019
                                  PE-Backed SMEs                   Control SMEs
                             N      Mean   Median    SD       N     Mean   Median    SD   Mean diff.  P-Value
Revenue (log)                    420       8.96      9.24      1.33       421      9.01      9.10     1.30      -0.05      0.55
Total  Assets  (log)                  421       8.70      8.93      1.37       421      8.75      8.92     1.35      -0.04      0.64
Profit Margin                     420       0.07      0.05      0.11       421      0.08      0.05     0.12      -0.01      0.36
EBITDA/Assets                  413       0.15      0.14      0.13       410      0.16      0.13     0.14      0.00      0.63
Net Income/Assets                421       0.09      0.08      0.11       421      0.10      0.08     0.11      0.00      0.62
Solvency                        421       0.46      0.46      0.21       421      0.48      0.48     0.22      -0.02      0.16
Debt  Contribution/Assets           419       0.01      0.00      0.17       419      0.02      0.01     0.15      -0.01      0.37
Equity  Contribution/Assets          419       -0.07     -0.02      0.13       419      -0.06     -0.02     0.12      -0.01      0.56
Cost  of  Liabilities                 409       0.02      0.01      0.02       407      0.01      0.01      0.02      0.00      0.21
Investments/Assets                405       0.07      0.08      0.18       404      0.08      0.09     0.18      -0.01      0.67
Operating Expenses/ Revenue       412       0.89      0.91      0.11       410      0.88      0.90     0.12      0.01      0.33
Working Capital/Assets             421       0.29      0.28      0.24       421      0.30      0.29     0.26      -0.01      0.55
          Panel D reports the mean and median values of each variable across PE-backed SMEs and the control SMEs.  “Mean
          diff.” measures the difference between the mean values of PE-backed and Control SMEs, with P-Values measuring
           the  respective  statistical  significance.  Values  are  winsorized  at  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  outliers.

                                              14
4.3 Dependent Variables:

       As  the  study  is  divided  into  three  analyses,  we  form  three  groups  of  variables  from  those
listed  in  panel  D  of  Table  1.  We  first  select  variables  to  measure  firm  performances,  used  to
determine  whether  there  is  any  outperformance,  or  value  creation,  from  PE-ownership  of  SMEs.
We  capture  this  component  through  analyzing  developments  in  firm  profitability,  sales,  and
assets.  We  take  inspiration  from  Lavery  and  Wilson  (2022),  collecting  data  on  total  assets,  as  a
measure  of  firm  size  growth,  earnings,  defined  as  earnings  before  interest,  taxes,  depreciation,
and  amortization  (EBITDA)  and  revenue,  defined  as  operating  revenue.  We  take  the  logarithmic
value  of  both  revenue  and  assets  to  handle  skewness  of  data  towards  developments  in  variable
values  of  larger  firms.  As  such,  all  changes  in  the  log  of  revenue  and  assets  in  our  tables  indicate
percentage  changes.  We  further  include  net  income  as  additional  measure  of  earnings,
normalized  by  assets,  and  profit  margin,  measured  as  net  income  divided  by  sales.  Adding  these
variables  addresses  any  concerns  of  EBITDA  measures  overstating  firm  profitability  by
providing  a  bottom-line  view,  accounting  for  all  expenses  including  non-operating  items.

       The  second  analysis  refers  to  the  use  of  operational  engineering.  While  measuring  a
PE-funds  operational  expertise  and  consultation  services  is  difficult,  we  do  select  variables  which
track  a  firm's  ability  to  use  operational  engineering.  This  is  done,  firstly,  through  measuring  cost
efficiency,  measured  as  operating  expenses  less  depreciation  and  amortization  divided  by  sales.
This  is  based  on  the  cost  reduction  measure  used  by  Boucly  et  al.  (2011),  but  adapted  to  data
limitations  in  Orbis,  and  shows  the  extent  to  which  firms  can  effectivize  and  minimize
operational  costs  during  the  exogenous  shocks.  For  simplicity  purposes,  we  call  the  cost  metric
“operating  expenses”,  although  it  is  important  to  note  it  leaves  out  depreciation  and  amortization
expenses,  as  per  our  mentioned  calculation  for  the  variable.  Additionally,  working  capital  as  a
percentage  of  total  assets  is  analyzed  (Boucly  et  al.,  2011).  Working  capital  (WC)  is  calculated  as
current  assets  minus  current  liabilities.  The  choice  of  using  current  liabilities  rather  than  current
non-interest  bearing  liabilities  comes  down  to  data  availability  in  Orbis  of  the  latter  variable.  WC
is  an  indication  of  a  firm’s  operating  liquidity  and  helps  describe  an  SME’s  ability  to  fund  current
operations  and  buffer  against  any  short-term  financial  scarring.  Investments,  defined  as  change  in
assets  plus  depreciation  and  amortization  (Bernstein  et  al.,  2019),  is  also  analyzed.  This  catches
the  extent  to  which  firms  work  to  invest  into  growth  initiatives.  To  define  whether  PE-backed
SMEs  make  more  use  of  financial  engineering,  we  use  debt  contribution,  defined  as  the  change
in  liabilities,  and  equity  contribution,  defined  as  the  change  in  equity  minus  net  profit.  These
variables  help  provide  an  understanding  as  to  whether  PE-firms  ease  financing  constraints  in
portfolio  companies  through  improved  access  to  external  financing.  Solvency  is  also  used  to
determine  the  extent  to  which  PE-backed  firms  alter  their  capital  structure.  These  variables  and
definitions  are  inspired  by  Bernstein  et  al.  (2019).  We  normalize  investments,  debt  contribution,
and  equity  contribution  to  assets  to  account  for  varying  firm  size.

                                      15
4.4 Control Variables:

       To  strengthen  our  analysis  and  reduce  potential  for  omitted  variable  biases,  we  augment
our  model  with  three  control  variables.  The  omitted  variable  bias  refers  to  the  absence  of  relevant
variables  which  affect  the  dependent  variables.  This  leaves  a  statistical  model  vulnerable  to
overemphasizing  any  effects  of  variables  included  in  the  model.  The  inclusion  of  control
variables  thus  further  isolates  the  effect  of  PE-backing  during  the  crisis.  All  control  variables  are
set  at  their  2019  values  to  establish  a  pre-crisis  baseline.  In  the  augmented  model  we  control  for
company  size,  performance,  and  financial  health,  inspired  by  Lavery  and  Wilson  (2022).

        Size:  Existing  research  suggests  that  larger  firms  are  more  resilient  in  times  of  exogenous
shocks  (Bernstein  et  al.,  2022).  The  intuition  is  that  a  larger  balance  sheet  value  coincides  with
greater  liquidities.  Furthermore,  a  greater  balance  sheet  value  posts  more  collateral  that  can  be
sold  off  in  face  of  financial  distress  or  used  for  refinancing.  We  define  firm  size  as  the
logarithmic  value  of  total  assets  before  the  onset  of  the  crisis.

       Performance:  Companies  with  greater  profitability  tend  to  have  a  stronger  cash  flow,
providing  a  cushion  to  absorb  unexpected  declines  in  revenue  or  increases  in  costs.  Pre-crisis
profitability  can  therefore  influence  firm  performance  throughout  the  crisis  period.  We  define
firm  performance  as  EBITDA  normalized  by  assets,  as  EBITDA  is  less  impacted  by  firm  and
country  specific  accounting  standards  and  therefore  more  indicative  of  a  company’s  true
performance.

       Financial  health:  Companies  with  greater  levels  of  debt  should  be  more  likely  to  face
liquidity  distresses  when  market  conditions  become  less  favorable.  Solvency  thus  serves  to
control  a  company’s  financial  health  before  the  crisis.

       Before  finalizing  the  augmented  model,  we  ensure  that  our  control  variables  are  not
highly  correlated  with  each  other  to  minimize  the  risk  of  multicollinearity.  Multicollinearity
arises  when  control  variables  are  strongly  correlated,  making  it  difficult  to  estimate  their
individual  effects  on  the  dependent  variable  and  potentially  leading  to  inflated  standard  errors,
unstable  coefficients,  and  reduced  reliability  of  the  model's  results.  Additionally,  we  assess  the
correlation  between  the  control  variables  and  the  treatment  effect,  PE-backing,  to  rule  out
potential  confounding  effects.  Confounding  implies  that  a  control  variable  not  only  affects  the
dependent  variable  but  is  also  a  sought-after  characteristic  for  PE  firms  when  selecting  portfolio
companies.  The  second  correlation  test  thus  rules  out  potentially  selection  biases.

                                      16
4.5  Empirical  Strategy:

       For  the  initial  comparative  analysis,  we  perform  a  matched  DiD  fixed  effect  model  on  a
panel  data  set,  as  a  replication  of  Bernstein  et  al.  (2019).  We  study  the  performance  and  use  of
operational  engineering  and  financial  engineering  of  PE-backed  SMEs  during  the  years  2017  to
2022.  2020  and  onwards  is  defined  as  the  crisis  period  upon  the  onset  of  COVID-19,  after  which
it  continues  in  2022  upon  the  onset  of  the  Ukraine  war.  This  is  in  line  with  the  first  reported
COVID-19  case  in  the  EU  in  January,  2020,  and  upon  the  invasion  of  Ukraine  in  February,  2022.
We  form  our  following  regression  formula  for  the  study:

                          (1)  yit  =  αt  +  αi  +  β1(PE  SMEt  ×  Crisis)  +  θXit  +εit

        In  the  estimated  formula,  yit  represents  the  dependent  variable  for  firm  i  at  time  t,  which
are  the  performance,  operational  engineering,  and  financial  engineering  variables.  On  the  right
hand  side,  we  include  year  (αt)  and  firm  (αi)  fixed  effects.  Firm  fixed  effects  account  for
time-invariant  discrepancies  between  all  firms  in  the  sample  while  year  fixed  effects  allow  us  to
control  for  unobserved  factors  which  are  constant  across  the  sample,  but  vary  over  time.  We
include  a  treatment  dummy  variable  (PE  SMEt)  for  whether  an  SME  is  PE-backed  (1)  or  not  (0)
and  Crisis,  a  dummy  variable  with  the  value  1  for  the  period  2020  to  2022  and  0  for  the  pre-crisis
period.  An  interaction  term  is  used  between  the  dummy  variables  and  coupled  with  the
coefficient  term  (β1)  which  helps  us  determine  the  effects  of  PE-backing  during  the  crisis  on  the
dependent  variable.  This  interaction  term  is  therefore  an  independent  variable  and  the  coefficient
represents  the  magnitude  of  its  effect.  In  this  model,  we  group  the  two  crises  into  one  dummy
variable,  primarily  due  to  the  lagged  effects  that  SMEs  endure  from  the  COVID-19  crisis  into  the
onset  of  the  Ukraine  war  (Brooks  and  Orzag,  2023).  This  spill  over  and  potential  unobserved
lagged  effects  of  the  first  crisis  make  it  difficult  to  accurately  isolate  the  effects  of  the  two  crises.
We  further  include  control  variables  (θXit),  previously  mentioned  variables  from  section  4.4,
which  isolate  the  effects  of  the  interaction  term,  as  well  as  account  for  an  error  term  (εit)  in  the
model.  Our  regression  uses  a  panel  linear  model  (PLM)  rather  than  the  linear  model  (LM)  used
by  Bernstein  et  al.  (2019)  and  Lavery  and  Wilson  (2022).  This  is  due  to  the  PLM  being  better
adapted  to  panel  data  and  handling  unobserved  heterogeneity  among  firms,  thereby  accounting
for  both  firm-fixed  effects  and  time-fixed  effects.

       In  addition  to  our  primary  model  from  equation  1,  we  add  an  additional  year-by-year  DiD
model  to  provide  more  detailed  insights  into  yearly  performances  during  the  crisis  of  PE-backed
SMEs,  compared  to  a  control  group.  The  crisis  period  is  undoubtedly  bipolar  in  terms  of  the
macro-effects,  that  is,  lockdowns  in  2020,  demand  recovery  and  regulation  easing  for  COVID-19
restrictions  in  2021,  and  rapid  inflation  in  2022.  Performances  are  thus  likely  to  vary  on  a
year-by-year  basis  and,  as  such,  we  pinpoint  the  interaction  term  between  the  PE-backing  and  the

                                      17
crisis  to  each  specific  year.  Exhibits  A1  to  A12  in  the  appendix  support  this,  where  changes  in
value  differences  of  variables  between  the  treatment  and  control  group  differ  greatly,  as  seen  in,
for  example,  investments  and  debt  contribution.  We  therefore  add  a  similar  model  to  equation  1,
through  three  separate  equations  2,  3,  and  4,  where  the  sole  difference  is  the  splitting  of  the  crisis
dummy  variable  into  the  years  2020,  2021,  and  2022.  This  provides  better  insight  into  the
year-by-year  resilience  of  PE-backed  SMEs  in  addition  to  their  behaviours  in  terms  of  operation
and  financial  engineering.  The  main  model  for  the  analysis  and  testing  of  the  hypothesis,
however,  remains  equation  1,  as  we  seek  to  analyse  the  overall  effect  of  PE-ownership  during
both  the  COVID-19  pandemic  and  the  Ukraine  war.  With  that  noted,  we  estimate  the  following
formulas  for  the  year-by-year  DiD  regression:

                          (2)  yit  =  αt  +  αi  +  β1(PE  SMEt  ×  2020)  +  θXit  +εit

                          (3)  yit  =  αt  +  αi  +  β1(PE  SMEt  ×  2021)  +  θXit  +εit

                          (4)  yit  =  αt  +  αi  +  β1(PE  SMEt  ×  2022)  +  θXit  +εit

4.6 Welch’s T-Test:

       To  be  able  to  interpret  a  causal  relationship  in  our  DiD  analysis,  the  Parallel  Trends
Assumption  must  be  met.  This  states  that  the  difference  in  values  between  the  dependent  variable
of  the  PE-backed  SMEs  and  control  SMEs  remain  constant  over  time  in  the  case  that  no  crisis
takes  place.  That  is,  we  assume  their  development/growth  rates  to  be  equal  or  similar  had  there
been  no  crisis.  To  test  this  assumption,  we  diverge  from  the  methodology  of  Bernstein  et  al.
(2019)  and  conduct  two  Welch’s  t-tests  on  the  mean  trends  of  firm  characteristics.  This  is  done
for  both  one  year  (2018  to  2019)  and  two  year  (2017  to  2019)  pre-crisis  trends  of  the  defined
performance,  operational  engineering,  and  financial  engineering  variables.  The  Welch’s  t-test
compares  the  mean  values  of  the  variables'  trends  across  the  treatment  and  control  groups  to
determine  whether  any  statistically  significant  differences  arise.  It  is  an  especially  robust
approach  to  testing  the  Parallel  Trends  as  it  can  account  for  unequal  variances  between
PE-backed  and  non-PE-backed  firms,  and  performs  well  with  unequal  sample  sizes,  as  is  the  case
for  the  data  in  this  study.

       Results  are  presented  in  Table  2,  showing  the  number  of  observations,  mean,  median  and
standard  error  values  for  both  groups,  and  lastly  the  mean  differences  accompanied  by  the
p-value.  If  the  mean  trend  differences  are  not  statistically  significant,  measured  through  the
p-value,  we  assume  parallel  trends.  We  remain  more  conservative  in  this  assumption  and  identify
p-values  of  0.1,  implying  weak  significance,  as  statistically  significant  for  the  Welch’s  t-test.  This
is  due  to  the  social  science-like  nature  of  our  crisis  periods,  a  field  in  which  confidence  levels
above  the  90%  level,  rather  than  95%  (p-value  of  0.05),  are  more  commonly  used.  We  include
only  variables  without  statistically  significant  differences  as  dependent  variables  in  our  final  DiD

                                      18
        regression.  Interestingly,  we  see  a  large  divergence  among  mean  and  median  values  of  certain
        variables.  Most  notably,  equity  contribution,  normalized  to  assets,  presents  a  very  high  growth
        rate  in  the  1-  and  2-year  trends.  This  is  likely  due  to  base  values  for  certain  firms  upon  which
        growth  is  measured  being  near  zero,  thereby  inflating  the  measured  figure.  The  same  issue  arises
        for  cost  of  liabilities  and  debt  contribution.  Nonetheless,  all  variables  match  the  parallel  trends
        assumption  in  both  years  as  no  mean  differences  are  statistically  significant.  As  such,  we  include
        all  named  variables  in  the  DiD  regressions.

       Table 2. Firms’ One and Two Year Trends in 2019

                                  PE-Backed SMEs                 Control SMEs
                             N     Mean   Median    SD       N     Mean   Median    SD    Mean diff.  P-Value
1-year  trend
Revenue (log)                    419      0.00     0.00     0.04       421      0.01     0.00     0.03      -0.00     0.269
Profit Margin                     419      0.77     -0.09     8.54       421     -0.23     0.00     10.82      1.00     0.138
EBITDA/Assets                  412     -0.36     -0.04     9.27       410     1.00     0.00     22.78     -1.37     0.261
Net Income/Assets                 420      0.77     -0.12     9.02       421     -0.13     -0.00     10.74      0.90     0.188
Assets  (log)                      420      0.01     0.00     0.03       421      0.01     0.00     0.03      -0.00     0.268
Solvency                        420      0.14     0.02     0.82       421      0.09     0.02     0.43      0.05     0.320
Debt  Contribution/Assets            418     -0.25     -0.96     12.28      419     -0.61     -1.04     16.76      0.37     0.719
Equity  Contribution/Assets          322     -17.42    -0.21    437.88      323     -2.51     -0.14     77.51     -14.91     0.548
Cost  of  Liabilities                  385     94.55     -0.01    1718.03     387      1.80     -0.02     16.75     92.75     0.290
Investments/Assets                404     -1.67     -0.56     17.09      404     -16.56    -0.46    238.42     14.89     0.211
Operating Expenses/Revenue        411      0.01     0.00     0.10       410      0.00     0.00     0.07      0.01     0.230
Working Capital/Assets             420      0.06     0.00     6.12       421      0.21     0.00     4.97      -0.15     0.690
2-year  trend
Revenue (log)                    419      0.01     0.01     0.06       421      0.01     0.01     0.04      -0.00     0.832
Profit Margin                     418     -0.27     -0.06     10.66      421      0.32     0.00     68.73      -0.59     0.862
EBITDA/Assets                  412      0.62     -0.05     14.74      410     0.06     -0.01     3.40      0.57     0.447
Net Income/Assets                 418     -0.11     -0.11     10.63      421     -0.02     -0.04     72.49     -0.08     0.982
Assets  (log)                      420      0.02     0.01     0.06       421      0.02     0.01     0.06      -0.00     0.622
Solvency                        420      0.26     0.03     1.28       421      0.19     0.02     1.19      0.07     0.384
Debt  Contribution/Assets            418     -1.44     -0.93     23.99      419     -0.68     -0.84     15.81      -0.77     0.586
Equity Contribution/Assets          312     170.02    -0.30    2915.43     306     -40.16    -0.21    1739.08    210.18    0.276
Cost  of  Liabilities                  387      6.51     -0.07     61.58      384     53.78     -0.12    709.89     -47.27     0.194
Investments/Assets                 404     -0.04     -0.58     56.14      404      0.02     -0.37     7.37      -0.06     0.982
Operating Expenses/Revenue        411      0.01     0.00     0.11       410      0.00     0.00     0.10      0.00     0.569
Working Capital/Assets             418      2.89     0.00     33.41      421      0.55     0.00     16.37      2.34     0.199
         Table  2.  reports  the  1-year  and  2-year  trends,  between  2018  to  2019  and  2017  to  2019  respectively,  across  all
         variables  for  the  PE-backed  SMEs  and  non-PE-backed  SMEs.  Mean,  median,  and  standard  deviation  (SD)  values
         are  reported  for  both  the  treatment  and  the  control  group.  Number  of  observations  (N)  is  provided  to  the  left  for  each
         sample  group.  Mean  differences  in  trends  and  the  respective  p-value  are  provided  to  indicate  statistical  signifiTrends
         are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  outliers.  Dashed  lines  separate  the  three  groups  of
          variables,  presented  in  the  order  of  performance  metrics,  financial  engineering  variables,  and  finally  operational
          engineering  variables.

                                             19
5.  Results:

       We  split  our  findings  into  three  separate  sections,  as  per  the  structure  of  the  analysis:
performance  metrics,  operational  engineering,  and  financial  engineering.  In  tables  3,  4,  and  5,  we
report  coefficients  for  the  interaction  term  “PE  SME  ×  Crisis”  in  the  top  row  coupled  with
standard  error  terms  in  parentheses  below.  Panel  A  of  Table  3  presents  findings  for  equation  1  for
all  performance  metrics  during  the  COVID-19  pandemic  and  the  Ukraine  war,  as  one  crisis.  For
tables  4  and  5,  the  coefficients  indicate  whether  PE-backed  SMEs  made  more  use  of  operational
engineering  and  financial  engineering  than  the  control  group,  as  a  result  of  the  onset  of  the  crisis
period.  We  couple  the  tables  for  the  conjuncted  crisis  period  with  results  from  the  year-by-year
DiD  regressions  across  2020,  2021,  and  2022  in  panel  B.  Odd-numbered  columns  in  the  tables
indicate  coefficients  without  the  inclusion  of  control  variables,  while  even-numbered  columns
are  models  augmented  with  control  variables.  We  trust  these  augmented  regressions  more  than
base  regressions  as  the  control  variables  reduce  risks  of  omitted  variable  bias.

5.1  Performance  Metrics

       Before  analyzing  the  DiD  regressions,  it  is  vital  to  note  that  both  PE-backed  SMEs  and
the  control  group  handled  the  crisis  period  relatively  well.  Both  samples  saw  increases  in
revenues  and  asset  values  by  2022  from  pre-crisis  values  in  2019,  as  shown  in  exhibits  1  and  2  in
the  appendix.  The  results  in  Table  3  are,  regardless,  surprising.  Profit  margin,  net  income,  and
EBITDA  were  all  negatively  affected  by  PE-ownership  during  the  COVID-19  pandemic  and
Ukraine  war.  When  including  control  variables,  PE-backed  SMEs  faced  a  2.4%  larger  reduction
in  profit  margins  and  a  1.8%  and  1.7%  decrease  in  net  income  and  EBITDA  respectively
compared  to  the  control  group.  These  results,  and  those  in  columns  5,  7,  and  9,  all  display
statistical  significance  with  a  99%  confidence  level.  Meanwhile,  both  revenue  and  assets  have
positive  coefficients,  although  these  results  are  statistically  insignificant  both  in  the  base  model
and  the  augmented  model.  We  therefore  conclude  that  there  is  no  overall  impact  of  PE-ownership
on  revenues  and  asset  development  throughout  the  COVID-19  pandemic  and  the  Ukraine  war.
Since  revenues  throughout  the  crisis  period  do  not  change  between  PE-backed  SMEs  and  the
control  group,  but  profitability  measures  do,  we  assume  that  PE-backed  firms  have  been  hit
harder  in  terms  of  expenses  during  the  crisis  period.  We  investigate  this  further  in  section  5.3.  A
decline  in  profitability  coupled  with  no  change  in  asset  size  between  the  treatment  and  control
group  further  implies  that  total  asset  size  among  PE-backed  SMEs  stems  from  external  financing,
rather  than  organic  growth.  This  is  analyzed  in  section  5.2.

                                      20
        Table 3. DiD Regressions on Performance Metrics

         Panel  A:  Crisis  Period
                      (1)        (2)          (5)        (6)          (7)        (8)          (9)        (10)         (11)       (12)
                    Revenue (log)          Profit Margin        Net Income/Assets       EBITDA/Assets         Assets (log)
                   0.006      0.008     -0.022***  -0.024***    -0.018***  -0.018***    -0.015***  -0.017***     0.016     0.014
PE SME × Crisis
                   (0.016)     (0.016)      (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.016)    (0.016)
Year fixed effects     Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes
Firm fixed effects    Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes
Firm controls       No       Yes        No       Yes        No       Yes        No       Yes        No      Yes
Observations       5042      4928       5042      4928       5047      4933       4939      4933       5047     4933
P-Value            0.691      0.607       0.000      0.000       0.000      0.000       0.000      0.000       0.315     0.377
R-squared          0.118      0.127       0.016      0.023       0.021      0.041       0.028      0.062       0.208     0.234
         Panel  B:  Year-by-Year
PE SME × 2020     0.003      0.006      -0.009     -0.011*      -0.006     -0.005      -0.003     -0.004     0.056***   0.056***
                    (0.0219    (0.022)      (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.021)     (0.021)
PE SME × 2021     0.024      0.027      -0.011*    -0.013**     -0.004     -0.006      -0.002     -0.003      0.006      0.003
                    (0.021)     (0.022)      (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.021)    (0.0219
PE SME × 2022     -0.016     -0.018     -0.019***  -0.019***   -0.023***  -0.022***   -0.022***  -0.022***     -0.032     -0.035*
                    (0.021)     (0.022)      (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.021)     (0.021)
Year fixed effects     Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
Firm fixed effects     Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
Firm controls        No       Yes        No       Yes        No       Yes        No       Yes        No       Yes
Observations        5042      4928       5042      4928       5047      4933       4939      4933       5047      4933
           Table  3  reports  the  coefficients  (β1)  from  a  difference-in-differences  model  for  all  dependent  variables  within  the
           performance  metrics.  Respective  standard  errors  (εit)  are  provided  in  parentheses  below  the  coefficients.
           Odd-numbered  columns  indicate  coefficients  without  the  inclusion  of  control  variables,  while  even-numbered
           columns  are  an  augmented  model  including  control  variables.  All  estimates  include  firm  fixed  effects  and  year  fixed
           effects.  Panel  A  indicates  the  baseline  model  for  equation  1,  while  panel  B  presents  a  year-by-year  model  resembling
           equations  2  to  4.  Values  are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  extreme  outliers.  Statistical
           significance  levels  are  denoted  as  *  for  the  10%  level,  **  for  the  5%  level,  and  ***  at  the  1%  level.

                Panel  B  indicates  that  the  negative  impact  of  PE-ownership  on  EBITDA  and  net  income
         occurred  in  2022,  with  a  relative  2.2%  decrease  in  EBITDA  compared  to  the  control  group.  2020
         and  2021  show  marginally  negative  coefficients  for  both  variables,  although  both  lack  statistical
         significance.  These  findings  are  in  line  with  exhibits  A3  and  A4  in  the  appendix,  which  present
         graphs  of  the  development  of  EBITDA  and  net  income  divided  by  total  assets,  normalized  to
         2019  values.  The  exhibits  show  that  both  firm  samples  experience  declines  across  the
         profitability  measures  in  2020,  followed  by  a  recovery  in  2021.  A  deviation,  however,  occurs  in
         2022,  where  PE-firms  face  yet  another  year  of  declining  profitability  while  the  control  group
         continues  to  recover.  PE-backed  SMEs  underperform  in  terms  of  profit  margin  throughout  all
          three  years  of  the  crisis,  with  statistical  significance,  although  the  biggest  deviation  occurs,  here
          too,  in  2022.

                                              21
             No  impact  from  PE-ownership  can  be  seen  in  columns  1  and  2  in  panel  B  for  revenue,
       confirming  the  initial  findings  from  panel  A  and  showing  consistent  trends  across  the  entirety  of
       the  crisis  for  the  variable.  For  assets,  the  results  vary  more  across  each  year.  As  column  12  in
       panel  B  shows,  PE-backed  firms  experience  a  big  increase  of  5.4%  in  asset  size  compared  to
       control  firms  in  2020  with  a  confidence  level  above  95%.  In  2021,  no  changes  appear  between
       the  treatment  and  control  group,  while  in  2022,  PE-ownership  sees  a  notable  3.5%  decline  in
       asset  value.  The  initial,  and  economically  large,  increase  in  assets  in  2020  is  therefore  offset  by
       asset  developments  during  the  following  years  of  the  crisis.  This  development  explains  the
       statistically  insignificant  change  in  assets  when  considering  the  crisis  period  as  a  whole,  from
       panel  A.  The  trends  in  exhibit  A2  in  the  appendix  support  these  findings.

       5.2  Financial  Engineering  Metrics

      Table 4. DiD Regressions on Financial Engineering

       Panel  A:  Crisis  Period
                          (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)             (7)          (8)
                     Debt  Contrib.  /  Assets      Equity  Contrib.  /  Assets           Solvency              Cost  of  Liabilities
PE SME × Crisis      0.017*     0.020**        0.009      0.007        -0.024***   -0.030***       -0.001      -0.001
                       (0.009)      (0.009)         (0.005)      (0.005)         (0.006)      (0.006)         (0.001)      (0.001)
Year fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
Firm fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
Firm controls          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
Observations          5029       4921          5029       4921          5047       4933          4892       4789
P-Value              0.065       0.030          0.101       0.192          0.000       0.000          0.480       0.468
R-squared             0.007       0.020          0.007       0.020          0.008       0.024          0.004       0.005
      Panel  B:  Year-by-Year
PE SME × 2020       0.055***   0.057***       0.013*     0.013*        -0.014*     -0.014*        0.000      0.001
                       0.012      0.012         0.007      0.007         0.008      0.008         0.001      0.001
PE SME × 2021        -0.020      -0.017         -0.003      -0.005         -0.010     -0.014*        -0.001      -0.001
                       0.012      0.012         0.007      0.007         0.008      0.008         0.001      0.001
PE SME × 2022        -0.005      -0.004         0.006      0.005        -0.020**   -0.025***       0.000      0.000
                       0.012      0.012         0.007      0.007         0.008      0.008         0.001      0.001
Year fixed effects        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
Firm fixed effects        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
Firm controls           No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
Observations           5029       4921         5029       4921         5047       4933         4892       4789
        Table  4  reports  the  coefficients  (β1)  from  a  difference-in-differences  model  for  all  dependent  variables  within
        financial  engineering.  Respective  standard  errors  (εit)  are  provided  in  parentheses  below  the  coefficients.
        Odd-numbered  columns  indicate  coefficients  without  the  inclusion  of  control  variables,  while  even-numbered
        columns  are  an  augmented  model  including  control  variables.  All  estimates  include  firm  fixed  effects  and  year  fixed
        effects.  Panel  A  indicates  the  baseline  model  for  equation  1,  while  panel  B  presents  a  year-by-year  model  resembling
        equations  2  to  4.  Values  are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  extreme  outliers.  Statistical
        significance  levels  are  denoted  as  *  for  the  10%  level,  **  for  the  5%  level,  and  ***  at  the  1%  level.

                                            22
       Panel  A  from  Table  5  shows  that  PE-backing  increases  access  to  debt  financing  by  2%,
normalized  to  total  assets,  throughout  the  crisis.  The  interaction  coefficient  rises  marginally  as
control  variables  are  implemented,  coupled  with  a  lower  p-value.  Debt  contribution  is
statistically  significant  in  both  the  base  model  and  the  model  augmented  with  control  variables.
Equity  contribution  also  bears  a  positive  coefficient,  although  with  no  statistical  significance  for
both  the  base  and  augmented  model.  We  therefore  conclude  that  PE-backing  holds  no  benefit  to
SMEs  regarding  equity  injections  when  considering  the  crisis  as  a  whole.  Greater  differences  in
debt  financing  compared  to  equity  injections  between  the  two  groups,  throughout  the  crisis,
indicate  that  PE  firms  make  use  of  leverage  during  the  exogenous  shocks.  As  seen  in  panel  A,
solvency  decreases  by  3%  as  a  result  of  the  crisis  interaction  term  when  we  account  for  control
variables,  with  a  p-value  level  below  1%.

       Looking  into  year-by-year  regressions,  in  panel  B  (Table  4),  we  see  that  the  overall
positive   coefficient   in   debt   financing   is  a  levelled  out  version  of  yearly  discrepancies.
Specifically,  PE-backing  increases  debt  contribution  by  5.7%  more  in  the  first  year  of  the
pandemic  than  the  control  group.  This  plateaus  during  the  following  years  with  a  negative
coefficient  in  2021  and  2022,  although  with  no  statistical  significance.  The  same  case  is
applicable  for  equity  contribution.  PE-backed  SMEs  enjoy  slightly  greater  equity  injections  from
investors  in  2020,  around  1.4%  greater  than  that  of  the  control  group.  The  coefficient  for
financing  through  equity  in  2020  is  significant  at  the  10%  level.  This  too  appears  to  decrease  in
the  following  years,  although,  similarly  to  debt  contribution,  this  decline  relative  to  the  control
group  is  statistically  insignificant.  These  trends  of  increases  in  equity  and  debt  contribution,  in
2020,  are  supported  by  exhibits  A6  and  A7  in  the  appendix.  Both  the  treatment  and  control  group
increase  equity  injections  in  2020,  although  the  increase  is  greater  for  the  PE  sample.  These
injection  rates  subside  in  the  following  years  for  both  groups.  Exhibit  A7  shows  that  PE-backed
SME  debt  financing  increases  greatly  in  2020  while  debt  contribution  in  the  control  group
remains  unchanged.  However,  in  2021,  non-PE-backed  SMEs  catch  up  to  this  trend,  although  not
to  the  same  growth  rate  seen  in  2020,  while  PE-backed  SMEs’  debt  financing  subsides.  The
higher  debt  and  equity  contributions  in  2020  confirm  that  asset  growth  in  2020,  among
PE-backed  firms,  is  sourced  from  external  financing,  rather  than  organic  growth.  Rather
surprisingly,  panel  B  shows  that  solvency  continues  to  decline  relative  to  the  control  group  up
until  2022.  However,  no  significant  differences  emerge  in  debt  and  equity  contribution  between
the  two  groups  after  2020.  This  implies  that  the  relative  decline  in  solvency,  after  2020,  is  a
result   of   underperformance   in   terms   of   profitability  among  PE-backed  SMEs,  thereby
comparatively  decreasing  shareholders’  equity.  In  regards  to  cost  of  liabilities,  we  find  no
evidence  of  PE-backed  firms  managing  to  obtain  financing  at  lower  interest  expenses  in  both  the
primary  crisis  regression  model  in  panel  A  and  the  the  year-by-year  regression  in  panel  B.  Both
base  and  augmented  regressions  show  no  statistical  significance  for  cost  of  liabilities.

                                      23
       Summarizing  these  findings,  in  the  entirety  of  the  crisis,  SMEs  with  PE-ownership  make
use  of  more  financial  engineering  through  debt  contributions  and  potentially  solvency,  although
the   reduced   equity   to   assets   ratio   is   also   a   byproduct   of  reduced  profitability.  Equity
contributions  and  cost  of  liabilities  present  no  overall  changes  throughout  the  crisis  period.

5.3  Operational  Engineering  Metrics

Table 5: DiD Regressions on Operational Engineering

Panel  A:  Crisis  Period
                               (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)
                           Investments/Assets             Cost/Sales                WC/Assets
     PE SME × Crisis       0.005      0.006        0.013***    0.014***       -0.011*    -0.015**
                            (0.010)      (0.010)         (0.004)      (0.004)         (0.007)      (0.007)
     Year fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Firm fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Firm controls          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
     Observations          4856       4840          4932       4923          5047       4933
     P-Value              0.629       0.537          0.000       0.000          0.100       0.033
     R-squared             0.004       0.005          0.009       0.021          0.004       0.012
Panel  B:  Year-by-Year
                               (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)
                           Investments/Assets             Cost/Sales                WC/Assets
     PE SME × 2020      0.053***   0.053***        0.004      0.005         0.004      0.003
                           0.014       0.014          0.005       0.005          0.009       0.009
     PE SME × 2021      -0.029**    -0.028**        0.005      0.006         -0.003      -0.005
                           0.014       0.014          0.005       0.005          0.009       0.009
     PE SME × 2022       -0.015      -0.014       0.014***    0.015***       -0.022**   -0.025***
                           0.014       0.014          0.005       0.005          0.009       0.009
     Year fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Firm fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Firm controls          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
     Observations          4856       4840          4932       4923          5047       4933
Table  5  reports  the  coefficients  (β1)  from  a  difference-in-differences  model  for  all  dependent  variables  within
operational  engineering.  Respective  standard  errors  (εit)  are  provided  in  parentheses  below  the  coefficients.
Odd-numbered  columns  indicate  coefficients  without  the  inclusion  of  control  variables,  while  even-numbered
columns  are  an  augmented  model  including  control  variables.  All  estimates  include  firm  fixed  effects  and  year  fixed
effects.  Panel  A  indicates  the  baseline  model  for  equation  1,  while  panel  B  presents  a  year-by-year  model  resembling
equations  2  to  4.  Values  are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  extreme  outliers.  Statistical
significance  levels  are  denoted  as  *  for  the  10%  level,  **  for  the  5%  level,  and  ***  at  the  1%  level.

       In  Column  4  of  Table  5,  operating  expenses  as  a  ratio  of  sales  increase  comparatively  for
PE-backed  SMEs  by  1.4%  with  strong  statistical  significance.  As  section  5.1  shows,  profit
margin  declines  by  around  2.4%  for  PE-backed  SMEs,  relative  to  the  control  group  while
operating  expenses  as  a  ratio  of  sales  increased  by  around  1.4%.  This  indicates  that  more  than

                                      24
half  of  the  negative  effect  in  profitability  for  PE-backed  SMEs,  compared  to  the  control  group,  is
attributable  to  an  increase  in  operating  expenses.  Additionally,  PE-backed  SMEs  appear  to  hold
marginally  leaner  working  capital  throughout  the  crisis  period,  at  around  1.5%  less  than  control
group  counterparts.  These  findings  become  more  significant  with  the  inclusion  of  control
variables,  seen  in  column  6.  The  reduction  in  working  capital  can  demonstrate,  for  example,
either  an  inadvertent  effect  of  lower  profitability  reducing  cash  reserves,  or  vice  versa  a  strategic
approach  in  improving  inventory  management,  collection  of  receivables  and  elongated  payment
terms  with  suppliers  as  a  means  of  freeing  up  liquidities.  As  such,  the  findings  in  regards  to
working  capital  become  more  ambiguous  when  considering  the  negative  impact  of  PE-ownership
on  profitability  between  2020  and  2022.  Lastly,  investments  in  SMEs  see  no  increase  from
PE-ownership  during  the  compounded  crisis  period  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  and  the  invasion
of  Ukraine  war  as  a  whole.  Both  coefficients  for  with  and  without  control  variables  present
statistical  insignificance.

       When  delving  into  the  year-by-year  analysis  in  panel  B,  discrepancies  arise  between  the
coefficients  for  investments  presented  in  panel  A  and  the  yearly  changes  in  2020,  2021,  and
2022.  While  investments  display  no  overall  impact  from  PE-ownership  across  the  two  crises
combined,  investments  rise  considerably  in  2020  by  5.3%  for  PE-backed  SMEs  relative  to  those
non-PE-backed.  The  coefficient  for  2020  is  strongly  statistically  significant.  This  rise  in
investment  comes  in  conjunction  with  the  notably  higher  debt  financing  levels  experienced  by
treatment  firms,  as  well  as  their  marginally  greater  equity  injection  levels.  However,  2021  sees  a
relative  reduction  in  investment  levels  among  the  treatment  sample  at  2.8%,  followed  by  no
changes  between  the  two  groups  in  2022.  This  reverse  effect  levels  out  the  coefficient  in  2020
which  explains  why  there  is  no  overall  difference  in  investments  across  the  joint  crises  between
2020  and  2022.  Interestingly,  exhibit  A10  in  the  appendix  shows  that  control  firms  heavily  invest
in  2021.  At  the  same  time,  priorly  significant  PE-backed  investments  from  2020  drop.
Year-by-year  DiD  regressions  further  show  that  the  reduction  in  working  capital  within  the
treatment  group,  shown  in  panel  A,  occurs  in  2022.  The  same  can  be  seen  with  operating
expenses  over  sales,  which  increase  comparatively  for  PE-backed  SMEs  by  1.5%  in  2022,  partly
explaining  the  divergence  in  EBITDA  and  net  income  levels  during  the  same  year.

       The  combined  results  from  panel  A  and  panel  B,  from  Table  5,  show  that  PE-backed
firms  make  no  more  use  of  operational  engineering  with  respect  to  investments,  while  they
present  worse  operational  efficiency  measured  by  operating  expenses.  On  the  other  hand,
PE-backed  firms  reduce  their  working  capital,  though  this  can  also  stem  from  their  relative
reductions  in  profitability  levels.  The  findings  therefore  suggest  that  PE-backed  companies  did
not  benefit  from  increased  operational  engineering  in  face  of  the  effect  of  the  whole  crisis  period.

                                      25
5.4  Comparison  of  Micro,  Small,  and  Medium  Sized  Enterprises

       We  run  additional  DiD  regressions  on  separate  firm-size  categories,  with  results  tables
shown  in  exhibit  C1  to  C3  in  the  appendix.  Micro  firms  were  notably  the  worst  performing
relative  to  their  control  group  counterparts,  experiencing  comparative  declines  in  net  income  and
EBITDA  at  3.9%  and  3.8%  respectively,  when  including  control  variables.  Both  findings  are
strongly  statistically  significant.  Staggeringly,  revenues  are  16.5%  less  compared  to  the  control
group,  post-crisis,  in  conjunction  with  operating  expenses  rising  by  5.1%  as  a  ratio  of  sales.
Profit  margins  therefore  see  a  7%  decline.  All  noted  coefficients  here  are  statistically  significant.
Interestingly,  micro  enterprises  were  the  biggest  beneficiaries  in  terms  of  debt  financing  in  2020,
taking  on  14.1%  more  debt  relative  to  control  group  counterparts.  No  differences  in  equity
contribution  were  observed.  Furthermore,  EBITDA  and  net  income  only  decreased  for  these
firms  in  2022  as  compared  to  non-PE-backed  SMEs,  by  5.7%  and  5.4%  respectively.  This  is
therefore  what  drives  the  coefficients  for  the  overall  crisis.  Compare  this  to  the  small-sized  and
medium-sized  enterprises,  and  the  comparison  is  striking.  Small  PE-backed  firms  see  no  change
in  revenues  and  a  smaller  comparative  increase  in  operating  expenses  relative  to  sales  at  1.5%.
Overall,  PE-ownership  among  small  sized  enterprises  sees  a  smaller  negative  coefficient  in  net
income  and  EBITDA  post-crisis  at  2.6%  and  2.7%  respectively.  Medium  sized  SMEs  are  the
least  negatively  affected  firms  by  PE-ownership,  seeing  overall  reductions  of  1.3%  and  1.0%  in
net  income  and  EBITDA  respectively,  compared  to  the  control  group.  Both  size-categories  of
firms  follow  the  same  trends  as  micro  firms,  in  that  profitability  drops  in  2022  relative  to
non-PE-backed  firms,  thereby  also  driving  these  coefficients  for  the  entire  crisis  period.

5.5 Robustness Tests:

       Our  findings  are  robust  for  both  the  inclusion  and  exclusion  of  control  variables,  with  no
notable  changes  in  statistical  significance  between  based  and  augmented  models.  We  additionally
run  a  robustness  test  on  our  matching  procedure,  decreasing  the  range  of  the  matched  financial
criteria  to  30%,  in  line  with  Bernstein  et  al.  (2019).  Results  are  found  in  exhibit  B1  in  the
appendix.  Performance  metrics  remain  unchanged  both  in  terms  of  coefficients  and  statistical
significance  when  considering  the  crisis  period  as  a  whole.  Previously  statistically  significant
coefficients  for  operational  and  financial  engineering,  however,  turn  insignificant.  Interestingly,
the  year-by-year  regressions  remain  largely  unchanged  in  terms  of  coefficients  and  statistical
significance.  As  such,  the  trends  we  observe  from  panel  B  in  the  results  tables  remain  upheld
with  validity.  We  run  a  second  robustness  test  filtering  for  firms  founded  before  2000,  seen  in
exhibit  B2  in  the  appendix.  We  test  the  assumption  that  one-year  range  matching  is  not  required
for  the  founded  year  criteria  when  firms  are  incorporated  before  2000,  due  to  concerns  about
survivorship  biases  becoming  null.  Results  show  minimal  variations  to  our  findings,  although  the
coefficients  for  working  capital,  debt  contribution,  and  assets  lose  statistical  significance.  Cost  of
liabilities  becomes  statistically  significant.  Year-by-year  regressions  show  similar  trends  to  those
found  in  panel  B,  again  implying  validity  in  our  observations.

                                      26
6.  Discussion:

       The  DiD  regression  yields  mixed  results  compared  to  prior  research.  PE-backed  firms
underperform  in  all  metrics  of  profitability.  Furthermore,  PE-backed  SMEs  see  no  overall
relative  changes  in  revenues  or  asset  size  compared  to  the  control  group.  We  therefore  reject  our
initial   hypothesis:   PE-backed   SMEs   operationally   perform   better   short-term   than
non-PE-backed  SMEs  following  exogenous  shocks.  Interestingly,  PE-backed  companies  obtained
more  debt  financing  over  the  course  of  the  crisis,  while  the  net  effect  of  PE-ownership  on  equity
injections  is  insignificant,  contributing  to  reduced  solvency  combined  with  reduced  profitability
levels.  Year-by-year  differences  appear  for  debt  and  equity  financing  levels,  indicating
discrepancies  in  the  effects  of  the  two  crises  interacting  with  PE-ownership.  Considering  the
overall  effects,  we  partially  accept  the  second  hypothesis:  PE-backed  SMEs  make  use  of
comparatively  more  financial  engineering  than  non-PE-backed  SMEs  following  exogenous
shocks.  Lastly,  we  find  no  evidence  of  PE-ownership  increasing  operational  engineering  over  the
course  of  the  crisis  compared  to  the  crisis  group.  Changes  in  working  capital  among  PE-backed
firms,  as  a  channel  of  operational  engineering,  are  challenged  by  the  alternative  observation  that
PE-backed  firms  are  less  cost  efficient.  Year-by-year  fluctuations  are  also  present  between
coefficients  of  investments,  operating  expenses  as  a  ratio  of  sales,  and  working  capital.  Yet,  the
net  effects  of  PE-ownership  appear  to  be  overall  null  in  this  channel  of  value  creation.  We
therefore  reject  the  third  hypothesis:  PE-backed  SMEs  make  use  of  comparatively  more
operational  engineering  than  non-PE-backed  SMEs  following  exogenous  shocks.

       The  results  for  our  performance  metrics  contradict  general  findings  from  prior  research
on  the  value  creation  implemented  by  PE-ownership,  particularly  during  times  of  crisis
(Bernstein  et  al.,  2019;  Lavery  and  Wilson,  2022;  Boucly  et  al.,  2011;  Gompers  et  al.,  2022).
Alternative  explanations  must  therefore  arise  as  to  why  such  discrepancies  in  findings  appear.
First,  we  extend  our  crisis  period  compared  to  prior  research,  thereby  combining  two  unrelated
exogenous  shocks  into  one  crisis.  This  adds  an  additional  stress  test  to  PE-ownership,  thereby
making  differing  results  more  reasonable.  We  see  that  EBITDA  and  net  income  only  decline
among  PE-backed  firms,  with  significance,  in  2022,  implying  that  it  was  the  Ukraine  war  which
formed  the  discrepancies  in  performance  between  PE-backed  and  non-PE-backed  SMEs.
Secondly,  and  most  notably,  these  findings  are  centralized  on  a  very  specific  and  vulnerable
size-category  of  firms.  SMEs  were  the  worst  hit  firms  during  both  the  COVID-19  pandemic  and
the  Ukraine  war.  Any  changes  in  consumer  demand,  supply  chain  fluidity,  credit  markets,
policies  and  other  market  conditions  significantly  affect  smaller  sized  firms  with  already  lower
short-term  liquidity  buffers,  small  market  shares,  less  economies  of  scale  and  operational
expertise,  in  conjunction  with  lower  access  to  capital  financing.  The  analysis  therefore  is  given
an  additional  layer  for  consideration  of  the  operational  and  financial  implications  of  the  crisis  on
the  sampled  firms.

                                      27
       While  the  results  on  PE  portfolio  firm  performance  contradict  prior  research,  our  findings
within  financial  engineering  are  in  line  with  Bernstein  et  al.  (2019)  and  Lavery  and  Wilson
(2022)  when  concerning  debt  contribution  and  solvency,  although  this  is  not  the  case  for  equity
contribution.  These  findings,  however,  regard  the  net  effect  of  the  crisis.  The  substantial  rise  in
debt  financing,  in  2020,  among  PE-backed  SMEs,  as  well  as  marginally  greater  access  to  equity
contribution,  offers  an  additional  perspective  for  analysis.  Namely,  2020  is  the  most  notable
period  of  financial  engineering  among  PE-backed  firms,  and  is  therefore  what  drives  the
coefficients  for  debt  and  equity  contribution  in  Table  4  primarily.  The  results  from  the  year
strongly  support  prior  research  arguments  that  PE  firms  alleviate  financial  constraints  by
providing  portfolio  firms  with  additional  sources  of  external  financing,  through  debt  and  equity.
This  ability  to  source  external  financing  stems  from  strong  banking  relationships,  debt
renegotiation  expertise,  reduced  information  asymmetry  from  majority  ownership,  as  well  as  the
existence  of  uninvested  “dry-powder”  in  PE  funds  (Bernstein  et  al.,  2019).  Combine  these
abilities  with  an  eased  credit  market,  displaying  near-zero  benchmark  interest  rates,  it  comes  to
no  surprise  that  PE  firms  offered  an  extensive  pathway  to  easing  liquidity  constraints  through
particularly  debt  financing  (Axelson,  Jenkinson,  Strömberg,  and  Weisbach,  2013).

       The  rise  in  leverage  is  argued  to  provide  a  value-creating  channel  for  firms  to  handle
short-term  liquidity  constraints,  financing  short-term  operations,  and  invest  into  profitable
projects  and  asset  classes  at  a  time  of  high  uncertainty.  This  thereby  contributes  to  operational
performances  and  profitability.  The  impact  of  debt  contribution  on  investments  is  clearly  seen,  as
both  rise  by  over  5%  relative  to  non-PE-backed  firms  in  2020.  Financial  engineering  therefore
contributed  to  increased  operational  engineering  through  heightened  investment  levels  in  2020.
Furthermore,  aside  from  reduced  profit  margins,  PE-backed  SMEs  did  not  underperform  within
any  performance  metrics  in  2020  and  2021,  implying  the  financial  engineering  allowed  firms  to
upkeep  and  finance  short-term  operations  and  operational  efficiency  during  the  COVID-19
pandemic.

       The  ‘catch-up’  in  debt  financing  among  non-PE-backed  SMEs  during  2021  can  be
explained  by  the  market  recovery  that  year.  First,  as  the  immediate  impacts  of  COVID-19
subsided,  and  markets  stabilized  relative  to  the  prior  year,  creditors  revisited  previously  cautious
approaches  to  lending  (European  Central  Bank,  2022).  Consequently,  the  advantages  to  debt
financing  from  strong  banking  relationships  and  reduced  information  asymmetries  among
PE-backed  firms  subsided.  Additionally,  by  2021,  PE-backed  SMEs  were  already  leveraged  in
relation  to  the  control  group,  leaving  less  wiggle  room  for  additional  borrowing  during  this  year.
While  potentially  value  creating  during  2020  and  2021,  the  leveraging  had  also  left  PE-backed
SMEs  particularly  vulnerable  to  the  unpredictable,  yet  oncoming  Ukraine  war.  PE-backed  firms
were  already  2%  more  leveraged  in  2019,  which,  in  conjunction  with  two  successive  years  of  a
relative  increase  in  debt  to  assets,  creates  greater  implications  for  their  financial  stability  in  2022,
when  yet  another  crisis  hits.

                                      28
       Bernstein  et  al.  (2019)  show  that  firms  displaying  higher  leverage  ratios  pre-crisis  face
reduced  investment  levels  post-exogenous  shock.  Furthermore,  Lavery  and  Wilson  (2022)  find
that  the  positive  impact  of  PE-ownership  on  sales,  EBITDA,  and  asset  growth  are  reduced
among  more  levered  firms  going  into  the  COVID-19  pandemic.  Both  studies  source  these
findings  to  the  fact  that  higher  pre-existing  debt  levels  hamper  firms'  abilities  to  acquire  further
debt  and  equity  injections,  thereby  reducing  performances  during  crises.  Bernstein  et  al.  (2019)
and  Lavery  and  Wilson  (2022)  suggest  that  performance  during  a  crisis  is  mostly  up-kept  by  the
ability  to  continuously  use  financial  engineering,  while  PE  firms’  ability  to  improve  profitability
metrics  through  operational  engineering  remains  relatively  limited.  Our  results  lean  towards  this
argument,  although  we  further  present  findings  on  underperformance.  Despite  the  invasion  of
Ukraine,  and  its  related  economic  implications,  non-PE-backed  SMEs  continued  to  recover  in
profitability  from  2021  onwards,  after  an  initial  dip  in  2020.  Recovery  is  also  observed  among
PE-backed  SMEs  during  2021.  However,  a  divergence  in  2022  is  clear,  as  their  respective
profitability  trends  turn  negative  once  more.  In  fact,  it  is  2022  which  appears  to  drive  the  overall
negative  coefficients  for  profitability  among  the  PE-backed  sample  for  the  overall  crisis.  We  note
earlier  that  no  underperformance  was  seen,  apart  from  profit  margins,  throughout  the  COVID-19
crisis,  however,  PE-backed  SMEs  did  perform  worse  when  the  Ukraine  war  began.

       In  line  with  Bernstein  et  al.  (2019)  and  Lavery  and  Wilson  (2020),  we  reason  the
underperformance  firstly  due  to  the  fact  that  prior  high  leverage  had  limited  PE-backed  SMEs'
ability  to  finance  their  operations  relative  to  their  non-PE-backed  counterparts  going  into  the
Ukraine  war.  Furthermore,  these  firms  must  allocate  greater  proportions  of  cash  flows  to  service
debt,  leaving  them  less  cash  to  finance  operational  activities  and  the  upkeep  of  operational
efficiency.  The  link  between  low  solvency  in  2021  and  underperformance  in  profitability  in  2022
is  further  displayed  by  the  comparisons  between  micro  enterprises  and  small  and  medium-sized
firms.  Micro-sized  firms  were  the  biggest  beneficiaries  for  debt  contribution  from  PE-ownership
in  2020,  but  were  also  those  who  experienced  the  biggest  hampering  in  profitability,  sales,  and
operating  expenses  compared  to  the  control  group  in  2022.

       The  overall  lack  of  operational  engineering  and,  in  particular,  its  underuse  in  2022  within
cost  efficiency  can  also  be  a  culprit  to  the  underperformance  among  PE-ownership.  According  to
Gompers  et  al.  (2022),  during  times  of  crisis,  PE-firms  reduce  working  hours  spent  on  finding
new  potential  acquisitions  and  instead  focus  on  aiding  portfolio  companies.  The  focal  areas  of
improvement  regard  reducing  mostly  operational  expenses  as  well  as  maintaining  or  increasing
sales.  However,  despite  this  argument,  operating  expenses  divided  by  sales  increased  in  2022
among  PE-backed  SMEs  year  with  statistical  significance,  relative  to  non-PE-backed  firms.
Working  capital  does  decline  among  PE-backed  firms,  which  is  a  method  of  freeing  up  cash  flow
by  reducing,  for  example,  inventory  holdings  and  accounts  receivables,  and  using  this  for
investments  and  repaying  debt.  However,  the  results  indicate  that  the  lack  of  cost  efficiency
within  PE-backed  SMEs  outweigh  any  benefits  from  a  leaner  working  capital,  as  seen  by  the

                                      29
profitability  metrics.  Humphrey-Jenner  (2005)  finds  that  the  capabilities  of  effective  operational
engineering  by  PE  firms  is  hampered  when  portfolio  companies  are  of  smaller  sizes.  This
presents  an  argument  as  to  why  our  findings,  focused  on  SMEs,  differ  to  those  of  Bernstein  et  al.
(2019)  and  Lavery  and  Wilson  (2022),  where  the  average  PE-backed  firm  is  a  mid-cap
corporation.  As  PE  funds  hold  more,  but  smaller  firms,  this  leaves  PE  employees  stretched  extra
thin  in  aiding  portfolio  firms  during  times  of  crisis.  Average  manpower  and  hours  spent  per  firm
decline  while  adapting  to  the  needs  of  each  small  enterprise  craves  more  diversified  manpower.
This   poses   the   risk   of   mismanagement   and   misguidance,   and   therefore,   causes   the
implementation  of  expertise  held  by  PE-ownership  to  become  additionally  challenging.

       Our  study,  overall,  finds  that  PE-backed  SMEs  did  not  manage  the  period  between  2020
to  2022  equally  well  to  firms  with  alternative  ownership  structures.  The  inclusion  of  multi-phase
crises  diminished  PE  firms’  ability  to  match  operational  and  financial  engineering  strategies,
presenting  a  broader  limitation  of  PE-ownership  during  periods  of  prolonged  crisis.  In  line  with
common  criticisms,  PE  firms  took  more  risk  towards  portfolio  SMEs  through  outlevering
non-PE-backed  firms  combined  with  an  inability  to  effectively  manage  operational  engineering
channels.  These  findings  therefore  shed  light  on  the  risks  of  financial  engineering,  as  a  channel
of  value  creation,  inadvertently  becoming  a  channel  of  value-destruction  for  already  vulnerable
SMEs.  As  such,  increased  consciousness  on  risk  aversion  is  required  to  be  able  to  adapt  to
prolonged  periods  of  crisis  arising  from  exogenous  shocks.

7.  Limitations:

       Similar  to  Bernstein  et  al.  (2019),  our  results  present  low  R-squared  values  for  each
dependent  variable.  This  implies  that  the  chosen  DiD  regression  control  variables  and  interaction
term  do  not  explain  a  larger  extent  of  the  dependent  variables’  standard  error.  Thus,  there  are
other  variables  not  accounted  for  in  the  model.  However,  due  to  the  nature  of  the  two  crises
relating  largely  to  the  social  sciences,  it  becomes  natural  that  many  macroeconomic,  political,
sociological  variables  are  not  accounted  for.  Additionally,  the  focus  of  the  DiD  regression
remains  on  the  interaction  term.  A  low  p-value  for  the  interaction  term  coefficient  therefore
implies  there  is  no  cause  for  concern,  as  the  results  display  significance  on  the  effect  of  the
variable.  Another  limitation  regards  the  measurability  of  operational  engineering.  While  we
incorporate  metrics  for  this  channel  of  value  creation,  it  is  difficult  to  take  into  account  the
tangible  impact  of  consultation  services  from  PE-firms  to  portfolio  companies  or  changes  in
operative  strategies.  Working  capital  and  operating  expenses  are  mere  representations  of  the
results   of   operational   engineering,   and   are   thus   more   dependent   upon   interpretation.
Additionally,  the  over-representation  of  certain  countries  in  our  sample  introduces  geographical
biases.  This  is  particularly  true  considering  certain  nations  are  specialized  towards  specific
industries,  such  as  Germany  towards  the  manufacturing  industry,  and  France  towards  retail  trade.
As  the  differences  in  performances  between  the  treatment  and  control  group  may  vary  depending
on  industry  and  wider  macro-economic  environment,  this  implies  that  our  findings  may  be

                                      30
overweighted  toward  certain  nations  and  less  applicable  to  others.  We  argue,  however,  that  our
findings  maintain  applicability,  not  only  to  underrepresented  nations  in  our  sample,  but  also
externally.  We  also  recognize  that  the  Ukraine  war  and  its  effects  extend  beyond  2022.  Financial
reports  after  this  year  were  not  used,  however,  simply  due  to  the  limited  availability  where  the
sample  remaining  may  skew  coefficient  findings.

8.  Conclusion

8.1. Summary

       This  paper  studies  whether  PE-backed  SMEs  outperformed  non-PE-backed  SMEs  upon
the  onset  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  and  the  Ukraine  war.  We  extend  this  by  delving  into
whether  PE-backing  benefits  SMEs  during  this  period  through  two  potential  channels  of  value
creation:  financial  and  operational  engineering.  Contrary  to  previous  research,  matched  DiD
regressions  conducted  show  that  PE-backed  SMEs  do  not  outperform  in  terms  of  profitability
during  multi-phase  crises.  In  fact,  underperformance  is  observed  after  the  Ukraine  war  began.
While  previous  research  focuses  on  single  occurring  crises,  the  inclusion  of  two  back-to-back
exogenous  shocks  forms  a  true  stress  test  on  PE-ownership.  We  find  that  profitability
vulnerabilities  in  PE-backed  SMEs  were  attributed  to  initial  external  financing  in  2020  through
debt,  in  combination  to  no  increased  benefits  from  operational  engineering  throughout  both
crises.  As  such,  we  conclude  that  PE-ownership  does  not  drive  value  creation  among  SMEs
when  forced  to  adapt  to  prolonged  periods  of  economic  downturn.  These  insights  stress  the  need
for  nuanced  assessments  on  PE’s  role  in  wider  economic  stability  to  upcoming  financial  crises  or
exogenous  shocks.

8.2  Further  Development  of  Research

       In  line  with  our  argument  that  operational  engineering  becomes  more  challenging  for  PE
firms  when  targeted  towards  smaller  portfolio  firms,  an  interesting  extension  to  the  paper  would
be  to  reverse  the  analysis  and  focus  the  effects  of  the  owner  size  on  operational  engineering.
Further  inclusion  of  additional  variables  for  operational  engineering  is  also  a  useful  extension,
although  measuring  PE  owners’  expertise  and  the  objective  benefits  from  information  sharing
towards  portfolio  firms  remains  challenging.  Before-and-after  survey  methodologies  for  crises
provide  a  good  beginning  in  quantifying  operational  engineering  (Gompers  et  al.,  2016;  Gompers
et  al.,  2022),  in  addition  to  including  more  variables  to  those  we  used  in  this  study.  Additionally,
considering  the  lag  effect  of  exogenous  shocks,  a  time-extended  analysis  to  incorporate
post-crisis  performance  beyond  2022  would  provide  valuable  insights  into  the  long-run
implications  of  PE  ownership  on  SME  performance  after  our  crisis  period.

                                      31
9.  References

     Aliaj,  O.,  Learner,  S.,  Torre  Arenas,  I.,  Joiner,  S.,  Louch,  W.,  Wiggins,  K.  (2024,  July  24)
          How  private  equity  tangled  banks  in  a  web  of  debt.  Financial  Times
            https://ig.ft.com/private-equity

     Asif,  M.,  Sabater,  A.  (2023).  European  private  equity  holding  periods  extend  as  exit
            activity  slumps.
          https://www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/news-insights/latest-news-headlines/
           european-private-equity-holding-periods-extend-as-exit-activity-slumps-77643308

     Autio,  E.,  Kenney,  M.,  Mustar,  P.,  Siegel,  D.,  &  Wright,  M.  (2014).  Entrepreneurial
           innovation:  The  importance  of  context.  Research  Policy,  43(7),  1097–1108.
           https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2014.01.015

     Bank,  E.  C.  (2022).  The  euro  area  bank  lending  survey  –  Fourth  quarter  of  2021.
          https://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/ecb_surveys/bank_lending_survey/html/ecb.blssurve
          y2021q4~43deabc06e.en.html

     Bernstein,  S.,  Lerner,  J.,  &  Mezzanotti,  F.  (2019).  Private  Equity  and  Financial  Fragility
           during  the  Crisis.  The  Review  of  Financial  Studies,  32(4),  1309–1373.
           https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhy078

     Biesinger,  M.,  Bircan,  Ç.,  &  Ljungqvist,  A.  (2023).  Value  Creation  in  Private  Equity
          (SSRN  Scholarly  Paper  No.  3607996).  Social  Science  Research  Network.
           https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3607996

     Borrow  Cheap,  Buy  High?  The  Determinants  of  Leverage  and  Pricing  in
           Buyouts—AXELSON  -  2013—The  Journal  of  Finance—Wiley  Online  Library.  (2013).
          https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jofi.12082

     Boucly,  Q.,  Sraer,  D.,  &  Thesmar,  D.  (2011).  Growth  LBOs.  Journal  of  Financial
           Economics,  102(2),  432–453.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2011.05.014

     Brooks,  R.,  &  Orzag,  P.  (2023,  March  20)  The  COVID  Inflation  Shock,  Monetary  Policy
           Gradualism,  and  Lingering  Supply  Chain  Effects.  Institute  of  International  Finance
          https://www.iif.com/Publications/ID/5337/The-COVID-Inflation-Shock-Monetary-Po
           licy-Gradualism-and-Lingering-Supply-Chain-Effects

                                      32
Cohn,  J.  B.,  Hotchkiss,  E.  S.,  &  Towery,  E.  M.  (2022).  Sources  of  Value  Creation  in  Private
     Equity  Buyouts  of  Private  Firms*.  Review  of  Finance,  26(2),  257–285.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/rof/rfac005

European Commission — SME definition (n.d.).
     https://single-market-economy.ec.europa.eu/smes/sme-fundamentals/sme-definition_e
     n

Fleming,  G.,  Cumming,  D.  J.,  &  Suchard,  J.-A.  (2005).  Venture  Capitalist  Value-Added
     Activities,  Fundraising  and  Drawdowns  (SSRN  Scholarly  Paper  No.  466962).  Social
     Science  Research  Network.
     https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=466962

Gompers,  P.,  Kaplan,  S.  N.,  &  Mukharlyamov,  V.  (2016).  What  do  private  equity  firms  say
     they  do?  Journal  of  Financial  Economics,  121(3),  449–476.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2016.06.003

Gompers,  P.  A.,  Kaplan,  S.  N.,  &  Mukharlyamov,  V.  (2022).  Private  equity  and  Covid-19.
      Journal  of  Financial  Intermediation,  51,  100968.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfi.2022.100968

Greenwood,  R.,  Hanson,  S.  G.,  Shleifer,  A.,  &  Sørensen,  J.  A.  (2021).  Predictable  Financial
     Crises.  Harvard  Business  School

Hancock,  K.  (2023,  March  8)  What  is  middle  market  private  equity?.  PitchBook.
     https://pitchbook.com/blog/what-is-middle-market-private-equity

Haque,  S.  (2023).  Does  Private  Equity  Over-Lever  Portfolio  Companies?  Finance  and
      Economics  Discussion  Series,  2023–009,  1–62.
      https://doi.org/10.17016/feds.2023.009

Humphery-Jenner,  M.  (2012).  Private  Equity  Fund  Size,  Investment  Size,  and  Value
     Creation*.  Review  of  Finance,  16(3),  799–835.  https://doi.org/10.1093/rof/rfr011

Inflation  Calculator  |  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Minneapolis.  (n.d.).
     https://www.minneapolisfed.org/about-us/monetary-policy/inflation-calculator

Ivashina,  V.,  &  Kovner,  A.  (2011).  The  Private  Equity  Advantage:  Leveraged  Buyout  Firms
     and  Relationship  Banking.  Review  of  Financial  Studies,  24(7),  2462–2498.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhr024

                                  33
Kalemli-Ozcan,  S.,  Gourinchas,  P.-O.,  Penciakova,  V.,  &  Sander,  N.  (2020).  COVID-19
     and SME Failures. IMF Working Papers, 2020(207), 1.
     https://doi.org/10.5089/9781513557748.001

Kaplan,  S.  N.,  &  Stromberg,  P.  (2009).  Leveraged  Buyouts  and  Private  Equity.  Journal  of
     Economic  Perspectives,  23(1),  121-146.

Lavery,  P.,  &  Wilson,  N.  (2024).  The  performance  of  private  equity  portfolio  companies
     during  the  COVID-19  pandemic.  Journal  of  Corporate  Finance,  89,  102641.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcorpfin.2024.102641

Moon,  J.  J.  (2006).  Public  vs.  Private  Equity.  Journal  of  Applied  Corporate  Finance,  18(3),
     76–82.  https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-6622.2006.00100.x

Statista.  Europe:  Private  equity  deal  volume  by  country.  (2023).
     https://www.statista.com/statistics/892097/number-of-private-equity-deals-in-europe-
     by-country/

Statista.  PE  as  GDP  share  in  European  countries  2023.  (2023).
     https://www.statista.com/statistics/256655/private-equity-investments-in-europe-by-in
      dustry/

Statista.  Private  equity  deals  value  by  target  country  2023.  (n.d.).  Retrieved  23  November
     2024,  from
     https://www.statista.com/statistics/520845/value-of-global-private-equity-deals-by-tar
      get-country/

Statistics  |  Eurostat.  (n.d.).  Retrieved  2  December  2024,  from
     https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/tec00115/default/table?lang=en

                                  34
Appendix A: Variable Graphs

                         Exhibit  A1:  Log  of  Operating  Revenue

Exhibit  A1  illustrates  the  change  in  mean  operating  revenue,  in  its  logarithmic  value,  between  2017  to  2022  for  both
PE-backed and non-PE-backed SMEs in the matched sample. Values are normalized to the base period, 2019, before
the  crisis  period  begins  in  2020.  This  is  to  capture  an  illustrative  effect  of  the  crisis  on  both  the  PE-backed  and
non-PE-backed sample. Values are winsorized to the 2% level to remove any influences from extreme outliers.

                            Exhibit A2: Log of Total Assets

Exhibit  A2  illustrates  the  change  in  mean  assets,  in  its  logarithmic  value,  between  2017  to  2022  for  both  PE-backed
and non-PE-backed SMEs in the matched sample. Values are normalized to the base period, 2019, before the crisis
period  begins  in  2020.  This  is  to  capture  an  illustrative  effect  of  the  crisis  on  both  the  PE-backed  and  non-PE-backed
sample.  Values  are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  extreme  outliers.

                                      35
                             Exhibit A3: EBITDA/Assets

Exhibit A3 illustrates the change in mean EBITDA by assets between 2017 to 2022 for both PE-backed and
non-PE-backed SMEs in the matched sample. Values are normalized to the base period, 2019, before the crisis
period  begins  in  2020.  This  is  to  capture  an  illustrative  effect  of  the  crisis  on  both  the  PE-backed  and  non-PE-backed
sample.  Values  are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  extreme  outliers.

                            Exhibit  A4:  Net  Income/Assets

Exhibit  A4  illustrates  the  change  in  mean  net  income  by  assets,  in  its  logarithmic  value,  between  2017  to  2022  for
both PE-backed and non-PE-backed SMEs in the matched sample. Values are normalized to the base period, 2019,
before  the  crisis  period  begins  in  2020.  This  is  to  capture  an  illustrative  effect  of  the  crisis  on  both  the  PE-backed
and non-PE-backed sample. Values are winsorized to the 2% level to remove any influences from extreme outliers.

                                      36
                               Exhibit  A5:  Profit  Margin

Exhibit A5 illustrates the change in mean profit margin between 2017 to 2022 for both PE-backed and
non-PE-backed SMEs in the matched sample. Values are normalized to the base period, 2019, before the crisis
period  begins  in  2020.  This  is  to  capture  an  illustrative  effect  of  the  crisis  on  both  the  PE-backed  and  non-PE-backed
sample.  Values  are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  extreme  outliers.

                         Exhibit  A6:  Equity  Contribution/Assets

Exhibit  A6  illustrates  the  change  in  mean  equity  contribution  divided  by  assets  between  2017  to  2022  for  both
PE-backed and non-PE-backed SMEs in the matched sample. Values are normalized to the base period, 2019, before
the  crisis  period  begins  in  2020.  This  is  to  capture  an  illustrative  effect  of  the  crisis  on  both  the  PE-backed  and
non-PE-backed sample. Values are winsorized to the 2% level to remove any influences from extreme outliers.

                                      37
                         Exhibit  A7:  Debt  Contribution/Assets

Exhibit  A7  illustrates  the  change  in  mean  debt  contribution  divided  by  assets  between  2017  to  2022  for  both
PE-backed and non-PE-backed SMEs in the matched sample. Values are normalized to the base period, 2019, before
the  crisis  period  begins  in  2020.  This  is  to  capture  an  illustrative  effect  of  the  crisis  on  both  the  PE-backed  and
non-PE-backed sample. Values are winsorized to the 2% level to remove any influences from extreme outliers.

                                 Exhibit  A8:  Solvency

Exhibit A8 illustrates the change in the mean solvency ratio between 2017 to 2022 for both PE-backed and
non-PE-backed SMEs in the matched sample. Values are normalized to the base period, 2019, before the crisis
period  begins  in  2020.  This  is  to  capture  an  illustrative  effect  of  the  crisis  on  both  the  PE-backed  and  non-PE-backed
sample.  Values  are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  extreme  outliers.

                                      38
                              Exhibit  A9:  Cost  of  Liabilities

Exhibit  A9  illustrates  the  change  in  mean  cost  of  liabilities  between  2017  to  2022  for  both  PE-backed  and
non-PE-backed SMEs in the matched sample. Values are normalized to the base period, 2019, before the crisis
period  begins  in  2020.  This  is  to  capture  an  illustrative  effect  of  the  crisis  on  both  the  PE-backed  and  non-PE-backed
sample.  Values  are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  extreme  outliers.

                            Exhibit  A10:  Investments/Assets

Exhibit A10 illustrates the change in mean investments divided by assets between 2017 to 2022 for both PE-backed
and non-PE-backed SMEs in the matched sample. Values are normalized to the base period, 2019, before the crisis
period  begins  in  2020.  This  is  to  capture  an  illustrative  effect  of  the  crisis  on  both  the  PE-backed  and  non-PE-backed
sample.  Values  are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  extreme  outliers.

                                      39
                        Exhibit A11: Operating Expenses/Sales

Exhibit  A11  illustrates  the  change  in  mean  operating  expenses  divided  by  sales  between  2017  to  2022  for  both
PE-backed and non-PE-backed SMEs in the matched sample. Values are normalized to the base period, 2019, before
the  crisis  period  begins  in  2020.  This  is  to  capture  an  illustrative  effect  of  the  crisis  on  both  the  PE-backed  and
non-PE-backed sample. Values are winsorized to the 2% level to remove any influences from extreme outliers.

                      Exhibit A12: Working Capital/Assets

Exhibit  A12  illustrates  the  change  in  mean  working  capital  divided  by  assets  between  2017  to  2022  for  both
PE-backed and non-PE-backed SMEs in the matched sample. Values are normalized to the base period, 2019, before
the  crisis  period  begins  in  2020.  This  is  to  capture  an  illustrative  effect  of  the  crisis  on  both  the  PE-backed  and
non-PE-backed sample. Values are winsorized to the 2% level to remove any influences from extreme outliers.

                                      40
      Appendix B: Robustness Tests

                    Exhibit B1: Robustness Test on Matching within 30% Range

       Table  B1.1:  DiD  Regressions  on  Performance  Metrics

       Panel  A:  Crisis  Period
                     (1)        (2)          (5)        (6)          (7)        (8)          (9)        (10)        (11)      (12)
                   Revenue (log)         Profit Margin       Net Income/Assets      EBITDA/Assets        Assets (log)
                  -0.023     -0.023     -0.015***  -0.016***    -0.011**   -0.011**     -0.008    -0.009*      0.014     0.009
 PE SME × Crisis
                  0.020     0.020       0.004     0.004       0.005     0.005       0.006     0.005      0.020     0.019
Year fixed effects    Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes
Firm fixed effects    Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes
Firm controls       No      Yes        No       Yes        No       Yes        No       Yes       No      Yes
Observations       2875     2821       2875      2821       2875      2821       2823      2821       2875     2821
P-Value           0.253     0.263       0.000     0.000       0.018     0.018       0.126     0.093      0.476     0.656
R-squared         0.137     0.154       0.010     0.025       0.020     0.047       0.027     0.070      0.262     0.299
       Panel  B:  Year-by-Year
PE SME × 2020    0.013     0.014      -0.005     -0.004      -0.002     0.000      0.000     0.000     0.081***  0.077***
                  0.027     0.027      0.006     0.006      0.006     0.006      0.007     0.007      0.027     0.026
PE SME × 2021    0.004     0.008     -0.014**  -0.015***    -0.002     -0.004      0.000     0.000      -0.006     -0.008
                  0.027     0.027      0.006     0.006      0.006     0.006      0.007     0.007      0.027     0.026
PE SME × 2022   -0.059**  -0.063**     -0.008     -0.010     -0.016**  -0.017***   -0.016**   -0.016**    -0.049**   -0.054**
                  0.027     0.027      0.006     0.006      0.006     0.006      0.007     0.007      0.027     0.026
Year fixed effects    Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
Firm fixed effects    Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
Firm controls       No      Yes       No       Yes       No       Yes       No       Yes       No       Yes
Observations       2875     2821       2875      2821       2875      2821       2875      2821       2875      2821
         Table  B1.1  reports  the  coefficients  (β1) from  a  difference-in-differences  model  for  all  dependent  variables  within  the
         performance  metrics.  Respective  standard  errors  (εit)  are  provided  in  parentheses  below  the  coefficients.
        Odd-numbered  columns  indicate  coefficients  without  the  inclusion  of  control  variables,  while  even-numbered
        columns  are  an  augmented  model  including  control  variables.  All  estimates  include  firm  fixed  effects  and  year  fixed
        effects.  Panel  A  indicates  the  baseline  model  for  equation  1,  while  panel  B  presents  a  year-by-year  model  resembling
        equations  2  to  4.  Values  are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  extreme  outliers.  Statistical
        significance  levels  are  denoted  as  *  for  the  10%  level,  **  for  the  5%  level,  and  ***  at  the  1%  level.

                                            41
      Table  B1.2:  DiD  Regressions  on  Financial  Engineering

       Panel  A:  Crisis  Period
                           (1)         (2)             (3)         (4)             (5)         (6)             (7)         (8)
                      Debt  Contrib.  /  Assets      Equity  Contrib.  /  Assets           Solvency              Cost  of  Liabilities
                       0.008       0.011         0.001      0.001        -0.017**   -0.023***        0.001      0.001
PE SME × Crisis
                       0.011       0.011         0.006      0.006         0.007      0.007         0.001      0.001
Year fixed effects        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
Firm fixed effects        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
Firm controls           No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
Observations           2868       2820         2868       2820         2875       2821         2791       2742
P-Value               0.496      0.346         0.844      0.895         0.018      0.001         0.318      0.376
R-squared              0.012      0.019         0.010      0.025         0.014      0.038         0.007      0.008
      Panel  B:  Year-by-Year
PE SME × 2020       0.062***   0.064***        0.007      0.007         -0.014     -0.016*        0.001      0.001
                       0.015      0.015         0.008      0.008         0.009      0.009         0.001      0.001
PE SME × 2021       -0.044***   -0.040***       -0.001      -0.002         -0.004      -0.009         -0.001      -0.001
                       0.015      0.015         0.008      0.008         0.009      0.009         0.001      0.001
PE SME × 2022        -0.004      -0.005         -0.003      -0.004         -0.012     -0.018*        0.001      0.001
                       0.015      0.015         0.008      0.008         0.009      0.009         0.001      0.001
Year fixed effects        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
Firm fixed effects        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
Firm controls           No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
Observations           2868       2820         2868       2820         2875       2821         2791       2742
        Table  B1.2  reports  the  coefficients  (β1) from  a  difference-in-differences  model  for  all  dependent  variables  within
        financial  engineering.  Respective  standard  errors  (εit)  are  provided  in  parentheses  below  the  coefficients.
        Odd-numbered  columns  indicate  coefficients  without  the  inclusion  of  control  variables,  while  even-numbered
        columns  are  an  augmented  model  including  control  variables.  All  estimates  include  firm  fixed  effects  and  year  fixed
        effects.  Panel  A  indicates  the  baseline  model  for  equation  1,  while  panel  B  presents  a  year-by-year  model  resembling
        equations  2  to  4.  Values  are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  extreme  outliers.  Statistical
        significance  levels  are  denoted  as  *  for  the  10%  level,  **  for  the  5%  level,  and  ***  at  the  1%  level.

                                            42
Table  B1.3:  DiD  Regressions  on  Operational  Engineering

Panel  A:  Crisis  Period
                               (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)
                           Investments/Assets             Cost/Sales                WC/Assets
     PE SME × Crisis       -0.002      -0.001         0.004       0.005         -0.005      -0.011
                           0.012       0.012          0.004       0.004          0.009       0.009
     Year fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Firm fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Firm controls          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
     Observations          2799       2792          2823       2816          2875       2821
     P-Value              0.871       0.941          0.335       0.246          0.579       0.200
     R-squared             0.007       0.008          0.005       0.027          0.006       0.021
Panel  B:  Year-by-Year
     PE SME × 2020      0.066***    0.066***       -0.003      -0.003         -0.004      -0.005
                           0.016       0.016          0.006       0.005          0.012       0.012
     PE SME × 2021      -0.047***   -0.046***       0.003      0.004         0.004      -0.001
                           0.017       0.017          0.006       0.005          0.012       0.012
     PE SME × 2022       -0.022      -0.021         0.007      0.007         -0.009      -0.014
                           0.017       0.017          0.006       0.005          0.012       0.012
     Year fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Firm fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Firm controls          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
     Observations          2799       2792          2823       2816          2875       2821
Table  B1.3  reports  the  coefficients  (β1) from  a  difference-in-differences  model  for  all  dependent  variables  within
operational  engineering.  Respective  standard  errors  (εit)  are  provided  in  parentheses  below  the  coefficients.
Odd-numbered  columns  indicate  coefficients  without  the  inclusion  of  control  variables,  while  even-numbered
columns  are  an  augmented  model  including  control  variables.  All  estimates  include  firm  fixed  effects  and  year  fixed
effects.  Panel  A  indicates  the  baseline  model  for  equation  1,  while  panel  B  presents  a  year-by-year  model  resembling
equations  2  to  4.  Values  are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  extreme  outliers.  Statistical
significance  levels  are  denoted  as  *  for  the  10%  level,  **  for  the  5%  level,  and  ***  at  the  1%  level.

                                      43
                       Exhibit B2: Robustness Test on Firms Founded Before 2000

         Table  B2.1:  DiD  Regressions  on  Performance  Metrics

         Panel  A:  Crisis  Period
                     (1)        (2)          (5)        (6)          (7)        (8)          (9)        (10)         (11)       (12)
                    Revenue (log)          Profit Margin        Net Income/Assets       EBITDA/Assets       Total Assets (log)
                   0.017      0.017     -0.013***  -0.014***    -0.009**   -0.009**      -0.006     -0.006       0.020     0.015
PE SME × Crisis
                   0.016      0.016       0.004      0.004       0.004      0.004       0.005      0.005       0.016     0.015
Year fixed effects    Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes
Firm fixed effects    Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes
  Firm controls      No       Yes        No       Yes        No       Yes        No       Yes        No      Yes
  Observations     3516      3444       3516      3444       3516      3444       3448      3444       3516     3444
    P-Value        0.279      0.300       0.004      0.001       0.045      0.041       0.225      0.196       0.194     0.317
   R-squared       0.125      0.133       0.013      0.022       0.017      0.041       0.023      0.062       0.221     0.262
         Panel  B:  Year-by-Year
 PE SME × 2020    0.007      0.008      -0.005     -0.007      -0.002     -0.001      0.000      0.000     0.061***   0.059***
                   (0.022)     (0.022)      (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.021)     (0.020)
 PE SME × 2021    0.030      0.031      -0.007     -0.008      -0.003     -0.004      0.001      0.000       0.018      0.013
                   (0.022)     (0.022)      (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.0219    (0.020)
 PE SME × 2022    -0.006     -0.009      -0.011*    -0.011*     -0.011*    -0.011**     -0.011*    -0.011*     -0.042**   -0.045**
                   (0.022)     (0.022)      (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.021)     (0.020)
Year fixed effects    Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
Firm fixed effects    Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
  Firm controls      No       Yes        No       Yes        No       Yes        No       Yes        No       Yes
  Observations     3516      3444       3516      3444       3516      3444       3448      3444       3516      3444
           Table  B2.1  reports  the  coefficients  (β1) from  a  difference-in-differences  model  for  all  dependent  variables  within  the
           performance  metrics.  Respective  standard  errors  (εit)  are  provided  in  parentheses  below  the  coefficients.
           Odd-numbered  columns  indicate  coefficients  without  the  inclusion  of  control  variables,  while  even-numbered
           columns  are  an  augmented  model  including  control  variables.  All  estimates  include  firm  fixed  effects  and  year  fixed
           effects.  Panel  A  indicates  the  baseline  model  for  equation  1,  while  panel  B  presents  a  year-by-year  model  resembling
           equations  2  to  4.  Values  are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  extreme  outliers.  Statistical
           significance  levels  are  denoted  as  *  for  the  10%  level,  **  for  the  5%  level,  and  ***  at  the  1%  level.

                                              44
       Table  B2.2:  DiD  Regressions  on  Financial  Engineering

       Panel  A:  Crisis  Period
                           (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)             (7)          (8)
                       Debt  Contrib.  /  Assets      Equity  Contrib.  /  Assets           Solvency              Cost  of  Liabilities
                       0.004       0.008          0.004       0.003        -0.018***   -0.024***        0.001       0.001
PE SME × Crisis
                       0.010       0.010          0.006       0.006          0.006       0.006          0.001       0.001
Year fixed effects         Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
Firm fixed effects        Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
Firm controls           No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
Observations           3505       3439          3505       3439          3516       3444          3442       3381
P-Value                0.674       0.461          0.486       0.608          0.004       0.000          0.199       0.139
R-squared              0.008       0.016          0.014       0.031          0.007       0.025          0.008       0.008
       Panel  B:  Year-by-Year
 PE SME × 2020       0.061***   0.061***        0.005      0.004        -0.021**   -0.022***       0.002*     0.002**
                         (0.014)      0.014         (0.007)     (0.007)         (0.009)     (0.008)         (0.001)     (0.001)
 PE SME × 2021       -0.032**    -0.030**        0.004      0.003         -0.007      -0.011         -0.001      -0.001
                         (0.014)      0.014         (0.007)     (0.007)         (0.009)     (0.008)         (0.001)     (0.001)
 PE SME × 2022        -0.021      -0.018         -0.002      -0.002         -0.006      -0.010         0.001      0.001
                         (0.014)      0.014         (0.007)     (0.007)         (0.009)     (0.008)         (0.001)     (0.001)
 Year fixed effects        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
 Firm fixed effects        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
 Firm controls           No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
 Observations           3505       3439         3505       3439         3516       3444         3442       3381
         Table  B2.2  reports  the  coefficients  (β1) from  a  difference-in-differences  model  for  all  dependent  variables  within
         financial  engineering.  Respective  standard  errors  (εit)  are  provided  in  parentheses  below  the  coefficients.
         Odd-numbered  columns  indicate  coefficients  without  the  inclusion  of  control  variables,  while  even-numbered
         columns  are  an  augmented  model  including  control  variables.  All  estimates  include  firm  fixed  effects  and  year  fixed
         effects.  Panel  A  indicates  the  baseline  model  for  equation  1,  while  panel  B  presents  a  year-by-year  model  resembling
         equations  2  to  4.  Values  are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  extreme  outliers.  Statistical
         significance  levels  are  denoted  as  *  for  the  10%  level,  **  for  the  5%  level,  and  ***  at  the  1%  level.

                                             45
Table  B2.3:  DiD  Regressions  on  Operational  Engineering

Panel  A:  Crisis  Period
                               (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)
                           Investments/Assets             Cost/Sales                WC/Assets
     PE SME × Crisis       0.003      0.004         0.006      0.007*         -0.004      -0.008
                           0.011       0.011          0.004       0.004          0.007       0.007
     Year fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Firm fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Firm controls          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
     Observations          3417       3403          3446       3439          3516       3444
     P-Value              0.784       0.734          0.103       0.070          0.610       0.272
     R-squared             0.005       0.006          0.006       0.022          0.003       0.013
Panel  B:  Year-by-Year
     PE SME × 2020      0.055***    0.055***        0.001      0.001         -0.001      -0.002
                           0.015       0.015          0.005       0.005          0.010       0.010
     PE SME × 2021      -0.031**    -0.030**        0.002      0.002         0.004      0.001
                           0.015       0.015          0.005       0.005          0.010       0.010
     PE SME × 2022       -0.019      -0.018         0.008      0.008*        -0.010      -0.013
                           0.015       0.015          0.005       0.005          0.010       0.010
     Year fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Firm fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Firm controls          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
     Observations          3417       3403          3446       3439          3516       3444
Table  B2.3  reports  the  coefficients  (β1) from  a  difference-in-differences  model  for  all  dependent  variables  within
operational  engineering.  Respective  standard  errors  (εit)  are  provided  in  parentheses  below  the  coefficients.
Odd-numbered  columns  indicate  coefficients  without  the  inclusion  of  control  variables,  while  even-numbered
columns  are  an  augmented  model  including  control  variables.  All  estimates  include  firm  fixed  effects  and  year  fixed
effects.  Panel  A  indicates  the  baseline  model  for  equation  1,  while  panel  B  presents  a  year-by-year  model  resembling
equations  2  to  4.  Values  are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  extreme  outliers.  Statistical
significance  levels  are  denoted  as  *  for  the  10%  level,  **  for  the  5%  level,  and  ***  at  the  1%  level.

                                      46
     Appendix C: DiD Regressions on Micro, Small, and Medium Sized Firms

                         Exhibit C1: DiD Regressions on Micro Sized Firms

       Table  C1.1:  DiD  Regressions  on  Performance  Metrics

       Panel  A:  Crisis  Period
                     (1)        (2)         (5)        (6)          (7)        (8)          (9)        (10)        (11)      (12)
                   Revenue (log)         Profit Margin       Net Income/Assets      EBITDA/Assets        Assets (log)
                 -0.188***  -0.165**    -0.075***  -0.07***    -0.042**   -0.039**     -0.023    -0.038**     -0.053    -0.064
 PE SME × Crisis
                   (0.066)    (0.066)      (0.026)    (0.027)      (0.016)    (0.017)      (0.017)    (0.017)     (0.078)    (0.082)
Year fixed effects    Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes
Firm fixed effects    Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes
Firm controls       No      Yes        No       Yes        No       Yes        No       Yes       No      Yes
Observations       504.00    480.00      504.00    480.00      504.00    480.00      482.00    480.00     504.00    480.00
P-Value           0.005     0.013       0.004     0.009       0.011     0.019       0.184      0.03       0.496     0.439
R-squared         0.115     0.172       0.028     0.035       0.041     0.053       0.024     0.087      0.259     0.275
       Panel  B:  Year-by-Year
PE SME × 2020     0.031     0.049      -0.050     -0.045      -0.020     -0.019      -0.005     -0.013      0.132     0.135
                  0.089     0.088      0.035     0.035      0.022     0.022      0.023     0.023      0.105     0.109
PE SME × 2021    -0.130    -0.085      -0.002     -0.001      0.002     0.004      0.012     0.004      -0.105     -0.104
                  0.089     0.088      0.035     0.035      0.022     0.022      0.023     0.023      0.105     0.109
PE SME × 2022   -0.240***  -0.253***   -0.082**   -0.078**   -0.056***  -0.054**    -0.048**   -0.057**     -0.123     -0.143
                  0.089     0.087      0.035     0.035      0.022     0.022      0.023     0.023      0.105     0.109
Year fixed effects    Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
Firm fixed effects    Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
Firm controls       No      Yes       No       Yes       No       Yes       No       Yes       No       Yes
Observations       504      480       504       480        504       480        482       480        504       480
         Table  C1.1  reports  the  coefficients  (β1) from  a  difference-in-differences  model  for  all  dependent  variables  within  the
         performance  metrics.  Respective  standard  errors  (εit)  are  provided  in  parentheses  below  the  coefficients.
        Odd-numbered  columns  indicate  coefficients  without  the  inclusion  of  control  variables,  while  even-numbered
        columns  are  an  augmented  model  including  control  variables.  All  estimates  include  firm  fixed  effects  and  year  fixed
        effects.  Panel  A  indicates  the  baseline  model  for  equation  1,  while  panel  B  presents  a  year-by-year  model  resembling
        equations  2  to  4.  Values  are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  extreme  outliers.  Statistical
        significance  levels  are  denoted  as  *  for  the  10%  level,  **  for  the  5%  level,  and  ***  at  the  1%  level.

                                            47
      Table  C1.2:  DiD  Regressions  on  Financial  Engineering

       Panel  A:  Crisis  Period
                           (1)         (2)             (3)         (4)             (5)         (6)             (7)         (8)
                      Debt  Contrib.  /  Assets      Equity  Contrib.  /  Assets           Solvency              Cost  of  Liabilities
                        0.049       0.062          0.008       0.013         -0.016      -0.021         -0.003      -0.003
PE SME × Crisis
                       0.039       0.04          0.016      0.016         0.024      0.025         0.003      0.003
Year fixed effects        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
Firm fixed effects        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
Firm controls           No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
Observations           504        480          504        480          504        480          458        434
P-Value               0.208      0.123         0.635      0.423          0.51       0.385         0.382      0.318
R-squared              0.026       0.04          0.009      0.052         0.007      0.017         0.019      0.029
      Panel  B:  Year-by-Year
PE SME × 2020        0.128**    0.141***       -0.007      0.005         -0.049      -0.053         -0.006      -0.005
                       0.052      0.053         0.021      0.022         0.032      0.032         0.004      0.004
PE SME × 2021        -0.073      -0.057         0.006      0.003         0.012      0.006         -0.005      -0.005
                       0.053      0.053         0.021      0.022         0.032      0.032         0.004      0.004
PE SME × 2022         0.034      0.025         0.015      0.015         0.009      0.009         0.006      0.004
                       0.053      0.053         0.021      0.022         0.032      0.032         0.004      0.004
Year fixed effects        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
Firm fixed effects        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
Firm controls           No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
Observations           504        480          504        480          504        480          458        434
        Table  C1.2  reports  the  coefficients  (β1) from  a  difference-in-differences  model  for  all  dependent  variables  within
        financial  engineering.  Respective  standard  errors  (εit)  are  provided  in  parentheses  below  the  coefficients.
        Odd-numbered  columns  indicate  coefficients  without  the  inclusion  of  control  variables,  while  even-numbered
        columns  are  an  augmented  model  including  control  variables.  All  estimates  include  firm  fixed  effects  and  year  fixed
        effects.  Panel  A  indicates  the  baseline  model  for  equation  1,  while  panel  B  presents  a  year-by-year  model  resembling
        equations  2  to  4.  Values  are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  extreme  outliers.  Statistical
        significance  levels  are  denoted  as  *  for  the  10%  level,  **  for  the  5%  level,  and  ***  at  the  1%  level.

                                            48
Table  C1.3:  DiD  Regressions  on  Operational  Engineering

Panel  A:  Crisis  Period
                               (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)
                           Investments/Assets             Cost/Sales                WC/Assets
     PE SME × Crisis       -0.021      0.004        0.046**     0.051**        -0.048      -0.049
                            (0.043)      (0.043)         (0.023)      (0.023)         (0.031)      (0.032)
     Year fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Firm fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Firm controls          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
     Observations           448        446           482        480           504        480
     P-Value               0.62       0.934          0.043       0.027          0.127       0.132
     R-squared             0.012       0.041          0.03        0.06          0.011       0.016
Panel  B:  Year-by-Year
     PE SME × 2020        0.082      0.098*         0.036      0.038         -0.034      -0.042
                           0.057       0.056          0.031       0.030          0.042       0.043
     PE SME × 2021       -0.105*     -0.091         0.012      0.014         -0.027      -0.034
                           0.057       0.056          0.031       0.030          0.042       0.043
     PE SME × 2022       -0.015      0.000         0.035      0.037         -0.025      -0.010
                           0.057       0.057          0.031       0.030          0.042       0.043
     Year fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Firm fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Firm controls          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
     Observations           448        446           482        480           504        480
Table  C1.3  reports  the  coefficients  (β1) from  a  difference-in-differences  model  for  all  dependent  variables  within
operational  engineering.  Respective  standard  errors  (εit)  are  provided  in  parentheses  below  the  coefficients.
Odd-numbered  columns  indicate  coefficients  without  the  inclusion  of  control  variables,  while  even-numbered
columns  are  an  augmented  model  including  control  variables.  All  estimates  include  firm  fixed  effects  and  year  fixed
effects.  Panel  A  indicates  the  baseline  model  for  equation  1,  while  panel  B  presents  a  year-by-year  model  resembling
equations  2  to  4.  Values  are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  extreme  outliers.  Statistical
significance  levels  are  denoted  as  *  for  the  10%  level,  **  for  the  5%  level,  and  ***  at  the  1%  level.

                                      49
                         Exhibit C2: DiD Regressions on Small Sized SMEs

       Table  C2.1:  DiD  Regressions  on  Performance  Metrics

       Panel  A:  Crisis  Period
                     (1)        (2)          (5)        (6)          (7)        (8)          (9)        (10)        (11)      (12)
                   Revenue (log)         Profit Margin       Net Income/Assets      EBITDA/Assets        Assets (log)
                  -0.006     -0.007     -0.017**   -0.02***    -0.026***  -0.026***   -0.026***  -0.027***    -0.008    -0.016
 PE SME × Crisis
                   (0.027)    (0.028)      (0.007)    (0.007)      (0.008)    (0.008)      (0.009)    (0.009)     (0.028)    (0.029)
Year fixed effects    Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes
Firm fixed effects    Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes
Firm controls       No      Yes        No       Yes        No       Yes        No       Yes       No      Yes
Observations       1531     1483       1531      1483       1531      1483       1485      1483       1531     1483
P-Value           0.835     0.809       0.012     0.003       0.001     0.001       0.004     0.002      0.782     0.575
R-squared         0.153     0.160       0.012     0.024       0.022     0.055       0.036     0.080      0.258     0.273
       Panel  B:  Year-by-Year
PE SME × 2020    -0.012    -0.007      0.002     -0.001      -0.001     0.001      0.000     0.000      0.031     0.029
                  0.036     0.037      0.009     0.009      0.011     0.011      0.012     0.012      0.038     0.038
PE SME × 2021    0.028     0.027     -0.023**  -0.025***    -0.020*   -0.024**    -0.024**   -0.025**     -0.011     -0.015
                  0.036     0.037      0.009     0.009      0.011     0.010      0.012     0.012      0.038     0.038
PE SME × 2022    -0.026    -0.032      -0.010     -0.009     -0.025**   -0.024**    -0.023*   -0.024**     -0.034     -0.043
                  0.036     0.037      0.009     0.009      0.011     0.010      0.012     0.012      0.038     0.038
Year fixed effects    Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
Firm fixed effects    Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
Firm controls       No      Yes       No       Yes       No       Yes       No       Yes       No       Yes
Observations       1531     1531       1531      1531       1531      1531       1485      1485       1531      1531
         Table  C2.1  reports  the  coefficients  (β1) from  a  difference-in-differences  model  for  all  dependent  variables  within  the
         performance  metrics.  Respective  standard  errors  (εit)  are  provided  in  parentheses  below  the  coefficients.
        Odd-numbered  columns  indicate  coefficients  without  the  inclusion  of  control  variables,  while  even-numbered
        columns  are  an  augmented  model  including  control  variables.  All  estimates  include  firm  fixed  effects  and  year  fixed
        effects.  Panel  A  indicates  the  baseline  model  for  equation  1,  while  panel  B  presents  a  year-by-year  model  resembling
        equations  2  to  4.  Values  are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  extreme  outliers.  Statistical
        significance  levels  are  denoted  as  *  for  the  10%  level,  **  for  the  5%  level,  and  ***  at  the  1%  level.

                                            50
      Table  C2.2:  DiD  Regressions  on  Financial  Engineering

       Panel  A:  Crisis  Period
                           (1)         (2)             (3)         (4)             (5)         (6)             (7)         (8)
                      Debt  Contrib.  /  Assets      Equity  Contrib.  /  Assets           Solvency              Cost  of  Liabilities
                       0.007      0.008        0.023**    0.020**       -0.024**   -0.030***        0.000      0.000
PE SME × Crisis
                        (0.017)     (0.017)         (0.010)     (0.010)         (0.011)      (0.011)         (0.001)     (0.001)
Year fixed effects        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
Firm fixed effects        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
Firm controls           No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
Observations           1524       1482         1524       1482         1531       1483         1478       1435
P-Value                0.66       0.62          0.022      0.047         0.026      0.004         0.799      0.894
R-squared              0.005      0.025         0.018      0.029         0.014      0.037         0.008       0.01
      Panel  B:  Year-by-Year
PE SME × 2020         0.027      0.025         0.014      0.012         -0.001      -0.003        0.005**    0.005***
                       0.022      0.023         0.014      0.014         0.014      0.014         0.002      0.002
PE SME × 2021        -0.027      -0.025         0.006      0.005         -0.010      -0.015         -0.002      -0.002
                       0.022      0.023         0.014      0.014         0.014      0.014         0.002      0.002
PE SME × 2022         0.013      0.015         0.022      0.019        -0.031**   -0.037***       -0.003      -0.003
                       0.023      0.023         0.014      0.014         0.014      0.014         0.002      0.002
Year fixed effects        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
Firm fixed effects        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
Firm controls           No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
Observations           1524       1524         1524       1524         1531       1531         1478       1478
        Table  C2.2  reports  the  coefficients  (β1) from  a  difference-in-differences  model  for  all  dependent  variables  within
        financial  engineering.  Respective  standard  errors  (εit)  are  provided  in  parentheses  below  the  coefficients.
        Odd-numbered  columns  indicate  coefficients  without  the  inclusion  of  control  variables,  while  even-numbered
        columns  are  an  augmented  model  including  control  variables.  All  estimates  include  firm  fixed  effects  and  year  fixed
        effects.  Panel  A  indicates  the  baseline  model  for  equation  1,  while  panel  B  presents  a  year-by-year  model  resembling
        equations  2  to  4.  Values  are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  extreme  outliers.  Statistical
        significance  levels  are  denoted  as  *  for  the  10%  level,  **  for  the  5%  level,  and  ***  at  the  1%  level.

                                            51
Table  C2.3:  DiD  Regressions  on  Operational  Engineering

Panel  A:  Crisis  Period
                               (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)
                           Investments/Assets             Cost/Sales                WC/Assets
     PE SME × Crisis       0.006      0.008        0.014**     0.015**        -0.016      -0.021
                            (0.019)      (0.019)         (0.006)      (0.006)         (0.013)      (0.013)
     Year fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Firm fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Firm controls          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
     Observations          1472       1465          1490       1483          1531       1483
     P-Value               0.776       0.691          0.018       0.012          0.228       0.12
     R-squared             0.005       0.008          0.01        0.03          0.011       0.029
Panel  B:  Year-by-Year
     PE SME × 2020        0.025      0.024         -0.003      -0.003         -0.006      -0.007
                           0.026       0.026          0.008       0.008          0.018       0.018
     PE SME × 2021       -0.036      -0.035       0.022***    0.023***        0.002      -0.001
                           0.026       0.026          0.008       0.008          0.018       0.018
     PE SME × 2022        0.022      0.024         0.006      0.007         -0.025     -0.030*
                           0.026       0.026          0.008       0.008          0.018       0.018
     Year fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Firm fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Firm controls          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
     Observations          1472       1472          1490       1490          1531       1531
Table  C2.3  reports  the  coefficients  (β1) from  a  difference-in-differences  model  for  all  dependent  variables  within
operational  engineering.  Respective  standard  errors  (εit)  are  provided  in  parentheses  below  the  coefficients.
Odd-numbered  columns  indicate  coefficients  without  the  inclusion  of  control  variables,  while  even-numbered
columns  are  an  augmented  model  including  control  variables.  All  estimates  include  firm  fixed  effects  and  year  fixed
effects.  Panel  A  indicates  the  baseline  model  for  equation  1,  while  panel  B  presents  a  year-by-year  model  resembling
equations  2  to  4.  Values  are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  extreme  outliers.  Statistical
significance  levels  are  denoted  as  *  for  the  10%  level,  **  for  the  5%  level,  and  ***  at  the  1%  level.

                                      52
                       Exhibit C3: DiD Regressions on Medium Sized SMEs

       Table  C3.1:  DiD  Regressions  on  Performance  Metrics

       Panel  A:  Crisis  Period
                     (1)        (2)          (5)        (6)          (7)        (8)          (9)        (10)        (11)      (12)
                   Revenue (log)         Profit Margin       Net Income/Assets      EBITDA/Assets        Assets (log)
                  0.029      0.03     -0.021***  -0.022***   -0.013***  -0.013***    -0.010**   -0.010**    0.050***  0.050***
 PE SME × Crisis
                   (0.019)    (0.019)      (0.005)    (0.005)      (0.005)    (0.005)      (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.018)    (0.018)
Year fixed effects    Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes
Firm fixed effects    Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes
Firm controls       No      Yes        No       Yes        No       Yes        No       Yes       No      Yes
Observations       3007     2965       3007      2965       3012      2970       2972      2970       3012     2970
P-Value           0.129     0.117       0.000     0.000       0.006     0.005       0.047     0.039      0.006     0.005
R-squared         0.130     0.139       0.024     0.031       0.023     0.042       0.027     0.056      0.189     0.228
       Panel  B:  Year-by-Year
PE SME × 2020    -0.004    -0.004     -0.013*    -0.014*     -0.007     -0.007      -0.004     -0.004     0.062**   0.062***
                  0.026     0.026      0.007     0.007      0.006     0.006      0.007     0.007      0.024     0.024
PE SME × 2021    0.032     0.033      -0.007     -0.008      0.001     0.001      0.005     0.005      0.037     0.033
                  0.026     0.026      0.007     0.007      0.006     0.006      0.007     0.007      0.024     0.024
PE SME × 2022    0.025     0.026     -0.017**   -0.018**   -0.017***  -0.018***   -0.019***  -0.019***    -0.008     -0.006
                  0.026     0.026      0.007     0.007      0.006     0.006      0.007     0.007      0.024     0.024
Year fixed effects    Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
Firm fixed effects    Yes      Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
Firm controls       No      Yes       No       Yes       No       Yes       No       Yes       No       Yes
Observations       3007     2965       3007      2965       3012      2970       2972      2970       3012      2970
         Table  C3.1  reports  the  coefficients  (β1) from  a  difference-in-differences  model  for  all  dependent  variables  within  the
         performance  metrics.  Respective  standard  errors  (εit)  are  provided  in  parentheses  below  the  coefficients.
        Odd-numbered  columns  indicate  coefficients  without  the  inclusion  of  control  variables,  while  even-numbered
        columns  are  an  augmented  model  including  control  variables.  All  estimates  include  firm  fixed  effects  and  year  fixed
        effects.  Panel  A  indicates  the  baseline  model  for  equation  1,  while  panel  B  presents  a  year-by-year  model  resembling
        equations  2  to  4.  Values  are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  extreme  outliers.  Statistical
        significance  levels  are  denoted  as  *  for  the  10%  level,  **  for  the  5%  level,  and  ***  at  the  1%  level.

                                            53
      Table  C3.2:  DiD  Regressions  on  Financial  Engineering

       Panel  A:  Crisis  Period
                           (1)         (2)             (3)         (4)             (5)         (6)             (7)         (8)
                      Debt  Contrib.  /  Assets      Equity  Contrib.  /  Assets           Solvency              Cost  of  Liabilities
                       0.018     0.022**        0.001      -0.001       -0.028***   -0.032***        0.000      0.000
PE SME × Crisis
                        (0.011)      (0.011)         (0.007)     (0.007)         (0.007)     (0.007)         (0.001)     (0.001)
Year fixed effects        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
Firm fixed effects        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
Firm controls           No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
Observations           3001       2959         3001       2959         3012       2970         2956       2920
P-Value               0.118      0.049         0.896      0.945         0.000      0.000         0.780      0.749
R-squared              0.008      0.019         0.010      0.022         0.010      0.029         0.008      0.008
      Panel  B:  Year-by-Year
PE SME × 2020       0.061***   0.063***        0.014      0.013         -0.015      -0.015        -0.001      -0.001
                       0.015      0.015         0.009      0.009         0.010      0.010         0.001      0.001
PE SME × 2021        -0.009      -0.008         -0.008      -0.011         -0.014     -0.018*        -0.001      -0.001
                       0.015      0.015         0.009      0.009         0.010      0.010         0.001      0.001
PE SME × 2022        -0.020      -0.016         -0.004      -0.003        -0.021**   -0.025***       0.001      0.001
                       0.015      0.015         0.009      0.009         0.010      0.010         0.001      0.001
Year fixed effects        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
Firm fixed effects        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
Firm controls           No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
Observations           3001       2959         3001       2959         3012       2970         2956       2920
        Table  C3.2  reports  the  coefficients  (β1) from  a  difference-in-differences  model  for  all  dependent  variables  within
        financial  engineering.  Respective  standard  errors  (εit)  are  provided  in  parentheses  below  the  coefficients.
        Odd-numbered  columns  indicate  coefficients  without  the  inclusion  of  control  variables,  while  even-numbered
        columns  are  an  augmented  model  including  control  variables.  All  estimates  include  firm  fixed  effects  and  year  fixed
        effects.  Panel  A  indicates  the  baseline  model  for  equation  1,  while  panel  B  presents  a  year-by-year  model  resembling
        equations  2  to  4.  Values  are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  extreme  outliers.  Statistical
        significance  levels  are  denoted  as  *  for  the  10%  level,  **  for  the  5%  level,  and  ***  at  the  1%  level.

                                            54
Table  C3.3:  DiD  Regressions  on  Operational  Engineering

Panel  A:  Crisis  Period
                               (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)
                           Investments/Assets             Cost/Sales                WC/Assets
     PE SME × Crisis       0.008      0.008        0.011**     0.011**        -0.006      -0.009
                            (0.012)      (0.012)         (0.005)      (0.005)         (0.008)      (0.008)
     Year fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Firm fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Firm controls          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
     Observations          2936       2929          2960       2960          3012       2970
     P-Value              0.538       0.501          0.020       0.015          0.497       0.258
     R-squared             0.004       0.006          0.011       0.019          0.002       0.007
Panel  B:  Year-by-Year
     PE SME × 2020      0.061***   0.062***        0.006      0.006         0.014      0.013
                           0.016       0.016          0.006       0.006          0.011       0.011
     PE SME × 2021       -0.015      -0.015         -0.003      -0.003         -0.003      -0.004
                           0.016       0.016          0.006       0.006          0.011       0.011
     PE SME × 2022      -0.033**    -0.033**       0.016***    0.017***       -0.022**    -0.025**
                           0.016       0.016          0.006       0.006          0.011       0.011
     Year fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Firm fixed effects       Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Firm controls          No        Yes          No        Yes          No        Yes
     Observations          2936       2929          2960       2960          3012       2970
Table  C3.3  reports  the  coefficients  (β1) from  a  difference-in-differences  model  for  all  dependent  variables  within
operational  engineering.  Respective  standard  errors  (εit)  are  provided  in  parentheses  below  the  coefficients.
Odd-numbered  columns  indicate  coefficients  without  the  inclusion  of  control  variables,  while  even-numbered
columns  are  an  augmented  model  including  control  variables.  All  estimates  include  firm  fixed  effects  and  year  fixed
effects.  Panel  A  indicates  the  baseline  model  for  equation  1,  while  panel  B  presents  a  year-by-year  model  resembling
equations  2  to  4.  Values  are  winsorized  to  the  2%  level  to  remove  any  influences  from  extreme  outliers.  Statistical
significance  levels  are  denoted  as  *  for  the  10%  level,  **  for  the  5%  level,  and  ***  at  the  1%  level.

                                      55
                               AI  Disclosure:

AI  was  used  in  this  study  to  provide  us  feedback  on  our  theories  and  general  arguments  made  in
the  text.  Some  recommendations  regarding  the  structure  of  the  paragraphs  was  also  provided  by
AI.

                                      56