RE-OPTIMIZING INEQUALITY

HOW CAPITAL INCOME TAXES MOVE WEALTH
DISTRIBUTIONS

MATTEO BRANDT

LEO TIKKANEN

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2026
Re-Optimizing Inequality: How Capital Income Taxes Move Wealth Distributions

Abstract:

   Despite famously high taxes, Sweden has exceptionally high wealth inequality. In
   this thesis, we aim to quantify the relation between capital income taxes and wealth
   inequality through counterfactual simulation based on Swedish data. We employ a
   structural life-cycle model adapted from Ebrahimian and Sodini (2025) and simulate
   wealth accumulation for different capital income tax rates, considering different
   behavioral re-optimization scenarios. Overall, consistent with previous literature, we
   find that taxes reduce inequality. In our main scenario, assuming full re-optimization,
   different capital income taxes in the range 0-50% can generate wealth gini variations
   equal to half of the variation in the data. From our baseline tax rate, every 2.08
   percentage point increase yields a gini reduction of 0.01, which is significant. This
   indicates that capital income taxes are a fruitful policy lever, that warrant further
   research and political attention.

Keywords:

Wealth Inequality, Fiscal Policy, Capital Income Tax, Tax Policy, Simulation

Authors:

   Matteo Brandt (26034)

   Leo Tikkanen (25296)

Tutor:

   Mehran Ebrahimian, Assistant Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Ramin Baghai, Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Matteo Brandt & Leo Tikkanen, 2026

                                   1
1 Introduction

The distribution of economic resources is a foundational issue in modern
economies, profoundly shaping both individual life chances and broader so-
cietal stability. While income inequality has historically dominated the lit-
erature, disparities in accumulated capital are of particular interest as they
present a much more rigid barrier to social mobility. This distinction is espe-
cially important in Sweden, which has a unique combination of a relatively
low income inequality and a high wealth inequality (see figure A.1). For
reference the Swedish wealth Gini is 0.75, putting it above the US at 0.74,
whereas the income Gini is far lower at 0.29 compared to 0.42 (UBS 2025;
World Bank 2021).

This discrepancy suggests that, in Sweden, wealth accumulation is more im-
portant than salary for becoming rich. Indeed, this is echoed by Roine and
Waldenström (2008), who find that inequality fell sharply at the beginning
of the 20th century, mostly due to drop in capital income for the top 1%, but
subsequently increases at the turn of the century, again mainly attributable
to capital income. Additionally, apart from the discrepancy in Gini coeffi-
cients, it is also clear that the absolute difference between the wealth- and
income Gini is substantial for both the US and Sweden (as well as for the rest
of the world). In Bach, Calvet, and Sodini (2020), the authors explain this
as the combination of the multiplicative nature of wealth returns and the
heterogeneity in returns between households. These findings make capital
income a key factor when discussing inequality in Sweden, and subsequently
make wealth inequality an important topic for further study.

When discussing economic inequality, taxation is often brought up as the
most important policy instrument. This raises the question if the afore-
mentioned discrepancy is related to a discrepancy in taxation. Indeed, one
would expect low income inequality in Sweden considering its famously high
income tax at up to 52%, putting it at the 6th highest progressive income tax
globally (Trading Economics 2026b). However, Sweden also has a substantial
capital income tax of 30%, which is the 8th highest in the world (PwC 2026).
This seems counterintuitive, but we need to consider the fact that all capital
income is not taxed equally. For instance, one can trade assets through a pri-
vate company, which is taxed using the Swedish corporate tax rate of 20.6%
- the 105th highest globally, just below the US at 21% (Trading Economics
2026a). Additionally, there is the Investment Savings Account (ISK) which
is taxed akin to a small wealth tax (1.065%), resulting in substantial tax sav-
ings for high returns. Finally, the 30% rate does by default not apply on real

                                 2
estate wealth, which is instead taxed at a 22% rate, nor on pension wealth
which is taxed in an entirely different manner. This makes it difficult to draw
any immediate conclusions between Sweden’s tax rates and its different Gini
coefficients, but it opens up an interesting avenue for research; how is wealth
inequality affected by capital income taxes? Specifically, this thesis aims to
answer:

   • How does a standard “flat” capital income tax affect wealth inequality?

   • How is this effect impacted by investor sophistication and optimal risk
     taking?

To answer this, we use a simulation approach. First, we introduce a model
for individual wealth accumulation. Our model is based on that proposed
by Ebrahimian and Sodini (2025), with the addition of a capital income tax
parameter. In this model, an individual accumulates wealth from returns on
risk-free and risky investments, as well as through labor income and direct
cash transfers from their parents. They also consume this wealth throughout
their life, and their choice between consumption and investment, as well as
between risk-free and risky asset classes, is governed by optimal portfolio
theory and personal preferences. The preferences that the model accounts
for are risk aversion γ, discount rate ρ, and motivation to leave a bequest to
one’s children (“bequest motive”) χ.

After establishing the model, we simulate the resulting wealth accumulation
for a sample of individuals representing the Swedish population. The individ-
uals receive different levels of starting wealth, sampled using heterogeneous
averages. Then the simulated individuals iteratively accumulate and consume
their wealth according to the model. Throughout the simulation the indi-
viduals receive stochastic investment returns, again sampled heterogeneously.
The variances used for these two sampling procedures are calibrated together
in order to match the final baseline Gini with the underlying data.

These simulations are run for four separate specifications of capital income
taxation, that account for how individuals re-optimize their portfolios in
response. Indeed, we find that according to optimal portfolio theory, the in-
dividual’s risk taking behavior will change with taxation in order to achieve
an equivalent return profile, effectively counteracting any taxes applied on
risky returns. As for consumption, there is a nontrivial effect arising from
the expectation on future returns, that in our results tends to decrease con-
sumption as taxes increase. As such, we consider the scenarios of full- and
no re-optimization, as well as the two partial re-optimization scenarios for

                                 3
either only risky investment or only consumption.

For the parameters that are not the subject of study in this thesis, we rely
on data by Ebrahimian and Sodini (2025). The authors start with a rich
micro dataset follows 4 million swedes between the years 2000-2007 contain-
ing information regarding their disposable income and savings, which is then
combined with different asset valuation datasets to provide a picture of the
individual’s wealth accumulation. They then infer the individual preference
parameters from the individual’s observed decisions in accordance with the
model. As this is a wealth mobility paper, these results are then aggregated
into three groups based on the individual’s wealth background: non-rich,
rich, and very rich. It is these aggregated results that make up the data
foundation for our simulations.

Although we focus on inequality in the cross-section rather than wealth mo-
bility, we argue that sampling individuals from the group level data is im-
portant. As mentioned, return heterogeneity is highly important in order to
explain the substantial wealth inequality found in the data (Bach et al. 2020;
Gabaix, Lasry, Lions, Moll, and Qu 2016). Ebrahimian and Sodini (2025)
find that return heterogeneity is well explained by these preference param-
eters. Moreover, there is also some observed differences in expected returns
on risky investments between groups, which naturally also has an impact
on return heterogeneity. Hence, although we will not use these groups to
present our results, capturing this heterogeneity will be key in order to simu-
late inequality and, subsequently, assessing the effect of capital income taxes.

Running the simulations we find that, so long as individuals re-optimize
(even partially), capital income taxes do reduce inequality. The magnitude
of the effect is greatest for full re-optimization, where a tax rate variation
of 0% to 50% corresponds to a Gini variation of 0.25 - more than half of
the total wealth Gini variation of 0.44 in the data (UBS 2025). When only
re-optimizing consumption, the same figure is 0.12, and for risky investment
it is 0.04. Focusing on the full re-optimization scenario and considering a
smaller, but still significant, capital income tax change of 5%, we get a Gini
reduction of 0.023, which would move Sweden from 6th to 9th place in the
UBS wealth inequality table. Additionally, by introducing heterogeneity in
re-optimization behavior, we find that if individuals sampled from the top
wealth groups are the only ones that re-optimize risky investments, perhaps
due to better access to financial information, we get a reduced effect of taxes.
Finally, if individuals sell assets too frequently, and miss out on the inherent
tax deductibility from holding assets, taxes start having perverse effects on

                                 4
inequality.

Furthermore, we show that our results are robust to various parameter choices.
Specifically, we consider alternative values for the two standard deviations
used in sampling initial wealth (σw) and return shocks (σr), as well as the
baseline tax rate that is used to rescale the results. We also consider top
wealth shares as an additional measure of wealth inequality, which generates
some interesting differences in the results. Most notably, top wealth shares
are reduced by tax rates even without accounting for re-optimization. Addi-
tionally, allowing for re-optimization of risky investments reduces the effect
of taxes on inequality.

To finish, the simulation results are analyzed and policy implications are
discussed. In doing so, we list some limitations of this study, and how they
impact the policy discussion. Finally, we lift some avenues for further re-
search.

2 Literature Review

We contribute mainly to three strands of literature: wealth accumulation,
wealth inequality, and taxation.

The task of modeling household wealth accumulation has been studied thor-
oughly in the literature. Early attempts, based on the unfinished work by Be-
wley (n.d.), include Huggett (1993) and Aiyagari (1994). These so called Be-
wley models consider a continuum of homogeneous individuals, each trying to
solve the optimization problem of maximizing expected utility by smoothing
out consumption. The individual receives idiosyncratic endowment shocks,
which they partially can insure against by saving and borrowing through a
central credit authority with credit constraints. However, Krusell and An-
thony A. Smith (1998) note that these models fail to produce the large wealth
inequality that is found in the data, and remedies this by introducing return
heterogeneity. Specifically, the authors extend the model by adding hetero-
geneous discount rates. Jumping forward a few years, Benhabib, Bisin, and
Zhu (2011) develop a new type of model that, in addition to discount rates,
accounts for heterogeneous bequest motives. Subsequently, this model is ex-
tended by Ebrahimian and Sodini (2025) to incorporate portfolio allocation,
adding an individual risk aversion parameter. We continue this iterative de-
velopment of wealth accumulation models by parameterizing capital income
taxes and showing how this impacts optimal risk-taking and consumption

                                 5
under different assumptions.

In the previous paragraph, two facts become apparent: wealth inequality
has been a key directing force in developing wealth accumulation models,
and return heterogeneity is required to generate the substantial wealth in-
equality seen in data. Indeed, there is a strong consensus of the latter in
the wealth inequality literature. Benhabib and Bisin (2018) notes that the
distribution of wealth follows a Pareto distribution with a thick tail at the
top. They consider three potentially important explanatory factors: skewed
earnings, stochastic wealth returns, and explosive wealth accumulation. Of
these, explosive wealth accumulation - a consequence of increasing returns
to wealth as well as higher savings rates among the wealthy, was found to be
the most important. Bach et al. (2020) reinforce the importance of return
heterogeneity, and explain that systematic risk exposure is more important
than skill. In addition to explaining the wealth inequality at a given point in
time, Gabaix, Lasry, Lions, and Moll (2016) also highlights the importance
of return heterogeneity in explaining the rapid transitions of the wealth dis-
tributions in the data. We contribute to this discussion by considering in
what way heterogeneity in how individuals respond to a capital income tax
change can affect inequality.

Finally, this thesis is, of course, far from the first paper to look at the im-
pact of capital income taxes on wealth inequality. After developing their
models for wealth accumulation, Benhabib et al. (2011) and Gabaix, Lasry,
Lions, and Moll (2016) both show that top wealth inequality is dampened
by increasing capital income taxes. Furthermore, Benhabib et al. (2011) an-
alyze this question in a simulated economy based on the US and find that,
although the effect of estate taxes is ambiguous, higher capital income taxes
substantially reduce inequality; imposing a 20% capital income tax reduces
Gini from 0.78 to 0.67. Kaymak and Poschke (2016) instead considers es-
tate and corporate income taxes. They find that the effective reduction in
progressivity of these, in conjunction with increased transfers to seniors, ac-
counts for nearly half of the sharp increase in US wealth concentration of the
past 50 years. Similarly, Hubmer, Krusell, and Smith. (2021) describes the
decreased tax progressivity in the US around 1980 as “by far the most pow-
erful force for the cumulative increase in wealth inequality”, and that at the
current low rates the top 10% and 1% wealth shares in the US will increase
by 10- and 20 percentage points respectively before 2100. Here, our con-
tribution to the literature is two-fold. Firstly, by instead simulating wealth
inequality in Sweden, we quantify to what extent that Sweden’s unique dis-
crepancy between wealth- and income inequality corresponds to a potential

                                 6
discrepancy in tax rates. Secondly, and more crucially, by using the extended
capital accumulation model by Ebrahimian and Sodini (2025), we are able
to investigate how portfolio re-optimization moderates the effect of capital
income taxes on inequality.

3 Methodology

This thesis employs a structural life-cycle model to simulate individual wealth
accumulation over a 25-year horizon in order to evaluate the impact of capi-
tal income taxation on wealth inequality. We extend the modeling approach
of Ebrahimian and Sodini (2025), which in turn builds upon the theoretical
framework developed by Benhabib et al. (2011), by integrating counterfactual
tax mechanics. Using this framework, we assess the resulting cross-sectional
wealth inequality, measured via the Gini coefficient. This is done through
a simulation that accounts for individuals’ optimal consumption and invest-
ment allocations, which are driven by their distinct behavioral preferences
and dynamically reshaped by these new fiscal constraints.

To ground this theoretical framework in empirical reality, we utilize compre-
hensive Swedish administrative registry data provided by Ebrahimian and
Sodini (2025). Since this dataset is provided aggregated at the socioeco-
nomic background level, we first artificially disaggregate the data to generate
an individual-level sample. This is achieved by taking the group averages for
comprehensive initial wealth and market returns and introducing random,
log-normally distributed shocks.

Once this baseline simulated economy is established, we systematically in-
troduce counterfactual tax regimes. This structured approach allows us to
disentangle the consequences of capital taxation by comparing the impact of
the tax in a static scenario without re-optimization against a dynamic sce-
nario in which investors re-optimize their portfolios in the face of new fiscal
constraints.

3.1 Model
We employ a structural life-cycle model to evaluate the distributional effects
of capital income taxation. Specifically, we simulate individual wealth ac-
cumulation over a 25-year horizon, building on the theoretical framework
developed by Benhabib et al. (2011).

                                 7
The Wealth Accumulation Process
The core of the simulation tracks the evolution of comprehensive wealth over
time. For each individual i, the transition of wealth to the subsequent period
t + 1 is governed by the following equation:

                      ′ −1           
                         (1 Ω  μ) · eri,t
 wi,t+1 = (1 + rft )wi,t +                 − at  (wi,t + hi,t + gi,t) + yi,t + pi,t
                              γ

where wi,t is the current financial wealth, hi,t is human capital, gi,t is the
present value of future inheritances and gifts, yi,t is labor income, and pi,t rep-
resents direct parental transfers. The individual’s financial behavior is deter-
                                                                       ′  −1
mined by at, the optimal consumption-to-wealth ratio, and 1 Ω  μ, the pre-
calculated optimal portfolio scalar determining the allocation to risky assets
(which combines expected market returns, μ, with the variance-covariance
matrix of asset returns, Ω). The optimal consumption-to-wealth ratio (at) is
defined as:

                                  ρ˜
                          at =     −ρ˜(T −t)
                          1 + ( ˜χρ˜ − 1)e
This ratio is governed by the individual’s specific preference parameters —
risk aversion (γ), impatience (ρ), and bequest motive (χ) — which are ad-
justed for the expected market conditions:

                      ρ − (1 − γ)˜r
                  ρ˜ =
                           γ
                                      ′  −1
                     μ Ω  μ
                   r˜ = rf +
                             2γ
                                 −ρ˜(T −T )
                                                d
                           1 − e             −ρ˜(Td−T )
                χ˜ =             + e      χ
                               γ

where T represents retirement (at age 65) and Td represents the expected
time of death (at age 82).

3.2 Simulation
Stochastic Parameters
To capture idiosyncratic, within-group variations, stochasticity is introduced
at the individual level through log-normally distributed shocks. The log-
normal distribution is utilized to correctly reflect the multiplicative, com-

                                 8
pounding nature of capital accumulation. Crucially, the shocks are param-
eterized to preserve the mathematical mean of the baseline data. First, an
initial shock is applied exclusively at the beginning of the life cycle (age 25)
to the individual’s comprehensive starting wealth. This is distributed as:
                                          2   
                                                      σw   2
       wi,0 + hi,0 + gi,0 ∼ Lognormal  log(w0 + h0 + g0) −    , σw
                                                         2
Second, the annual market returns are subjected to an idiosyncratic shock
in every period t, distributed as:
                                     2   
                                                       σr   2
               1 + eri,t ∼ Lognormal  log(1 + ert) −   , σr
                                                   2

                                                                2
                                                σ
By explicitly subtracting half the variance ( 2 ) from the log-mean in both
equations, the expected value of the stochastic multiplier remains exactly 1.
This ensures that the introduced shock successfully disperses the distribution
of wealth without artificially inflating the aggregate capital of the simulated
economy.

Taxation Mechanics
Once the underlying wealth paths and return shocks are established, the
model dynamically integrates counterfactual capital taxation directly into
the individual’s capital growth. The counterfactual capital income tax (τc)
is applied symmetrically to the risk-free component of wealth accumulation
based on the gross, pre-tax returns (rfpre,t and erpre,i,t, the derivation of which
is detailed in Section 3.3):

                                   tax
                            rft = rfpre,t · (1 − τc)
However, for capital income derived from market returns, the model intro-
duces an asymmetric tax to evaluate the impact of loss deductibility. At the
individual level, the after-tax excess return is calculated as:

          tax
      eri,t = erpre,i,t − τc · max(0, erpre,i,t) + τc · preimb · |min(0, erpre,i,t)|
where preimb represents the reimbursement rate, defined as the fraction of cap-
ital losses eligible to act as a tax shield. A reimbursement rate of preimb = 1
simulates a perfectly symmetric tax code with full loss deductibility, while
preimb = 0 simulates a strictly asymmetric regime where downside risk is en-
tirely unshielded. Unless otherwise specified, preimb is fixed at 1 by default
across all baseline scenarios, and is only varied when explicitly analyzing the

                                 9
effects of asymmetric loss deductibility.

Incorporating these fiscal parameters, the baseline wealth accumulation for-
mula is expanded into its fully taxed form for the counterfactual simulations:

                      ′  −1        tax      
              tax        (1 Ωtaxμtax) · eri,t
wi,t+1 = (1+rft )wi,t +                   −atax,t  (wi,t +hi,t +gi,t)+yi,t +pi,t
                              γ

Behavioral Scenarios
To properly quantify the impact of these taxes, the model is evaluated under
two distinct behavioral scenarios:

   1. Static Response: Individuals hold their asset allocations and con-
      sumption ratios constant at their baseline pre-tax optimal levels.

   2. Dynamic Re-optimization: Individuals behave as rational, forward-
      looking agents. As the tax code alters the after-tax expected return and
      variance, agents dynamically recalculate their optimal risky portfolio
     allocation and consumption to maximize utility under the new con-
      straints.

Mathematically, the dynamic re-optimization scenario is obtained by recalcu-
                                          ′  −1
lating the optimal portfolio scalar (1 Ωtaxμtax) and the optimal consumption-
to-wealth ratio (atax,t) utilizing the post-tax expected returns and variance-
covariance matrix. A formal mathematical derivation of these post-tax pa-
rameters is provided in Appendix B.

To further decompose the behavioral response, partial re-optimization sce-
narios in which agents re-optimize only the consumption while holding in-
vestments fixed, or only the risky investments while holding consumption
fixed, are also evaluated.

For the deductibility counterfactual, where preimb ̸= 1, the full re-optimization
scenario is not applicable. Unlike symmetric taxation, asymmetric taxa-
tion skews the after-tax return distribution and admits no straightforward
closed-form solution for optimal portfolio choices. Modeling these behavioral
responses would therefore be extremely computationally intensive and unfea-
sible for this thesis, hence why the analysis is restricted to the consumption
re-optimization scenario.

                                10
Measuring Inequality
Once the individual wealth levels at age 50 across the whole population have
been computed, the wealth Gini coefficient is calculated using the standard
discrete formula for a finite, ordered population:
                  Pn
                               2    i=1 i · wi   n + 1
                 G =   Pn    −
                             n   i=1 wi      n
where n is the population size, i is the individual’s relative wealth rank (in
ascending order; i = 1 represents the poorest individual), and wi is the wealth
of individual i.

3.3 Data and Calibration
To ensure the mathematical model accurately reflects reality, it is heavily an-
chored to empirical data. Specifically, with the exception of the idiosyncratic
shock parameters, all structural, financial, and behavioral preference param-
eters are drawn directly from an aggregated dataset provided by Ebrahimian
and Sodini (2025). The underlying micro-data for their estimations primarily
originates from registers maintained by Statistics Sweden (SCB), including
the Wealth, Income, and Demographics registers, and the Multi-Generation
Register (Flergenerationsregistret).

Population Groups and Return Heterogeneity
The simulation tracks a representative economy of N = 4, 034, 480 individu-
als from the age of 25 to 50. Following the empirical classification established
by Ebrahimian and Sodini (2025), the simulated population is divided into
three distinct socioeconomic groups based on their wealth background: the
Non-Rich (90.68%), the Rich (7.00%), and the Very Rich (2.32%).

While this thesis evaluates cross-sectional wealth inequality rather than in-
tergenerational trajectories, retaining the three wealth background groups
from Ebrahimian and Sodini (2025) is a necessary structural choice. The
macroeconomic impact of capital income and taxes is highly dependent on
individual savings decisions and optimal risk-taking, which together gen-
erate return heterogeneity. Crucially, as previous literature demonstrates,
these financial behaviors systematically depend on an individual’s socioeco-
nomic background. By preserving these distinct groups, each calibrated with
their own group-specific preference parameters (summarized in Table 1) and
baseline returns, our simulation naturally generates the empirically backed

                                11
return heterogeneity required to accurately assess how capital taxes shape
the wealth distribution.

            Table 1: Preference Parameters by Wealth Background

            Risk Aversion (γ) Impatience (ρ) Bequest Motive (χ)
 Non-rich 10.788 0.119 0.641
 Rich 6.222 0.023 5.419
 Very rich 3.848 0.006 25.189

This table reports the behavioral preference parameters utilized in the baseline
simulation, for each population group, rounded to three decimal places.

Pre-Tax Conversions
A critical feature of the dataset is that the baseline expected market returns
(ert) and risk-free rates (rft) are reported net of taxes. In reality, the Swedish
capital tax system applies different statutory rates across asset classes—such
as a 30% tax on stock returns and a 22% tax on real estate capital gains.
However, because our framework aggregates these various investments into a
single market portfolio, we assume a homogenized, flat 25% capital tax rate
for simplicity in our baseline calibration. To ensure that our findings are not
sensitive to this homogenization, we subsequently perform robustness checks
using 20% and 30% baseline rates, which confirm that our core results remain
consistent.

Since the baseline data already accounts for this existing capital taxation,
superimposing counterfactual tax regimes directly onto these returns would
induce double-taxation, and the simulated taxes would have to be analyzed
merely as deviations from an already taxed baseline. Instead, for inter-
pretability, we reverse-engineer the gross, pre-tax returns. For each period
t, the pre-tax excess return (erpre,t) and pre-tax risk-free rate (rfpre,t) are
rescaled to account for the existing tax:

                                    ert                     rft
                  erpre,t =      , rfpre,t =
                         1 − 0.25           1 − 0.25
The counterfactual tax policies, including asymmetric adjustments for loss
deductibility, are subsequently applied exclusively to these derived pre-tax
returns.

                                12
Shock Calibration
The stochastic parameters are calibrated to match the empirical Swedish
wealth Gini coefficient of 0.679 for the 50-year-old cohort. The market return
shock is set to σr = 0.20, which reasonably approximates the aggregate
behavior of the Swedish market, while the initial wealth shock is calibrated
to σw = 0.33.

4 Simulation Results

Figure 1: Plot of the wealth Gini coefficient for different capital tax rates in the
range 0-50% for different scenarios of adjustment among the population. The four
scenarios are: no adjustment of financial decisions, adjusting only consumption,
adjusting only risky investments, and full re-optimization. The dashed line is the
baseline model result assuming a 25% capital tax.

In Figure 1 we see that when individuals are allowed to re-optimize, partially
or fully, capital income taxes reduce inequality as expected. This directional
change is in line with previous research, and also intuitive. However, in
the scenario of no re-optimization, we instead see an increase in inequality
caused by taxes. Given the strong consensus in the literature that taxes

                                13
reduce inequality, we take these results to rather imply that accounting for
re-optimization is necessary in our model in order to generate sensible re-
sults. As such, we focus our analysis on these cases, but we will investigate
the mechanisms that generate this increasing Gini in 4.3.

4.1 Re-optimization Scenarios
For the magnitude of the effect, we notice a substantial difference between
the scenarios. Assuming re-optimization of consumption only, the Gini falls
by 0.12 (0.05 from baseline) as taxes approach 50%. However, if individu-
als do fully re-optimize, this effect goes up to 0.25 (0.10). These are both
very significant changes in wealth Gini, the latter reaching more than half of
the total variation of 0.44 in the data (UBS 2025). In the case of only re-
adjusting risky investment, the effect is dampened, and although the change
in wealth Gini of 0.04 (0.02) is significant, we need to consider that this is
for an unrealistic increase in capital income taxes.

In order to succinctly present the effects of a realistic (small) tax change, we
numerically compute the elasticities at baseline for the different scenarios.
Doing so we get −0.086 for consumption, −0.027 for risky investments, and
−0.179 for full re-optimization. For, say, a 5 percentage point increase in
the tax rate, this would imply approximate Gini reductions of 0.012, 0.004,
and 0.024 respectively, which very closely matches the actual model reduc-
tions of 0.011, 0.04, and 0.023. The latter of these three reductions would
mean Sweden going from the 6th to 9th highest wealth inequality in the UBS
wealth report (UBS 2025), which certainly is significant, but it would still
leave Sweden as having the highest wealth inequality among the EU coun-
tries listed.

                                14
Figure 2: A plot of the Lorenz curves for our three re-optimization scenarios for
a capital income tax of 50%, compared to the Lorenz curve of the baseline wealth
distribution at a 25% tax rate.

Comparing these scenarios with each other also illuminates the mechanisms
through which taxes impact wealth inequality. As we have established, the
effect of capital income taxes is greater when individuals only optimize con-
sumption than when they only optimize risky investment. To understand
this, we plot the Lorenz curves for the different scenarios in Figure 2. One
immediate observation is that for all of the re-optimization scenarios, the
Lorenz curve is shifted up from the baseline 25% tax, and that most of this
shift occurs for the part of the curve where cumulative wealth is negative.
Since all of the scenarios have a reduced risk-free rate in common, we interpret
this as that a significant part of the effect of taxes is reducing the effective
interest rate paid by individuals with negative net wealth. Moreover, re-
optimizing consumption causes more individuals to escape negative wealth
than when they re-optimize risky investments, and a full re-optimization
seems to have a greater effect than the sum of its parts.

Another observation is that all of the curves seem to approach the baseline
as we approach the top of the distribution. We note that when individu-
als only optimize risky investments we get the fastest convergence, which

                                15
makes sense as this scenario implies an increased return variance, which will
generate increased inequality that is especially pronounced at the top of the
wealth distribution where individuals hold larger risky investments. Inter-
estingly, although the full re-optimization scenario generates the largest shift
in the Lorenz curve for most of the distribution, the aforementioned effect
causes this scenario to approach baseline faster than when individuals only
re-optimize consumption (the curves intersect around x = 0.965). This shows
that when individuals do not optimize away the effect of taxes on risky in-
vestment returns, the taxes do have the intended effect of reducing variance,
but that for overall inequality as measured by the Gini this is offset by the
friction to wealth accumulation that is generated.

Finally, since the effect of capital income taxes on consumption in the model
are nontrivial, it is worth looking at the simulation values to understand
what effect that the consumption re-optimization has. Overall, we notice
that consumption tends to decrease as the anticipated tax increases (i.e.
when rfave · (1 − τc) decreases). Accordingly, assuming re-optimization of
consumption, individuals all across the wealth distribution will be accumu-
lating wealth faster. Further, since this effect is relative to the sum of wealth,
human capital, and gifts and inheritances, which is less unequally distributed
than wealth alone in our data, we would expect this effect to indeed reduce
wealth inequality.

4.2 Additional Simulations
Let us now consider the case where individuals have different re-optimization
behaviors. In Figure 3 we see, assuming everyone re-optimizes consumption,
that if we randomly select individuals to re-optimize their risky investment,
we get a partial increase in tax effectiveness. This makes sense as within this
subgroup we would expect overall higher wealth and as such a higher tax
effectiveness. However, if this selection is not random, but rather that the
individuals sampled from the two rich groups are the only ones to optimize,
the effect of taxes is suddenly reduced. This makes sense as we are effectively
reducing the effect of taxes on the high return individuals, but it is interest-
ing as the underlying assumption is sensible. Indeed, these individuals might
have better access to financial information or advice, and as such could be
more likely to re-optimize. It is, therefore, important to note this potential
mitigating factor to the effect of capital income taxes.

                                16
Figure 3: Same plot as figure 1, but for heterogeneous re-optimization. In all
scenarios, everyone re-optimizes consumption. The scenarios are then: no-one op-
timizes risky investment, 10% of the population selected at random optimizes, the
individuals sampled from the rich and very rich groups (roughly 10%) optimize,
and everyone optimizes. Again, the dashed line is the baseline model result assum-
ing a 25% capital tax.

As mentioned, in our application of taxes there is a parameter controlling tax
deductibility (preimb), that has so far been set to 1 for theoretical tractability
of the re-optimization scenarios. Adjusting this parameter, assuming re-
optimization of consumption only, gives us figure 4, which reveals interesting
macroeconomic consequences of asymmetric taxation. When capital income
taxes are high but loss deductibility is very low, the Gini coefficient becomes
extremely high, indicating a large presence of negative wealth, and a rela-
tively low total wealth for the population. Indeed, in such a scenario, the
effect of taxes become too harsh for individuals at any level to successfully
accumulate wealth. Interestingly, at approximately 60% loss deductibility,
the tax rate becomes mostly irrelevant to the overall Gini coefficient; all tax
regimes produce a Gini of roughly 0.68. However, the graphs do not all in-
tersect at the same point, so there is not a precise deductibility percentage
for which the effect is reversed.

                                17
Figure 4: Wealth Gini coefficient at age 50 across different capital income tax loss
deductibility percentages for different tax rates with consumption re-optimization.

To the right of the 60% threshold, the intended progressive nature of taxation
finally materializes, and the higher tax rates effectively compress the top of
the distribution, resulting in the 45% tax rate achieving the lowest relative
wealth inequality (a Gini of roughly 0.61). It is important to recall here that
Sweden, despite not having cross-period deductibility, does not necessarily
fall to the left of the graph, as preimb accounts for the effective deductibility
that arises when individuals do not sell their assets after a loss. We do not
have access to data on selling behavior, but it would be reasonable to assume
a high preimb in Sweden given that a substantial part of each individual’s
portfolio is real-estate and pension wealth, which are typically held for long
periods of time.

4.3 Supporting Results
In Figure 5 we see the average wealth trajectories for the different scenarios.
We notice a clear reduction in average wealth for the no re-optimization sce-
nario, which seems to be the cause of the increased Gini we saw in Figure

                                18
Figure 5: Average wealth trajectories for all scenarios at a 50% capital income tax
rate, compared to the baseline trajectory for a 25% tax.

1. Interestingly, we also note an increase in average wealth in the full re-
optimization case, likely caused by the reduction in negative wealth that was
discussed for the Lorenz curve in Figure 2. Another observation is that for
the two scenarios where risky investment is not re-optimized, we notice that
the curve is significantly less jagged, which is reasonable as we expect return
shocks to be dampened. Now, we know that shifting the average wealth up,
all else equal, reduces inequality and vice versa. This tells us that, although
average wealth falls in the partial re-optimization cases, this is offset by the
distribution becoming more equal. Again, this tracks with the Lorenz curve
plot, but it would also be interesting to display the wealth distribution in a
more intuitive plot.

Accordingly, in Figure 6, we create a box plot of the wealth distributions
for the different scenarios, winsorizing the data at the 90% level for read-
ability. Again, we see that full re-optimization shifts up the median, and
that no re-optimization shifts it down. Additionally, we see that in all sce-
narios, the total variation is reduced, with the strongest reduction for the
two scenarios where risky investment is not re-optimized, again consistent

                                19
with intuition. Given that there is the least wealth variation in the no re-
optimization scenario, one could expect the Gini to be lowest there, but this
is not necessarily true. Indeed, the Gini coefficient is scale-invariant, and so
if the shape of the distribution does not change substantially, the Gini will
remain unaffected. However, the Gini is not translation invariant, and the
reduced average wealth is likely to increase the Gini significantly.

This plot also shines light on how full re-optimization is driving up the aver-
age wealth. We notice that the bottom end of the distribution is shifted up
substantially, while the top is only slightly elevated. Again, this increased
wealth at the bottom is likely attributable to reduced interest payments as
a result of the effect of rft on negative wealth in the model. However, the
increased wealth at the top, albeit small, is counterintuitive. Due to the
winsorization, this is not actually the top wealth, which we can confirm does
decrease from 43.6 to 41.5 Msek, but this is still the top 5% of wealth where
the top 30% start with positive wealth. Further experimentation shows that
this is, at least partially, caused by the fact that rft is negative for the first
7 years, so an individual that starts with a significant positive wealth would
benefit from an increased tax on this rate. Indeed, removing the tax for this
period results in a (winsorized) top wealth of 2.57 as opposed to 2.59 msek
in the baseline.

5 Robustness and Sensitivity Tests

We conducted robustness and sensitivity tests to validate the structural in-
tegrity of our findings. First, we performed a sensitivity analysis on the
stochastic parameters, independently adjusting return shocks and initial wealth
shocks to observe their distinct impacts on the wealth distribution. Sec-
ond, we introduced a robustness check by calibrating new pairs of shocks
(σr = 0.25, σw = 0.30) and (σr = 0.15, σw = 0.35) achieving the same Gini.
Next, we tested the sensitivity of the model to the assumed 25% baseline cap-
ital tax rate by evaluating the wealth inequality under alternative tax rates
of 20% and 30%. Across all these tests, the fundamental mechanics of capi-
tal taxation and behavioral re-optimization remained completely consistent,
confirming that the primary policy insights are robust to diverse underlying
risk profiles and taxation regimes. Finally, we consider top wealth shares as
an alternative measure to the Gini coefficient, to avoid making the analy-
sis overly reliant on the selected measure. This produced some noteworthy
changes to the results, but the overall story of reduced inequality remained
consistent.

                                20
Figure 6: Boxplots of the resulting wealth distribution in our different scenarios
assuming a 50% capital income tax rate. All distributions are winsorized at the
90% level for readability.

In Figures C.1 and C.2 in the appendix we plot the sensitivity of the wealth
Gini to our parameters σw and σr. For σw we get a linear graph with a
slope of roughly 1.2, whereas for σr we get a curve, which at the baseline
has an approximate slope of 0.6. These plots show that the results are fairly
sensitive to these parameters, so it is important that they are tuned together
to reach an appropriate target Gini, rather than trying to estimating them
independently, which potentially could result in an unrealistic baseline Gini
coefficient.

                                21
Figure 7: Robustness of wealth inequality to alternative parameter pairs achieving
the same Gini (combinations of σr and σw that are jointly calibrated to give the
baseline Swedish wealth Gini coefficient of 0.679 at age 50).
                                22
When tuning the parameters together, however, we have a degree of free-
dom, so let us consider the sensitivity of our results to the specific choice of
pair (σw, σr). Two alternative choices that yield the same baseline Gini are
(0.3, 0.25) and (0.35, 0.15), the results for which are displayed in Figure 7.
These mostly generate the same results, but, intuitively, when more of the
inequality is generated by random return shocks rather than initial wealth,
taxes have an increased effect for the scenarios where risky investments are
not re-optimized. This is to be expected seeing that, in these scenarios, capi-
tal income tax is applied to the risky investment returns, so it would dampen
the inequality that is generated by return shocks. However, the other two
scenarios remain seemingly unaffected by this parameter shift.

                                23
Figure 8: Robustness of wealth inequality to alternative baseline capital gains
taxation of 20% and 30% respectively.

                                24
As mentioned, the underlying return data for our simulation is already taxed,
and not at a flat rate since real estate and pension wealth are taxed differ-
ently. Accordingly, in order to translate our additional taxes added in the
simulation into raw tax rates, we artificially divide away the underlying taxes
as if they were a flat 25% rate. However, given that the choice of a 25% base-
line tax rate is arbitrary, and that it will have a re-scaling effect on all our
results, it is appropriate to consider some alternative rates. We do this in
Figure 8, where we see that, as expected, we get the same overall results,
only re-scaled. This provides a measure of precision to our estimation of
Gini variance, which we now conclude should lie between 0.23 and 0.3. Re-
gardless of where exactly this value falls in the interval, the Gini impact is
highly significant, and the assertion that it constitutes more than half of the
variance in wealth Gini between countries in the data remains true.

Figure 9: Plot of the share of total wealth held by the top 1% of the population
for various tax rates in our different re-optimization scenarios.

Finally, in Figure 9, we immediately notice that using top wealth shares as
a measure yields reduced inequality in all four scenarios. This confirms our
hypothesis that Gini was increasing in the no re-optimization case due to
perverse effects at the lower end of the wealth distribution. Additionally, we

                                25
notice that the effect of taxes is now largest for when only consumption is
re-optimized, rather than for a full re-optimization, which is consistent with
our findings from the Lorenz curve in Figure 2. This is seemingly because
re-optimization of risky investment is a strong mitigating force to the effect
of taxes. Although we also saw a weak tax effect for the same scenario when
considering Gini, we now have a weaker effect than the no re-optimization
scenario. This shows that although more wealth is accumulated at the lower
end of the distribution in this scenario, wealth is also dispersed from the
increased return variance, which becomes especially pronounced at the top
of the distribution. Additionally, these results also hold true for the top 0.1%
wealth shares (see figure C.3 in the appendix).

6 Analysis

The results in the previous sections are clear: higher capital income taxes
do reduce inequality. The magnitude of this effect varies depending on how
individuals react to the change, with the highest effect being in the scenario of
full re-optimization. Given that our model builds on individuals investing and
consuming optimally, this will constitute the main scenario in our analysis.
Now, given that we noticed substantial effects of taxes in this scenario, this
raises the question of how policymakers should react.

6.1 Policy Implications and Limitations
In order to approach the question of how policy makers should react to our
results, we need to first establish what we want to accomplish regarding
wealth inequality. This discussion might seem a formality, but it cuts deeply
into the concept of fairness. Ultimately, there is no theoretical answer to
such a question, so let us consider the data.

In their study, Almås, Cappelen, and Tungodden (2020) conduct an exper-
iment where a sample of people from Norway and the United States get to
re-distribute income between two workers. They find that (a) Americans ac-
cept higher inequality overall, and (b) both nationalities accept significantly
higher inequality when it is merit-based. Using the Norwegian results as
proxies for Sweden, we get an acceptable income Gini range of 0.167-0.322
depending on the degree of meritocracy. Interestingly the Swedish income
Gini coefficient does fall in this range, as does the coefficient for e.g. Norway
and Denmark.

                                26
Extrapolating from this acceptable income Gini to a corresponding wealth
Gini is no easy task. Essentially, this is what we are doing in our simulations,
but, as we found, this depends on other exogenous variables such as the cap-
ital income tax. What can be said, however, is that the wealth inequality
stemming from differences in skill should in principle be more acceptable
than that from chance. On the one hand, the literature is in agreement
that most of wealth inequality stems from household return heterogeneity
rather than pure chance (Krusell and Anthony A. Smith 1998; Benhabib
et al. 2011). On the other hand, return heterogeneity was in turn found
to not be well explained by skill, but rather systematic risk exposure and
increasing investment shares (Bach et al. 2020; Benhabib and Bisin 2018).
This makes wealth inequality particularly tricky to decompose into a merit-
and a chance component, but doing so, as well as subsequently developing a
theoretical relationship between acceptable income- and wealth Ginis, would
constitute interesting further research.

Although we do not have a precise target wealth Gini, we can look at public
sentiment to give us some direction. In a survey to EU countries, Hofmann,
Marterbauer, and Schnetzer (2025) finds that 52% of Swedes consider the
top 5% wealth share to be unfairly high, compared to 34% thinking the same
for income. This indicates that some reduction of wealth inequality is desir-
able, and so from our results it would stand to reason that Sweden should
increase its capital income tax rate somewhat. However, naturally, it is not
that simple.

Firstly, as mentioned in the introduction, Sweden has an exceptionally high
capital income tax rate (8th highest globally), but with certain caveats (pen-
sion, ISK, and real estate). Given limitations in the dataset of this study,
we were unable to control for this inconsistent application of capital income
taxes, and only know the impact of increases in the effective average tax rate.
However, it remains to be determined how this average is best increased, as
simply increasing the headline 30% rate might have unanticipated effects.
Indeed, if a household consistently generates high returns, they will prefer
an investment savings account, leaving their investments unaffected by this
headline rate change.

Secondly, our results rest on some assumptions that need to be challenged.
Most significantly, one consistent theme for how taxes reduced inequality in
our simulations was increasing wealth levels at the lower end of the distribu-
tion. We interpreted this as capital income taxes reducing the effect of the
risk free rate on negative wealth, which acts as an effective interest rate, caus-

                                27
ing individuals to escape negative wealth faster. However, for this reduction
of effective interest rates to hold true the individual needs to generate suffi-
cient capital income taxes every year in order to utilize the tax shield from
their interest payments, which themselves are unaffected by capital income
taxes. This is a strong assumption, and if it turns out to not be true, the ef-
fect of capital income taxes might be reduced significantly. Moreover, we fall
victim to the classic assumption of rational individuals all following optimal
portfolio theory. As we saw in our analysis of heterogeneous re-optimization,
the effect of taxes is potentially reduced if not all individuals adjust their
investments to retain optimal portfolios.

Finally, it is also worth mentioning that since our simulation strictly focuses
on inequality in the cross section, any external effects of tax changes are not
accounted for. Potential effects include reduced investments and emigration
of talent, both being negative for the aggregate economy. Indeed, it is well
established that overall higher taxes is negative for long-run economic growth
(Alesina and Rodrik 1994). Further, Ferraro, Ghazi, and Peretto (2020) finds
that reducing capital gains taxes by 1pp leads to an increase of 0.2pp in
economic growth, stating that the personal capital gains tax effectively is a
tax on corporations. These factors, of course, need to be considered alongside
inequality by any policy maker. Accordingly, our results do not tell us that
capital income taxes should be increased, but rather that said taxes are a
promising avenue for further research and consideration.

6.2 Further Research
Other than developing a theoretical wealth Gini target, we propose further
research to be conducted into: extending our model with more data, consid-
ering the effects and feasibility of progressive capital tax rates, and exploring
other avenues of wealth inequality reduction.

First, as mentioned in the previous section, our results are calculated for
changes in the effective average capital income tax rate, which is different
from the headline capital income tax rate. Indeed, a policy-maker wanting to
increase this effective average rate, has different rates as levers (e.g. headline
rate and flat-rate tax for the ISK), and different adjustments that generate
the same average rate might have drastically different effects on inequal-
ity. Running the simulations on the underlying micro-dataset, and adjusting
these capital income tax rates separately, would generate more actionable
results as a policy-maker would know what lever is best to adjust.

                                28
Moreover, by extending the dataset, our model could be further refined by
more precisely estimating σw and σr, as well as including a preimb ̸= 1. For
the standard deviations, we are able to calibrate them together in order to
generate the final group level Gini in the data, but by having access to the
initial Gini these parameters could be calibrated in sequence. Although we
do not find material differences in our results when changing these parame-
ters, it would be important if a policy-maker has access to a target wealth
Gini, as they would then need to know by how much to change taxes. As
for preimb, we found a high dependence of tax effects on the selection of this
parameter, but for tractability of the model we had to set it to 1 for most
of our simulations. Further research would be necessary in order to both
estimate this parameter from asset trading data, as well as incorporating it
into our scenarios, which is difficult as we can no longer set μtax = (1 − τ )μ
for our derivations in appendix B.

Second, given that Hubmer et al. (2021) finds reduced tax progressivity to
be the key force driving wealth inequality in the US, it would be reasonable
to consider progressivity for capital income taxes. Indeed, a few countries do
employ progressivity for capital income taxation, which could act as exam-
ples to study the feasibility of such a system in Sweden. There are potentially
great benefits from such a scheme; Saez (2013) finds that “in contrast to lin-
ear taxation, optimal nonlinear capital taxation can have a drastic impact
on the long-run wealth distribution”. Extending this analysis by, as in this
paper, simulating the effect of progressive capital income taxes on Swedish
data would be of interest in order to assess the numeric differences in tax
effects.

Finally, although capital income taxes are a promising avenue for reducing
wealth inequality, there are, naturally, other policy levers that need consider-
ation. In the literature, estate taxes are mentioned to have uncertain effects
(Benhabib et al. 2011), making these an interesting consideration. Given that
the wealth Gini varies by 0.44 between countries in the data (UBS 2025), and
that we found capital income taxes to generate a variation of roughly 0.25
(0.23-0.3 depending on baseline tax rate), there are clearly other important
factors at play. Identifying these and combining them into one model would
then allow policy-makers to consider the inequality effects from combinations
of these different policy levers.

                                29
7 Conclusion

In line with the existing literature we find that, overall, applying a flat cap-
ital income tax reduces wealth inequality. In our main scenario, capital
income taxes in the range 0-50% generate a variation of roughly 0.25 in
the Gini coefficient, which is substantial. However, if individuals only par-
tially re-optimize, the effect of capital income taxes is significantly reduced,
with potential further reductions for when only the high return households
re-optimize. The reduction in inequality is seemingly largely driven by in-
creased wealth at the bottom of the distribution, which in turn seems to be
caused by increased tax shields generated from interest payments. Consid-
ering top wealth shares instead of the Gini coefficient gives largely the same
results, but for this measure the results are more intuitive; re-optimizing risky
investments reduces the effect of capital income taxes, and in the scenario
of no re-optimization we still get reduced inequality from higher tax rates.
Both of these findings need to be considered in conjunction, as each measure
highlights a different aspect of wealth inequality.

Although it would be convenient to state that these results imply that Sweden
should increase its capital income tax rate to reduce wealth inequality, the
policy implications are more nuanced than that. Indeed, this thesis highlights
the importance of capital income taxes for managing wealth inequality, but
the results are not comprehensive enough to make such an argument. Firstly,
our model needs to be developed further, differentiating between asset classes
and investment vehicles that are taxed differently, and incorporating addi-
tional complexities such as allowing for preimb ̸= 1. Secondly, when the model
is capable of outputting a very precise relationship between capital income
tax rates and wealth Gini, we need to establish a wealth inequality target.
Finally, capital income tax needs to be compared to other policy levers to
establish the best course of action, where investment skill and risk-taking are
rewarded to an extent, but significant wealth movements caused by luck are
mitigated. All the while, model assumptions need to be questioned, and po-
tential external effects considered. This is a tall order, but given how heated
the topic of wealth inequality has become in macroeconomic discourse during
recent years, we certainly believe that this is a worthwhile topic to investigate
further.

                                30
References

Aiyagari, S. Rao. 1994. “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving.”
    The Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (3): 659–684. issn: 00335533,
    15314650.
Alesina, Alberto, and Dani Rodrik. 1994. “Distributive Politics and Economic
     Growth*.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (2): 465–490. issn:
    0033-5533. https://doi.org/10.2307/2118470.
Almås, Ingvild, Alexander W. Cappelen, and Bertil Tungodden. 2020. “Cut-
    throat Capitalism versus Cuddly Socialism: Are Americans More Merito-
     cratic and Efficiency-Seeking than Scandinavians?” Journal of Political
    Economy 128 (5): 1753–1788. https://doi.org/10.1086/705551.
Bach, Laurent, Laurent E. Calvet, and Paolo Sodini. 2020. “Rich Pickings?
    Risk, Return, and Skill in Household Wealth.” American Economic Re-
    view 110, no. 9 (September): 2703–47. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.
    20170666.
Benhabib, Jess, and Alberto Bisin. 2018. “Skewed Wealth Distributions: The-
     ory and Empirics.” Journal of Economic Literature 56, no. 4 (December):
    1261–91. https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.20161390.
Benhabib, Jess, Alberto Bisin, and Shenghao Zhu. 2011. “The Distribution
    of Wealth and Fiscal Policy in Economies With Finitely Lived Agents.”
    Econometrica 79 (1): 123–157. https://doi.org /https://doi.org /10.
    3982/ECTA8416.
Bewley, Truman. n.d. “Interest Bearing Money and the Equilibrium Stock of
     Capital.”
Ebrahimian, Mehran, and Paolo Sodini. 2025. “More than Money: The Role
    of Preferences on Wealth Mobility,” https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/
    10.2139/ssrn.5577751.
Ferraro, Domenico, Soroush Ghazi, and Pietro F. Peretto. 2020. “Implica-
    tions of tax policy for innovation and aggregate productivity growth.”
    European Economic Review 130. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euroecorev.
    2020.103590.
Gabaix, Xavier, Jean-Michel Lasry, Pierre-Louis Lions, and Benjamin Moll.
    2016. “Supplement to “The Dynamics of Inequality”: Online Appendix
    E.” Econometrica 84 (6): 2071–2111. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/
    10.3982/ECTA13569.

                                31
Gabaix, Xavier, Jean-Michel Lasry, Pierre-Louis Lions, Benjamin Moll, and
    Zhaonan Qu. 2016. “THE DYNAMICS OF INEQUALITY.” Economet-
     rica 84 (6): 2071–2111. Accessed February 1, 2026.
Hofmann, Julia, Markus Marterbauer, and Matthias Schnetzer. 2025. “Fair-
    ness Perceptions of Wealth Inequality in Europe.” Review of Income and
    Wealth 71 (3). https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/roiw.70026.
Hubmer, Joachim, Per Krusell, and Anthony A. Smith. 2021. “Sources of US
    Wealth Inequality: Past, Present, and Future.” NBER Macroeconomics
    Annual 35:391–455. https://doi.org/10.1086/712332.
Huggett, Mark. 1993. “The risk-free rate in heterogeneous-agent incomplete-
    insurance economies.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 17
     (5): 953–969. issn: 0165-1889. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/
    0165-1889(93)90024-M.
Kaymak, Barış, and Markus Poschke. 2016. “The evolution of wealth in-
     equality over half a century: The role of taxes, transfers and technol-
     ogy.” Journal of Monetary Economics 77:1–25. https://doi.org/https:
    //doi.org/10.1016/j.jmoneco.2015.10.004.
Krusell, Per, and Jr. Anthony A. Smith. 1998. “Income and Wealth Hetero-
    geneity in the Macroeconomy.” Journal of Political Economy 106 (5):
    867–896. issn: 00223808, 1537534X.
PwC. 2026. Capital gains tax (CGT) rates. Accessed May 11, 2026. https:
    //taxsummaries.pwc.com/quick-charts/capital-gains-tax-cgt-rates.
Roine, Jesper, and Daniel Waldenström. 2008. “The evolution of top in-
     comes in an egalitarian society: Sweden, 1903–2004.” Journal of Public
    Economics 92 (1): 366–387. issn: 0047-2727. https : / / doi . org / https :
    //doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2007.06.012.
Saez, Emmanuel. 2013. “Optimal progressive capital income taxes in the
     infinite horizon model.” Journal of Public Economics 97:61–74. issn:
    0047-2727. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2012.09.
    002.
Trading Economics. 2026a. List of Countries by Corporate Tax Rate. Ac-
     cessed May 11, 2026. https : / / tradingeconomics . com / country - list /
     corporate-tax-rate.
       . 2026b. List of Countries by Personal Income Tax Rate. Accessed
    May 11, 2026. https://tradingeconomics.com/country - list/personal-
    income-tax-rate.

                                32
UBS. 2025. Global Wealth Report. Accessed May 11, 2026. https://www .
    ubs.com/global/en/wealthmanagement/insights/global-wealth-report.
    html.
World Bank. 2021. “World Development Indicators,” accessed May 11, 2026.
    https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators
       .

A Wealth- and Income Inequality

Figure A.1: Income- and wealth Gini for a selection of OECD countries. Income
coefficients are from the World Bank (2021), and wealth coefficients from the 2025
UBS global wealth report. Sweden is highlighted in red.

                                33
B Portfolio re-optimization after capital income
    taxes

B.1 Risky investments
Given the individual’s wealth accumulation equation
                       T  −1         
                           (1 Ω  μ) · ert
    wt+1 = (1 + rft )wt +                − at  (wt + ht + gt) + yt + pt
                               γ

we are interested in showing that risky investment returns is unaffected by
capital income taxes, i.e. that

                                    T   −1
                             ∗    (1 Ω  μ) · ert
                         x :=                                    (1)
                                     γ

                                                              tax
does not change if we set μtax = (1 − τ )μ and ert = (1 − τ )ert.

Let us denote the risky investment return after applying capital income taxes
     ∗
by xtax. We already know what happens with μ, so let us instead look at Ω,
which is defined as:
                                                       
             Ωi,j := Cov(μi, μj ) = E  μi − E[μ]  μj − E[μ]  .

Applying a tax τ on μ then gives us
         tax                                                       
      Ωi,j = E  (1 − τ )μi − E[(1 − τ )μ]  (1 − τ )μj − E[(1 − τ )μ]
                       2                    
           = E (1 − τ )  μi − E[μ]  μj − E[μ]
                      2                      
           = (1 − τ ) E  μi − E[μ]  μj − E[μ]
                          2
           = (1 − τ ) Ωi,j .

Consequently, assuming τ ̸= 1:
                     −1           2  −1       1     −1
                Ωtax =  (1 − τ ) Ω   =    2 Ω
                                        (1 − τ )

whence, in (1)
                          
                 ∗        T 1     −1
            γxtax =  1      Ω  (1 − τ )μ  · (1 − τ )ert
                                      2
                     (1 − τ )
                         T   −1
                    = (1 Ω  μ) · ert

                  ∗       ∗
proving that xtax = x .

                                34
B.2 Consumption
As for consumption, we need to consider the definition of at:

                                   ρ˜
                           at :=     −ρ˜(T −t)
                          1 + ( ˜χρ˜ − 1)e

where
                                                   −ρ˜(T −T )
      ρ − (1 − γ)˜r            T  −1        1 − e   d
                              μ Ω  μ                         −ρ˜(Td−T )
 ρ˜ =             , r˜ = rf +        , χ˜ =              + e       χ.
           γ              2γ             γ

Clearly, the only factor that will be affected by taxation is r˜, where we by
the same reasoning as with risky investment get

                           T 1   −1   
                     (1 − τ )μ   2 Ω  (1 − τ )μ
                                   (1−τ )
              r˜tax = rf +                           = ˜r.
                                    2γ

However, this is only accounting for μ, whereas in actuality rf is also taxed,
resulting in a slight change to consumption determined by:

                                            T   −1
                             μ Ω  μ
                       r˜tax = (1 − τ )rf +         .
                                         2γ

                                35
C Robustness tests: additional figures

Figure C.1: Sensitivity of wealth Gini coefficient to variations in initial wealth
shock magnitude around the baseline calibration of 0.33. The return shock is kept
at the baseline calibration of 0.2.

                                36
Figure C.2: Sensitivity of wealth Gini coefficient to variations in return shock
magnitude around the baseline calibration of 0.2. The initial wealth shock is kept
at the baseline calibration of 0.33.

                                37
Figure C.3: Plot of the share of total wealth held by the top 0.1% of the population
for various tax rates in our different re-optimization scenarios.

                                38
D Use of AI

During the coding and writing process of this thesis, the language model
Google Gemini 3.1 Pro was used as a technical assistant. The AI was pri-
marily employed to optimize MATLAB scripts, refactor simulation loops to
improve computational efficiency for the large-scale simulations, and gener-
ate visual plots. Additionally, the tool was used to proofread sections of the
text for clarity and academic tone, specifically for providing synonyms and
streamlining language.

                                39