THE POWER OF  INDICES

A STUDY OF JOINERS AND LEAVERS TO THE MOST
PROMINENT INDICES IN THE NORDICS AND  BALTICS

LUKAS SANDELIN

EMILIA ÖSTERBERG

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2024
                                      The Power of Indices

The Power of Indices:  A Study of Joiners and Leavers to the Most Prominent
Indices in the Nordics and the  Baltics

Abstract:

   This paper investigates the index effect in the Nordic and Baltic stock markets through
   an event study on  the  five major  indices:  OBX,  OMXB10,  OMXC20,  OMXH25  and
   OMXS30, covering  the period  1996  to  2024.  We find  positive (negative) abnormal
   returns for inclusions  to  (exclusions  from)  the indices  , in line with prior findings.  The
   index effect refers to the abnormal returns and trading volumes observed when stocks
   are added to or removed from an index. This phenomenon has gained renewed
   attention with the global shift from actively managed to passively managed funds,
   which has heightened the role of indices in investment strategies. Utilizing an event
    study methodology, this research provides evidence consistent with the index effect.
   The study contributes to the literature by offering a comprehensive analysis of less-
   explored Nordic and Baltic markets.

Keywords:

   Index Effect, Event Study, Abnormal Returns, Abnormal Trading Volume

Authors:

   Lukas  Sandelin  (25820)
   Emilia  Österberg  (25809)

Tutors:

   Marieke Bos,  Associate Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Ramin Baghai,  Associate  Professor,  Department of  Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in  Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Emilia Österberg and Lukas Sandelin, 2024

                                   1
                                      The Power of Indices

                       1   Introduction

     Passive  investing, where  investors buy index-based strategies instead of individual
stocks,  has  increased in  popularity, and thereafter also size. In  February  this year,
Morningstar reports for the first time  that  passively managed funds  in the  U.S.  controlled
more assets than their actively managed competitors (Morningstar, 2024). A similar trend
is evident in the Nordics where the share of passively managed funds in the Swedish fund
market has surged from 6% in 2010 to 22% in 2023. This growth shows no signs of losing
momentum, as inflows to index funds are nearly 100 times higher than those to actively
managed funds, highlighting a strong and sustained preference for  passive investing
(Fondbolagens Förening,  2024).  The underlying driver  is partly  explained  by  increased
awareness of the  difficulties  in  consistently  outperforming  the market  (Fama and French,
2010).  Prior research has primarily focused on the index effect of the S&P 500 list.  To
our knowledge, we are the first to  systematically study  the effects on individual stock
performance, when a stock is added to or removed from a prominent index in the Nordic
and Baltic markets.
     Through the research question, this report aims to investigate the effects on
performance of joining and leaving prominent indices in the Nordics and the Baltics.
Shleifer (1986) documented this  effect,  and found that as  index fund ownership grew,
researchers observed that stocks tend to exhibit positive (negative) abnormal returns after
being added to (removed from) an index. This phenomenon, known as the  index effect,
has since been extensively studied by scholars.  By employing a similar methodology  as
Beneish and Whaley (1996) and  Chen, Noronha and Singal (2004), we aim to quantify
whether there  is  any abnormal  trading volume or returns associated with reconstitution
events. For our analysis, we use a dataset of index  reconstitutions, daily stocks prices and
trading  volume in the selected markets spanning from the inception date of each index to
the present day.  By comparing actual returns with expected returns, we examine whether
any abnormal returns are present.
     Due to the limited  prior  research on this topic in these regions, this  study focuses
exclusively on the Nordic and Baltic markets.  The constitutional criteria for the indices
we study in these markets differ from those in other financial markets studied  previously,
such as the S&P 500. The OMX indices, maintained by Nasdaq for each of these markets,
take a simpler approach compared to S&P 500. For the S&P 500, inclusion requirements
                                                                                 1                2
are based on a combination of market capitalization, financial viability  and liquidity .
Additionally, committee discretion is applied to maintain sector balance and ensure
representativeness of the U.S. stock market. In contrast, the OMX  and OBX  indices rely
primarily on  publicly available data, particularly  aggregate turnover over six months,
starting seven months before the reconstitution date.  This distinction highlights a key
difference between the S&P 500 studied previously  which is partly based on  non-public
information,  whereas the OMX indices are solely based on publicly transparent data.
     The contribution of this paper is  to enhance knowledge of the Nordic financial
markets, delivering valuable insights into a market with different dynamics than previous
studies  that can benefit investors, policymakers, and other market stakeholders. This
paper also contributes to previous research by  applying a larger sample and  looking at a

1
  Measured by positive GAAP earnings.
2
  Requiring a minimum float-adjusted market capitalization of $18 billion for new additions.
                                   2
                                      The Power of Indices

more recent timeframe for which passive investing has grown considerably in market
share.  The rationale for including both  the Nordics and the Baltics  is that they share
several characteristics, including market dynamics, political connections, corporate ties,
and trade relationships.
     We hypothesize that firms joining an index will experience positive abnormal
returns, while those leaving an index will  experience  a  negative abnormal return,  albeit
at  a lower magnitude.  If our predicted result  finds  that stocks experience  a  positive
abnormal  return  upon inclusion  to an index and a  negative  abnormal  return upon
exclusion, this suggests that the index reconstitution was not priced in among investors.
Alternatively, it suggests that the reconstitutions were not a non-information event. Given
the methodology of the observed indices, which allows for predictability in their
reconstitution,   any   abnormal   returns   surrounding   index   changes   could   suggest
inefficiencies in the market and challenge the validity of the  strong-form  efficient market
hypothesis. If observed, this would contradict the financial theory suggesting that demand
curves for stocks are infinitely elastic, since the price at any point in time is assumed to
reflect all available information about the stock  (Fama, 1970).
     Our predicated outcome  is derived from  empirical evidence  on  asymmetrical price
effects.  Chen  et  al.  (2004) demonstrate that companies added to  the  S&P 500  list
experience abnormal returns  while stocks being removed  show  no  or  a  small negative
effect.  Shleifer (1986)  and Ben-Rephael,  Kandel  and Wohl  (2011)  provide  explanations
about price pressure  on  newly added  stocks, arising from  an increased demand driven by
institutional investors like index funds  being  forced to  rebalance their  portfolios as a
response to the index reconstitution.  Further,  Denis, McConnell, Ovtchinnikov and Yu
(2003)  discuss in their study whether the abnormal performance for newly added stocks
to the S&P 500 list  is because of the higher attention and expectations of performance or
if the index inclusion itself supports greater performance.  Additionally, they argue  that
index reconstitutions  thereafter might not be a non-informational event, but a type of
signaling  of higher  quality.
     Ideally,  to  investigate the  effects of stocks  being added to or removed from the
observed indices, the inclusions and exclusion  should  exhibit  truly  quasi-randomness  as
this would allow  for  isolating  causal  relationships  between the  index reconstitution  and
any observed abnormal returns. The methodology for the index composition is influenced
by external, often unpredictable, market dynamics, which introduce variability into the
outcomes.  These  factors  might  make  the  process  appear  quasi-random  at  times,
particularly for securities near the eligibility thresholds. However, the structured rules
ensure  that the  overall process remains systematic and predictable to a significant degree.
For example,  newly added  stocks with high turnover may already exhibit positive
abnormal returns before being added to an index, making it harder to attribute the effect
to index inclusion.
     The methodology for the OMX indices basing the constituents on publicly available
information on turnover makes the changes to these predictable.  The risk of not
accounting for the predictability is  underestimating  expected returns  and consequently
overstating  the  abnormal  returns.  By  aligning  our  estimation  window  with  the
reconstitution window of the indices,  the  CAPM  coefficients should capture any
speculation and minimize the risk of overstating the abnormal return.
     Since  different indices  serve  as a ranking  mechanism  for the most actively traded
entities  in each market,  their  inclusion or exclusion is not  determined  solely  by  individual
merits. This introduces a potential risk of endogeneity, as it may lead to estimates that fail

                                   3
                                      The Power of Indices

to  accurately  capture  the true relationship between the independent and dependent
variables. We account for this in two ways. First, we include the traded volumes around
the reconstitutions in our study and compare it to the 30-day prior the announcement
average. By comparing each stock's traded volumes with its  own historical levels, this
can to some extent explain the individual performance.  This is described further in the
appendix under section A.1.  Second, we tested the robustness of our  findings  through the
Placebo  Permutation test  in order to  assess  the randomness of our findings. The
Permutation  Test showed that  our main findings are robust  and are not attributed to
randomness in the data.
     We have two main sets of findings. First, the result of this study shows that stocks
added to a prominent index experience  abnormally  high  trading volume  and return.
Consistent with the price pressure hypothesis, this study shows that the excess trading
volumes can be interpreted as an increased demand leading to a price increase. Moreover,
stocks removed from the index experience small to no effect on their performance. Our
result,  together  with  previous  research,  provides  us  with  the  insight  that  index
reconstitutions events have similar  effects  on several different stock markets with
different market structures, practicalities and investors.
     This paper proceeds as follows:  section 2 describes  the  fundamental concepts.
Section  3  outlines  the  theoretical  framework  on which  our study is based  on.  Section 4
details the  data and methodology  used  to  examine our research  question.  Section  5
develops  and  tests our hypotheses,  along  with  presenting  our  empirical findings.  Section
6  evaluates  the robustness of our model.  Finally,  section  7  provides  our concluding
remarks.

                2   Fundamental Concepts

2.1   Efficient Markets Hypothesis
The Efficient Market Hypothesis (EMH) is a foundational financial theory proposing that
financial markets are efficient, meaning that asset prices fully incorporate all available
information at any  given moment (Fama, 1970). Consequently, consistently achieving
returns above the market average through strategies such as stock-picking or market
timing is deemed impossible, except by chance or by assuming greater risk. EMH offers
a framework for understanding investment strategies, market behavior, and the challenges
of consistently outperforming the market. It suggests that  earning abnormal  risk-adjusted
returns  is unlikely, as price movements are driven by new and inherently unpredictable
information. As a result, the hypothesis indicates that actively managed funds are unlikely
to consistently outperform passive funds after accounting for fees and  expenses. The
                                                   3               4                           5
EMH is divided in three forms, weak-form , semi-strong  form and strong-form , all
distinguished by the degree of information available.
2.2   Liquidity and  Illiquidity
The liquidity hypothesis  persists  that investors demand higher returns for  investing in
illiquid stocks (Beneish and Gardner,  1995).  In the context of stocks, liquidity and

3
 Only historical information is accounted for.
4
 Publicly available is also  accounted  for.
5
 All information is accounted for, including insider information.
                                   4
                                      The Power of Indices

illiquidity refer to how easily a stock can be bought or sold in the market without
significantly affecting its price. Liquidity in stocks means there is a high level of trading
activity, making it easy to buy or sell shares quickly without causing a substantial impact
                                                                               6
on the stock's price. Liquidity as measured by the size of the bid-ask spread has an inverse
relationship  to the bid-ask spread, meaning that liquid (illiquid) stocks exhibit smaller
(larger) spreads.  The larger spread on illiquid stocks  implies  increased transaction costs,
meaning you may pay a premium to buy or sell immediately  and vice versa for more
liquid stocks.

               3   Theoretical Framework

     Finance  scholars  have extensively  examined  the index effect, where stock returns
are  impacted  by inclusion in or exclusion from  specific indices, with a primary focus on
the S&P 500 due to its significant prominence and attention.  Newly included firms often
experience significant positive abnormal returns, sparking investor interest and profitable
strategies (Chen et al., 2004;  Beneish and Whaley, 1996).  The theoretical framework
provides a foundation  for examining index reconstitution effects on performance and
trading volumes,  however  there are different views  regarding the persistence and causes
of these price effects.  While early studies linked this phenomenon to market inefficiency,
evolving   research   such   as   those   presented   below   have   introduced   alternative
explanations. Consequently, it is ambiguous whether the index effect violates the efficient
market hypothesis or  represents  an  informative event.
     Our study is most closely related to Shleifer (1986), Beneish and Whaley (1996) and
Chen et al.  (2004).  Early research  noted that prior to 1976, index  inclusions or exclusions
did not lead to abnormal returns. However, as passive fund ownership of the S&P 500
grew, abnormal returns for the firms included also began to rise, suggesting a correlation
between the two  (Shleifer, 1986). This relationship underpins the concept of  the index
effect, with Shleifer’s research indicating that the magnitude of abnormal returns from
index changes is positively associated with the level of index ownership by passive
investment vehicles. This is because passive index funds aim to replicate the performance
of specific indices and must rebalance their portfolios in response to index revision to
minimize tracking errors.
      According to  Scholes (1972),  demand curves for stocks are perfectly elastic,
implying that stock prices fully  reflect all available information and that changes in
demand should not influence prices. However,  Shleifer (1986)  provided evidence
supporting  the  downward  sloping demand curve  hypothesis,  which  argues that  stock
prices are influenced by demand because investors view stocks as  unique and  imperfect
substitutes.  Shleifer’s study showed  a positive relationship between rising stock prices
and shifts in demand curves in contexts where no additional information was assumed
from inclusion events.  In contrast, stock prices decline when a stock is  excluded  from the
index. Notably, these price changes  were  persistent, indicating that short-term arbitrage
does not fully correct the  demand-driven price adjustments.
     Building on  this,  Chen et al. (2004)  presents the  price  pressure  theory  that  claims
that stock prices can  temporarily  deviate from their fundamental values due to shifts in

6
 The bid-ask spread refers to the difference between the price at which a buyer is willing to purchase an
asset (the bid price) and the price at which a seller is willing to sell that asset (the ask price).  It is an
important concept in financial markets, as it represents the transaction cost of trading an asset.
                                   5
                                      The Power of Indices

supply and demand, even when there is no new  fundamental information.  We employ a
similar  model as  Chen et al. (2004)  to examine if our study finds evidence of the price
pressure hypothesis.
     Another key framework is the  Information  Signaling  Theory.  Spence (1973)
suggests  that  actions or events  can directly or indirectly  signal relevant information to
others, influencing their  decision.  Applied to index compositions,  the information
signaling theory  suggests that inclusion in a major index signals improved quality or
reduced risk, which may lower the risk premium for the stock, leading to price increases.
Consequently, exclusion may signal higher risk, resulting in price declines. Denis  et al.
(2003)  and Shleifer (1986)  argued that while index reconstitutions are often considered
as non-informational events, they might carry implicit signals. Their findings indicate that
inclusion in the S&P 500 is associated with increased investor expectations of future
earnings and actual improvements in earnings relative to comparable companies.
     The liquidity hypothesis posits that investors consider transaction costs when buying
stocks, which leads  them  to  demand a liquidity  premium for  holding  illiquid  stocks,
leading to lower prices for such stocks. Applied to indices, this hypothesis suggests that
stocks included in an index experience a positive market reaction as measured by reduced
bid-ask spreads, while exclusions see the opposite effect. Amihud and Mendelson (1986)
found that liquidity characteristics, such as trading volume, shareholder numbers, market
maker activity and price continuity, are negatively correlated with bid-ask spreads, and
expected asset returns increase with these spreads. Erwin and Miller (1998) observed a
significant reduction in bid-ask spreads for stocks added to the S&P 500, which was
accompanied  by sustained increases in share price and trading volume.
     Hegde and McDermott (2003) extended these findings by showing that stocks added
to the S&P 500 exhibit a persistent increase in liquidity, primarily due to decreased
transaction costs and a reduction in asymmetric information. They documented that
increased liquidity, often measured by reduced bid-ask spreads, correlates with positive
abnormal returns for included stocks, while excluded stocks face decreased liquidity  and
negative abnormal returns. However, only a portion of these abnormal returns could be
directly attributed to changes in liquidity.
     Additionally, Hegde and McDermott’s study, consistent with earlier research by
Shleifer (1986) and Chen et al. (2004), found that index inclusions attract greater attention
from analysts and institutional investors, leading to increased trading volume and public
information flow.  Applying the liquidity hypothesis to this context implies that an index
inclusion  and the heightened visibility  should lead to a permanent increase in trading
volume  with  a decreased  bid-ask  spread.
      Building on  these insights,  the investor awareness hypothesis  suggests that firms
included in an index gain heightened visibility among investors. Chen et al.  (2004) and
Denis  et  al.  (2003)  documented  asymmetric  responses  and  described  two  main
mechanisms  driving  abnormal  returns.  First,  greater  visibility  raises  expectations,
motivating firms to improve efficiency.  Second,  index membership, like the S&P 500,
attracts  capital and boosts  growth, while reduced information asymmetry lowers bid-ask
spreads and improves market access. Deletions have minimal negative effects, as
excluded firms retain some benefits  and  since  it is challenging for investors to unlearn
information about a firm, explaining weaker impacts of exclusions.
     Mase (2007), however, challenged the investor awareness hypothesis, arguing that
it primarily applies to first-time inclusions or exclusions rather than repeated changes to
index composition. His research  on the  FTSE100  index  suggested that the hypothesis

                                   6
                                      The Power of Indices

might be less relevant for indices where firms frequently  cycle in and out. He posited that
firms in the S&P 500 might be more affected by changes in awareness due to differences
in index composition and investor behavior
     Recent studies  have  observed  that  most  abnormal returns  occur between the
announcement day and  the  opening of the market on the following day  (Kappou, Brooks
and Ward,  2010;  Kim, Li, and Perry, 2017).  Kim et al.  (2017) findings indicate that stock
prices are adjusting more quickly than reported in earlier studies, limiting opportunities
for profitable trading based on index inclusions or exclusions. However, Kim et al. (2017)
also found evidence of price reversion following the initial spike, suggesting that market
participants may initially overreact to the announcement.
     Our  contribution  to previous research is  trifold.  First, this paper  examines  a  more
recent timeframe  during  which passive investing  strategies  have  grown considerably in
market share.  Second,  we  examine  the Nordic and the Baltics markets, which  have not
been previously studied. Following this, our paper enhances knowledge of these financial
markets, delivering valuable insights that can benefit investors, policymakers, and other
market stakeholders in a market  first  with different dynamics to those studied previously.
Thirdly, a larger sample is studied as compared to most previous work.
     In summary,  related work has  provided  valuable  insights into  the index effect
through five main concepts: the Downward Sloping Demand Curve Hypothesis, the Price
Pressure  Hypothesis, the  Information Signaling Theory,  the Liquidity Hypothesis,  and
the Investor Awareness Hypothesis. The composition criteria for the indices examined in
this study rely on publicly available information, such as trading volume. Unlike the S&P
500, the Nordic indices studied in this paper  should not  imply any expectations regarding
a firm's continued operation.  Consequently, announcements of inclusion or  exclusion
from these indices should not convey new information to market participants.  This
implies that some hypotheses from related  work  may  have limited applicability in this
context.

                4   Data and Methodology

     Previous literature provides guidance for our methodology. This section outlines the
methodology and the key characteristics of our dataset. We present the initial sample,
describe our data processing steps and explain the methodology used in our analysis.
4.1   Index  Description
     As the objective of this  study  is to measure the effects on individual stocks’
performance  upon inclusion  to  and  exclusion  from  an index limited to the Nordic  and the
Baltic  markets, we identified the most prominent indices in Denmark, Finland,  Norway,
Sweden and the Baltics. The rationale behind including the Baltics, although  it is  not an
official part of the Nordics, lies in the alignment of market practices, extensive financial
integration, and strong economic ties between the Baltics and the Nordic countries.  The
selected indices are frequently cited in the media to evaluate the state of the stock market,
making  them  influential.  Consequently,  these  prominent  indices  attract  consistent
attention from investors, with many funds tracking their performance.  Table 1 provides
an overview of the selected indices in this study.

                                   7
                                      The Power of Indices

                                     Table 1
                        Index Overview

This table provides an overview of the most prominent indices in the Nordics and the Baltics. The
indices  are  reviewed  semiannually  and  represent  the  most  actively  traded  stocks.  The
reconstitution  is based on data from  seven  to  one  month  prior to  the  effective date.
   Ticker       Area      Components     Currency     Reconstitutions       Weight
   OBX      Norway        25         NOK     March/September    Market Cap
  OMXB10     Baltics         10          EUR        January/July      Market Cap
  OMXC20    Denmark        20         DKK      June/December    Market Cap
 OMXH25     Finland         25          EUR      February/August    Market Cap
  OMXS30     Sweden         30          SEK        January/July      Market Cap

4.2   Data  Collection  and Processing
     The data on index compositions was  extracted  through  Stockholm School of
Economics’ access to the Refinitiv Eikon data hub (Datastream, 2024), providing detailed
information  on  historical index compositions and  dates for  each stock’s inclusion  or
exclusion  from the index. Additionally, through Eikon and Datastream, we obtained
datasets on the  daily  trading volume and  closing price for each  affected  security.  This
database is commonly used in both industry and academia and the stock prices  used  are
adjusted for splits and other events.  The joiner and leaver data from the Eikon  database
included only the effective dates of each stock’s inclusion or exclusion in the index.
However, the announcement date, when market demand typically starts to shift, is of
greater interest.  The announcement date is  at least 5 trading days  before the effective date
for all indices, except for the OBX Index, where the announcement occurs on the trading
day  before  the effective date.
     We filtered the data and excluded irregular events, including but not limited to name
changes,  merger  and  acquisition  activities, and bankruptcies, to ensure the dataset's
relevance to the purpose of this study. To be included in the final dataset, observations
needed at least 180 trading days of available data before the event date and 90 days after
it. Including observations that  did not meet these criteria would result in an insufficient
time series and inaccurate estimations. For some observations, the  inclusion date  was the
same as  the stock's first trading day, likely reflecting the effects of simultaneous events,
such as spin-offs. This makes it challenging to attribute changes solely to index inclusion.
Some stocks are added to indices due to mergers or acquisitions, while others leave for
the same reasons. For example, Swedish Match left the OMXS30 index in 2022 following
its acquisition by Philip Morris, and Astra was  excluded  in 1999, only to be reintroduced
as AstraZeneca after its merger with the British firm Zeneca.
     Our data covers the period 1996  to 2024 and  the initial sample  includes a total of
825  observations of leavers and joiners  across all observed indices.  Table 2 provides an
overview  of  both our initial and final sample.

                                   8
                                      The Power of Indices

                                     Table 2
                     Number of Observations

This table  presents  the initial sample and  outlines  the  process  leading  to the final sample.  We
excluded irregular events involving,  but not limited to,  name changes, M&A activity  and
bankruptcy.  Since these events do not represent typical reconstitutions, they were excluded from
the sample to ensure the relevance of the dataset to this research.  The first  stocks  to be included
in the index at inception have been incorporated into the final data set. This explains the disparity
between the number of joiners and leavers overweighting joiners as these initially populated the
indices.  The data screening process  reduced the  sample from 825 observation  to 582 whereas the
number of joiners  reduced  from 436 to 350  and leavers from 389 to 232.  Since irregular events
are considered abnormal, removing them from the dataset will not result in a loss of  information
or accuracy,  instead, it is likely to enhance both.
 Data                  Initial sample          Irregular  events          Final  sample
 OBX                   271                 95                 176
  Joiners | Leavers         136  |  135               32  |  63               104  |  72
 OMXB10                84                 25                 59
  Joiners | Leavers          39  |  45                 5 |  20                 34  |  25
 OMXC20               158                 33                 125
  Joiners | Leavers          82  |  76                11  |  22                71  |  54
 OMXH25               197                 56                 141
  Joiners | Leavers         107  |  90               26  |  30                81  |  60
 OMXS30                115                 34                 81
  Joiners | Leavers          72  |  43                12  |  22                60  |  21
 Summary                825                 243                 582
                         436  |  389              86  |  157              350  |  232

     The dataset for each index  begins with the earliest  available  data  for the  respective
index, in other words,  the date when the index was  established. The dataset  ends with the
most recent  reconstitution event  as of  October 2024, when the data was extracted. Table
3 provides an overview of the time  frames  for the selected indices.

                                     Table 3
                   Time Frame for Observations

This table provides an overview of the earliest observed dates and the latest observed dates  for
additions and deletions  to  each index. The  data sample  for each index begins  with  the first day of
trading  and ends with the last observed  reconstitution  event for  the  respective index.
 Index                          Earliest observed date          Latest observed date
 OBX                             1996-06-03                 2024-09-23
 OMXB10                         2006-12-04                 2023-06-17
 OMXC20                         1997-04-23                 2024-01-31
 OMXH25                         1996-08-01                 2024-08-01
 OMXS30                         1996-06-24                 2023-01-02

                                   9
                                      The Power of Indices

4.3   Justification for Selected Time Periods
     Throughout the period examined  in our study, major crises  and  events have
influenced the financial markets. To account for their impacts, we divided our data sample
into three time  periods,  defined  by key historical events that  characterize  each interval.
Table  4  provides an overview of the selected time periods.
     As  Hoffman,  Post  &  Pennings  (2013)  describes,  investor  behavior  changed
following the financial crisis of 2008-2009. They found  that investors' risk perceptions
increased, while return expectations and risk tolerance decreased. Towards the end of the
crisis, return expectations, risk tolerance, and risk perceptions began to recover. They
demonstrated that investment strategies and  risk perceptions are time-varying and
significantly related to risk-taking behavior, which, in turn, moves in parallel with market
risks. Based on this, we argue that these changes in investor behavior may impact inflows
to index funds. Consequently,  since the investor behavior changed,  our first time period
ends the  year before  the financial crisis  to isolate a potential effect in one period.
     In recent years, the market experienced a  Covid-19  pandemic starting in 2020,
followed by the war in Ukraine, which began in 2022, and the conflict in Gaza, which
started in 2023.  The study by Hoffman  et al.  (2013) provides a framework for
understanding ongoing changes in investor behavior during these periods. Since their
findings show that investors' risk-taking behavior is influenced by market risks, it may
imply that during times of crisis, investors'  risk perceptions have increased.  Our third and
final time period starts with the beginning of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020  and ends
with the last observed date of our dataset.
     Another rationale for the selected time periods is that uncertainty is higher in
abnormal environments, such as during crises. This heightened uncertainty makes it more
difficult to estimate expected returns, leading to less precise estimations. Consequently,
the abnormal returns from such uncertain periods may provide less guidance.  Following
this, we will  test  whether the results deviate when  the data is  segmented  into different
subperiods.

                                   Table  4
                   Time Frame for Subperiods

As mentioned in the section above, our data sample is divided into three subperiods based on two
major events: the financial crisis in 2008 and Covid-19 in 2020. This table outlines the subperiods
as follows: from the first observed date to 2008, from 2009 to 2019, and finally from 2020 to the
last observed date for respective index. Each time frame begins on the first trading day of the first
year and ends on the  last trading day of the final year within the respective subperiod.
 Index                   Time Frame 1         Time Frame 2         Time Frame 3
 OBX                  1996 to 2007         2008 to 2019         2020 to 2024
 OMXB10               2006 to 2007         2008 to 2019         2020 to 2023
 OMXC20               1997 to 2007         2008 to 2019         2020 to 2024
 OMXH25               1996 to 2007         2008 to 2019         2020 to 2024
 OMXS30               1996 to 2007         2008 to 2019         2020 to 2023

                                  10
                                      The Power of Indices

4.4   Our Data Sample in Comparison to  Related Work
      The data sample in this study differs from the previous literature in three key aspects.
First, it focuses on a different geographical area and thereafter different prominent indices
than those examined in previous research. Second, our final data sample,  consisting of
570 observations, exceeds  both  the median  and average  sample size used in prior studies.
Finally, the  indices  selected  for  this study  contain fewer components and  represent  less
total market capitalization  compared to those analyzed in  related  studies.  While this  will
not affect our  quantified estimations of the index effect, the underlying  drivers,  such as
investor  awareness and  the  price pressure hypothesis,  may  provide  limited guidance.
Table  5  provides an overview of the key characteristics of the samples from previous
studies.

                                   Table  5
                    Comparison to  Related Work

This table presents an overview of the selected previous research that provides guidance to our
study. As presented in table 2,  our final data sample of 582   observations are larger than the
median  and average  of the final data sets for the previous literature.
                                                                     Total Number of
Research                     Index studied         Time period
                                                                        Observations
Beneish & Whaley (1996)        S&P 500          1986 to 1994            103
Chen et al. (2004)               S&P 500          1962 to 2000            995
Mase (2007)                  FTSE 100         1992 to 2005            132
Shleifer (1986)                 S&P 500          1966 to 1983            297
                      OBX and OMX B10,
Our sample                                      1996 to 2024            582
                             C20, H25, S30

Event Study
     We use an event study methodology as described by MacKinlay (1997) and Chen et
al. (2004) to investigate the price and volume effects of index reconstitution and define
an event as an index inclusion or exclusion.  We do this to capture abnormal returns,
specifically tied to index changes rather than other market factors.  We separate the data
for the inclusions from the exclusions, creating two datasets.  When conducting an event
study,  two  key aspects must be considered,  the  estimation  window and  event  window.
The  event  date refers to the effective date of the index reconstitution, which must be
clearly defined.  The  event  window represents the time frame during which the impact of
the event is analyzed. The  estimation  window is the period used to calculate parameter
estimates, which are then applied to compute the normal returns. For indices maintained
by  Nasdaq, the announcement date (AD) occurs at least five trading days before the
effective date (ED), whereas for the OBX  index, changes are announced on the first
trading day before the ED  (Nasdaq, 2024).  Table 6 provides an overview of how
important events and dates are labelled in our study.

                                  11
                                      The Power of Indices

                                   Table  6
                         Clarification of Labels

In  an  event study, it is of interest to examine the effect  within the set event window.  This table
provides  clarification of  how the different  intervals are labelled  in the  results.  The announcement
date is typically 5 trading days before the effective date for all indices, except for the OBX  index,
where the announcement occurs on the trading day immediately preceding the effective date. One
trading day is defined as  t.
 Dates                                                   Label
 Days (t) Before the Announcement Date                         AD  -  t
 Announcement Date                                 AD
 Days (t) After AD but Before ED                            AD + t
 Days (t) Before the Announcement Date                         ED  -  t
 Effective Date                                        ED
 Days  (t)  After  Effective Date                                   ED +  t

4.5   Estimation Window
     The estimation window is the period during which the parameters of our application
of the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) are estimated. In line with MacKinlay (1997),
this study employs  a type of  market  model to approximate the stock’s normal return over
the event window. MacKinlay (1997),  further suggests that  daily closing prices for  120
trading days, approximately six months, are sufficient for estimating the parameters.
Based on this guidance, we define our estimation window as  [-143,  -21] in trading days
relative to the ED which is approximately  the six months prior to the event  window, as
shown in  Figure 1.  Following guidance from MacKinlay (1997),  the estimation window
should be near the event window  since  this approach better reflects  the current  levels of
the firm and  provides  more accurate  estimates for the future, as near-term  estimations
carry less  uncertainty  compared to long-term outlooks.  To avoid  overlapping  and reduce
the risk of the event influencing the parameters, we keep the estimation  window,  and the
event window separate  but adjacent.
     The six months leading up to the event window align with Nasdaq's evaluation
period for determining the upcoming reconstitution of the index. For stocks newly added
or removed, this period may partially reflect abnormal activity compared to their
historical levels. Added stocks typically exhibit higher trading volumes and meet criteria
they had previously failed to satisfy, while removed stocks show decreased volumes,
reflecting their exclusion. Since the indices are determined through a ranking system,
these reconstitution events could also result from shifts in the performance of competing
stocks. To assess whether a stock's inclusion or exclusion is based on its individual merits,
we compare its performance (trading volume and returns) during the period when it failed
to meet the inclusion criteria with the evaluation period when it did. This analysis is
detailed in Figure A.1 in the Appendix.
4.6   Event Window
     The event window is defined as the period  spanning  20 trading days prior to the
effective date  (ED) to  60  trading days following the  ED.  This is in line with previous
research who investigate similar effects on the  S&P 500,  KFX  and  FTSE100 indices
                                  12
                                      The Power of Indices

(Beneish and Whaley, 1996; Bechmann, 2002; Chen et al., 2004; Mase, 2007).  This time
frame is designed to capture  both short-term and long-term effects of index reconstitution
on stock prices. The 20 trading days before the announcement date allow for the inclusion
of potential early trading activity by investors anticipating changes in the index
composition prior to the official  announcement. The 20 trading days preceding the event
are considered sufficient to capture both the initial announcement and any  early trading
activity by investors who anticipated the index changes before the official announcement.
     Chen et al. (2004), suggests that stock prices may revert after the event, and
extending the post-event window provides an opportunity to examine whether the
observed price effects are temporary or permanent.  Beneish and Whaley (1996) found
decreasing significance of the effects of stock index inclusion up  to  60 days post the ED.
Their results were still statistically significant at the 5% level 60 days post ED. Extending
the event window to 60 days post ED allows for testing if any eventual effects persist
over a longer term or capturing delayed market reactions that shorter windows might
miss. This approach enables a comprehensive analysis of the dynamics surrounding index
reconstitution, capturing investor behavior  surrounding the announcement, immediate
market reactions to the  effective date, and longer-term price adjustments after the event.
     The announcement date (AD) varies across indices. For the OBX10, OMX20,
OMXH25 and OMXS30 indices, reconstitution decisions are announced five trading days
before the effective date. In contrast, for the OBX index, the announcement is made just
one trading  day prior to the effective date.
     The effective date (ED) is the date when the changes to the index officially take
effect, either through the inclusion or exclusion of stocks. For the OMX Copenhagen 20
index, the effective date occurs on the nearest trading day  after the third Friday in
December and June.  The OMX Helsinki 25 index  implements changes on the  nearest
trading day following the last trading day of January and July. For the OMX Stockholm
30 index, reconstitution takes effect on the nearest trading day after the last trading day
of June and December.

                                  13
                                      The Power of Indices

                                      Figure 1
             Estimation Window and Event Window

This figure provides an overview of the selected  estimation window and event window. The
expected returns are estimated using data from the estimation window,  spanning from  T0 to T1 in
the figure. The estimation window spans a total of six  calendar  months, beginning  seven  months
prior to the  effective date  and ending  one month (~22 trading days) prior ED. The event window
covers the period from 20 trading days before the effective date to 60 trading days after the
effective date, noted T2  and T3  in the figure. The event window  is in total 81  trading days, which
is approximately three  and a half months. The two windows are adjacent to  each other but do not
overlap  to  separate potential spill-over effects.

4.7   Estimating Expected Return
     Our analysis uses an estimation window of six months that ends before the event
window to estimate each stock’s  expected  return.  This is explained in depth under the
previous section  Event Study.  The expected return or “normal” return is the return that
would be expected without the  index reconstitution  taking place.  From the estimation
window we derive  each stock’s  expected return  under  the Capital Asset Pricing Model
(CAPM).  Abnormal return  (AR)  on day  t  is the difference between the actual return of
the stock and its expected return based on the market model.  We then calculate  the
cumulative abnormal return  (CAR)  as the sum of  the daily abnormal return over a
specified period. Lastly, we use a two-tailed student t’s test to  determine if the observed
AR and CAR  is significantly different from zero. A more thorough explanation is
provided below.
     First, we define the daily stock return as the arithmetic  change in closing price on
day  𝜏  from day  𝜏-1 (equation  1).

                                               𝑃!,#  −  𝑃!,#$%
                                     𝑅!,#  =                                                 (1)
                                                       𝑃!,#$%

                                  14
                                      The Power of Indices

     Secondly,  we specify the CAPM as the model characterizing “normal” returns.
MacKinlay (1997) argues that the improvements with a multiple factor model are limited
for an event study.  The CAPM predicts  𝑅!,#, the return of company  𝑖  on day  𝜏  based on
its correlation with  𝑅&'(,),  the  market return  on day  𝜏,  where  𝐸(𝜖!,#*  =  0.

                        𝑅!,#  −  𝑟*,#  =  𝛼!  +  𝛽!0𝑅&'(,)  −  𝑅*,#1  +  𝜖!,#                     (2)

                          𝐸(𝑅!,#*  −  𝑟*,#  =  𝛼!  +  𝛽!0𝑅&'(,)  −  𝑟*,#1                       (3)

     To  estimate  the  coefficients  𝛼!  and  𝛽!  of stock  𝑖  to the market, we run the  ordinary
least squared (OLS) regression expressed in equation 2 for each individual security during
the estimation window.  We use a dummy variable  indicating whether an event is an
inclusion or an exclusion event.  The proxy for the market is the  market return in the  daily
European Fama French Factors derived from Kenneth R. French’s data library.  As
previously discussed, the estimation window spans 120 trading days  (six months)  [-143,
-23]  relative to the ED.  Since  the announcement date (AD) is ordinarily 5 days prior to
the ED, it is reasonable to assume that no effect is leaking to our estimation window  and
should not affect the parameter estimates of the CAPM.  The expected return is then
calculated under CAPM  as described in  equation  3.
     A shortcoming of our application of CAPM is the choice of market proxy. Since this
study focuses on the Nordic markets, a reasonable market proxy would be the broader all-
share indices for each country. This could potentially raise questions about endogeneity
as the studied indices make up the majority of the market capitalization for these markets.
We opted to use  another  proxy  for the market which also had more historical data
available which increased the sample size.
     We then calculate the daily abnormal return (AR) during the event window [-20, 60]
relative to the ED.  The abnormal  return  is calculated as the difference between  𝑅!,#,  the
realized return  of stock  𝑖  on day  𝜏  and  𝐸0𝑅!,#1, the  expected return  of stock  𝑖  (equation
4).  We also calculate the average  abnormal return (AAR) across all stocks  i  on day  𝜏
(equation  5).

                                    𝐴𝑅!,#  =  𝑅!,#  −  𝐸0𝑅!,#1                              (4)
                                   +
                                1
                            𝐴𝐴𝑅#  =   6 𝐴𝑅#                          (5)
                                            𝑁
                                               !,%

     To aggregate the daily  abnormal return  through time, we calculate the cumulative
abnormal return  (CAR)  as the sum of abnormal returns  for  stock  𝑖  between  𝑇%  and  𝑇-
(equation 6).

                                                ("
                                  𝐶𝐴𝑅!,(!,("  =  6  𝐴𝑅!,#
                                                                                       (6)
                                              ),(!

     The subperiods from our event window for which we calculate CAR is expressed in
Table 7. The chosen subperiods are determined based on the findings from previous
research (Chen et al., 2004; Beneish and Whaley, 1996).
                                  15
                                      The Power of Indices

                                        Table 7
              Clarification of Labels and Sub-Event Windows

Table 7  provides  a detailed breakdown  of the  sub-event windows  used in this study, explaining
the labels and their respective intervals in trading days.  Anticipation Period  captures market
activity and potential speculative behavior before any official announcements. Investors might
anticipate changes to index compositions based on prior trends or turnover data, which can
influence prices and trading volumes even before public announcements are made.  The inclusion
period represents  the time  from  the  announcement  date  leading up to the effective date.
Institutional investors, particularly index funds, begin rebalancing their portfolios by buying
stocks being added to the index or selling those being excluded. Prior research has shown that this
period often exhibits significant price and volume changes.  After the effective date, the market
undergoes a short-term adjustment phase. This period is used to assess how quickly prices
stabilize and whether any short-term overreaction occurs.  The event effect sub-windows captures
both pre-  and post-effective date activity to measure the overall impact of the event. It provides
insights into whether the observed effects persist beyond the immediate reconstitution.
Sub-Event Window                        Labels               Interval  (trading days)
Anticipation Period                   ED-20 to ED-5                 16 days
Inclusion Period                       ED-5 to ED                   6 days
Adjustment Period                   ED+1 to ED+60                60 days
Event Effect                        ED-5 to ED+20                26 days
Event Effect Longer Term             ED-5 to ED+60                66 days
Event Period in Total                 ED-20 to ED+60                81 days

     To calculate the mean effect across  the observed stocks in our sample  we calculate
the average  cumulative abnormal return  𝐶𝐴𝑅  (!,("  across all stocks for each subperiod
from our event window  (equation 7).

                                   +
                               1
                             𝐶𝐴𝑅  (!,("  =    6 𝐶𝐴𝑅(!,("
                                            𝑁                                          (7)
                                               !,%

We use  the cross section of  𝐶𝐴𝑅!,(!,(" to estimate the  variance  𝑉𝑎𝑟[𝐶𝐴𝑅  (!,(" ]  (equation
8).

                                +
                                1                        -
                  𝑉𝑎𝑟[𝐶𝐴𝑅  (!,(" ]  =   - 6(𝐶𝐴𝑅(!,("  − 𝐶𝐴𝑅  (!,(" )                (8)
                                         𝑁
                                           !,%

     An important assumption when calculating  the variance is that the abnormal returns
in the cross-section are uncorrelated  (Campbell,  Andrew,  and  MacKinlay,  1997).  This
assumption  is valid when the event day is not common to the  stocks observed.  For our
sample, some stocks are likely to  share the same event date  but if they are from different
industries, the CAPM reduces the inter-correlation to zero (Brown and Warner, 1982).  In
our sample,  most of  the stocks that share the same event date  also have opposite dummy

                                  16
                                      The Power of Indices

variables, being included or excluded. We therefore assume that the abnormal returns are
uncorrelated in the cross-section.
     Lastly, we  perform a hypothesis test  and interpret the results to assess the
significance of the observed  effect.  We use a two-tailed  t-test to account for both positive
and negative effects as the predictability of the composition of the observed indices
suggests  that eventual price effects could potentially be priced in and reversed around the
ED and AD.  The null hypothesis  is that the average CAR and AR  are  zero.  With our
sample being large, since  𝑁  >  30,  the  𝐶𝐴𝑅  (!,("  and  𝐴𝐴𝑅!,#  follow the normal distribution
(equation 9). The two-tailed t-test statistic is defined in equation (10).

                              𝐶𝐴𝑅  (!,(" ~𝑁[0, 𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝐶𝐴𝑅  (!,(" )]                         (9)

                                                 𝐶𝐴𝑅  (!,("
                             𝜃%  =
                                                                                      (10)
                                        C𝑉𝑎𝑟[𝐶𝐴𝑅  (!,(" ]

4.8   Methodology to Examine Trading Activity
     To isolate abnormal trading volume  related to the index reconstitution  we use the
constant mean model (MacKinlay, 1997), we calculate a volume ratio (equation 11) based
on  a  benchmark trading volume  as the average volume  for stock  𝑖  in the estimation
window  [-143,  -23]  (equation  12).  This allows us to assess  whether  the reconstitution  has
any impact on the trading volume.

                                                                    𝑉!,#
                                 𝑉𝑅!,#  =                                               (11)
                                               𝑉#$%./:#$-/,!

                                             #$-/
                                        1                                 (12)
                            𝑉#$%./:#$-/,!  =     6  𝑉!,#
                                             𝑁
                                            #$%./
   Whereas:
                      𝑉𝑅!,#  =  𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒  𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜  𝑓𝑜𝑟  𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘  𝑖  𝑜𝑛  𝑑𝑎𝑦  𝜏
                           𝑉  =  𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒  𝑓𝑜𝑟  𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘  𝑖  𝑎𝑡  𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒  𝜏
     𝑉#$%./:#$-/,!  =  𝐴𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒  𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒  𝑜𝑓  𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑘  𝑖  𝑖𝑛  𝑡ℎ𝑒  𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛  𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑜𝑤
                          𝑁  =  𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟  𝑜𝑓  𝑜𝑏𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠

      Similar to how we tested the significance of the 𝐶𝐴𝑅  (!,(" , we applied the two-tailed
student t’s test at the 5% significance level  to test if there are any abnormal trading
volumes surrounding the ED.  The drawback of the methodology for the constant mean
                                  17
                                      The Power of Indices

model is that it does not account for changes in the market  which could generate biased
results. An additional consideration is that the timing of the index reconstitutions
(January/July) imply that the stock returns might experience seasonality (January Effect).

4.9   Data  Limitations
     A general concern with event studies is other overlapping events that can impact the
studied outcome  and lead to  incorrect conclusions.  In the setting of this thesis, this relates
to other  idiosyncratic  events  such as  but not limited to  M&A activity,  earnings
announcements, changes in capital structure or  changes in  management.  We accounted
for name changes  and M&A activity  and removed these  observations  as it would skew
the results.  This was done  both  manually and through the coding  process,  but the  risk  of
human error  that we failed to account for all such events  still  prevails.  This paper does
not account  for earnings  announcements  during the event or estimation windows  which
could have an impact on the  stock price.
     Determining  the  announcement  date  caused  another  limitation,  because  the
announcements are not always made on the same date in relation to the effective event
date.  Despite extensive effort, we were not able to access the exact announcement date
for  each  observation.  Due  to  this  problem,  we  decided  not  to  investigate  the
announcement date directly, but rather encompass it in the event window.  Previous
research  in other financial markets  has found  the AD to be of high importance  for
abnormal returns  and not  accurately  determining this date across all stocks studied in this
paper highlights a limitation. A more extensive study could utilize web scraping to extract
the announcement dates from financial newspapers.
     The  timeframe of this study encompasses  two  events that affected the  stock market
broadly, namely the  financial crisis  and  Covid-19.  These events alone  could  have a
significant impact  on investor  behavior  and consequently  on the overall cumulative
abnormal return over the entire period. We divided our initial sample into subgroups, both
across indices and over different time periods to account for these changes. Some of these
subgroups contained only a small number of observations which  limit  the conclusions
that can be drawn from the sample. With smaller samples, it is possible that outliers will
have a greater impact on the  overall results of the subgroup.
      The market model is applied to estimate each stocks’ normal return.  In general,
scholars suggest that models incorporating additional factors can yield a better estimation
(Fama, French, 1992)  Meanwhile MacKinlay (1997)  argues  that  the  improvements  from
more complicated models are limited when applied to an event study.
     Using another market proxy, such as the MSCI Nordic Index or the OMX All-Share
indices for each country, could yield different conclusions. The small size of these
markets raises concerns about endogeneity with the stocks studied in this paper,
particularly if the OMX All-Share indices  were used as the market proxy. Additionally,
historical  daily closing prices for these broader indices are  limited,  restricting the
observation for our sample. Following this, another potential risk of using local and
broader  indices as market proxies is the difficulty in maintaining a sufficient sample size.
In this study, the current sample size is  larger than most  similar studies,  which is
something we want to strengthen in the research.
     As previously discussed, the timing of  reconstitution  of the studied indices raises
the concern  of  seasonality such as the January effect.

                                  18
                                      The Power of Indices

                       5   Results

    Ideally, to test the effects  on individual stocks being added to or removed from the
selected  indices  in  this  study,  the  inclusion  and  exclusion  should  exhibit  quasi-
randomness as it would  allow for isolating a causal relationship between the index
reconstitution and any observed abnormal returns.  Additionally, by analyzing quasi-
random inclusion and exclusion, investors, researchers and policymakers gain a better
understanding of market mechanics, behavioral tendencies and the interplay between
indices and securities. This analysis  does  not only help  to  optimize trading and portfolio
management strategies but also enhances market transparency and efficiency.  The
inclusion and exclusions to the selected indices in this study are quasi random, since rules
exist but  the  outcome (membership to  the  index)  are  influenced by external variables.
    We  find robust results  showing  that,  for both  inclusions  and exclusions, trading
volume increases on the  days  before the  effective date of the  reconstitution,  with a larger
magnitude  observed  for excluded stocks.  We find positive  𝐶𝐴𝑅  for included stocks in the
five days preceding the inclusion date.  In  line with  previous studies (Schleifer, 1986;
Benish and Whaley, 1996)  we find this  effect  to be permanent  with  no signs of reversal
observed  during the event window.  This is not in line with the findings of Chen et al.
(2004) which found the effects were reversed after 60 days post ED. For excluded stocks,
we find negative abnormal returns  preceding the exclusion date with the largest
magnitude occurring 20 to 5 days preceding the exclusion event.  We see a short reversal
of the 𝐶𝐴𝑅  for the excluded stocks until almost 30 days post the ED, before the 𝐶𝐴𝑅  turns
negative again.
5.1   Abnormal Trading Volume
     In this section we  document the  changes in  volumes traded  as a result of  index
reconstitution events.  This study does not directly  investigate the announcement day,
which limits its comparability to previous research. Kappou et al. (2010) suggest that  the
observed positive  abnormal  return and  trading  volume  are  significant  both at  the  close of
the  announcement  day and  during  the opening of the market on the following day,
reflecting the market's reaction to newly released information.  Additionally, Bechmann
(2002)  observed that abnormal returns  and trading volume  were  most significant and of
similar magnitude  on the  day  after the announcement and the day before  the  effective
date.
     Table  8 presents the results for the abnormal  trading  volumes  surrounding  the
effective date (ED). The  table is split between  Panel A for inclusions and  Panel B for
exclusions.  The observations are also split among the observed indices and for the full
sample.
     We observe  an increased  trading volume on the day  immediately preceding  the
effective date  (ED-1)  across all indices  for both the inclusions and exclusions.  The
increase in trading volume is notably larger for excluded stocks and appears to persist in
the days immediately following the ED. For the full sample, the abnormal trading volume
for exclusions  is more than  double  that  observed  for  included stocks on day ED-1.  The
positive abnormal trading volume observed for the inclusions on day ED-1  appears  to be
temporary when observing Figure 2. We see that the cumulative abnormal trading volume
is negative for inclusions over the event window but  gradually reverts toward zero by the
end of the event window.  Overall,  the standard errors  are small for all observations.  We
                                  19
                                      The Power of Indices

find similar results in our regression analysis on the abnormal trading volume in Appendix
A.2.
     For the stock being included in the indices, we see that there are significant decreases
in trading volume  on days ED-5 to ED-3  (Table 8).  This is interesting since previous
research  has  found  the  most  significant  increases  in  trading  volume  around  the
announcement date  (AD)  (Kappou et al., 2010).  Given the set  methodology  of the OMX
index  compositions,  ED-5 should  be the AD by praxis. However, since we did not have
accurate data on the  individual announcement date,  we cannot  confirm that there  have
been no deviations from the general  praxis  regarding the announcement date.  Assuming
that day ED-5 is the announcement  date, these findings  go  against our expectations and
contradict previous research which has found  increased  trading volume on the AD and
the trading day immediately following.  Potential explanations to this might be that
passive index funds that will include the stock may delay significant buying activity until
the official inclusion date to align with the index. This restraint could lower overall
trading volumes temporarily.
     As shown in Table 8, the volume ratio for deletions increases in the days leading up
to the effective date (ED) and decreases in the days following the ED. Our findings
indicate significantly higher volumes on the day or days immediately preceding the ED.
Since the volume ratio reflects both selling and buying activity, the observed increase in
volume ratio for deletions can be attributed to heightened selling pressure from index
funds rebalancing their portfolios. This rebalancing involves selling the deleted stock
while simultaneously purchasing newly added  stocks, consistent with the index effect
theory.

                                  20
                                      The Power of Indices

                                   Table  8
               Average Abnormal Trading Volume

Table  8  presents  the average  daily abnormal trading volume  surrounding the effective date (ED)
across all stocks in  each  subset.  A more thorough table is provided in the appendix (section
A.4). Day 0 represents the ED of the reconstitution. The abnormal volume is defined as the
difference between the actual  daily volume and the normal daily volume  where the  normal
volume is  defined as the  average  trading volume  over the  estimation  window.  The standard
error for each observation is presented in parentheses.  The significance level is tested with a
student t’s test.  All data is retrieved from  Datastream.  The symbols *, **, and *** denote
significance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % level  respectively.  Standard  errors are  presented in
parentheses below  each observation.
                                      Panel A: Inclusion
 Day   Full Sample     OBX      OMXB10    OMXC20    OMXH25    OMXS30
  -5    -22.27% ***     -7.52%       -18.42%     -32.37% ***   -36.24% ***   -21.83% **
           (0.042)        (0.081)        (0.239)        (0.066)        (0.068)        (0.079)
  -4    -24.03% ***   -17.80% **      3.10%        -8.61%     -45.77% ***   -35.83% ***
          (0.045)        (0.060)        (0.176)        (0.155)        (0.073)        (0.088)
  -3    -17.78% ***      5.33%       -12.09%      -14.78%     -38.96% ***   -33.55% ***
           (0.044)        (0.091)        (0.158)        (0.117)        (0.073)        (0.071)
  -2      6.36%       10.80%      86.53% **     -11.65%      -17.71%       2.59%
           (0.065)        (0.128)        (0.309)        (0.126)        (0.109)        (0.112)
  -1    62.92% ***   115.75% ***    85.74%       1.33%       31.97%       61.46%
          (0.141)        (0.290)        (0.667)        (0.118)        (0.203)        (0.354)
  0      2.46%       18.86%       31.23%       -7.89%       -12.33%      -10.46%
          (0.082)        (0.188)        (0.490)        (0.101)        (0.097)        (0.098)
  1      -8.92%       -4.51%       68.50%       -18.99%      -25.62%     -25.80% ***
           (0.092)        (0.098)        (0.803)        (0.107)        (0.129)        (0.061)
  2      -9.12%       -8.54%       58.92%       -22.46%    -41.30% ***     2.94%
           (0.092)        (0.098)        (0.803)        (0.107)        (0.129)        (0.061)
                                    Panel B: Exclusion
  -2     50.37% *      25.76%      407.86%      25.01%       -9.64%       -4.97%
           (0.242)        (0.132)        (2.308)        (0.149)        (0.152)        (0.103)
  -1   139.76% ***   176.03% **    111.99%      27.67%    193.15% ***   126.47% **
           (0.262)        (0.623)        (0.784)        (0.138)        (0.393)        (0.374)
  0      15.99%       42.18%       2.37%        4.80%       -8.15%       9.10%
           (0.161)        (0.421)        (0.238)        (0.173)        (0.101)        (0.137)
  1      23.28%      -15.56%      10.63%       -9.06%       3.97%       209.05%
           (0.292)        (0.094)        (0.223)        (0.119)        (0.192)        (2.065)
  2      27.19%       -3.28%       35.07%      -25.85% *      1.25%       215.44%
           (0.292)        (0.094)        (0.223)        (0.119)        (0.192)        (2.065)

     Studies by Bechmann (2002), Hedge  and  McDermott (2003),  and  Kappou, Brooks
and Ward  (2007)  indicate  that  index funds  tend to avoid  making  significant  reallocations
prior to  the  effective date (ED), irrespective  of  any  price  fluctuations  leading up to the
event.  They attribute regulations and  policies  to force  portfolio managers  to hold their
positions as long as possible to reduce tracking errors. This could explain why we observe

                                  21
                                      The Power of Indices

increased trading activity on the day immediately preceding the ED instead of those
surrounding the AD.  Bechmann (2002), Hedge & McDermott (2003) and Kappou et al.
(2007)  argue that  in the closing hours on ED-1,  index funds start  executing large block
trades to  buy  (sell)  the stocks being included (excluded) in the indices. This could be an
explanation to why we observe increased trading activity on the day preceding the ED.
We find  no statistical  support for this in the cross-sectional  regression in the appendix
(Section A.3).
     Finance scholars are  divided  as to  whether changes to indices have temporary or
permanent effects.  When observing  Figure  2, we see that most of the  abnormal trading
activity  is  surrounding  the ED, depicted as event day 0 in the plots.  When observing the
plot to the right  for the cumulative abnormal volume ratio (CAVR)  we see that for the
exclusions, the increased trading activity seems to be permanent whilst for the inclusions,
the  decrease in trading looks to revert  to zero  towards the end of the event window.
     The temporary decrease in trading volume for the included firms could be explained
by them having  higher trading volumes during our estimation window  which coincides
with the index reconstitution window and is the cause for them being included in the
index. This results in a higher benchmark  of  which the added stocks revert to towards the
end of our event window.

                                    Figure  2
                   Abnormal Trading Volume  Plot

Figure  2  plots the average abnormal volume ratio (AVR) and average cumulative abnormal
volume ratio (CAVR) over the event window.  The x-axis is the event day in the event window
and the y-axis is the observed volume ratio. The vertical  dashed line depicts day zero which is the
effective date (ED) of the index reconstitution. The dotted line is the observed values for the
exclusions dataset and the solid line is the observed values for the  inclusion  dataset.  A value of
zero on the y-axis indicates no abnormal trading volume and values above (below) indicate
positive (negative) abnormal trading volume.
             AVR                       CAVR

5.2   Price  Effect
     In this section we document the  price effects  following  the changes to the observed
indices.  We report results  based on abnormal and cumulative abnormal returns.  In  table
9 and 10  along with figure 3  and 4  the price effects  surrounding the effective date (ED)

                                  22
                                      The Power of Indices

are presented.  Average Abnormal Return is  denoted  as AAR  and  Average  Cumulative
Abnormal Return is  denoted  as  𝐶𝐴𝑅.
     Overall we find the  presence  of the index effect in the Nordic markets  supporting
research by Chen et al. (2004) and Shleifer (1986) but do not find support for any reversals
of the effects such as Mase (2007)  and Beneish and Whaley (1996).  Our findings support
the awareness hypothesis as  proposed by Chen et al. (2004).  There is some  support for
the observed abnormal returns being attributed to increased demand  which could stem
from  inflows from index funds.
     For the full sample,  we observe the most prominent price movement to be the
positive  𝐶𝐴𝑅of  5.67%  for  the timeframe  -5:ED. Meanwhile  excluded stocks have
negative abnormal returns of 0.13% over this period, although not statistically significant.
Since the indices maintained by Nasdaq announce the reconstitutions at least 5 days prior
to the effective date, this supports the hypothesis that markets react positively (negatively)
to index inclusion (exclusion).  These findings are in line with  previous research  that
suggests  that  all abnormal returns are  essentially  generated  on the day after the
announcement  (Kappou et al.,  2010).
     Across the indices  the  OBX index  exhibits  the largest  positive abnormal return of
14.57%  during  the  inclusion  period  (-5:ED).  Notably, the  OMXC20  index records  a
negative abnormal return of  -16.82%,  for the period  -20:ED  which  may significantly
contribute to lowering  the  overall  return for the  full  sample.  All indices  exhibit  positive
abnormal returns on ED-1 for inclusions, with statistically significant results observed for
the  full  sample, OMXC20,  and OMXS30.  The magnitude ranges  from 0.17% to  1.44%
on ED-1.  As previously discussed, we also  find statistically significant increases in
trading activity on ED-1. This could be interpreted as  the abnormal returns  being  linked
to increased demand on ED-1 supporting the  downward sloping demand curve and price
pressure hypothesis.  Other explanations  could be that the information asymmetry  as
measured by  the bid-ask spread  is reduced  (increased)  when stocks are included
(excluded). This would mean that the liquidity premium is priced in. An extension on this
study would thus be to investigate the bid-ask spread and assess whether the information
asymmetry is affected by the index reconstitution.
     We observe significant and positive  average abnormal  return (𝐶𝐴𝑅)  for the full
sample of inclusions across all event windows except ED+5. The magnitude of this effect
is likely affected by the AAR on ED-2  of 4.85%.  The AAR for the full sample on ED-2
is not statistically significant and could simply be an outlier in the dataset so the
interpretation of the  𝐶𝐴𝑅  over periods  which encapsulate this day should take this  into
consideration.  For the full sample, the AAR on the ED and subsequent days are negative,
although not statistically significant.
     Comparing the AAR for exclusions  on the ED, we observe  only negative abnormal
return for  OBX10 whilst all other indices and the full sample have positive abnormal
returns.  In contrast,  we observe  negative abnormal returns for OMXH25,  OBX and
OMXC20 for the  inclusions.  This could be explained by the anticipation effect, where
investors have already acted on the event in advance.

                                  23
                                      The Power of Indices

                                   Table  9
                 Daily Average Abnormal Return

Table  9  presents our main  findings on  the average daily abnormal  return  surrounding the
effective date (ED) across all stocks in each subset.  These  show the largest effect on  the  𝐶𝐴𝑅
over the event  windows presented later in  Table 10.  A more thorough  table is  provided in the
appendix  (section  A.5).  Day  0 represents the ED of the reconstitution.  The abnormal return is
defined as the actual return minus the expected return as determined by the CAPM. The
significance level is  tested with a student t’s test.  All data on  daily  stock  prices  is retrieved from
Datastream  and  daily  market return  is  retrieved from  Kenneth R.  French’s’ data library.  The
values given  in parentheses is the standard error of each observation.  The symbols *, **, and
*** denote significance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % level respectively.  Standard  errors are
presented  in  parentheses below  each observation.
                                     Panel A: Inclusions
 Period   Full Sample     OBX      OMXB10    OMXC20    OMXH25    OMXS30
   -3      -0.49%**     -0.72%*       0.64%        0.03%       -0.50%     -2.65%***
              (0.005)        (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.008)
   -2       4.85%       14.74%      0.43%**      0.49%       -0.33%       0.04%
              (0.033)        (0.106)        (0.002)        (0.01)        (0.005)        (0.004)
   -1      0.47%***      0.43%       0.17%      0.39%***      0.40%      1.44%***
              (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.001)        (0.005)        (0.003)
    0       -0.03%      0.61%**      0.43%       -0.06%     -1.21%***      0.25%
              (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.004)        (0.003)        (0.004)        (0.004)
    1       -0.06%       0.24%       0.29%       -0.24%       -0.01%      -0.62%**
              (0.001)        (0.003)        (0.004)        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.002)
    2       -0.24%       -0.17%       0.07%       0.24%       -0.50%     -0.73%***
              (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.009)        (0.003)
                                    Panel B: Exclusion
 Period   Full Sample     OBX      OMXB10    OMXC20    OMXH25    OMXS30
   -3      -0.49%**     -0.72%*       0.64%        0.03%       -0.50%     -2.65%***
              (0.002)        (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.008)
   -2       -0.01%      1.72%***    1.36%***    -14.78%***     -0.98%      1.60%***
              (0.005)        (0.005)        (0.005)        (0.022)        (0.011)        (0.006)
   -1       0.56%       -0.38%      0.50%*       0.05%       1.47%       0.49%
              (0.005)        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.002)        (0.013)        (0.005)
    0      0.55%**     1.11%***     -0.31%       0.00%       0.26%       1.65%*
              (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.008)        (0.009)
    1       -0.08%       0.03%       -0.28%       0.11%       0.00%       -0.94%
              (0.002)        (0.004)        (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.006)
    2       0.06%       0.24%       0.09%      -0.73%*      0.43%       0.40%
              (0.002)        (0.005)        (0.002)        (0.004)        (0.005)        (0.005)

                                  24
                                      The Power of Indices

                                  Table 10
             Average  Cumulative Abnormal Return (𝑪𝑨𝑹)

Table  10  presents the cumulative average abnormal  return (𝐶𝐴𝑅)  for  both the  inclusion and
exclusion datasets  over  6  periods.  The symbols *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10 %, 5
%, and 1 % level.  Standard  errors are  presented in  parentheses below  each observation.
                                     Panel A: Inclusions
 Period   Full Sample     OBX      OMXB10    OMXC20    OMXH25    OMXS30
 -20:ED    4.94%***    13.42%***    6.41%***    1.66%***    -1.47%**     1.41%**
              (0.011)        (0.032)        (0.005)        (0.006)        (0.007)        (0.007)
  -5:ED    5.67%***    14.57%**    2.12%***     0.92%**      0.82%      2.62%***
             (0.020)        (0.060)        (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.009)        (0.008)
  ED:5      -0.10%       0.25%       -0.23%       0.20%       0.25%      -1.48%***
              (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.005)        (0.004)
 ED:60    -0.61%***    -3.31%***    -5.26%***    5.74%***    -1.95%***    1.03%***
              (0.002)        (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.006)        (0.006)        (0.003)
  -5:20    6.17%***    13.78%***    2.60%***    2.61%***    4.43%***      -0.29%
              (0.010)        (0.029)        (0.003)        (0.005)        (0.006)        (0.005)
  -5:60    5.10%***    10.65%***    -3.58%***    6.73%***      0.08%      3.40%***
              (0.006)        (0.019)        (0.004)        (0.006)        (0.006)        (0.004)
                                    Panel B: Exclusion
 Period   Full Sample     OBX      OMXB10    OMXC20    OMXH25    OMXS30
 -20:ED   -4.66%***    -2.35%***    -3.59%***   -16.82%***   -5.55%***   -10.04%***
              (0.004)        (0.007)        (0.008)        (0.033)        (0.007)        (0.012)
  -5:ED     -0.13%       -0.24%      2.19%***    -14.58%**      0.02%       -0.26%
              (0.005)        (0.011)        (0.007)        (0.060)        (0.008)        (0.018)
  ED:5     3.08%**      0.88%*       0.40%      -0.88%**    11.37%**      0.16%
              (0.014)        (0.005)        (0.003)        (0.004)        (0.054)        (0.009)
 ED:60      0.51%      -7.13%***    -3.40%***    -3.07%***    15.11%***    -1.33%**
              (0.006)        (0.005)        (0.004)        (0.005)        (0.021)        (0.007)
  -5:20     5.47%***      0.24%      4.05%***    -12.99%***   19.10%***     -0.93%
              (0.009)        (0.007)        (0.004)        (0.029)        (0.031)        (0.010)
  -5:60      -0.16%     -8.48%***    -0.90%**    -17.66%***   14.87%***    -3.24%***
             (0.006)        (0.006)        (0.004)        (0.019)        (0.020)        (0.008)

     For the inclusions, the most noticeable period of  CAR is  -5:ED which suggests that
the most significant effects occur between the announcement date and the effective date.
Given the limited data we have on announcement dates we cannot fully determine this
but as described in the data limitations, most reconstitutions are announced at least 5
trading days before the ED.
     We  observe  positive  average  cumulative  abnormal  returns  (𝐶𝐴𝑅)  for  stock
inclusions  for the full sample and  across all indices during the five days  preceding  the
                                  25
                                      The Power of Indices

effective date (-5:ED), with all values statistically significant except for OMXH25. Over
the extended window of 20 trading  days prior to the effective date (-20:ED), all  𝐶𝐴𝑅
values are statistically significant.  with  positive  𝐶𝐴𝑅  for all indices except OMXH25.
The OBX index exhibits the highest  𝐶𝐴𝑅  for both the  -5:ED  and  -20:ED  windows,
measuring 14.57% and  13.42%,  respectively, compared to the  𝐶𝐴𝑅  of 5.67% and 4.94%
for  the full sample.  This outperformance is largely attributable to an exceptionally high
abnormal return (AAR) of 14.74% for OBX on ED-2.  (Table 9, Panel A).
     Following this, it is  evident  that  as previously mentioned, the period  -5:ED  is
considered  the  most  impactful,  suggesting  that  the  most  significant  effects  are
concentrated  the days  succeeding  the  announcement date.  This is under the assumption
that ED-5 is the announcement date.  These findings are in line with previous research
such as  Kappou et al. (2007).
     For the exclusions,  there seem to be an opposite effect where we  observe  negative
𝐶𝐴𝑅  for the full sample and  across all indices  for the period  -20:ED.  The most negative
𝐶𝐴𝑅  over this period is for the OMXC20 index with a  𝐶𝐴𝑅  of  -16.82%  and for the entire
sample this is  -4.66%. The  𝐶𝐴𝑅  for OMXC20 over this period is in large because of the
AAR on day  ED–2 where  the OMXC20 index has an  AAR of  -14.78%.  For the
exclusions, it seems like most of the negative effects are captured in the period before the
announcement date.
     Comparing the  𝐶𝐴𝑅  for the inclusion and exclusion dataset over the same periods,
we find support  for the  asymmetric  price effects observed by Chen et al. (2004). We
observe positive abnormal return for the included stocks and negative abnormal returns
for excluded stocks. Only looking at the period  -20:ED,  the effect seems to be symmetric
with included stocks having  a similar price increase as excluded stocks have a decrease.
Looking at the period,  -5:ED, this symmetry diminishes  as included stocks show a larger
positive effect than excluded stocks show a negative one.
     Our findings on the difference in where in the event window most of the effects for
the inclusions and exclusions are captured are in line with the awareness hypothesis (Chen
et al., 2004).  The  excluded stocks,  which are already tracked by many investors  capture
their effect  earlier in the event window as compared to the inclusions.  Moreover, the
permanent price increase observed for  included stocks can also be supported by the
awareness hypotheses  as they receive more monitoring from analysts.
     This permanent price increase  presents strong evidence for the imperfect substitute
hypotheses  (ISH)  as proposed by  Schleifer (1986).  The ISH explains that stocks are not
perfect substitutes since they have different underlying assets and investors have
heterogenous preferences. In the context of the index effect, the ISH  persist that included
stocks receive permanent price  increases from demand pressure.  We observe this for
included stocks having abnormal trading volume and experience a permanent price
increase.
     We also find there to be a  gradual price shift preceding the ED  challenge the  semi-
strong form of the  efficient market hypothesis,  that all publicly available information
should be priced in the stock price. Under the EMH, we would expect all relevant
information to be quickly reflected in the stock price instead of gradually.

                                  26
                                      The Power of Indices

                                    Figure  3
               Average  Cumulative Abnormal Return

Figure 3 plots the Average Cumulative Abnormal Return (𝐶𝐴𝑅) for the full sample over the entire
event window. The  dashed  line  represents the  exclusion  dataset,  the  solid  line represents the
inclusion dataset.  Day 0  is shown as the vertical dashed line and  denotes the effective date (ED)
of the reconstitution.

      When observing the plots for the  𝐶𝐴𝑅,  an interesting observation is the movements
on the days leading up to the effective date. Just from the observation, it is in line with
our hypothesis  that included  (excluded)  stocks experience  positive (negative) price
effects. For the exclusion dataset, the downtrend leading up to the ED is reverted until
approximately 10 days post the ED and then continues the downward sloping trend.  The
positive  effect on included stocks looks to be permanent as the  effect does not revert
towards zero during the event  window.  We do not find for either of the inclusions and
exclusions that the price effect  is  temporary and revert towards zero.  The excluded stocks
start  to revert and the  𝐶𝐴𝑅  turns positive before turning negative again succeeding 20
trading days post the ED.  This supports  the findings of Chen et al. (2004) whilst Mase
(2007) found the similar effects in the FTSE100 index to be reversed and Beneish and
Whaley (1996) also found the effects to start to reverse following the ED.
     In figure 4, we can observe the differences over different time periods. We see that
the effects  during the period 2020-2024 which is depicted as the dotted line in figure 4
are more stable and do not deviate as much from 0 as the other time frames.  This is in
line with  more recent research  that  shows  that the abnormal returns associated with the
index effect have diminished over time, suggesting that the market has become more
efficient. Findings by Kappou et al. (2010) and Kim et al. (2017) show that stock prices
adjust more quickly than reported in earlier studies, limiting arbitrage opportunities for
profitable trading based on index inclusions or exclusions. However, since the observed
indices in this study are smaller in size and less liquid, the index  effect may have larger
implications for these markets compared to more established ones, such as the S&P 500.
                                  27
                                      The Power of Indices

Worth considering is also the fact that the timeframe for which we observe the smaller
magnitude is also shorter and has a smaller sample size.

                                    Figure  4
    Average  Cumulative Abnormal Returns  (𝑪𝑨𝑹)  for Inclusions in
                      Different Time Frames

Figure 4 plots the Cumulative Average Abnormal Return for both the inclusion and exclusion
datasets over three  different  time frames.  The solid line represents the period 1996-2007, the
dotted line represents  2008-2019 and the dashed line represents 2020-2024.
                  Inclusions                                 Exclusions

                6   Additional  Robustness Tests

     Next, we examine the robustness of the key findings from the previous section.
Specifically, we consider the vulnerability of the results  to  issues related to randomness
and data structure.  To test this, we apply a  placebo permutation  test,  in  which  random
stocks are  randomly assigned inclusion or exclusion dates.  By reshuffling the dummy
variables in the dataset over 20  000  iterations,  the test breaks the relationship between the
reconstitution event and trading  volume and returns.  This allows us to assess whether the
observed abnormal  returns and volume are associated with the reconstitution events or
whether they are random.  The test should create a  normal  distribution of the test statistic
from random reshuffling. If our result lies in  either tail  of this distribution, it suggests that
our findings are unlikely due to randomness. While this provides evidence against
randomness, additional analysis is required to argue for a causal relationship with the
reconstitution event.  We  apply the same analysis used in the main results, and exclude
stocks with insufficient data,  thus, the test does not suffer from  biases  as stocks being
assigned dates for which they were not public will not be included in that  iteration.
Because of computing limitations, we only apply the permutation test to the main findings
for the full sample set across all indices.
     Panel A and B  in  Figure  5  plots the permutation test  for the  𝐶𝐴𝑅  of the  inclusion
dataset over the period  -5:ED and we  find that our findings are robust. The  vertically
dashed line in Figure 5 plots our findings, suggesting that our findings exhibit randomness
to some degree.  The dashed line  clearly  does not lie in the  main body of  the  null
distribution, but it lies somewhat in the  middle of the smaller tail  to the right.  The
                                  28
                                      The Power of Indices

observed results are unlikely due to random  chance.  The main body of the distribution
looks to be normally distributed  centered  around zero  with few outliers.  The shape of the
distributions suggests the validity of the permutation test.  One concern is that a second
cluster is formed to the right of the main body, which could indicate non-random patterns
in the data. The dashed line for our findings lies close to the center of the second smaller
body of the distribution.  Panel B  in Figure 5  plots the permutation test for  ED-5  (5 days
before the addition date). Again, the distribution seems to be normally distributed
centered around zero with a smaller cluster to the right. Our observation on day ED–5 lies
in the  right  tail of the main body of the distribution centered around 0, suggesting that this
finding is robust as well.

                                    Figure  5
           Permutation test  on  𝑪𝑨𝑹 and  AAR for inclusions

Figure  5  plots the permutation test for the  Average  Abnormal Returns  (AAR) and  Average
Cumulative Abnormal Returns (CAR) for the main findings of our results. The test was performed
by running the same analysis as the main findings and randomly reshuffling the event dates 20 000
times until a normal distribution was formed. The histogram plots the randomized observations.
The vertical dashed lines plot our observed result  for the entire sample.  The x-axis  is the
magnitude  of  return,  and the y-axis is the frequency of the number of  observations  for each
magnitude of AAR and CAR.
          Panel A:  Inclusions  -5:ED                   Panel B:  Inclusions  ED-5

         Panel C: Exclusions -20:ED                  Panel D: Exclusions ED-5

     In  figure  5  Panel C and D, the  plots  of the  permutation test for the dataset  on
exclusions are presented. We chose the period -20:ED which is where we found that most
of the effect took place for the deletions dataset  and event day ED-5 to act as a means of
comparison to the inclusion dataset. We see that for both of these, the  distribution  seems
to exhibit normality with ED-5 being centered around zero and  -20:ED centered just to
                                  29
                                      The Power of Indices

the right of zero.  The shape of the distributions  suggests  the validity of the permutation
test.  We see that for both plots, our observation lies in the left tail of the distribution
suggesting  that  the  results  are  unlikely  to  be  observed  at  random.  While  these
observations  lie  in the tail of the distributions, they do not  lie in the extreme, which
suggests  that the findings are only moderately significant,  indicating some level of
robustness but also warrants cautious interpretation.
     Figure  6  plots the permutation test  for the volume ratio.  The test was performed on
event day ED-1 since this is where we found the most effect on trading volume appearing.
The distribution looks to  approximately  exhibit normality  centered  just above  one.  We
would expect  the distribution to be centered around one  under the null hypothesis  as a
volume ratio of 1 indicates that there is no difference to the benchmark volume. The slight
shift to the right does not  affect  our conclusion on the robustness  of our findings as the
overall shape of the distribution looks to  approximately  exhibit normality  and our
observations lie so far to the right.  The permutation test for the volume ratio is performed
with the same methodology as for the abnormal return by randomly reshuffling the event
dates but only  4  000 times  because of limitation on computing power.  We deem 4  000
permutations  as  sufficient as we obtain a normal distribution. The vertical  line plots  the
findings in our main results  for day ED-1.  We see that  our observed statistic lies in the
very far right tail of the distribution. We conclude that our findings are robust and not due
to randomness.

                                  30
                                      The Power of Indices

                                    Figure  6
               Permutation test on  Abnormal Volume

Figure  6  plots the permutation test for the Average abnormal trading volume. The selected event
day is the day for which we found the most  effect on abnormal volume in our main results.  The
test was performed by running the same analysis as the main findings and randomly reshuffling
the event dates 4  000 times until a normal distribution was formed. Limitations on computing
power restricted our number of randomized permutations.  The histogram plots the randomized
observations. The vertical lines plot our observed result  for the full sample. The dashed left line
represents  the inclusion and the vertical dotted line  to the right  plots our observation  on the
exclusion dataset. The x axis is the magnitude of the volume  ratio,  and the y-axis is the frequency
of the number of  observations  for each  magnitude of the volume ratio.
                                 ED-1

                        7   Conclusion

     This study provides a comprehensive examination of the index effect in the Nordic
and Baltic stock markets, specifically focusing on the prominent indices OMXS30,
OMXH25, OMXC20, OMXB10, and the OBX Benchmark Index. By employing an event
study  methodology,  similar to  previous research (Shleifer,  1986;  Beneish and Whaley,
1996;  Chen et al.,  2004),  we analyzed the short-term and long-term abnormal returns and
trading volumes associated with stock inclusions and  exclusions.
     Our  most prominent  findings  confirm  the presence of significant short-term  and
long-term abnormal returns and trading volume spikes for both inclusions and exclusions.
Notably, stocks added to indices experience a persistent price increase  which does not
appear  to revert towards zero during the event window. Rather it finds a new steady level.
Similar to Chen et al. (2004) we  attribute  this to the awareness hypotheses  but do not rule
out the signaling hypothesis.  We also attribute these effects to the Imperfect Substitutes
Hypothesis as presented by Schleifer (1986).  We  attribute  the effects on the day before

                                  31
                                      The Power of Indices

the   reconstitution   date   to   heightened   demand   and   reduced   liquidity   constraints,
supporting  to some degree  the downward sloping demand curve hypothesis.  However,
we cannot strongly  conclude that the observed index effect is a result of capital inflows
from passive index funds, rather we provide it as a possible explanation.  In contrast,
exclusions show a more complex dynamic, with initial price drops followed by partial
reversals   and   subsequent   declines,   reflecting   the   asymmetric   impact   of   index
reconstitutions.  These results are consistent with  the related work (Shleifer, 1986;
Beneish and Whaley, 1996).
     Building on the extensive research conducted on the S&P 500, this study aims to
enhance the field by offering a more detailed and comprehensive analysis of the index
effect on Nordic stocks, filling a notable gap  in the existing literature  and  providing
insights for  investors and policymakers.  Our result, together with previous research,
provides us with the insight that index reconstitution  has  similar effects on several
different stock markets with different market structures, practicalities and investors.
     Our findings  on the gradual price shift preceding the ED  challenge the  semi-strong
form of the  efficient market hypothesis,  that all publicly available information should be
priced in the stock price.  Under the EMH, we would expect  all relevant information to be
quickly reflected in the stock price  instead of gradually.  Notably,  the magnitude of the
findings has smoothed over the years, suggesting that markets are becoming increasingly
efficient.
      As for the results of any model which simplifies complex phenomenon in the real-
world economy, these results can be questioned.  The limitations of our study was
discussed extensively under data limitations, expressing issues such as absence of
available announcement dates. Particularly, the methodology for the OMX indices, which
relies on publicly available turnover data, makes these changes more predictable.
Notably, our  robustness  tests  further validated our  observed findings as we conclude that
they are unlikely to occur at random. Overall, we believe this event study provides
valuable insights into the effects of index inclusion and exclusion on individual stocks in
the Nordic and Baltic markets.

                                  32
                                      The Power of Indices

                       References

Amihud, Y.  and  Mendelson, H. (1986). Liquidity and Stock Returns, Financial Analysts
Journal, 42(3), pp.43-48

Bechmann, K. (2002). Price and Volume Effects Associated with Changes in the Danish
BlueChip Index: The KFX Index.  Multinational Finance Journal, 8(1-2).  3-34.

Beneish, M. & Gardner, J. (1995). Information Costs and Liquidity Effects from Changes
in the Dow Jones Industrial Average List. The Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis. 30(1), 135-157.

Beneish, M.  and  Whaley, R. (1996). An Anatomy of the “S&P Game”: The Effects of
Changing the Rules. The Journal of Finance, 51(5). 1909-1930.

Ben-Rephael, A., Kandel, S.  and  Wohl, A. (2011).  The Price Pressure of Aggregate
Mutual Fund Flows. The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 46(2). 585-603.

Brown,  S. and Warner, J. (1985). Using Daily Stock Returns: The Case of Event Studies,
Journal of Financial Economics, 14(1), pp. 3-31.

Campbell, J. Andrew, L. MacKinlay, A. (1997) The Econometrics of Financial Markets.

Chen, H.,  Noronha, G.,  and  Singal, V. (2004). The price response to S&P 500 index
additions and deletions: Evidence of asymmetry and a new explanation. The Journal of
Finance, 59(4), 1901–1930.

Denis, D. K., McConnell, J. J., Ovtchinnikov, A. V.  and  Yu, Y. (2003). S&P 500 index
additions and earnings expectations. The Journal of Finance, 58(5), 1821–1840

Erwin, G. and Miller, J. (1998). The liquidity effect associated with addition of a stock to
the S&P 500 index: evidence from bid/ask spreads. The Financial Review, 33(1).131-
146.

Fama, E., (1970). Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work.
The Journal of Finance, 25(2).  383-417

Fama, E.  and French, K.R. (1992).  The Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns.  The
Journal of Finance, 47(2). 427-465.

Fama, E. F. and French, K. R. (2010). Luck versus skill in the cross-section of mutual
fund  returns. The Journal of Finance, 65(5).  1915-1947.

Fondbolagens   Förening.   Årsrapport:   Fondsparandet   2023.   Published   2024-01-16.
https://www.fondbolagen.se/globalassets/faktaindex/manadsstatistik/arsrapport_2023.pd
f.

                                  33
                                      The Power of Indices

Hegde, S. P.  and  McDermott, J. B. (2003). The liquidity effects of revisions to the S&P
500 index: An empirical analysis. Journal of Financial Markets, 6(3).  413–459.

Hoffmann, A., Post, T.  and Pennings J. (2013). Individual investor perceptions and
behavior during the financial crisis. Journal of Banking & Finance, 37(1). 60-74.

Kappou, K., Brooks, C., & Ward, C. (2007). A Re-examination of the Index Effect:
Gambling on Additions to and Deletions from the S&P 500’s ‘gold seal’, Research in
International Business and Finance, 22(3), pp.325–350

Kappou, K., Brooks, C., & Ward, C. (2010). The S&P 500 Index Effect Reconsidered:
Evidence from Overnight and Intraday Stock Price Performance and Volume. Journal Of
Banking & Finance, 34(1).116-126

Kim, C., Li, X., & Perry, T. (2017). Adaptation of the S&P 500 Index Effect, The Journal
of  Index Investing, 8(1).29-36

MacKinlay, C. (1997). Event Studies in Economics and Finance. Journal of Economic
Literature, 35(1).  13-39

Mase, B. (2007). The Impact of Changes in the FTSE 100 Index, The Financial Review,
42(3).  461-484

Nasdaq, Inc.  (2024).  OBX Benchmark 25® Index Methodology. Accessed  October  11,
2024.  https://indexes.nasdaq.com.

Nasdaq, Inc.  (2024).  Nasdaq  OMX  Baltic 10® Index Methodology. Accessed  October
11, 2024.  https://indexes.nasdaq.com.

Nasdaq, Inc.  (2024).  Nasdaq  OMX  Copenhagen  20® Index Methodology. Accessed
October  11, 2024.  https://indexes.nasdaq.com.

Nasdaq, Inc. (2024). Nasdaq OMX Helsinki 25® Index Methodology. Accessed October
11, 2024.  https://indexes.nasdaq.com.

Nasdaq, Inc.  (2024).  Nasdaq  OMX Stockholm 30® Index Methodology. Accessed
October  11, 2024.  https://indexes.nasdaq.com.

Rekenthaler, J. Morningstar, Index Funds Have Officially Won, Published 2024-02-14.
https://www.morningstar.com/columns/rekenthaler-report/index-funds-have-officially-
won.  Retrieved 2024-11-12.

Scholes, M. (1972). The Market for Securities: Substitution Versus Price Pressure and
the Effects of Information on Share Prices, The Journal Of Business, 45(2).  179-211

Shleifer, A. (1986). Do demand curves for stocks slope down? The Journal of Finance,
41(3), 579–590.

Spence, M. (1973). Job Market Signaling. The  Quarterly  Journal of Economics. 87(3),
355-374.

                                  34
                                      The Power of Indices

S&P Dow Jones Indices. S&P U.S. Indices Methodology. Published November 2024.

Thomas   Reuters   Datastream   Economics   (2024).   Eikon   Datastream.   Datastream
International.     Retrieved     October     17,     2024,     from     SSE     Library,
OBX/OMXB10/OMXC20/OMXH25/OMXS30, Constituents, Leavers and Joiners.

AI-Appendix

AI tools have been used to improve the quality of our writing by providing advanced
grammar checking. Additionally, AI tools have offered guidance for debugging problems
encountered in the coding process.

                       Appendix

Appendix A.1:  Assessing Whether Index Reconstitution Events are
Driven by Individual Merits or Relative Competition

     The six months  period Nasdaq uses to evaluate performance for the upcoming
reconstitution decision spans from seven to one month prior to the effective day. For
newly added or deleted stocks, this period may partially indicate an abnormal period in
relation to their historical levels.  During this period, added stocks showed higher trading
volumes and met requirements they previously did not meet, while removed stocks
experienced lower volumes, reflecting their exclusion from the index. The seven months
before the effective date likely capture trading volumes above (for included stocks) or
below (for excluded stocks) their historical averages. However, since the indices are a
ranking, the reconstitution events could be caused by changes in the performance of the
competing  stocks. To investigate whether inclusion or exclusion of a stock is based on
individual merits or not, we examine the performance (trading volume and return) of the
affected stocks in the period where they meet (or not met) the requirements for the
inclusion of the index to a period where they did not meet (or met) the requirements for
the index. If the average performance increases (decreases), the reconstitution event is
based on individual merits. If the average performance has not changed, the reconstitution
event is caused by changes in other firms. Figure  A.1  shows the new estimation window,
the  reconstitution window and how they are in relation to the event window.  The  student
t-test below shows that the  average volume in the reconstitution window is  significantly
larger than the average over the 6 month period preceding across all stocks. We hence
conclude that stocks are included as a response to their own increase in trading volume
rather than others decrease.
                                     Table  A.1
                     Individual  Performance: Output

                       Mean            T-stat        CI lower bound    CI upper bound
    𝑉!"#$%:!"'%,)
                        1.417            6.459             1.291            1.545
   𝑉!"'*+:!"#$',)

                                  35
                                      The Power of Indices

                                     Figure  A.1
                  Examining Individual Performance

This table provides an overview of the selected windows used to estimate individual performance
leading up to the event window. The purpose is to examine if the firm was included or excluded
from the index based on individual merits or relative competition. If individual performance
remains unchanged from the estimation period to the reconstitution period (T0  to T2  in figure 2),
this suggests that the reconstitution event was likely driven by relative competition among other
stocks in the ranking. In contrast, if there is a change in performance between the estimation
window and the reconstitution window (T0  to T2  in figure 2), this  supports  that the firm was
included or excluded based on individual merits. However, ambiguity remains, as it is not possible
to reject one hypothesis in favor of the other. The reconstitution event may have been influenced
by both individual merits and changes in relative performance. The figure illustrates the event
window, primarily to show the relationship between the estimation window and the reconstitution
window. Note that the event window itself is not used in this estimation.

Appendix  A.2:  Volume ratio with dummy variables for event days
     Table A.2 presents the regression results used to analyze increases in trading volume
on the days surrounding the reconstitution date. The variables represent Recon at different
time points (t) and are dummy variables indicating the day relative to the event date (ED),
where t = 0 corresponds to the ED. The dependent variable is the volume ratio for each
stock, calculated as specified in Equation 10. A positive coefficient indicates an  increase
in trading volume, while a negative coefficient indicates a decrease, both benchmarked
against the average.
     The results in  table  indicate  no significant increases in trading volume on the ED. In
fact, insignificant decreases are observed for both the OMXH25 and OMXC20 indices
on this day. However, on the day preceding the ED (t = -1), significant increases in trading
volume are observed across all indices except the OMXC20, which shows an insignificant
decrease. The most substantial increase is observed for the OBX Index, with a rise of
118.5% on day t =  -1.

                                  36
                                      The Power of Indices

                                  Table A.2
                 Regression Output: Volume Ratio

A positive coefficient indicates an increase in trading volume, while a negative coefficient
indicates a decrease, both benchmarked against the average.  The independent variables indicate
dummy variables for each day relative to the effective date.  The symbols *, **, and *** denote
significance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1  % level.
                                   Panel A: Inclusions
 Variable     All stocks     OBX     OMXB10    OMXC20   OMXH25   OMXS30
  Recon t-3      -0.167       -0.018        0.013        -0.204       -0.383       -0.215
  Recon t-2      0.115        0.021      1.437***      -0.215       -0.151       0.157
  Recon t-1     0.707***    1.185***     1.051***      -0.038       0.513*      0.697**
  Recon t        0.044        0.078        0.377        -0.109       -0.017       0.026
  Recon t+1      -0.092       -0.131        0.492        -0.237       -0.173       -0.104
  Recon t+2      -0.105       -0.188        0.506        -0.304       -0.344       0.144
  Recon t+3      -0.013       -0.102        0.129        -0.237       -0.173       0.653*
                                  Panel B: Exclusions
 Variable     All stocks     OBX     OMXB10    OMXC20   OMXH25   OMXS30
  Recon t-3      0.091       -0.119        0.668        0.755*       -0.278       -0.084
  Recon t-2     1.559***      0.163      7.292***     4.511***      -0.226       -0.084
  Recon t-1     1.031***     1.064**       0.975        0.294      1.864***     0.823**
  Recon t        0.052        0.244        0.007        -0.083       -0.173       0.083
  Recon t+1      0.277       -0.319       -0.165       -0.178      1.262***    1.343***
  Recon t+2      -0.041       -0.237       -0.665        -0.358       -0.053      1.354***
  Recon t+3      -0.144       -0.154       -0.978        -0.213       -0.208       0.666*

                                  37
                                      The Power of Indices

Appendix  A.3:  Regression Output

                                  Table A.3
  Regression output: CAR as dependent on Cumulative volume ratio

The price-volume relationship is interesting in testing the price pressure hypothesis. Consistent
with Shleifer (1997) we test the association between abnormal trading volume (AV) and
abnormal return (AR) by treating the AR as a dependent variable and AV as the independent
variable to examine if the abnormal return is dependent on the abnormal volume. In line with
Shleifer, we apply  the following  cross-sectional regression
𝐴𝑅),!  =  𝛼)  +  𝛽#𝑉𝑅),!  +  𝜖),,  to test this.  If the  volume ratio has a positive relationship to the
abnormal return, this supports the downward sloping demand curve and price pressure
hypothesis.  Table 8 presents a  cross-sectional  regression. The dependent variable is the CAR
over different intervals. The independent variable is the cumulative VR over the same period. A
positive coefficient  suggests  a positive relationship between trading volume and CAR. The
symbols *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % level respectively.
                                     Panel A: Inclusions
                                     Dependent variable (CAR)
               -20:0        -5:0          -5:5          0:10          0:60          0:20
 Cum.  VR     -0.001       -0.005        -0.003        0.000        0.000        0.001
 S.E.          (0.002)      (0.004)        (0.002)       (0.001)        (0.000)       (0.001)
 Constant      -0.524       -1.141        -1.325        0.696         0.849         1.153
 R^2          0.001       0.003        0.001        0.001        0.002        0.002
                                    Panel B: Exclusions
                                     Dependent variable (CAR)
               -20:0        -5:0          -5:5          0:10          0:60          0:20
 Cum. VR      0.000       0.001         0.000        -0.001        0.001        -0.001
 S.E.          (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.001)       (0.002)
 Constant      -0.609       1.123        -0.150        -0.170        0.630        -0.403
 R^2          0.002       0.001        0.002        0.001        0.002        0.001

                                  38
                                      The Power of Indices

Appendix  A.4:  Extended Abnormal Trading Volume

                                  Table A.4
               Average Abnormal Trading Volume

Table  A.4  presents an extended version of the average daily abnormal trading volume
surrounding the effective date (ED) across all stocks in each subset. Day 0 represents the ED of
the reconstitution. The abnormal volume is defined as the difference between the actual daily
volume and the normal daily volume where the normal volume is defined as the average trading
volume over the estimation window. The standard error for each observation is presented in
parentheses. The significance level is tested with a student t’s test. All data is retrieved from
Datastream. The symbols *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % level
respectively.  Standard  errors are  presented in  parentheses below  each observation.
                                      Panel A: Inclusion
 Period   Full Sample     OBX      OMXB10    OMXC20    OMXH25    OMXS30
   -10       -6.06%       9.38%       -2.60%       9.97%     -38.28% ***     -9.21%
             (0.060)        (0.099)        (0.219)        (0.216)        (0.091)        (0.091)
   -9       0.87%       43.72%      -15.33%      -17.55%      -17.73%     -17.24% *
             (0.167)        (0.544)        (0.175)        (0.141)        (0.104)        (0.076)
   -8       -7.90%       0.75%       23.23%       -9.97%      -34.49%      -5.20%
              (0.066)        (0.073)        (0.298)        (0.117)        (0.181)        (0.146)
   -7     -14.98% **      3.60%       -23.57%      -19.42%    -35.58% ***    -11.89%
             (0.046)        (0.100)        (0.145)        (0.101)        (0.089)        (0.086)
    -6       -7.61%       19.54%      -33.96% *    -22.65% **     -6.62%      -22.08% *
             (0.088)        (0.269)        (0.125)        (0.074)        (0.110)        (0.085)
    -5     -22.27% ***     -7.52%       -18.42%    -32.37% ***  -36.24% ***   -21.83% **
              (0.042)        (0.081)        (0.239)        (0.066)        (0.068)        (0.079)
    -4     -24.03% ***   -17.80% **      3.10%       -8.61%     -45.77% ***  -35.83% ***
             (0.045)        (0.060)        (0.176)        (0.155)        (0.073)        (0.088)
    -3     -17.78% ***     5.33%       -12.09%      -14.78%    -38.96% ***  -33.55% ***
              (0.044)        (0.091)        (0.158)        (0.117)        (0.073)        (0.071)
   -2       6.36%       10.80%     86.53% **     -11.65%      -17.71%       2.59%
              (0.065)        (0.128)        (0.309)        (0.126)        (0.109)        (0.112)
   -1     62.92% ***  115.75% ***    85.74%       1.33%       31.97%      61.46%
             (0.141)        (0.290)        (0.667)        (0.118)        (0.203)        (0.354)
    0        2.46%       18.86%      31.23%       -7.89%      -12.33%      -10.46%
             (0.082)        (0.188)        (0.490)        (0.101)        (0.097)        (0.098)
    1       -8.92%       -4.51%       68.50%      -18.99%      -25.62%    -25.80% ***
              (0.092)        (0.098)        (0.803)        (0.107)        (0.129)        (0.061)
    2       -9.12%       -8.54%       58.92%      -22.46%    -41.30% ***     2.94%
              (0.092)        (0.098)        (0.803)        (0.107)        (0.129)        (0.061)
    3        5.62%       0.97%       21.53%    -33.15% ***   -32.27% **     77.20%
             (0.082)        (0.092)        (0.649)        (0.114)        (0.090)        (0.142)
    4       6.26%       12.57%      -4.63%      -17.52%      8.97%       19.59%
             (0.159)        (0.124)        (0.277)        (0.094)       (0.096)        (0.713)
    5       -9.31%       -3.37%       -5.27%      -22.64%       3.80%       -22.22%
             (0.110)        (0.163)        (0.159)        (0.106)        (0.349)        (0.281)
    6      -10.96% *      3.36%       -7.11%      -27.34% *     -10.73%     -19.58% *
             (0.082)        (0.105)        (0.216)        (0.158)        (0.286)        (0.113)
    7      -14.43% *      -1.66%       9.70%      -30.39% **     -19.32%     -25.41% **
             (0.055)        (0.122)        (0.211)        (0.120)        (0.100)        (0.094)
                                  39
                                     The Power of Indices

  8       4.45%       -1.13%       4.50%       0.71%       40.85%     -22.84% *
            (0.071)        (0.141)        (0.254)        (0.106)        (0.204)        (0.081)
  9       -13.10%      -4.52%      -10.08%     -29.43% **     -6.39%      -20.04%
            (0.105)        (0.087)        (0.231)        (0.159)       (0.423)        (0.107)
  10       -3.36%       13.37%       -8.23%       -1.41%       -5.47%      -24.25% *
            (0.068)        (0.113)        (0.206)        (0.097)       (0.216)        (0.119)
                                   Panel B: Exclusion
Period   Full Sample     OBX      OMXB10    OMXC20    OMXH25    OMXS30
 -10      8.54%       3.87%       30.61%      18.76%       0.09%       5.41%
            (0.096)        (0.117)        (0.533)        (0.274)        (0.203)        (0.150)
  -9       -2.23%       -5.17%     -38.72% **     -11.06%       9.51%       23.70%
            (0.102)        (0.100)        (0.125)        (0.112)       (0.405)        (0.180)
  -8       5.69%       39.07%       -8.38%     -24.83% **     -6.90%      -12.13%
            (0.109)        (0.256)        (0.269)        (0.076)        (0.189)        (0.138)
  -7      -15.70% *      7.67%     -58.14% ***   -29.38% **     -18.52%     -25.09% **
            (0.062)        (0.134)        (0.114)        (0.091)        (0.131)        (0.075)
  -6       7.35%       28.56%      17.40%      -18.05%       1.06%       -11.93%
            (0.079)        (0.152)        (0.36)        (0.125)        (0.156)        (0.110)
  -5       15.94%      12.40%      77.40%       2.36%       18.86%       -4.19%
            (0.156)        (0.161)        (1.135)        (0.237)        (0.372)        (0.236)
  -4       30.30%      42.93%      180.74%      30.17%     -28.33% **     -14.21%
            (0.183)        (0.335)        (1.267)        (0.245)        (0.102)        (0.15)
  -3       31.36%       4.01%      116.40%     140.23%      -20.11%      -17.17%
            (0.271)        (0.101)        (0.664)        (1.419)        (0.136)        (0.088)
  -2      50.37% *      25.76%      407.86%      25.01%       -9.64%       -4.97%
            (0.242)        (0.132)        (2.308)        (0.149)        (0.152)        (0.103)
  -1    139.76% ***  176.03% **    111.99%      27.67%    193.15% ***  126.47% **
            (0.262)        (0.623)        (0.784)        (0.138)        (0.393)        (0.374)
  0       15.99%      42.18%       2.37%       4.80%       -8.15%       9.10%
            (0.161)        (0.421)        (0.238)        (0.173)        (0.101)        (0.137)
  1       23.28%      -15.56%      10.63%      -9.06%       3.97%      209.05%
            (0.292)        (0.094)        (0.223)        (0.119)        (0.192)        (2.065)
  2       27.19%       -3.28%      35.07%     -25.85% *      1.25%      215.44%
            (0.292)        (0.094)        (0.223)        (0.119)        (0.192)        (2.065)
  3       22.70%      31.42%       -6.88%      -12.62%      -1.48%      109.02%
            (0.302)        (0.096)        (0.516)        (0.110)       (0.190)        (2.122)
  4       29.02%       2.77%      -27.66%      -7.80%      11.92%      216.20%
            (0.224)        (0.320)        (0.223)        (0.129)       (0.148)        (1.368)
  5        3.31%       -2.42%       8.12%     -29.84% **    -10.91%      83.13%
            (0.320)        (0.141)        (0.193)        (0.160)        (0.206)        (2.260)
  6       96.34%      -0.31%      -24.08%      14.32%      395.62%      55.08%
           (0.146)       (0.115)       (0.330)       (0.108)       (0.179)       (0.939)
  7       0.69%     -21.92% **     0.98%       26.21%      -0.93%      27.19%
            (0.866)        (0.128)        (0.198)        (0.343)       (3.862)        (0.794)
  8       8.66%       -0.11%       4.46%       10.80%       6.41%       35.24%
            (0.104)        (0.077)       (0.295)       (0.344)       (0.156)       (0.460)
  9       7.49%       3.07%       48.81%      28.89%      -19.83%      4.95%
            (0.100)        (0.105)        (0.245)        (0.233)        (0.221)        (0.396)
  10       0.77%       17.92%       -5.20%       -4.02%       -9.51%      -16.14%

                                 40
                                      The Power of Indices

Appendix  A.5:  Extended Abnormal Trading  Volume

                                  Table A.5
                      Daily  Abnormal  Returns

Table  A.5  presents  an extended version output of our findings on the average daily abnormal
return surrounding the effective date (ED) across all stocks in each subset. These show the
largest effect on the  CAR over the event windows presented later in table 10. Day 0 represents
the ED of the reconstitution.  The abnormal return is defined as the actual return minus the
expected return as determined by the CAPM. The significance level is tested with a student t’s
test.  All data on daily stock prices is retrieved from Datastream and daily market return is
retrieved from Kenneth R. French’s’ data library. The values given in parentheses is the
standard error of each observation. The symbols *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10 %,
5 %, and 1 % level respectively.  Standard  errors are  presented in  parentheses below  each
observation.
                                     Panel A: Inclusions
    Full Sample     OBX      OMXB10     OMXC20     OMXH25     OMXS30
 -5     -0.05%      -0.89%***      0.19%        0.76%        0.47%      -2.26%***
        (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.005)        (0.011)         (0.008)        (0.008)
 -4    -0.69%***     -1.09%***      -0.19%      -0.65%***     -0.70%**       0.91%
        (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.004)        (0.002)         (0.003)        (0.007)
 -3    -0.49%**      -0.72%*        0.64%        0.03%        -0.50%      -2.65%***
        (0.005)        (0.004)         (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.004)        (0.008)
 -2     -0.01%      1.72%***     1.36%***    -14.78%***      -0.98%      1.60%***
        (0.002)        (0.005)         (0.005)        (0.022)         (0.011)        (0.006)
 -1     0.56%        -0.38%       0.50%*       0.05%        1.47%        0.49%
        (0.004)        (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.002)         (0.013)        (0.005)
 0     0.55%**     1.11%***      -0.31%        0.00%        0.26%       1.65%*
        (0.004)        (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.008)        (0.009)
 1     -0.08%        0.03%        -0.28%        0.11%        0.00%        -0.94%
        (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.003)        (0.006)
 2      0.06%        0.24%        0.09%       -0.73%*       0.43%        0.40%
        (0.005)        (0.005)         (0.002)        (0.004)         (0.005)        (0.005)
 3     -0.24%        0.04%        0.29%        -0.28%       -0.64%**       -0.58%
        (0.005)        (0.005)         (0.002)        (0.004)         (0.003)        (0.004)
 4     -0.49%        -0.09%        0.08%        -0.28%        -1.65%        0.21%
        (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.016)        (0.008)
 5      3.29%        -0.45%       0.53%**       0.30%        12.98%       -0.59%
        (0.004)        (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.125)        (0.006)
                                    Panel B: Exclusions
 -5    -1.05%***     -1.05%***     -1.05%***     -1.05%***     -1.05%***     -1.05%***
        (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.005)        (0.011)         (0.008)        (0.008)
 -4     -0.60%      -1.09%***      -0.19%      -0.65%***     -0.70%**       0.91%
        (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.004)        (0.002)         (0.003)        (0.007)
 -3     0.09%       -0.72%*       0.64%        0.03%        -0.50%      -2.65%***
        (0.005)        (0.004)         (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.004)        (0.008)
 -2     0.23%       1.72%***     1.36%***    -14.78%***     -0.98%      1.60%***
        (0.002)        (0.005)         (0.005)        (0.022)         (0.011)        (0.006)
 -1     0.44%        -0.38%       0.50%*       0.05%        1.47%        0.49%
        (0.004)        (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.002)         (0.013)        (0.005)

                                  41
                                     The Power of Indices

0    1.04%***     1.11%***      -0.31%        0.00%        0.26%       1.65%*
       (0.004)        (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.008)        (0.009)
1     -0.55%        0.03%        -0.28%        0.11%        0.00%        -0.94%
       (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.003)        (0.006)
2      0.45%        0.24%        0.09%       -0.73%*       0.43%        0.40%
       (0.005)        (0.005)         (0.002)        (0.004)         (0.005)        (0.005)
3      0.26%        0.04%        0.29%        -0.28%      -0.64%**      -0.58%
       (0.005)        (0.005)         (0.002)        (0.004)         (0.003)        (0.004)
4     -0.33%        -0.09%        0.08%        -0.28%        -1.65%        0.21%
       (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.016)        (0.008)
5      0.50%        -0.45%       0.53%**       0.30%        12.98%       -0.59%
       (0.004)        (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.125)        (0.006)

                                    Panel A: Inclusions
   Full Sample     OBX      OMXB10     OMXC20     OMXH25     OMXS30
-1     0.56%        -0.38%       0.50%*       0.05%        1.47%        0.49%
       (0.004)        (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.002)         (0.013)        (0.005)
0     0.55%**     1.11%***      -0.31%        0.00%        0.26%       1.65%*
       (0.004)        (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.008)        (0.009)
                                   Panel B: Exclusions
-2     0.23%       1.72%***     1.36%***    -14.78%***     -0.98%      1.60%***
       (0.002)        (0.005)         (0.005)        (0.022)         (0.011)        (0.006)
-1     0.44%        -0.38%       0.50%*       0.05%        1.47%        0.49%
       (0.004)        (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.002)         (0.013)        (0.005)
0    1.04%***     1.11%***      -0.31%        0.00%        0.26%       1.65%*
       (0.004)        (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.008)        (0.009)

                                  42