The Impact of Geopolitical Risk on
Firm Behavior and Stock Returns

VIGGO V. OLOFSSON

ALEXANDER GEORGI

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2025
The Impact of Geopolitical Risk on Firm Behavior and Stock Returns

Abstract:

        We adopt established textual analysis methods to create the ϐirst validated ϐirm level
       measure of geopolitical risk. We analyze the distribution of geopolitical risk across
       ϐirms and the impacts of geopolitical risk exposure on ϐirm actions and stock prices.
       We ϐind evidence that, although ϐirms are concerned about aggregate geopolitical
        risk, they may be more concerned about ϐirm-speciϐic geopolitical risk exposure.
       Further, we ϐind evidence for the conclusion that geopolitical risk is negatively
       associated with capital expenditures and sales growth, and positively associated
        with stock price volatility. Finally, we ϐind that portfolios consisting of ϐirms with
       high geopolitical risks outperform portfolios of other ϐirms in terms of abnormal
       returns.

Keywords:

       Asset pricing, Finance, Geopolitics, Textual analysis

Authors:
       Viggo V. Olofsson (25804)

      Alexander Georgi (25711)

Tutors:

       Mustafa Bulut, Postdoctoral Fellow, Swedish House of Finance

Examiner:

       Ramin P Baghai, Associate Professor, Department of Finance, SSE

Acknowledgement:

       We extend our heartfelt gratitude to Mustafa Bulut for his unwavering dedication,
       invaluable guidance, and inspiring presence throughout the entirety of our research
       journey.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Viggo V. Olofsson and Alexander Georgi, 2025

                                   1
                                         I. Introduction

Geopolitical risks have grown increasingly complex and interconnected, with recent events
underscoring their far-reaching implications on global security and trade policies. Events like
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine demonstrate how geopolitical shocks in one region can ripple
across the global economy, impacting ϐirms worldwide. Despite widespread speculation on
how geopolitical shocks propagate through the world economy, the size of their impact on
ϐirm behavior and stock returns remains largely unknown. Measuring these effects has been
difϐicult due to a paucity of data on ϐirm-level exposure to geopolitical risks.

In this paper, we construct a ϐirm-level measure of geopolitical risk. We deϐine geopolitical
risk broadly, encompassing not only risks of violence and territorial competition, but also
indirect threats such as economic sanctions. The methodology we use closely resembles the
method developed by Hassan, Hollander, Van Lent, and Tahoun (2019). We use our measure
to study the distribution of geopolitical risk across ϐirms and its effect on ϐirm actions and
stock returns.
In pursuit of these goals, we ϐirst construct our ϐirm-level measure by analyzing quarterly
earnings call transcripts from S&P 500 constituents. We score a ϐirm’s exposure to
geopolitical risk at a given point in time based on the share of its earnings call dedicated to
discussions of geopolitical risks. We use a similar methodology to construct a measure of
geopolitical sentiment. News about geopolitical shock exposure is likely not independent of
news about these shocks’ conditional mean. While our measure of geopolitical risk captures
news of ϐirm-level variance of geopolitical shocks, constructing a proxy for geopolitical
sentiment allows us to measure news about their mean and, in principle, separate
information about ϐirst and second moment impacts (Hassan et al., 2019, 2023, 2024).
We strengthen the interpretation of our measure as a proxy of geopolitical risk by showing
that passages from the highest rated transcripts correctly identify discussions on geopolitical
risk. Further, from manual reading of 200 transcripts, we show that our measure indeed
captures discussions on geopolitical risk across its distribution. Moreover, our measure
captures major known changes in geopolitical risk, spiking in association with geopolitical
events like Brexit, the major tariffs in the US-China trade war, and Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine.
When looking at the properties of our measure, we ϐind that just 2.52% of the variation in
our measure is explained by time ϐixed effects, and that only 1.41% of the variation is
accounted for by permanent differences between sectors. Strikingly, just 8.73% is accounted
for at the sector level and the economy as a whole. 91.27% of the variation in our measure
plays out at the “ϐirm level,” with 15.77% being accounted for by permanent differences
across ϐirms. In our sample of large U.S. ϐirms, we ϐind that 75.50% of the variation in
geopolitical risk plays out across same-sectored ϐirms over time. This large variation suggests
that, within a given industry, although ϐirms are concerned about broad-reaching geopolitical
events, they are also concerned about geopolitical risk speciϐic to them at a given time. At the
ϐirm level, we argue that ϐirms exhibit heterogeneous exposure to aggregate geopolitical risk,

                                   2
while also facing distinct ϐirm-speciϐic geopolitical challenges (e.g., risk of expropriation,
rather than risk of conϐlict escalation in the Middle East).
Moving on, we study whether ϐirm level geopolitical risks have an impact on ϐirm actions and
stock prices. Traditional models of uncertainty predict that increased risk exposure
decreases ϐirm investments and employment growth, while simultaneously driving greater
stock price volatility (e.g., Pindyck, 1988; Bloom, Bond, and Van Reenen, 2007). We show
evidence that ϐirms with greater geopolitical risk reduce capital expenditures. Further, we
show that there is a negative association between geopolitical risk and sales growth, and a
positive association between geopolitical risk and stock price volatility. The strongest result
is the association with capital expenditures, which remains at least marginally signiϐicant
even when adequately adding controls to assess robustness. The association with sales and
stock price volatility becomes insigniϐicant when controlling for systematic time and ϐirm
level differences.
We do not ϐind a statistically signiϐicant association between our measure of ϐirm-level
geopolitical risk and employment growth. This could suggest that ϐirm-level exposure to
geopolitical risks has no impact on employment growth. However, it may also reϐlect
insufϐicient statistical power to detect what are likely small effect sizes.
Finally, we study whether geopolitical risk is priced in stock returns. We perform quarterly
portfolio sorts with our measure of geopolitical risk as the sorting variable. We ϐind evidence
that portfolios with higher geopolitical risk outperform other ϐirms in terms of generating
higher abnormal returns, although our ϐindings are only signiϐicant at the 10% level.
We would like to highlight two important considerations to address in our results. First, our
measures of geopolitical risk show signs of containing substantial measurement error.
Second, measuring the share of discussions on geopolitical risk is only an approximation of
actual exposure to geopolitical risk. Our measure is more accurately described as measuring
geopolitical risk as experienced by ϐirm managers. For these reasons, one should be careful
when handling our measures and interpreting our ϐindings.

                                       1.1 Literature
Our research builds upon recent developments in the textual analysis literature.
Traditionally, many researchers have relied on pre-deϐined dictionaries to analyze
documents and quantify the prevalence of speciϐic themes, such as economic policy
uncertainty, within the text (Baker, Bloom, and Davis, 2016). However, we instead rely on the
methodology outlined by Hassan et al. (2019) which avoids exogenously deϐining
dictionaries. Hassan et al. (2019) use their methodology to construct a measure of ϐirm-level
political risk. They extensively validate their measure and ϐind it captures meaningful
economic information at the ϐirm level.
The general methodology developed by Hassan et al. (2019) has been applied to measure a
wide range of risks at the ϐirm-level. For example, Ersahin, Gianetti, and Huang (2024) study
ϐirm-level supply chain risks. Sautner, Van Lent, Vilkov, and Zhang (2023) use a slightly
                                   3
altered methodology to analyze ϐirm-level climate change exposure. They ϐind signiϐicant
heterogeneity in how different ϐirms are exposed to climate change, even within sectors. In
our research, we apply the same methodology as Hassan et al. (2019) to study ϐirm-level
geopolitical risk, particularly its impact on ϐirm behavior and stock returns. We also propose
some improvements in the construction of the training libraries of the Hassan et al. (2019)
method. Notably, we ϐilter out speciϐic unwanted topics.
To date, there is already a signiϐicant amount of research on political and geopolitical risks.
For example, Kelly, Pastor, and Veronesi (2016) look at the relationship between government
policy and stock price volatility. They ϐind that, on average, stock prices fall at the
announcement of a policy change. Further, Caldara and Iacoviello (2020) study trade policy
uncertainty. They show that increases in trade policy uncertainty is associated with reduced
investments.
Moreover, several studies have speciϐically examined geopolitical risks. Caldara and
Iacoviello (2022) create an aggregate measure of geopolitical risk by analyzing newspaper
articles. They ϐind that higher geopolitical risk leads to periods of lower investment and
employment. Additionally, they build a ϐirm-level measure of geopolitical risk following
Hassan et al. (2019) and brieϐly study the impacts of geopolitical risk on investments at the
ϐirm level. However, their paper does not include validation of the ϐirm-level measure of
geopolitical risk. In our research, we validate that the methodology outlined in Hassan et al.
(2019) is applicable for measuring geopolitical risk at the ϐirm-level, providing the ϐirst
validated measure of ϐirm-level geopolitical risk in the literature.
We use our measure to further extend the research by studying how geopolitical risk is
distributed across ϐirms and subsequently what impact geopolitical risk has on a wider set
of ϐirm actions. In doing so, we also test the predictions of the real options literature, i.e., that
heightened exposure to any form of risk should have a greater impact on hard-to-reverse
investments than short term output growth (Pindyck, 1988). Finally, we examine the
relationship between ϐirm-level geopolitical risk and stock price volatility, as well as its asset
pricing implications.

                                          II. Data
We gather quarterly earnings calls for S&P 500 companies from Reϐinitiv Eikon “Advanced
Events.” Firms generally host one earnings call in each quarter, generating 4 observations per
ϐirm per year. 19077 transcripts are initially collected, spanning the 10-year period from
2014 through 2023.
Moving on, we include companies that were part of the S&P 500 index at any point during
our period of study, even if they later dropped out. This is to prevent survivorship bias in our
sample. We collect all available transcripts for these ϐirms for the entire period of study.
Finally, we exclude 135 transcripts with incorrectly formatted ϐile names, as we cannot

                                   4
accurately match these with the correct company and date. After these steps, our ϐinal sample
consists of 23 486 transcripts.1

The earnings calls predominantly share the same general structure; They start with a
management presentation followed up with a Q&A session where analysts and other market
participants are invited to ask questions. We construct our measure of ϐirm-level geopolitical
risk using the entire conference call.
We use Center for Stock Price Returns (CRSP) to obtain both monthly and daily stock price
data. We obtain U.S. equity factor returns (market excess return, SMB, HML and UMD) from
the Fama-French Data Library. Finally, we use Compustat data for balance sheet and income
statement items. Table 1 provides summary statistics for the variables used, and Appendix
Table 1 provides further detail of the variables used.

          III. Constructing a Measure of Geopolitical Risk at the Firm Level
In this section, we ϐirst deϐine geopolitical risk. Next, we develop a measure for geopolitical
risk, and ϐinally, we validate the measure to ensure it accurately reϐlects what it is intended
to capture.
Deϐinitions of geopolitics range from very narrow to broadly inclusive (Caldara and
Iacoviello, 2022). For example, when the media refer to geopolitics, they are often referring
to international violence and crises (Rogers, Castree, and Kitchin, 2013). Formally,
geopolitics is concerned with how geographical factors including territory, population, and
natural resource endowments, as modiϐied by economies and technology, affect relations
between states (Foster, 2006). We adopt this formal deϐinition of geopolitics in our paper.
Acts of violence and territorial competition, e.g., the Russo-Ukrainian War, are captured in
this deϐinition of geopolitics. We also consider power struggles that occur without
necessarily involving violence, e.g., tensions between North Korea and the United States
(U.S.), in our deϐinition. Furthermore, in line with recent global developments, we also
include trade wars, tariffs, and economic sanctions in our deϐinition, as restrictions are
increasingly being used as tools of political leverage. We deϐine geopolitical risk as the
uncertainty stemming from any aspect of our comprehensive deϐinition of geopolitics.

                               3.1 Measure Construction
To construct our proxy of geopolitical risk, we ϐirst deϐine a measure of the share of quarterly
earnings call discussions centered around geopolitical risks. We argue that the geopolitical

1 On rare occasions, ϐirms have 2 available earnings call transcripts in one quarter. If the two observations are
at most 1 day from each other, we merge these observations into one.

                                   5
risks covered during earnings calls are likely to reϐlect actual concerns of ϐirm managers and
analysts on average. We assume their concern reϐlects actual exposure to geopolitical risk.2

We distinguish geopolitical and non-geopolitical topics by comparing language patterns used
in earnings calls to that of geopolitical text, e.g., a textbook on geopolitics. To identify
association with risk, we check that these language patterns of geopolitical risk topics are
used together with synonyms of risk and uncertainty. This pattern-based sequence
classiϐication closely resembles the method used by Hassan et al. (2019).
To construct our measure of geopolitical risk we ϐirst compile a training library of text
archetypical of geopolitical topics (𝔾) and another library with text that is archetypical of
neutral, non-geopolitical topics (ℕ). The libraries are decomposed into the set of its
composite bigrams, i.e., all adjacent two-word combinations the text contains. We deϐine
geopolitical bigrams as 𝔾\ℕ, i.e., the set of bigrams that are unique to the training library of
archetypical geopolitical text. Congruently, we also decompose each earnings call transcript
for ϐirm i at time t into the list of bigrams it contains 𝑏 = 1, 2, … , 𝐵௜,௧.

We then deϐine our measure of geopolitical risk for ϐirm i at time t by counting the number
of geopolitical bigrams contained within the 10-word window surrounding a synonym of risk
or uncertainty in the transcript of ϐirm i’s earnings call held at time t. To normalize for the
                                                        ଵ
length of the transcript, we multiply by a factor of  . The formal deϐinition is as follows
                                                                                   ஻೔,೟
(Hassan et al., 2019):

                                                    ஻೔,೟
                                       1                                                 𝑓௕,𝔾
                 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ =   ෍ ൬𝐼[𝑏 ∈ 𝔾\ℕ] × 𝐼[|𝑏 − 𝑟| < 10] ×    ൰
                                               𝐵௜,௧                                                           𝐵𝔾
                                  ௕
                                                                                         (1)

where 𝐼[∗] is the indicator function,3 r is the position of the nearest synonyms of risk or
uncertainty, 𝑓௕,𝔾 is the frequency of bigram b in the library of geopolitical texts 𝔾, and 𝐵𝔾 is
the total number of bigrams in 𝔾. In (1), we weight each bigram according to its term
                   ௙ ್ ,𝔾
frequency     , i.e., its relative frequency in the geopolitical training library. Clearly,
              ஻𝔾
geopolitical bigrams will be assigned a greater weight if they occur more often in 𝔾.
                       ௙ ್ ,𝔾
Weighting by     enables us to score the extent to which passages are related to geopolitical
                 ஻𝔾
risks. Despite weighting bigrams, we interpret 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ simply as the share of earnings calls
dedicated to risks associated with geopolitical topics.4

Variance shocks may be correlated to shocks to their conditional mean. For example, a U.S.
aluminum exporter may be concerned about potential tariffs on its Chinese exports and
expect less cash ϐlow in the future (i.e., lowering of the conditional mean), while

2 Obviously, this will likely not hold perfectly in practice. However, we believe it to be a good approximation.
3 𝐼[∗] = 1 if the condition inside is fulϐilled, otherwise, 𝐼[∗] = 0.

4 See, e.g., Hassan et al. (2019) for a similar interpretation.
                                   6
simultaneously expecting higher variance due to uncertainty surrounding the imposition of
the trade restrictions. To differentiate between ϐirst- and second-moment impacts, we deϐine
𝐺𝑃𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡௜,௧. Following Hassan et al. (2019), we use the same procedure as when
constructing (1), but instead of conditioning on nearness of geopolitical bigrams, we
condition the measure on proximity to words with positive or negative sentiment:

                                                     ஻೔,೟                                 ௕ାଵ଴
                                             1                          𝑓௕,𝔾
              𝐺𝑃𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡௜,௧ =   ෍ ൭𝐼[𝑏 ∈ 𝔾\ℕ] ×     × ෍ 𝑆(𝑐)൱,
                                                      𝐵௜,௧                               𝐵𝔾
                                           ௕                          ௖ୀ௕ିଵ

where 𝑆(𝑐) = 1 if bigram c is associated with positive sentiment and 𝑆(𝑐) = −1 if bigram c
is associated with negative sentiment; 𝑆(𝑐) = 0 otherwise.

Following Hassan et al. (2019), we also create a ϐirm-level measure of overall sentiment to
use as a control:

                                                                                ஻೔,೟
                                     1
                                𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡௜,௧ =   ෍ 𝑆(𝑏).
                                                                              𝐵௜,௧
                                                     ௕

With this method, we can construct a ϐirm level measure of geopolitical risk, and by validating
it, it is the ϐirst validated ϐirm-level measure of geopolitical risk in the literature.

                                    3.2 Training Libraries

In our speciϐication, we deϐine our library of topics archetypical of geopolitical topics with
four texts on different geopolitical topics. This is different from previous approaches in the
literature which have used one textbook in the library archetypical of the type of the risk of
interest. We believe that constructing the geopolitical library with several books improves
the measure in two main ways. First, it reduces the risk that common bigrams in the
geopolitical library are prevalent due to the author's writing style rather than the actual
subject matter. Second, it allows us to cover the topics associated with our deϐinition of
geopolitics; we found that different textbooks on geopolitics generated bigrams with vastly
                                                                  ௙ ್ ,𝔾
different weights, i.e., term frequency    . For example, some textbooks might not mention
                                                ஻𝔾
sanctions at all, while others focus on them as a central topic. To capture all aspects of our
deϐinition of geopolitics, we inevitably included more than one book in our geopolitical
library.

For our library of discussion archetypical of non-geopolitical topics, we include an
undergraduate textbook on ϐinancial accounting to compensate for the fact that earnings
calls tend to focus on ϐinancial information. In this library we also include the bigrams from
the Santa Barbara Corpus of Spoken American English (2000) to ϐilter out bigrams that are
speciϐically related to spoken language, such as “next question.” Furthermore, we include an
                                   7
undergraduate textbook on differential equations and technical portions from the COVID-19
Wikipedia page to ϐilter out bigrams speciϐically associated with mathematics and the COVID-
19 pandemic respectively. Using the neutral library to ϐilter our speciϐic topics is an
innovation in the ϐield of using textual analysis to measure risk.

To improve accuracy, we exclude from the ϐinal speciϐication bigrams among the top 1000
contributors to 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ in the penultimate speciϐication that are not explicitly linked to
geopolitical risk. The bigrams removed were of the character: “focused on,” “coupled with,”
and “information on.”

The sentiment of words was categorized using Loughran and McDonald’s (2011) sentiment
dictionary. Common positive sentiment classiϐied words include, e.g., “good,” “strong,” and
“great,” while negative-sentiment words include, e.g., “loss,” “slowdown,” and “difϐicult.”

Finally, we create the set of synonyms of risk and uncertainty from the Oxford dictionary (see
Appendix Table 1). We exclude “question,” “questions,” and “venture” in accordance with the
previous literature because they are likely to often have a meaning separate from referencing
risk in the context of earnings calls.

                               3.3 Validation and Properties
In this section, we explore whether our measure of ϐirm-level geopolitical risk captures actual
discussions of risks associated with geopolitics. In Table 2, we show the geopolitical bigrams
most strongly associated with geopolitical discussions – i.e., the elements of 𝔾\ℕ with the
highest assigned weight in the construction of 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧. The highest weighted bigrams have
a strong geopolitical connotation. The top bigrams are almost exclusively geopolitical in
nature; “trade policy,” “of sanctions,” and “war in.” However, the top bigrams also contain a
few bigrams that are less exclusively connected to geopolitics, e.g., “the Russian,” “Europe
and,” and “inϐluence in.” Bigrams of this character may cause our measure to misidentify
conversations as centering around geopolitical risk when they contain discussions on
international non-geopolitical risks (e.g., unfavorable local fashion trends). However, from
manual reading of transcripts, we found the frequency of such misidentiϐications to be very
low. The distribution of all bigrams in 𝔾\ℕ by their term-frequency is plotted in Figure 1. The
term-frequency exhibits a strong right skew, which is in-line with previous literature (Hassan
et al., 2019).5

Table 3 shows the highest rated passages from the 10 transcripts with the highest 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧.
It is reassuring that the passages which contribute most to the highest rated transcripts
clearly address geopolitical risk. The only exception is the transcript from Monster Beverage
Corp, where call participants discuss risks associated with the global supply chain
environment at the time. Although geopolitical factors do inϐluence the global supply chain

5                                               ିହ
 The median term-frequency is 0.955 ∙ 10   , in line with the order of magnitude of term frequency in the
previous literature (Hassan et al., 2019).
                                   8
environment, the supply chain environment is distinct from geopolitics and can be affected
by non-geopolitical factors. Accordingly, we classify the discussion as a false positive.
Although our approach is intended to identify the share of the transcript which centers
around discussions of geopolitical risk, the fact that the passages which contribute the most
to 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ contain discussions on geopolitical risk further validates our measure as
capturing the share of discussions centering around geopolitical risk. As additional
validation, we plot the share of true positives at a given average level of 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ in Figure
2. The ϐigure shows a positive, possibly linear, relationship between the share of true
positives and 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧. This result indicates that the assigned value of 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ contains
information of discussions on geopolitical risk across its distribution, not just for the highest
rated observations.
Of the top-rated transcripts, most receive their greatest contribution from discussions on
trade policy and tariffs. Moreover, many of the bigrams with the highest weight seem to be
associated with international trade-related topics. These facts suggest that our measure is
more sensitive to trade-related risks, compared to other geopolitical risks. Importantly, from
manual reading of transcripts, we note that our measure captures additional integral
components of geopolitical risk well, such as the shock in geopolitical uncertainty associated
with Russia’s invasion of Ukraine (without the mention of any trade-related concerns).
Further, many of the highest weighted bigrams capture other aspects of geopolitics, e.g., “of
geopolitical,” “war in,” and “invasion of.” Although the measure is quite sensitive toward
international trade related discussions, the measure captures the other facets of our
deϐinition of geopolitical risk, with its biggest spike occurring when Russia invades Ukraine.
We now explore the properties of the measures generated. Figure 3 plots a times series of
the mean 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘  6 across all ϐirms in each quarter. Quarterly aggregate 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘   varies
                             ௜,௧                                                                                                       ௜,௧
intuitively with geopolitical events. For example, it spikes in 2016 Q2 in association with the
Brexit referendum and the following announcement of the results. Furthermore, aggregate
𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ spikes in the same quarter as the announcement of the ϐirst major tariffs imposed
by the U.S. on China in 2018 Q2 and drops in 2019 Q4 when the U.S. and China agree to the
Phase One trade deal to prevent further escalation of the trade conϐlict. Aggregate 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧

6 We lead 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘  when constructing Figure 3, such that the risk in quarter t is constructed from the
                         ௜,௧
transcripts of quarter t+1. The earnings calls in our sample are concentrated towards the beginning of the
quarter as shown in Appendix Figure 1, with half of earnings calls occurring within the ϐirst 31 days of the
quarter on average. Assuming relevant geopolitical risks are uniformly distributed and limited to each
quarter, the average ϐirm is discussing almost two-thirds of total geopolitical risks which became apparent in
quarter t-1 in quarter t. Leading the risk measure as we do above has has not been discussed in the textual-
analysis literature. For example, Hassan et al. (2019) investigate association of Brexit and poltical risk by
searching for “brexit” in 2016 Q3 without discussing why they do not search for “brexit” in the previous
quarter – i.e., the quarter in which the referendum was held. Leading quarterly measures of geopoltical risk
does not solve the timing issues, but it may ammeliorate them, and should be considered when constructing
quarterly measures from earnings calls.

                                   9
spikes in the beginning of 2020 in relation to the global COVID-19 pandemic spreading. Our
measure also responds as expected to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in Q1 2022.
Figure 4 compares 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ with Caldara and Iacoviello’s (2022) GPR index. Whereas our
measure is constructed using discussions from decision makers and analysts on large U.S.
companies, the GPR index is constructed by analyzing newspapers published in the U.S.,
United Kingdom, and Canada. 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ measures risk at the ϐirm-level, while the GPR index
measures geopolitical risk at the aggregate level. The two series have a low but positive
Pearson correlation coefϐicient of 0.234.7 Reassuringly, the two series behave similarly
around the time when Russia invades Ukraine in 2022 Q1. However, the GPR index focuses
on wars and terrorism, while we have a much broader deϐinition of geopolitics, including
other geopolitical uncertainties such as trade regulations. For example, their measure is
visually silent on Brexit, while the mean of 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ spikes in the quarter of the referendum.
The low correlation between the two series suggests that risks other than those associated
with war and terrorism (e.g., trade policy) account for a large share of the variation in the
aggregate concerns of ϐirms and analysts about geopolitical events. The divergence might
also reϐlect the distinct perspectives of media outlets versus corporate decision-makers,
suggesting that the GPR index cannot be interpreted as a comparable benchmark of
geopolitical risk. The fact that Caldara and Iacoviello’s (2022) ϐirm level measure of
geopolitical risk using Hassan et al.’s (2019) method and their newspaper-based method
have a similarly low correlation coefϐicient of 0.19 supports the latter interpretation.
In total, our results reassure us that we measure geopolitical risk. Importantly, the
transcripts with the highest 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ contain discussions centering around geopolitical risk,
𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ appears to be informative across its distribution, and the time series of aggregate
𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ spikes as expected in response to known geopolitical shocks.

Next, we investigate the decomposition of the variance of 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧. We look at the share of
variation explained by select sets of ϐixed effects (Table 4). Time ϐixed effects account for just
2.52% of the variation. Permanent differences across sectors explain just 1.41% of the
variation. Moreover, 8.73% of the variation in 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ is accounted for by time ϐixed effects,
sector ϐixed effects, and the interaction of time and sector ϐixed effects together. An
interpretation of these results is that only a small portion of the variation in geopolitical risk
is explained at the sector level or at the level of the broader economy.8 That is, the
overwhelming majority (91.27%) of the variation in 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ is not explained by economy-
wide shocks or shocks to individual industries.
We decompose the remaining ϐirm level variation and note that 15.77% of the total 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧
variation is accounted for by time-invariant differences between ϐirms, while the substantial
residual (75.50% of total variation in 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧) is explained by ϐluctuations in 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ over
time across same-sectored ϐirms.

7 The Pearson correlation weakens between the two series to 0.067 when we do not lead 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘  as
                                                                                                                                          ௜,௧
explained in Footnote 6.
8 See Hassan et al. (2019) for a similar interpretation of this set of ϐixed effects.
                                  10
The large share of ϐirm level variance not explained by ϐixed effects suggests that geopolitical
events have disparate effects across ϐirms even within the same sector. Our results are quite
striking, as one might expect geopolitical risks to affect ϐirms in a relatively consistent
manner, particularly when the ϐirms are members of the same industry. One might, for
instance, reason that ϐirms in the same sector, e.g., oil and gas companies, would be similarly
impacted by rising tensions in the Middle East. However, our data does not support this view.
One potential explanation for the large residual is that same-sectored ϐirms have vastly
different exposures to aggregate geopolitical risk. For example, terrorist threats may concern
commercial airline ϐirms to varying degrees, depending on the regions they service.9
However, we argue that it is unlikely that the heterogeneity is sufϐiciently large (as large U.S.
airlines generally service similar regions) to explain the large residual. Firms being
concerned about risks speciϐic to them at a given point in time (e.g., risk of expropriation)
would also explain the large residual. Taken together, our results suggest that, although ϐirms
are worried about major geopolitical risks to which their industry or the wider economy is
exposed (e.g., rising tensions in the Middle East, escalation of Russo-Ukraine War), they are
not uniformly impacted by these risks and may be just as worried about risks speciϐic to their
ϐirm.
Hassan et al. (2019) similarly ϐind that 91.69% variation in political risk played out at the
ϐirm level.10 Time ϐixed effects explain more than three times the variation in 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘
                                                                                                                                                                   ௜,௧
(2.52%) than Hassan et al.’s (2019) political risk (0.81%). Comparison of our results could
suggest that geopolitical risk is more systemic than political risk. However, we want to
caution against such interpretations because, although we both study U.S. ϐirms, the ϐirms in
our sample are on average larger and studied in a different time period. Hassan et al. (2019)
study U.S. listed ϐirms between 2002 and 2016, while we are limited to ϐirms in the S&P 500
index from 2014 to the end of 2023. For example, it is plausible that larger ϐirms are more
exposed to aggregate shocks. As ϐirm size is not controlled for, this possibility would
confound our results. Furthermore, it is also plausible that ϐirms in more recent periods are
exposed to a greater proportion of common geopolitical risk in accordance with rising global
geopolitical tensions.

9 The granularity of our sector deϐinitions likely does not allow for classiϐications of narrow industries like the
commercial airline industry. The examples are to convince the reader of plausibility of heterogeneous
exposure to aggregate geopolitical risk in principle and that this heterogeneity is likely not the only
explanation of the unaccounted ϐirm level variation.
10 Hassan et al. deϐined sectors at the 2-digit SIC level, while we deϐine sectors using the Fama & French 12
industry classiϐication. When we deϐine sectors with the same level of granularity, we still ϐind that the great
majority (78.23%) of the variation is explained at the ϐirm level. We prefer the Fama & French 12 industry
classiϐication as we ϐind their classiϐication more informative. We do not think that we populate the sectors at
the 2-digit SIC level sufϐiciently; we have ten times fewer ϐirms than Hassan et al. (2019). Furthermore,
although less variation is explained by the residual with the more granular sector deϐinition, the decrease is
not enough to challenge the arguments presented in the main text. As sector granularity increases, the
residual will approach zero, as each sector becomes more narrowly deϐined, eventually containing only a
single ϐirm.
                                  11
                                   IV. Main Results
Having established that our measure of ϐirm-level geopolitical risk captures discussions on
geopolitical topics in company earnings calls, we next explore the effects of exposure to
geopolitical risk on ϐirm behavior, stock price volatility, and stock returns. We standardize
𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ by its standard deviation to aid interpretation. 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧, a proxy for the variance
of geopolitical shocks, is likely correlated with news about the mean of geopolitical shocks,
proxied by 𝐺𝑃𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡௜,௧. Hence, by including 𝐺𝑃𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡௜,௧ in our regressions, we
reduce omitted variable bias and are more conϐidently able to interpret the effect of
𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧. The correlation between 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ and 𝐺𝑃𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡௜,௧ is negative (-0.13),
suggesting that increased geopolitical risk is indeed correlated with bad geopolitical news.
Where applicable, we also control for overall 𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡௜,௧. We group industries based on the
Fama-French 12 industry classiϐication.

                                    4.1 Stock Price Volatility
We now move on to study whether there is an association between geopolitical risk and stock
price volatility. We expect heightened exposure to any risk, including geopolitical risk, to be
associated with increased stock price volatility, as greater uncertainty about future cash
ϐlows leads to more variable asset prices. We test if this relationship holds true for 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧
and report our results in Table 5.
We control for the logarithm of ϐirm total assets and cluster standard errors at the ϐirm level
in all speciϐications. Realized volatility is the volatility of daily stock returns in the window
between day t+1 up until and including day t+90, where t is the day of the earnings call.
The ϐirst column reports the results of a simple OLS regression of realized volatility on our
measure of geopolitical risk. The coefϐicient is positive and statistically signiϐicant; one
standard deviation increase in 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ is associated with 0.0315 (s.e. = 0.0069) increase in
the standard deviation of stock price returns for the next 90 days. In the second column, we
check if the result is robust to adding 𝐺𝑃𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡௜,௧ and 𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡௜,௧ as controls. The
coefϐicient (0.0232, s.e. = 0.0068) is noticeably smaller than in Column 1, implying that our
initial speciϐication suffered from omitted variable bias, suggesting that we were able to tease
out the effect of changes in the variance of geopolitical shocks from the effects of variation in
their conditional mean. Nevertheless, the coefϐicient is still signiϐicant at the 1% level and
continues to support the hypothesis that higher 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ is associated with increased stock
price volatility. In Columns 3-5, we add various combinations of ϐixed effects to the
speciϐications to test the robustness of our results. The relationship is robust to time ϐixed
effects at the 5% signiϐicance level, with reduced coefϐicient (0.0206, s.e. = 0.0088). The
coefϐicient is rendered insigniϐicant when both controlling for time and industry ϐixed effects
(Column 4) and time and ϐirm ϐixed effects (Column 5).
To summarize, we initially ϐind a positive association between 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ and stock price
volatility. However, the association is not robust to adding appropriate controls, e.g.,
controlling for time and ϐirm ϐixed effects. The reduction in both the magnitude and
                                  12
signiϐicance of the 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ coefϐicient when adding time ϐixed effects implies that the
relationship we observe in Columns 1 and 2 is partly driven by market-wide variation over
time rather than ϐirm-speciϐic differences. Speciϐically, while Columns 1 and 2 show that
higher 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ is associated with higher stock price volatility, the results in Column 3 reveal
that this relationship is partly explained by periods of high 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ coinciding with periods
of increased market-wide volatility, rather than ϐirms with higher individual 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧
exposure consistently experiencing higher volatility relative to their peers.
Moreover, the decline in signiϐicance and magnitude of the 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ coefϐicient when adding
industry ϐixed effects suggests that the cross-sectional relationship between geopolitical risk
and volatility is primarily driven by industry-level differences. Industries that tend to have
higher stock price volatility also tend to have higher exposure to geopolitical risk, but within
any given industry, there isn't a strong relationship between 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ and stock price
volatility. In other words, industries with greater geopolitical risk have permanent
unobserved characteristics that are associated with higher stock price volatility. When these
characteristics are controlled for, the relationship between 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ and volatility
disappears. Replacing industry ϐixed effects with ϐirm ϐixed effects produces very similar
results – insigniϐicant coefϐicient of 0.0070 (s.e. = 0.0059).
Taken together, our results do not support the hypothesis that increased geopolitical risk
exposure is associated with increased stock price volatility. Speciϐically, we cannot conclude
that there is a within-ϐirm effect over time of heightened 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ on realized volatility, i.e.,
that a given ϐirm would exhibit higher realized stock price volatility following an increase in
geopolitical risk exposure.

                               4.2 Impact on Firm Actions
Next, we investigate how geopolitical risk affects capital expenditures, hiring, and sales. Table
6 reports the associations of 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧, with capital expenditures and ϐirm hiring and sales.
The term 100×ΔCapex୧,୲ାଵ/Capex୧,୲ represents the percentage growth in capital
expenditures from quarter t to quarter t+1. Similarly, 100×ΔEmp୧,୲ାଵ/Emp୧,୲ represents the
percentage growth in the number of employees from year t to year t+1.11 For instance,
if 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ is measured in Q1, then 100×ΔCapex୧,୲ାଵ/Capex୧,୲ reϐlects the percentage growth
in capital expenditures from Q1 to Q2. We include 𝐺𝑃𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡௜,௧ to disentangle ϐirst-
moment effects from second-moment effects. This control is advised to include since changes
𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ is likely associated with news relating to geopolitical events. All speciϐications
include the logarithm of ϐirm total assets as a control for ϐirm size. Standard errors are
clustered at the ϐirm level throughout all models.
The ϐirst, second, and third columns report the results of the association between our
measure 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ and capital expenditures. In Column 1, we regress the change in capital

11 Data on capital expenditures and employment can be noisy. We therefore winsorize both of these variables
at the 1st and 99th percentile.
                                  13
expenditures on 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ and include time and industry ϐixed effects. The coefϐicient in
Column 1 is statistically signiϐicant and suggests that one standard deviation increase in
𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ is associated with a 0.564 (s.e. = 0.274) percentage point decrease in capital
expenditures in the following quarter. In Column 2, we introduce 𝐺𝑃𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡௜,௧ as control.
The resulting coefϐicient is virtually unaffected with an effect size of -0.550 (s.e. = 0.273).
Columns 1 and 2 show that cross-sectional differences in 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ between ϐirms in the
same sector explain differences in capital expenditure growth. We ϐind that the relationship
holds when we control for geopolitical sentiment. In Column 3, we replace industry ϐixed
effects with ϐirm ϐixed effects. The coefϐicient maintains similar magnitude (now -0.519 vs -
0.550), but it is only signiϐicant at the 10% level rather than the generally accepted 5% level.
Moving on, the fourth, ϐifth, and sixth columns report associations between 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ and
employment growth. Notably, none of the coefϐicients on 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ are statistically signiϐicant
in any of the regressions. These results therefore do not provide evidence of a signiϐicant
relationship between ϐirms' exposure to geopolitical risk and their employment decisions.
We must note, however, that our data for employment is available only on a yearly basis. It is
possible that we do not have enough statistical power to detect an association between
𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ and employment. The ϐirms in our sample are large, and they may be unable to
make substantial year-to-year employment adjustments. Accordingly, the effect of 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧
on employment levels may be too small to detect at a signiϐicant level without a larger sample.
Finally, we now move on to look at the association between 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ and sales growth. While
a ϐirm cannot directly control sales to the same extent as capital expenditures or
employment, it still retains some discretion over important decisions that indirectly affect
sales. For example, it can choose to reduce its operations in geographically risky areas,
indirectly reducing sales. The results of regressing sales growth on 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ and various
controls are shown in Table 6, Columns 7-9. The coefϐicient in Column 7 suggests that a one
standard deviation increase in 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ is associated with a 0.166 (s.e. = 0.083) percentage
point decrease in sales growth. However, when we control for 𝐺𝑃𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡௜,௧, the coefϐicient
is no longer signiϐicant at the 5% level, implying that news to variation of geopolitical shocks
was indeed entangled with news to the mean of these shocks. Furthermore, the coefϐicient is
even smaller when controlling for ϐirm ϐixed effects; We do not see a signiϐicant association
between within-ϐirm variation of 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ and sales growth.

According to traditional models of uncertainty and investments, an increase in risk exposure
should decrease ϐirm investments and employment growth (Pindyck, 1988). We ϐind support
that ϐirms react to increases in geopolitical risk exposure by decreasing capital expenditures.
The results, although only marginally signiϐicant when adding necessary controls, suggest
that one standard deviation increase in geopolitical risk exposure leads to roughly half a
percent decrease in ϐirm capital expenditures. However, we do not ϐind evidence that
increased exposure to geopolitical risk is associated with decreased employment growth or
sales growth.

                                  14
                               4.3 Impact on Stock Returns
We now move on to study whether portfolios with higher 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ exhibit higher returns.
Conventional ϐinance theory tells us that securities with higher risk should earn a higher
expected return to compensate for this risk (Markowitz, 1952). We study whether this holds
true for our measure of ϐirm-level geopolitical risk. We construct equally weighted portfolios
at the end of each quarter with 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ as the sorting variable. We keep the ϐirms in the
portfolios for the next quarter until we rebalance again. Portfolio 1 contains the tercile of
ϐirms with the lowest levels of 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧, while Portfolio 3 contains the tercile of ϐirms with
the highest levels of 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧. We analyze the performance of the portfolios. We report
portfolio alphas adjusted for market risk (CAPM alphas), alphas adjusted for the Fama-
French three factors (1992), and alphas adjusted for the Fama-French-Carhart factors
(1997).
We further report the Newey-West standard errors for the respective alphas and report the
difference in alphas in Portfolio 3 and Portfolio 1 under the respective models. The
condensed results are shown in Table 7 while the full results from the regressions are
outlined in Appendix Table 3.
Controlling only for the market factor, we ϐind that the alpha of Portfolio 3 (high 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧) is
higher than the alpha of Portfolio 1 (low 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧). However, the difference is not
statistically signiϐicant. The same overarching pattern of higher alpha for the high 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧
portfolio is repeated when controlling for the factors in the Fama-French three-factor model
and the Fama-French-Carhart four-factor model. Interestingly, when controlling for the Fama
French’s three factors and Fama-French-Carhart’s four factors, we observe a difference in
alphas that is statistically signiϐicant at the 10% level. Taken together, although the results
are not signiϐicant at the generally accepted 5% level, we ϐind some evidence that portfolios
with higher 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ earn higher abnormal returns over time.

                               4.4 Measurement Error
It is likely that our measure of geopolitical risk contains substantial measurement error. The
large residual from the variance decomposition (Table 4) could be interpreted as the result
of measurement error. Obviously, it is more difϐicult to pick up ϐirm-level variation than at the
levels of the sector or the wider economy. Very likely, much of the residual in the variance
composition is due to measurement error, but we do not know how much. Hassan et al.
(2019) found that 52.8% of their ϐirm level variation could be attributed to measurement
error, but that the rest contained information of economic signiϐicance. So far in this paper
we have brazenly assumed that our data is of equivalent quality. However, barring an
explanation of investor irrationality, the fact that we lose signiϐicance in the relationship
between realized volatility and 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ in Table 5 when controlling for time (2.52% of total
variation) and sector (1.41% of total variation) could suggest that we have substantially
more measurement error than Hassan et al. (2019). After controlling for these ϐixed effects,
the overwhelming majority of the variation in 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ remains, but we do not see the

                                  15
expected relationship: that an increase in (geopolitical) risk as measured by 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧
increases realized volatility. It suggests that only a very small part of the variation in our
measure is informative. And, if the residual from our ϐirm level variance decomposition is
overwhelmingly the result of measurement error, our interpretation that much of the
variation is explained by changes in geopolitical risk exposure across same-sectored ϐirms
over time would be challenged. In light of this, our measures and results, particularly the
variance decomposition, should be interpreted with care.

                                      V. Conclusion
In this paper, we construct the ϐirst validated measure of ϐirm-level geopolitical risk. We ϐind
evidence that ϐirms in the same industry are concerned about both aggregate geopolitical
risk, as well as distinct, ϐirm-speciϐic geopolitical risk. Furthermore, we use our measure to
study ϐirm actions and market responses to changes in geopolitical risk. We ϐind support that
ϐirms respond to increases in geopolitical risk by decreasing capital expenditures. We also
ϐind weak support that increased geopolitical risk is associated with increased stock price
volatility, but this result is not robust to adding all necessary controls. Finally, we ϐind
evidence that portfolios exposed to more geopolitical risk are compensated with higher
abnormal returns, however, this result is only signiϐicant at the 10% level.
We would like to highlight two important limitations and considerations to address in our
results. First, we ϐind signs that our measures likely contain substantial measurement error.
Second, in constructing our measure of geopolitical risk, we argue that ϐirm’s discussions
centering around risks associated with geopolitics is equivalent to their actual exposure to
geopolitical risk. Obviously, this is an approximation. We measure the geopolitical risk
exposure of ϐirms as perceived by senior managers (and analysts), but we do not know how
well their perception reϐlects actual exposure to geopolitical risk. For these reasons, one
should be careful when handling our measures and interpreting our ϐindings.

                                  16
                                  References
Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis, 2016, Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty, The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(4), 1593-1636.

Bloom, N., S. Bond, and J. Van Reenen, 2007, Uncertainty and investment dynamics, Review
of Economic Studies 74, 391–415.

Bloom, N. (2014). Fluctuations in uncertainty, Journal of Economic Perspectives 28(2), 153–
   76.
Caldara, D., M. Iacoviello, P. Molligo, A. Prestipino, and A. Raffo, 2020, The economic effects
   of trade policy uncertainty, Journal of Monetary Economics 109, 38-59.
Caldara, D., and M. Iacoviello, 2022, Measuring geopolitical risk. American Economic
  Review 112, 1194–1225.
Carhart, M. M., 1997, On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance, The Journal of Finance
   52(1), 57-82.
Du Bois, J. W., W. L. Chafe, C. Meyer, S. A. Thompson, and N. Martey, 2000, Santa Barbara
   Corpus of Spoken American English, CD-ROM, Philadelphia: Linguistic Data Consortium.
Ersahin, N., Giannetti, M., & Huang, R., 2024, Supply chain risk: Changes in supplier
   composition and vertical integration, Journal of International Economics 147, 103854.
Fama, E. F., and K. R. French, 1992, The Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns, The
   Journal of Finance 47(2), 427-465.
Foster, J. B., 2006, The New Geopolitics of Empire, Monthly Review 57(8).
Hassan, T. A., S. Hollander, L. van Lent, and A. Tahoun, 2019, Firm-level political risk:
   Measurement and effects, Quarterly Journal of Economics 134, 2135–2202.
Hassan, T. A., S. Hollander, L. van Lent, and A. Tahoun, 2023, Firm-Level Exposure to
   Epidemic Diseases: Covid-19, SARS, and H1N1, The Review of Financial Studies 36(12),
  4914-4964.
Hassan, T. A., S. Hollander, L. van Lent, and A. Tahoun, 2024, The Global Impact of Brexit
   Uncertainty, Journal of Finance 79(1), 413-458.
Kelly, B., L. Pastor, and P. Veronesi, 2016, The Price of Political Uncertainty: Theory and
   Evidence from the Option Market, Journal of Finance 71(5), 2417-2480.
Loughran, T., and B. McDonald, 2011, When is a liability not a liability? Textual analysis,
   dictionaries, and 10-Ks, Journal of Finance 66, 35–65.
Markowitz, H., 1952, Portfolio Selection, Journal of Finance 7(1), 77-91.

                                  17
Pindyck, R. S., 1988, Irreversible investment, capacity choice, and the value of the firm, The
American Economic Review 78(5), 969.

Rogers, A., N. Castree, and R. Kitchin, 2013, A Dictionary of Human Geography (Oxford
University Press, Oxford).
Sautner, Z., L. van Lent, G. Vilkov, and R. Zhang, 2023, Firm-Level Climate Change Exposure,
   The Journal of Finance, 78(3), 1449-1498.

                                  18
                       Figure 1: Distribution of bigram weights

                                           ௙ ್ ,ಸ      ହ
This ϐigure shows a histogram of     ∙ 10  for the geopolitical bigrams in (𝔾\ℕ). The mean
                                ஻ಸ
    ௙ ್ ,ಸ      ହ
of     ∙ 10  is 1.966.
   ஻ಸ

                                  19
                     Figure 2: Correctly identiϐied positives over 𝑮𝑷𝑹𝒊𝒔𝒌𝒊,𝒕

This ϐigure plots the results from an additional validation exercise. We manually read
excerpts from 200 transcripts at various points of the distribution 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧. We select the
10 transcripts with the greatest 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘   at the 5th, 10th, 15th, … , 100th percentiles and read
                                                            ௜,௧
windows of the adjacent 10 words to a synonym of risk or uncertainty which contributed to
𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧. We count the number of true positives, i.e., the number of transcripts which
contain a window of discussion obviously centered around geopolitical risk. The ϐigure
plots the number of true positives on the vertical axis over the median of 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ for a
given set at a given percentile. The median score is capped at the 97.5th percentile. The line
of best ϐit is plotted.

                        Figure 3: Variation in mean 𝑮𝑷𝑹𝒊𝒔𝒌𝒊,𝒕 over time

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ଼
This ϐigure plots the quarterly mean of 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ scaled by a factor of 10 . Key geopolitical
events are indicated. We lead 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ such that the value plotted in quarter t was
generated from transcripts from quarter t+1. For more details, see Footnote 6.

                                  20
              Figure 4: Variation in mean 𝑮𝑷𝑹𝒊𝒔𝒌𝒊,𝒕 and GPR index over time

This ϐigure plots the quarterly mean of 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ and the news-based Geopolitical Risk
(GPR) index developed by Caldara, D., and M. Iacoviello (2022). 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ is scaled by a
                                                          ଼
factor of 10 and the GPR index is scaled by a factor of 1/45. The correlation between the
two series is 0.234. We lead 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ such that the value plotted in quarter t was generated
from transcripts from quarter t+1. For more details, see Footnote 6.

                                  21
                            Table 1: Summary statistics
The table outlines summary statistics used for the variables. 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ is the transcript-based
score of geopolitical risk. 𝐺𝑃𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡௜,௧ is the transcript-based score of geopolitical
sentiment, while 𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡௜,௧ is the transcript-based score of overall sentiment. 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧,
𝐺𝑃𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡௜,௧ and 𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡௜,௧ are all standardized by their standard deviation. 90 day
realized stock price volatility is the standard deviation of stock price returns for a 90 day
window. It is winsorized at the ϐirst and last percentile. 100 ∗ ∆𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑥௧ାଵ/𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑥௧ is the
percentage growth in capital expenditures from quarter t until quarter t+1, 100 ∗
∆𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠௧ାଵ/𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠௧ is the percentage growth in sales from quarter t until quarter t+1, and 100
* ∆𝐸𝑚𝑝௧ାଵ/𝐸𝑚𝑝௧ is the percentage growth in employees from year t until year t+1. 100 ∗
∆𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑥௧ାଵ/𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑥௧, 100 ∗ ∆𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠௧ାଵ/𝑆𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑠௧, and 100 * ∆𝐸𝑚𝑝௧ାଵ/𝐸𝑚𝑝௧ are all winsorized at
the ϐirst and last percentile.

                                  22
      Table 2: Top 100 highest weighted bigrams used in construction of 𝑮𝑷𝑹𝒊𝒔𝒌𝒊,𝒕

                                                                                                                          ௙ ್ ,𝔾
This table lists the top 100 bigrams with the highest weight or term frequency ቀ   ቁ. The
                                                                                                   ஻𝔾
third column shows the contribution of a bigram to 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ across all transcripts in
promille (one thousandth of whole).

                                  23
                      Table 3: Transcript experts with the highest 𝑮𝑷𝑹𝒊𝒔𝒌𝒊,𝒕

This panel shows the 10 transcripts with the highest 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ together with the
corresponding ϐirm name, date of the earnings call, the geopolitical score of the transcript
along with the passage with the greatest contribution to this score. Geopolitical bigrams
(elements of 𝔾\ℕ) are bolded and synonyms of risk and uncertainty are capitalized and
                                               ଻
italicized. 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ is scaled by a factor of 10 .

                                  24
                            Table 4: Variance decomposition of 𝑮𝑷𝑹𝒊𝒔𝒌𝒊,𝒕

This table reports the resulting total variance explained from regressing 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ on
various ϐixed effects. We regress 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ individually on time ϐixed effects and sector ϐixed
effects. We then regress 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ on time and sector ϐixed effects, as well as their
interaction term. The resulting residual variation is the “ϐirm level” variation. Finally, we
regress this ϐirm level variation on ϐirm ϐixed effects. The share of total variation in
𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ is reported. We classify sectors using the Fama-French 12 industry classiϐication.

                                  25
                              Table 5: Stock price volatility

The table shows regressions of realized stock price volatility on 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ and controls.
Realized volatility is the 90-day stock price volatility calculated as the standard deviation of
stock price returns between the date t+1 and t+90, if the observation of 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ occurs at
time t. Time ϐixed effects, where included, are at the year-month level. All speciϐications
control the logarithm of total ϐirm assets. Standard errors are clustered at the ϐirm level in
all regressions and ***, **, and * denote statistical signiϐicance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
                            ଶ
level, respectively. Within 𝑅  is reported.

                                  26
         Table 6: 𝑮𝑷𝑹𝒊𝒔𝒌𝒊,𝒕 effect on capital expenditure, employment, and sales

The table shows regressions of capital expenditure growth, sales growth and employment
growth on 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧. Capital expenditure and sales growth is from quarter t to quarter t+1.
Employment growth is from year t to year t+1. Capital expenditure growth, employment
growth and sales growth are winsorized at the ϐirst and last percentile. 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ and
𝐺𝑃𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡௜,௧ are all standardized by their respective standard deviations. All
speciϐications include the logarithm of total ϐirm assets as a control. Time ϐixed effects are at
the year-month level. Standard errors are clustered at the ϐirm level in all three regressions
and ***, **, and * denote statistical signiϐicance at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively. The
                     ଶ
table reports total 𝑅 .

                                  27
                               Table 7: Portfolio alphas

This table reports CAPM, FF3 and FFC monthly alpha in percent for three portfolios. The
portfolios are constructed at the end of each quarter based on 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ as the sorting
variable. The ϐirms in each portfolio are kept until the end of the next quarter when
portfolios are rebalanced again. The difference in alpha between the high and low
𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ portfolio is also shown. The table reports associated Newey-West-corrected t-
statistics for each of the alphas in square brackets. ***, **, and * denote statistical
signiϐicance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                                  28
                 Appendix

Appendix A: A Note on AI
AI tools ChatGPT and Claude were used to debug code in R and Python. ChatGPT was also
used to format output tables and ϐigures in R and LaTeX.

Appendix B: Other Model Speciϐications
We experimented with novel speciϐications in which bigrams closer to synonyms of risk and
uncertainty carried greater weight.

                                              ஻೔,೟
                               1                                           𝑓௕,ீ     20 − |𝑏 − 𝑟|
             𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ =   ෍ ቆ𝐼[𝑏 ∈ 𝔾\ℕ] × 𝐼[|𝑏 − 𝑟| < 20] ×     ×            ቇ
                                  𝐵௜,௧                                                 𝐵ீ         20
                              ௕
                                                                                         (2)
Here, the window size is increased to 20, and the weight of the bigram decreases linearly
                                                                                           ଶ଴ |௕ି௥ |
with distance from the risk synonym due to the addition of the factor        . We also
                                                                           ଶ଴
experimented with augmenting the Hassan et al. method such that it would exhibit the
behavior of bigrams associated with (2), i.e. bigrams closer to the risk synonym would be
weighted higher:

                          ஻೔,೟
                1                                                                       20 − |𝑏 − 𝑟|     𝑓௕,ீ
𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ =   ෍ ൭ቆ𝐼[𝑏 ∈ 𝔾\ℕ] × (𝐼[|𝑏 − 𝑟| < 10] + 𝐼[|𝑏 − 𝑟| ∈ [10, 20]] ×             ቇ ×    ൱
                 𝐵௜,௧                                                                                       10     𝐵ீ
                 ௕
                                                                                         (3)
In this speciϐication, bigrams in the transcript found in the window of the 10 words on
either side of the synonyms of risk or uncertainty are treated the same way as in (1). The
difference between (1) and (3) is that the bigrams further away than 10 words from the
risk synonym in (3) are included but with decreasing weight. This behavior captured by
                                                                              ଶ଴ି |௕ି௥ |
extending the conditioning with: 𝐼[|𝑏 − 𝑟| ∈ [10, 20]] ×         .
                                                            ଵ଴
It seems natural that the closer a bigram is to a synonym of risk or uncertainty, the more
strongly associated with risk it likely is. This speaks for choosing (2) or (3) as our
speciϐication. Overall, speciϐications (2) and (3) varied over time in a manner similar to our
preferred speciϐication (1); however, all three speciϐications produced distinctly different
transcript rankings for geopolitical risk. Although (2) and (3) both favor bigrams closer to a
risk word, we found that neither (2) nor (3) were substantially better at identifying
discussions centering around geopolitical risk. Accordingly, we proceeded with (1) as our
speciϐication for its relative elegance and lower complexity as well as its extensive
validation and popularity in the previous literature.

                                  29
                  Appendix Figure 1: Distribution of earnings calls

This ϐigure plots a histogram of the proportion of the total earnings calls held on a given day
in a given quarter in our sample. The “halfway point,” marked with a red line, is where half
of the earnings calls on average have been held.

                                  30
             Appendix Figure 2: Variation in mean 𝑮𝑷𝑺𝒆𝒏𝒕𝒊𝒎𝒆𝒏𝒕𝒊,𝒕 over time

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ଼
This ϐigure plots the quarterly mean of 𝐺𝑃𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡௜,௧ scaled by a factor of 10 . Key
geopolitical events are indicated. We lead 𝐺𝑃𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡௜,௧ such that the value plotted in
quarter t was generated from transcripts from quarter t+1. For more details, see Footnote 6.

                                  31
Appendix Table 1: Variable descriptions

                32
                Appendix Table 2: Synonyms of risk and uncertainty

This table lists all the synonyms of risk and uncertainty used to construct 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧. The
synonyms were obtained from the Oxford Dictionary following Hassan et al. (2019).

                                  33
                          Appendix Table 3: Portfolio sorts

The table shows results from regressions of portfolio monthly excess return on different
risk factors. P1 contains stocks with low 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ while P3 contains stocks with high
𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧. The portfolios are constructed at the end of each quarter based on 𝐺𝑃𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘௜,௧ as
the sorting variable. The ϐirms in each portfolio are kept until the end of the next quarter
when portfolios are rebalanced again. ***, **, and * denote statistical signiϐicance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                                  34