
Does Past Performance Guarantee Future Returns? The Role of Fund Growth and
Sector in Private Equity Performance Persistence
Abstract:
   For investors in Private Equity (PE), the ability to identify persistent outperformers can
   significantly influence long term returns. In this paper we analyse performance
   persistence within PE using a comprehensive dataset containing both fund and deal level
   data; including 1004 funds managed by 419 general partners (GPs) and 36,292 deals
   across 755 GPs. We replicate the models in Harris et al. (2023) to measure persistence
   and extend them by looking at the role of sector and scaling. We find persistence over
   one and two fund cycles for both buyout and venture capital funds. Additionally, we find
   that excessive scaling negatively impacts the performance of buyout funds and that
   persistence diminishes when they scale above 200% over two fund cycles. Finally, we
   show that the existence of persistence varies depending on the sector or industry a GP
   invests in. These findings are useful to investors in deciding where to allocate their
   capital, showing that they should evaluate the past performance of PE firms as well as
   how they manage growth across fund vintages.
Keywords:
   Private Equity, Performance Persistence, Fund Scaling, Investment Sector
Authors:
   Rebecka Stefansson (25660)
   Josefine Revelius Warghusen (25661)
Tutor:
   Mustafa Bulut, Postdoctoral Fellow, Swedish House of Finance
Examiner:
   Ramin P, Baghai, Professor, Swedish House of Finance
Acknowledgements:
   We would like to express our sincere gratitude to Mustafa Bulut for his valuable advice
   and insightful ideas throughout our research process. We are profoundly grateful to
   HarbourVest Partners and the QIS team for providing us with data. We especially extend
   a heartfelt thanks to David Butts, whose unwavering support and industry expertise was
   invaluable to the success of this project. Lastly, we want to thank Professor Per
   Strömberg for his key role in making the collaboration with HarbourVest possible.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Rebecka Stefansson and Josefine Revelius Warghusen, 2025
                                    1. Introduction

If past performance is no guarantee of future results, why do we base so many investment
decisions on it? Nowhere is this paradox more apparent than in private equity (PE), in which
investors must commit capital long before final returns are known. Thus, the possibility of
identifying repeatable outperformance over peers, so called performance persistence, would be
of great value for limited partners (LPs) in deciding where to allocate their capital.

Since the first PE boom in the 1980s, the industry has seen extraordinary growth: global capital
commitments surged from $6.7 billion in the 1990s to $7.6 trillion by 2022 (Sensoy, Wang and
Weisbach, 2014; Ain Tommar, Darolles and Jurczenko, 2024). Findings from the early 2000s
show that some PE firms consistently outperform their peers (Kaplan and Schoar, 2005; Kaplan
and Strömberg, 2009). Such outperformance can be attributed to skill in deal sourcing, valuation,
and execution (Kaplan and Schoar, 2005). Yet as the industry has become more mature and
competitive, economic theory would suggest that opportunities to outperform net fees should
become exhausted. Recent research shows the opposite to be true; top performing PE firms do
not fully appropriate the returns to their skill through higher fees or aggressive scaling (Harris,
Jenkinson, Kaplan and Stucke, 2023).

LPs typically agree to provide capital to a PE fund, which the general partner (GP) draws upon
as investment opportunities arise and to cover management fees. When investments are exited,
they are distributed back to the LPs, net of performance fees and carried interest. The PE
industry encompasses both buyout and venture capital (VC) funds. Buyout funds tend to invest
in mature companies, using control and leverage to drive performance, whereas VC funds
generally invest in startups with large growth potential but higher risk. In this paper, we
investigate performance persistence of both buyout and VC funds. We use the same definition for
performance persistence as Kaplan and Strömberg (2009, p. 137), as when “performance by a
private equity firm in one fund predicts performance by the firm in subsequent funds.”

While the existence of performance persistence among PE funds has been established by prior
literature, a key challenge has been to find ways in which investors can identify and act on such
in time to reap benefits from it. Moreover, limited research has been conducted on the effect of
scaling on performance persistence, as well as on whether persistence is more prevalent in
certain sectors GPs invest in. This paper extends Harris et al. (2023), by revisiting the question of
whether performance persistence exists over one and two fund cycles for both buyout and VC
funds. We are especially interested in understanding whether LPs, based on a GP’s prior
performance, can predict future fund performance before allocating their capital. We also study
whether persistence persists when GPs scale fund-to-fund and whether GPs have sector specific
performance persistence. We use a novel dataset sourced from an LP and investment manager,
updated as of 2025. This dataset includes performance data on 1004 funds and 36,292 holdings
across four continents, spanning from 1981 to 2019.

Our primary findings can be summarised as follows. Firstly, we confirm prior literature by
finding evidence of performance persistence over one fund cycle for buyout and VC funds, using
a more recent and geographically diverse dataset than previously available. We contribute by
showing that persistence is driven by consistent top performers for buyout funds and consistent

                                          1
top and bottom performers for VCs. Secondly, we find evidence of persistence over two fund
cycles for buyout and VC funds, a measure which is available to investors at the time of
fundraising. Thirdly, we find that scaling above 200% over two fund cycles has a negative effect
on performance for buyout funds. We show that performance persistence disappears when
buyout funds scale more than 200% over two fund cycles, but find no evidence that scaling
affects VC performance.

Lastly, we find that GPs have persistent performance in some sectors they invest in, while not in
others. Our results show that a GP’s past buyout performance in the Consumer, Industrials, and
Information Technology (IT) sector predicts future performance in the same sector. However,
past buyout performance in Health Care investments does not predict future performance in the
Health Care sector. For VC funds, we find evidence of performance persistence in investments
within Health Care Equipment & Services, Software Services, Technology Hardware &
Equipment, and Telecommunication Services, but not in Media & Entertainment or
Pharmaceuticals, Biotechnology & Life Sciences.

Early research into performance persistence finds strong evidence of its existence within PE.
Kaplan and Schoar (2005) analyse US buyout and VC funds raised in the 1980s and 1990s and
find that a GP’s previous two funds are good predictors of current fund performance. The
existence of persistence based on the most previous fund is reaffirmed in several studies,
including Hochberg, Ljungqvist and Vissing-Jorgensen (2014), Robinson and Sensoy (2016), and
Chung, Sensoy, Stern and Weisbach (2012). However, Harris, Jenkinson and Kaplan (2014)
show that the Venture Economics data used to show evidence of persistence by Kaplan and
Schoar (2005) and Hochberg et al. (2014) includes funds without recently updated figures. Harris
et al. (2023) use a larger dataset than previously available and find evidence of performance
persistence in U.S. buyout and VC funds raised between 1984 and 2015. Ain Tommar et al.
(2024) are the first to examine persistence in PE beyond U.S. funds. They find evidence of
persistence over one fund cycle in European buyout funds, but not in European VC or Asian
funds. Using data from four continents, we reaffirm prior literature by showing evidence of
persistence over one fund cycle. We also contribute by showing that persistence is driven by the
top and bottom funds of the performance distribution.

Harris et al. (2023) note that investors usually commit to a GP’s new fund while the previous
fund is still active, meaning they can only assess its interim performance rather than its final
returns when making a decision. Thus, even though persistence has been identified using ex-post
values, this is not useful information to investors. Hochberg et al. (2014) therefore also examine
persistence based on the interim performance of the previous fund at the time of new fundraising,
and find evidence of weak persistence for VC funds. Similar results are found by Harris et al.
(2023), who identify persistence based on interim performance for VC funds but not for buyout
funds. The discrepancy in the predictive power of ex-post and interim performance stems from
the low correlation between these metrics. Jenkinson, Sousa and Stucke (2013) find that the
performance figures reported by funds during follow-on fund raising are poor predictors of their
final returns due to temporarily inflated returns during fundraising. Brown, Gredil and Kaplan
(2019) confirm that underperforming managers inflate reported returns during fundraising to
attract investors; depleting the usefulness of interim performance as a reliable indicator of future
results.

                                          2
The ex-post performance of the second previous fund is also typically available to investors at
the time of fundraising (Harris et al., 2023). However, past research on persistence over two fund
cycles has yielded contradictory results. Chung et al. (2012) argue that persistence should
weaken over subsequent fund cycles due to excessive fund growth following good performance,
and find persistence over two fund cycles for buyout funds but not for VCs. To the contrary,
Harris et al. (2023) find persistence for VCs but not for buyout funds when using second
previous performance. Contradicting both Chung et al. (2012) and Harris et al. (2023), we find
evidence of persistence over two fund cycles for both buyout and VC funds.

Kaplan and Schoar (2005) argue that heterogeneity in PE performance can exist because of an
inefficient market. Having superior performance requires skills in management, access to deals,
and the ability to secure good deal terms. If these skills and opportunities are scarce or
proprietary, it will be difficult for new actors to compete efficiently, which could lead to
persistence. Brown, Fei and Robinson (2023) find that 40% of persistent return variation across
GPs is explained by skill, 48% by luck, and 12% by overlapping market conditions. Consistent
outperformance in net returns can only persist if returns to skills are not appropriated by
successful GPs. Hochberg et al. (2014) present a model for why returns to performance are not
appropriated by raising fees: if current investors choose not to invest in subsequent funds, it
signals that they possess private information suggesting the GP’s skills are poor. As this would
drive new investors away, GPs are reluctant to raise fees following good performance and
persistence can survive. As an alternative way to earn a premium on their skill, GPs can scale
their funds.

Our results on the negative effect of scaling on performance are consistent with foundational
research within the field, such as Berk and Green (2004). Our analysis also strengthens the
findings of Harris et al. (2023), who find weak evidence that scaling negatively affects the
performance of buyout funds. They argue that buyout funds are less disciplined than VCs in
avoiding scaling too rapidly to the detriment of their performance. Sensoy et al. (2014) reason
that superior performance should decline when the PE industry grows in size and sophistication,
with opportunities representing “low-hanging fruit” becoming exhausted. The higher up in the
size pyramid of PE funds you look, the less scarce GP skills are and the more efficient the market
for deals becomes, making it harder to consistently outperform. Kaplan and Schoar (2005) also
highlight that inputs in PE like time, advice or human capital are scarce and not easily scalable.
We extend prior research on the relationship between scaling and performance by showing that
scaling excessively ultimately eliminates performance persistence for buyout funds.

Previous literature largely overlooks the question of whether performance persistence in PE
varies by sector. Spaenjers and Steiner (2024) find that PEs specialised in a sector have higher
performance in that sector. Hochberg, Mazzeo and McDevitt (2015) describe the tradeoff GPs
face between reaping the benefits of building sector specialised skills and maintaining the
flexibility to shift to other sectors if competition intensifies and valuations go up. They highlight
the benefits of having specialised skills in sectors which are less crowded and require skills that
are more scarce. Since Brown et al. (2023) attribute persistence to differences in GP skill, there is
reason to believe that persistence could be stronger in such sectors. Our findings on sector
specific persistence are a new addition to the field and show that the existence of persistence
does indeed depend on the sector.

                                          3
                                   2. Data Description

We use data provided by HarbourVest Partners, a global PE fund of funds (a pooled investment
fund that invests in other PE funds) and investment manager. The data is constructed by
HarbourVest from an aggregation of investments made by HarbourVest funds and programs, data
collected as part of due diligence, and investments of client portfolios monitored by
HarbourVest. We use two datasets: one with fund level data and the other with deal level data.
Our fund level data includes 1004 funds managed by 419 GPs and have vintage years between
1981 and 2019. Our deal level data includes 36,292 deals across 755 GPs, with investment years
ranging from 1985 to 2019. Here, vintage year refers to when a fund first draws capital from its
LPs and investment year to when a GP makes its first cash outlay to a deal. Following Harris et
al. (2023), we exclude observations with vintages and investment years from the past five years
to ensure that the investments are mature enough to provide meaningful performance measures.
The fund level data covers 785 North American, 134 European, and 85 Asian funds. 684 of the
funds are from the GPs’ flagship family and 320 from adjacent fund families. The deal data
covers 25,024 North American deals, 5703 European deals, 4408 Asian (non-emerging) deals,
and 1157 deals from Emerging Markets (including South America, Eastern Europe, and parts of
Southern Asia).

We winsorise the performance variables in our datasets at a 1% level on each tail and exclude
unusually small investments to ensure the robustness of our results. We filter out buyout and VC
funds with less than $100 million in committed capital to minimise noise from very small or
emerging funds. For the same reason, we exclude buyout deals with a total cost of less than $1
million and VC deals with a total cost of less than $100,000. The difference in threshold reflects
the nature of the two strategies: buyout funds invest larger shares of their capital in mature
companies, while VCs spread smaller investments across younger, riskier companies to diversify
their exposure.

The data is likely to be accurate as it is used by HarbourVest for investment monitoring and due
diligence on behalf of themselves as an LP and clients whose portfolio they manage. This
reduces the risk of reporting bias or data manipulation, which can be a problem when data is
sourced from GPs. The dataset is highly up to date, with performance measurements last updated
as of April 2025, reducing the risk of timing bias. However, since the dataset is sourced from the
investments of a single large LP and the portfolios of its clients, there is a possibility that the
included funds and holdings are not representative of the broader PE market. While HarbourVest
has a portfolio diversified across a wide range of strategies and geographies, they may for
instance possess skills that lead them to make investments that outperform the average,
potentially introducing an upward bias in the observed performance. The average IRR and
capital committed in our fund data differ from those reported by Harris et al. (2023), who used
Burgiss data sourced from over 1000 LPs. The differences could suggest limitations in the
representativeness of our data, but could also be due to the fact that Harris et al. (2023) only
include U.S. funds and cover fewer vintage years than we do.

Prior literature (Harris et al., 2023; Kaplan and Schoar, 2005) use public market equivalent return
(PME) as their main performance metric when investigating persistence. This variable assumes
that PE performance can be directly benchmarked against public market returns, which might not

                                          4
be the case due to fundamental differences in liquidity, risk, and timing (Korteweg and Nagel,
2016). In our analysis, we instead use performance measurements that are standard industry
practice: Net Internal Rate of Return (IRR) and Total Value to Total Cost (TVTC). We adjust
these relative to the appropriate PE market.

Table 1 presents summary statistics on the 1004 funds in our sample, sorted by vintage year.
Panel A includes 565 buyout funds with an overall average committed capital of approximately
$2.5 billion. For comparison, Harris et al. (2023) have a sample including 929 buyout funds, with
an average capital committed of around $1 billion. Panel B shows data on 439 VC funds, with an
overall average committed capital of approximately $580 million. Harris et al. (2023) analyse
408 VC funds, with total average committed capital of around $250 million.

We also report average fund performance per vintage year using two metrics. Both are net of fees
and carried interest, thereby measuring the returns appropriated by LPs. The IRR is based on the
fund’s cash flows and treats any unrealised value as a final cash flow. The Total Value to Paid-In
capital (TVPI) measures the fund’s total value, both realised and unrealised, relative to the
capital paid-in by LPs. The unrealised value of a PE fund is its Net Asset Value (NAV) to this
date, which Jenkinson, Landsman, Rountree and Soonawalla (2020) find to be close to its
discounted future cash flows. The average Net IRR of buyout funds is 18% and the average Net
TVPI is 2.02. For comparison, buyout funds in Harris et al. (2023) had an average IRR of 14%
and an average TVPI of 1.81 (referred to as MOIC in their paper, although it is calculated in the
same way as TVPI). The average IRR of VC funds is slightly below 16% and the average Net
TVPI is 2.33, while the VC funds in Harris et al. (2023) had an average IRR of 19% and an
average TVPI of 2.56.

                                          5
Table 1: Summary statistics on funds
Panel A - Buyout funds

                                          6
Panel B - VC funds

                                          7
The table above replicates Table 1 in Harris et al. (2023) and shows summary statistics on the
565 buyout funds and 439 VC funds in our sample. 298 (189) of the buyout funds and 189 (133)
of the VC funds can be used to measure persistence over one (two) fund cycles. The funds are
sorted based on vintage year, which is defined as the year a fund first draws capital from its LPs.
For each vintage year, the table reports the average capital committed by investors to the fund.
The table also reports the average of two performance measures for each vintage year: 1)
Internal Rate of Return (IRR) and 2) The ratio of the total value of the fund to the capital paid-in
by investors (TVPI). Both variables include realised and unrealised values and are net of fees
and carried interest. All data is sourced from HarbourVest Partners.

When possible, we link each fund to the previous and second previous fund by the same GP
within the same fund family. We follow Harris et al. (2023) in studying fund sequences within
the same fund family, as the nature and individual partners of funds often change when GPs
deviate from their “flagship” strategies. Our data does not include side or annex funds, which
typically replicate the performance of a previous fund. If a dataset includes fund 1, 3, 4, and 5,
from a given fund sequence, this yields two pairings over two fund cycles (1-4, 3-5) and two
pairings over one fund cycle (3-4, 4-5). Harris et al. (2023) note that such gaps in fund sequences
are a natural consequence of using data from LPs, who may skip investing in certain funds
offered by a GP. Our sample thus narrows when requiring linked performances.

We measure the degree of fund-to-fund scaling by GPs based on the percentage increase in total
capital committed between subsequent funds. Since the scaling variable is right skewed, we
remove single extreme upper outliers from the datasets of funds with prior performance data
ahead of our regression analysis. Following the removal of outliers, buyout funds scaled on
average 87% (with a median of 51%) over one fund cycle and 162% (with a median of 114%)
over two fund cycles. VCs scaled on average 76% (with a median of 26%) over one fund cycle
and 181% (with a median of 47%) over two fund cycles (see Appendix A).

After removing scaling outliers, 297 buyout funds in our dataset have previous performance and
188 have second previous performance. 182 VC funds have previous performance and 132 have
second previous performance. Funds with prior performance data have performance averages
close to the full dataset, with a slight upward trend. However, they have an overall higher
average capital committed compared to the full sample (see Appendix B).

To identify sector performance, we use deal level data. Our dataset classifies each holding
according to the 11 Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS) sectors and 25 GICS industry
groups. We build “sector proxy funds” which include all deals from the same manager and
within the same GICS classification during a 3 year interval. We build our proxy funds by
grouping deals using sector classification for buyout funds and the narrower industry group
classification for VC funds. This is since most VC funds in our dataset are concentrated in the
Health Care, IT or Communication Services sector. To the contrary, buyout funds tend to be
spread more evenly across sectors (Brown et al., 2023). Moreover, buyout funds generally invest
in mature companies that tend to behave like their broader sector, while the dynamics of VC
industries within the same sector vary significantly. Thus, looking at VC performance in terms of
industry groups rather than broader sectors leads to a more meaningful and precise analysis.
When possible, we link proxy funds to the previous proxy fund by the same GP in the same

                                          8
sector or industry group. We also calculate the degree of scaling by a GP within a sector/industry
group based on the percentage change in total cost between subsequent proxy funds.

Table 2 presents summary statistics on the 2608 proxy funds with prior performance data in our
dataset, sorted by the investment year intervals of their deals. Panel A includes 1028 buyout
sector proxy funds and Panel B 1580 VC industry proxy funds. We calculate the total cost of
each proxy fund by summing the total cost of its deals. The overall average total cost is
approximately $155 million for buyout proxy funds and $15 million for VC proxy funds. Since
we do not have access to the IRRs of individual deals, the performance measurement we report is
the capital weighted ratio of TVTC. The total value of a proxy fund is the sum of the realised and
unrealised values of all its deals. We use a gross performance measure since fees and carried
interest are charged at the fund level, which makes it difficult to allocate fees to individual deals.
While this does not fully represent the returns investors experience, this is not a significant
limitation as LPs do not invest in individual deals and incur fees solely at the fund level.

The overall average TVTC is 2.64 for buyout proxy funds and 2.66 for VC proxy funds. The full
dataset of proxy funds, including those without previous performance, have capital committed
and performance averages close to the proxy funds with previous performance presented in
Table 2 (see Appendix C). While Table 2 includes observations from all GICS sectors and
industry groups, we only perform analysis on sector and industry group subsets with more than
100 proxy funds.

Table 2: Summary statistics on proxy funds with previous performance
Panel A - Buyout sector proxy funds

                                          9
Panel B - VC industry proxy funds

The table above replicates Table 1 in Harris et al. (2023) and shows summary statistics on the
1028 buyout sector proxy funds and 1580 VC industry proxy funds in our sample. A proxy fund
includes all of the buyout (VC) deals from the same GP within the same sector (industry group)
during a three year interval. The proxy funds are sorted based on the investment year intervals of
their deals. Only proxy funds that can be used to measure persistence over one fund cycle are
included. For each vintage year, the table reports the average total cost of the proxy funds. We
calculate the total cost of each proxy fund by summing the total costs of its deals. The table also
reports averages of the performance measure Total Value to Total Cost (TVTC). The TVTC of a
proxy fund is defined as the sum of the realised and unrealised values of all its deals, divided by
the sum of the total costs of those deals. All data is sourced from HarbourVest Partners.

To correct for cross-sectional correlation, and reduce skewness and spurious autocorrelation
caused by macroeconomic cycles, we benchmark fund and proxy fund performance. To
benchmark fund performance, we use data collected from MSCI’s Burgiss Private Capital
Indexes by HarbourVest. Burgiss has a global dataset of over 13,000 PE funds with return data
sourced directly from LPs. They use this to calculate indices for different PE markets, as defined
by stage (meaning VC or buyout) and geography. We benchmark performance by subtracting the
Net IRR index of the corresponding market and vintage year from each fund’s Net IRR (see
Appendix E). Another way to benchmark performance is through performance quartiles. Burgiss
provides quartiles based on the distribution of Net IRR for all funds within the same market and
vintage year. To assess relative performance, we again use Burgiss data collected by HarbourVest
to identify into which quartile each fund in our sample falls within its respective market.

To benchmark sector specific performance, we calculate the pooled, capital weighted TVTC for
all buyout (VC) deals within the same sector (industry group) and investment year interval. Since

                                          10
TVTC does not take on negative values, we also log it to reduce skewness. We adjust sector
performance by subtracting the logged pooled TVTC of the corresponding sector and vintage
year from each proxy fund’s logged TVTC (see Appendix F).

                                   3. Empirical Results

3.1 Performance Quartile Persistence
We replicate prior studies (Kaplan and Schoar, 2005, Robinson and Sensoy, 2016, and Harris et
al., 2023) in constructing a performance quartile transition matrix. We base our analysis on the
Net IRR quartiles of funds in their respective market and vintage year, where quartile one
represents top performers and quartile four bottom ones. We begin by dividing the funds into six
groups: four quartiles based on performance of the previous fund of the same GP, first funds of a
GP, and funds wherein data of a prior fund is missing but the fund is not first in its sequence. For
each vintage year, the funds within one market have also been assigned into four quartiles based
on their current performance. The proportion of funds within each of the six groups that end up
in each quartile, as well as the average Net IRR for each group, is computed. In this way, we
investigate whether the performance quartile of a previous fund predicts the performance quartile
of the next.

Table 3: Buyout performance quartile transition matrix

The table above replicates Table 2 in Harris et al. (2023) and shows a quartile transition matrix
over one fund cycle for buyout funds. The column“Group” divides the funds as follows: funds
with a prior fund are matched with the previous fund performance quartile, first funds of a GP in
a fund family are sorted into the “First Time Funds” category, and funds with no prior fund data
that are not first in their fund family are assigned to the “No Most Previous Fund” group. The
distribution of each group’s fund performance across quartiles is calculated. Quartile one
represents best performing funds and quartile four represents worst performing ones. The table
also presents the average Net IRR of each group. Quartiles are pre-assigned to each fund using a
Burgiss dataset, and represent their performance within the most appropriate PE market.

Table 3 shows that there is persistence based on previous fund performance among buyout
funds, primarily driven by consistent top quartile performance. GPs whose previous fund had top
quartile performance perform in the top quartile and above the median in 42% and 65% of cases,
respectively. A top to bottom flip occurs 17% of the time and a bottom to top flip 14% of the

                                           11
time. The average Net IRR is seven percentage points higher for GPs with a prior fund in the top
quartile compared to GPs with one in the bottom quartile, and a t-test for equality of the means
between these groups is rejected at the 5% significance level. Funds with previous performance
in the first and second quartile outperform the overall buyout subsample average of 18% (see
Table 1), while funds with previous performance in the third and fourth quartile underperform it.
This means that if LPs had information about GPs’ most previous fund performance before
investing they could improve their performance significantly.

GPs with previous funds in the bottom quartile perform below the median only 42% of the time,
primarily due to their high allocation to the second quartile. This could be due to a high attrition
rate for bottom performing funds; only 11% of funds with a previous fund had prior bottom
quartile performance, rather than the 25% you would expect at random. As noted by Harris et al.
(2023), this could reflect the exit of GPs after poor performance and risks biasing the analysis.
The average Net IRRs of GPs with prior performance in the intermediate quartiles are not
significantly different from each other, nor from the average Net IRRs of GPs with prior
performance in the other quartiles. It is notable that GPs with prior third quartile performance
perform worse on average than those with fourth quartile previous performance, although this
difference is not statistically significant.

First time funds rank between GPs with prior first quartile and second quartile results, yet the
difference in average Net IRR is not statistically different compared to either group. First time
funds also perform significantly better than funds with previous performance in the third quartile,
but have no significant difference to funds with previous performance in the fourth quartile. They
perform in the top quartile and above the median almost as frequently as funds with prior first
quartile performance (42% and 65% of the time, respectively), and have an average Net IRR
higher than the overall sample (see Table 1). This suggests that avoiding investments in funds
managed by new GPs, or in new fund families launched by existing GPs, could mean forgoing
above average returns. Non-first time funds with missing prior performance show a fairly even
quartile distribution, suggesting the data may be missing at random, which makes it less likely to
bias conclusions about persistence.

 Table 4: VC performance quartile transition matrix

The table above replicates Table 2 in Harris et al. (2023) and shows a quartile transition matrix
over one fund cycle for VC funds. The column“Group” divides the funds as follows: funds with a

                                          12
prior fund are matched with the previous fund performance quartile, first funds of a GP in a fund
family are sorted into the “First Time Funds” category, and funds with no prior fund data that
are not first in their fund family are assigned to the “No Most Previous Fund” group. The
distribution of each group’s fund performance across quartiles is calculated. Quartile one
represents best performing funds and quartile four represents worst performing ones. The table
also presents the average Net IRR of each group. Quartiles are pre-assigned to each fund using a
Burgiss dataset, and represent their performance within the most appropriate PE market.

Table 4 shows performance quartile persistence for VC funds based on their previous fund,
driven by consistent top and bottom performance. GPs with previous top performance stay in the
first quartile 44% of the time and above the median 65% of the time. GPs with previous funds in
the bottom quartile stay in the bottom quartile and below the median 41% respectively 68% of
the time. There is a semi high attrition rate for fourth quartile funds, as only 17% of funds with a
previous fund had prior bottom quartile performance. A top to bottom flip only occurs 10% of
the time and a bottom to top flip 14% of the time. GPs with prior top and bottom performance
show an average Net IRR difference of a remarkable 14 percentage points, and a t-test for
equality of their means is rejected at the 5% significance level. Funds with previous performance
in the first or second quartile outperform the overall VC subsample average of slightly below
16%, while funds in the third or fourth quartile underperform it (see Table 1).

Similar to our findings for buyout funds, we find that the average Net IRRs of VC funds with
prior quartile two and three performance are not significantly different from each other or from
other groups. First time funds rank between funds with prior top and second quartile
performance, with no significant difference in average Net IRR compared to either group. They
perform in the top quartile 40% of the time and selectively not investing in first time funds
would mean foregoing returns higher than the overall average of slightly less than 16% (see
Table 1). The distribution of quartile performance for funds without a most previous fund is
skewed toward high performance, which could suggest that there is some selection bias related to
the missing data.

Given the limited value of ex-post persistence to investors and the poor predictive ability of
interim results (Harris et al., 2023), we go on to examine persistence based on second previous
fund performance. We present probability transition matrices looking at persistence over two
fund cycles in Appendix G. These transition matrices show that information on buyout and VC
performance quartiles from two fund cycles ago can give LPs insight on future top performance.
However, due to high attrition rates and a resulting small sample of funds with second previous
bottom performance, few conclusions can be drawn on persistent underperformance with this
method.

3.2 Persistence Estimation Using Regressions
An alternative approach to measure persistence included in Harris et al. (2023), is to use linear
regressions to relate current and previous performance to one another. We replicate this method
using benchmarked Net IRR instead of PME as our performance metric. We use second previous
performance as the independent variable since we aim to identify persistence based on a measure
informative to LPs. In contrast to probability transition matrices, using linear regressions allows
us to control for factors that may influence performance. Replicating Harris et al. (2023), we

                                          13
introduce two non-cumulative dummy control variables for funds that scale by 50-200% and by
more than 200% relative to their second previous fund. When time fixed effects are included in
the regression, none of them are significant. We believe this is because the benchmarked Net IRR
variable already captures the effects of cross-sectional correlation and spurious autocorrelation
caused by macroeconomic effects. Therefore we omit time fixed effects from our regression
analysis going forwards.

Table 5: Persistence regressions over two fund cycles

The table above replicates Table 8 in Harris et al. (2023) and shows an OLS regression in which
benchmarked current Net IRR is regressed on benchmarked second previous Net IRR, with two
scaling dummies. The regression is run separately for VC and buyout funds. One of the dummies
is coded one when funds scale between 50-200% over two fund cycles, and the other when funds
scale above 200%. Our samples consist of 182 (132) buyout (VC) funds, and only include funds
with a corresponding second previous fund. Robust standard errors (HC0) are reported in
parentheses. The number of observations, R², adjusted R², residual standard error, and
F-statistics are provided as additional indicators of model fit and robustness. The regression is
as follows:

 Current Benchmarked Net IRR = β₀ + β₁ · Second Previous Benchmarked Net IRR + D₁ · Scale
                       Increase 50-200% + D₂ · Scale Increase >200% + ε

Table 5 reports performance persistence over two fund cycles at the 1% significance level for
both buyout and VC funds. Contrary to Harris et al. (2023), we show that second previous fund
performance can predict current fund performance not only for VC but also for buyout funds. We
find no effect of scaling on the performance of VC funds. Scaling by more than 200% relative to
the second previous fund has a negative effect on the performance of buyout funds at the 5%
significance level. This negative effect of scaling on performance is consistent with Berk and
Green (2004). It also confirms the findings of Harris et al. (2023), who find a negative effect of

                                          14
scaling for buyout funds and argue that VC funds are more disciplined than buyouts in their
approach to scaling.

3.3 Persistence When Scaling Fund-to-Fund
To examine whether persistence remains when GPs scale fund-to-fund, we create two subsets:
one of funds that scale between 25-100% (50-200%) and one of funds that scale more than 100%
(200%) over one (two) fund cycle. We run the regression with both previous and second previous
fund performance as the independent variable to investigate if persistence persists over both one
and two fund cycles when funds scale. We use different scaling cutoffs when looking over one
and two fund cycles to reflect the difference in time periods when comparing funds with their
most previous, and second most previous, predecessor. We regress the current benchmarked Net
IRR on the (second) previous benchmarked Net IRR for these subsets separately.

Table 6: Buyout persistence regressions when scaling over one fund cycle

The table above replicates Table 6 in Harris et al. (2023) and shows OLS regressions on our
buyout scaling subsets, one for funds that scale between 25-100% and another for funds that
scale above 100% over one fund cycle. We regress current benchmarked Net IRR on previous
benchmarked Net IRR. Our sample consists of 131 funds that scale 25-100% and 70 that scale
>100%. Robust standard errors (HC0) are reported in parentheses. The number of observations,
R², adjusted R², residual standard error, and F-statistics are provided as additional indicators of
model fit and robustness. The regression is run as follows for each subset:

       Current Benchmarked Net IRR = β0 + β1⋅ Previous Benchmarked Net IRR + ε

As shown in Table 6, there is performance persistence at the 1% significance level among
buyout funds that scale between 25-100% over one fund cycle. There is also persistence at the
10% level for buyout funds that scale above 100% over one fund cycle. Scaling over one fund
cycle thus does not eliminate persistence for buyout funds.

                                          15
Table 7: Buyout persistence regressions when scaling over two fund cycles

The table above replicates Table 8 in Harris et al. (2023) and shows OLS regressions on our
buyout scaling subsets; one for funds that scale between 50-200% and another for funds that
scale above 200% over two fund cycles. We regress the benchmarked current Net IRR on the
second previous benchmarked Net IRR. Our sample consists of 64 funds that scale 50-200% and
59 that scale >200%. Robust standard errors (HC0) are reported in parentheses. The number of
observations, R², adjusted R², residual standard error, and F-statistics are provided as additional
indicators of model fit and robustness. The regression is run as follows for each subset:

    Current Benchmarked Net IRR = β0 + β1⋅ Second Previous Benchmarked Net IRR + ε

Table 7 shows that performance persistence exists for buyout funds that scale between 50% and
200% over two fund cycles, but not for those that scale by more than 200%. As scaling above
200% over two funds has a negative effect on performance, this could potentially disrupt
previous persistent outperformance (see Table 5), explaining why persistent differences in
performance between GPs could diminish. Regressions on our VC scaling subsets over one and
two fund cycles can be found in Appendix H, however, the conclusiveness of these results is
limited due to small sample sizes.

3.4 Sector Specific Persistence
To investigate sector level persistence, we continue by creating sector and industry group subsets
using our “sector proxy funds.” LPs cannot pick individual deals to invest in and therefore
cannot selectively back investments in certain sectors. Thus, it is not interesting whether sector
specific persistence is based on a measure available to LPs at the time of fundraising or not. We
therefore only look at sector specific persistence over one fund cycle, i.e., using the most
previous fund results. We repeat the methodology used in prior regressions (replicating Harris et
al., 2023) by investigating if the performance of a GP’s previous proxy fund can predict the
performance of their next proxy fund, within each sector/industry subset. Our performance
metric in this case is benchmarked TVTC, since we do not have access to Net IRRs for our deal
level data. We control for the effect of scaling by including two non-cumulative dummy
variables: one for proxy funds that are 25-100% larger than their predecessor in the same
sector/industry, and one for those that are more than 100% larger.

                                          16
Table 8: Buyout persistence regressions by sector

The table above replicates Table 6 in Harris et al. (2023) and reports the results from OLS
regressions on our buyout sector subsets – consisting of sector proxy funds – including scaling
dummies. One of the dummies is coded one when sector proxy funds scale between 25-100%
over one fund cycle, and the other when they scale above 100%. Current performance is
regressed on previous performance. Performance is measured using benchmarked (logged)
TVTC. Our sample consists of 332 Consumer proxy funds, 205 Industrials proxy funds, 118
Health Care proxy funds, and 156 Information Technology ones. Robust standard errors (HC0)
are reported in parentheses. The number of observations, R², adjusted R², residual standard
error, and F-statistics are provided as additional indicators of model fit and robustness. The
regressions are run as follows for each sector subset:

         Current Benchmarked TVTC = β0 + β1 ⋅ Previous Benchmarked TVTC + D₁ ⋅ Scale
                     Increase 25-100% + D₂ ⋅ Scale Increase >100% + ε

Table 8 presents the results of our persistence regressions on sector specific subsets of buyout
proxy funds. We identify performance persistence for buyout funds at the 10% significance level
in the Consumer and Industrials sectors, and at the 5% level in the IT sector. Thus, prior buyout
performance in these sectors can predict future performance in the same sector. However, we do
not identify performance persistence for investments in the Health Care sector.

                                          17
Table 9: VC persistence regressions by industry

The table above replicates Table 6 in Harris et al. (2023). It reports the results from OLS
regressions on our VC industry subsets – consisting of industry proxy funds – including scaling
dummies. One of the dummies is coded one when industry proxy funds scale between 25-100%
over one fund cycle, and the other when they scale above 100%. Current performance is
regressed on previous performance. Performance is measured using benchmarked (logged)
TVTC. Our sample includes 202 Healthcare, 145 Media, 384 Software, 130 Pharma, 174
Tech-Hardware, and 111 Telecom industry proxy funds. These are abbreviation of GICS industry
groups:“Healthcare” denotes the “Healthcare Equipment & Services” industry; “Media” the
Media & Entertainment industry; “Software” the Software & Services industry; “Pharma” the
Pharmaceuticals, Biotechnology & Life Sciences industry; “Tech-Hardware” the Technology
Hardware & Equipment industry; and finally “Telecom” the Telecommunications Services
industry. Robust standard errors (HC0) are reported in parentheses. The number of observations,
R², adjusted R², residual standard error, and F-statistics are provided as additional indicators of
model fit and robustness. The regressions are run as follows for each industry subset:

         Current Benchmarked TVTC = β0 + β1 ⋅ Previous Benchmarked TVTC + D₁ ⋅ Scale
                     Increase 25-100% + D₂ ⋅ Scale Increase >100% + ε

Table 9 presents the results of our persistence regressions on industry specific subsets of VC
proxy funds. In the Healthcare Equipment & Services industry (denoted “Healthcare”),
Telecommunications Services industry (denoted “Telecom”), and the Software & Services
industry (denoted “Software”) we find performance persistence at the 1% level. We also find
persistence at the 5% level within the Technology Hardware & Equipment industry (denoted
“Tech-Hardware”). Thus, we conclude that prior VC investments within Healthcare, Software,
Tech-Hardware, and Telecom can predict future performance in those industries. However, we
find no performance persistence within the Media & Entertainment industry (denoted “Media”)
or the Pharmaceuticals, Biotechnology & Life Sciences industry (denoted “Pharma”).

                                          18
                                        4. Discussion

Despite conflicting findings in past literature regarding the existence of performance persistence
over two fund cycles, we find evidence of persistence using both previous and second previous
performance for buyout and VC funds. Prior fund performance is especially informative if the
previous fund was in the top quartile for buyout funds and top or bottom quartile for VCs. As
earlier literature has suggested (Kaplan and Schoar, 2005; Brown et al., 2023), the existence of
performance persistence can be explained by inefficiencies in the PE market; with the skills
required to be successful scarce or proprietary. Performance persistence net of fees can exist
since returns to high performance are not appropriated. This may be due to the negative
signalling effect that would arise if current LPs chose not to invest in future funds, hindering GPs
from raising fees following strong performance (Hochberg et al., 2014).

Our evidence of persistence over two fund cycles contradicts Chung et al. (2012), who argue that
persistence should weaken over subsequent fund cycles due to excessive fund growth following
strong performance. As argued by Kaplan and Schoar (2005), successful GPs face diseconomies
of scale as the inputs they provide, like time or advice, are not easily scalable. This could disrupt
prior consistent top performance. Our findings suggest that successful GPs exercise caution
when scaling and avoid scaling excessively. Successful GPs who aim to scale may also face
obstacles as there might only exist a limited number of opportunities present in the market at a
given time, both in terms of investing and hiring (Kaplan and Schoar, 2005). Thus, persistence
persists over both one and two fund cycles, and investors should be able to significantly improve
their performance by basing investment decisions on the performance of a GP’s second previous
fund.

Another key finding of ours is the effect of scaling on persistence. According to Kaplan and
Schoar (2005) and Sensoy et al. (2014), excessive scaling should diminish consistent
outperformance since investment opportunities representing “low-hanging fruit” become
exhausted in the higher end of the PE fund size distribution. We find that moderate scaling over
two fund cycles (50-200%) has no significant effect on performance for either of our subsets,
while more excessive scaling (>200%) has a significant negative effect on performance for
buyout funds. We also find that persistence disappears when buyout funds scale more than 200%
over two fund cycles. Harris et al. (2023) report similar findings, noting that scaling only
negatively affects performance in their buyout sample. The authors argue that this is likely a
consequence of buyout funds being less disciplined than VCs in avoiding scaling too rapidly to
the detriment of their performance. An alternative explanation could be derived from the VC
business model itself, as it might not be scalable by nature. For instance, the number of quality
startups in a market might be limited and the value VCs add might stem from less scalable inputs
such as mentorship and networks. This theory is consistent with the comparably smaller number
of VC than buyout funds which scale in our data.

There are few precedent findings surrounding the impact of sector/industry on performance
persistence in PE. However, Sensoy et al. (2014)’s conclusions surrounding the decline of
superior performance as the PE industry grows in size and sophistication could be applicable to
sectors/industries within PE too. As highlighted by Hochberg et al. (2015), having specialised
skills in a sector is more valuable if competitors and skills within that sector are scarce. Since

                                          19
Brown et al. (2023) attribute persistence to differences in GP skill, persistent outperformance
could be stronger in such sectors. For buyout funds, we find performance persistence in every
sector except for Health Care. Moreover, we find persistence in every VC industry except for
Media and Pharma. This could be due to these sectors representing more crowded and efficient
markets, with skills that are less scarce than in other sectors, making consistent outperformance
more difficult.

An alternative explanation for the lack of persistence in some sectors could be a recent surge in
sector concentrated GPs. Spaenjers and Steiner (2024) show that the proportion of GPs
specialising in a sector has almost doubled during the last 20 years, mostly driven by new
entrants. They also find that being specialised in a sector improves performance in that sector. It
is thus possible that generalist GPs who were once top performers in a sector might no longer
hold that position, due to specialised new entrants outperforming them. This shift could lead to a
temporary transitional period during which performance persistence disappears in sectors where
the number of specialised GPs have increased significantly. This could explain our inability to
detect persistence in some sectors, should they have seen a recent increase in specialised actors.
It would be interesting for future research to investigate if persistence in specific sectors varies
across different points in time – and whether findings become more consistent across sectors
once the surge in sector specialised GPs stabilises.

                              5. Concluding Remarks

Our findings confirm prior literature by showing that performance persistence over one fund
cycle exists for buyout and VC funds, using a more recent and geographically diverse dataset.
We contribute to the field by finding evidence of persistence based on a measure which is useful
to investors when allocating their capital. Past performance is no guarantee of future results,
however examining a GP’s second previous fund results is informative for where to allocate
capital next. By finding that scaling too aggressively destroys persistence for buyout funds, we
show that LPs should not only evaluate past performance, but also how GPs manage growth
across fund vintages. Our results on the variation of performance persistence across the different
sectors are a new addition to the field, and future research on this topic would be particularly
interesting.

PE is generally exempt from public disclosure requirements, making data hard to come by. Early
research into persistence among PE funds therein relies on datasets voluntarily reported by GPs.
While sourcing data from an LP and investment manager increases the reliability of our results, it
also limits our sample size. Since analysing persistence requires data on prior fund performance,
and given that we examine persistence separately for different subsets, our sample sizes become
even more limited. We think that further research building on our contributions – especially
looking at the effects of scaling on persistence as well as sector specific persistence – would
benefit from larger datasets sourced from multiple LPs.

Most past research on persistence relies on North American funds due to limited international
data. However, half of global PE investments are made in markets outside of North America
(Ain Tommar et al., 2024). In this paper, we attempt to look at the aggregate PE market, and thus
conduct our analysis on a geographically diverse sample. Recent studies by Ain Tommar et al.

                                          20
(2024) find little evidence of persistence in Europe, Asia, and the rest of the world, compared to
North America. This indicates that our results could be more driven by certain markets than
others. If the prevalence or nature of persistence differs significantly across regions, our analysis
would have benefitted from being completed on a geographical level. As more international PE
data becomes available, a closer examination of regional differences in performance persistence
would also be an interesting way of extending the field.

Finally, our analysis could also benefit from being conducted separately for different time
periods, mitigating the risk that a few extreme vintages unproportionally influence the results.
For instance, the negative effect on buyout performance we find from scaling excessively could
be driven by the strong buyout growth seen leading up to the 2008 financial crisis (Kaplan and
Strömberg, 2009). Therefore, it might be meaningful to conduct our scaling analysis separately
for pre- and post- 2008 vintages.

                                          21
                                      6. References

Berk, Jonathan B., Richard Green, 2004, Mutual Fund Flows and Performance in Rational
Markets, Journal of Political Economy 112, 1269-1295.

Brown, Gregory W., Celine Yue Fei, David T. Robinson, 2023, Portfolio Management in Private
Equity, NBER Working paper w31664.

Brown, Gregory W., Oleg Gredil, Steven N. Kaplan, 2019, Do private equity funds manipulate
returns?, Journal of Financial Economics 132, 267-297.

Chung, Ji-Woong, Berk A. Sensoy, Léa Stern, Michael S. Weisbach, 2012, Pay for Performance
from Future Fund Flows: The Case of Private Equity, The Review of Financial Studies 25,
3259-3304.

Harris, Robert S., Tim Jenkinson, Steven N. Kaplan, 2014, Private Equity Performance: What
Do We Know?, Journal of Finance 69, 1851-1882.

Harris, Robert S., Tim Jenkinson, Steven N. Kaplan, and Reudiger Stucke, 2023, Has persistence
persisted in private equity? Evidence from buyout and venture capital funds, Journal of
Corporate Finance 81, 102361.

Hochberg, Yael V., Alexander Ljungqvist, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2014, Informational
Holdup and Performance Persistence in Venture Capital, The Review of Financial Studies 27,
102-152.

Hochberg, Yael V., Michael J. Mazzeo, Ryan C. Mcdevitt, 2015, Specialization and Competition
in the Venture Capital Industry, Review of Industrial Organization 46, 323-347.

Jenkinson, Tim, Miguel Sousa, Rudiger Stucke, 2013, How Fair Are the Valuations of Private
Equity Funds?, Working Paper, University of Oxford.

Jenkinson, Tim, Wayne R. Landsman, Brian R. Rountree, Kazbi Soonawalla, 2020, Private
Equity Net Asset Values and Future Cash Flows, The Accounting Review, 191-210.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Per Strömberg, 2009, Leveraged Buyouts and Private Equity, The Journal
of Economic Perspectives 23, 121-146.

Kaplan, Steven., and Antoinette Schoar, 2005, Private Equity Performance: Returns, Persistence,
and Capital Flows, Journal of Finance 60, 1791-1823.

                                          22
Korteweg, Arthur, Stefan Nagel, 2016, Risk-Adjusting the Returns to Venture Capital, Journal of
Finance 71, 1437-1470.

Robinson, David T., Berk A. Sensoy, 2016, Cyclicality, performance measurement, and cash
flow liquidity in private equity, Journal of Financial Economics 122, 521-543.

Sensoy, Berk A., Yingdi Wang, Michael S. Weisbach, 2014, Limited partner performance and the
maturing of the private equity industry, Journal of Financial Economics 112, 320-343.

Spaenjers, Christophe, Eva Steiner, 2024, Specialization and performance in private equity:
Evidence from the hotel industry, Journal of Financial Economics 162, 103930.

Tommar Ain, Sara, Serge Darolles, Emmanuel Jurczenko, 2024, Private Equity Performance
around the World, Financial Analysts Journal 80, 99-121.

                                          23
                                    7. Appendix

Appendix A
Figure A1: Distribution of buyout scaling over one fund cycle (pre- and post-outlier
removal)

The left side of the table above shows the distribution of scaling over one fund cycle for buyout
funds with previous performance data. Scaling is calculated as the percentage change in total
capital committed by investors. The right side of the table shows the distribution after removing
one extreme upper outlier.

Figure A2: Distribution of buyout scaling over two fund cycles (pre- and post-outlier
removal)

The left side of the table above shows the distribution of scaling over two fund cycles for buyout
funds with second previous performance data. Scaling is calculated as the percentage change in
total capital committed by investors. The right side of the table shows the distribution after
removing one extreme upper outlier.

                                          24
 Figure A3: Distribution of VC scaling over one fund cycle (pre- and post-outlier removal)

The left side of the table above shows the distribution of scaling over one fund for VC funds with
previous performance data. Scaling is calculated as the percentage change in total capital
committed by investors. The right side of the table shows the distribution after removing one
extreme upper outlier.

 Figure A4: Distribution of VC scaling over two fund cycles (pre- and post-outlier removal)

The left side of the table table above shows the distribution of scaling over two funds for VC
funds with second previous performance data. Scaling is calculated as the percentage change in
total capital committed by investors. The right side of the table shows the distribution after
removing one extreme upper outlier.

Appendix B
Appendix B presents summary statistics on funds with prior performance information. The
average Net IRRs of funds with available previous and second previous performance is within
one percentage point of their respective overall sample Net IRRs (see Table 1). This is except for
VC funds with second previous performance, which have a Net IRR that is 4.1 percentage points
higher than the overall sample. Average TVPI for buyout funds with previous and second
previous performance differs less than 4% from the overall sample, and VC funds differ less than
20% from the overall sample. Average capital committed differs less than 20% compared to the
overall sample for buyout funds and less than 68% for VC funds.

                                          25
Table B1: Summary statistics on funds with previous performance
Panel A - Buyout funds

                                          26
Panel B - VC funds

The table above replicates Table 1 in Harris et al. (2023) and shows summary statistics on the
298 buyout funds and 189 VC funds in our sample with previous performance data. The funds
are sorted based on vintage year, which is defined as the year a fund first draws capital from its
LPs. For each vintage year, the table reports the average capital committed by investors to the
funds. The table also reports the average of two performance measures for each vintage year: 1)
Internal Rate of Return (IRR); and 2) The ratio of the total value of the fund to the capital
paid-in by investors (TVPI). Both variables include realised and unrealised values and are net of
fees and carried interest. All data is sourced from Harbourvest Partners.

                                          27
Table B2: Summary statistics on funds with second previous performance
Panel A - Buyout funds

                                          28
Panel B - VC funds

The table above replicates Table 1 in Harris et al. (2023) and shows summary statistics on the
189 buyout funds and 133 VC funds in our sample with second previous performance data. The
funds are sorted based on vintage year, which is defined as the year a fund first draws capital
from its LPs. For each vintage year, the table reports the average capital committed by investors
to the funds. The table also reports the average of two performance measures for each vintage
year: 1) Internal Rate of Return (IRR); and 2) The ratio of the total value of the fund to the
capital paid-in by investors (TVPI). Both variables include realised and unrealised values and
are net of fees and carried interest. All data is sourced from Harbourvest Partners.

                                          29
Appendix C
Appendix C presents summary statistics on all proxy funds in our sample. For both buyout and
VC, average TVTC differs less than 7% from proxy funds with previous performance. Average
total cost differs less than 13% from proxy funds with previous performance data (see Table 2).

Table C1: Summary statistics on proxy funds
Panel A - Buyout sector proxy funds

                                          30
Panel B - VC industry proxy funds

The table above replicates Table 1 in Harris et al. (2023) and shows summary statistics on the
2504 buyout sector proxy funds and 3656 industry proxy funds in our sample. A proxy fund
includes all of the buyout (VC) deals from the same GP within the same sector (industry group)
during a three year interval. The proxy funds are sorted based on the investment year intervals of
their deals. For each vintage year, the table reports the average total cost of the proxy funds. We
calculate the total cost of each proxy fund by summing the total costs of its deals. The table also
reports averages of the performance measure Total Value to Total Cost (TVTC). The TVTC of a
proxy fund is defined as the sum of the realised and unrealised values of all its deals, divided by
the sum of the total costs of those deals. All data is sourced from HarbourVest Partners.

                                          31
Appendix D
Figure D1: Distribution of HHI for buyout managers

The table above shows the distribution of Herfindahl-Hirschman indices score (HHI) for all GPs
with buyout deals in our deal data. HHI measures sector concentration. The score can range
between [0,1] and a higher value indicates a higher degree of concentration. A HHI score for
GPj is calculated as follows:
       HHIj = Σ (wᵢ)²
        wᵢ = (Lifetime total invested in sector i) ÷ (Lifetime total invested across all sectors)

Figure D2: Distribution of HHI for VC managers

The table above shows the distribution of Herfindahl-Hirschman indices score (HHI) for all GPs
with VC deals in our deal data. HHI measures industry concentration. The score can range
between [0,1] and a higher value indicates a higher degree of concentration. A HHI score for
GPj is calculated as follows:

                                          32
       HHIj = Σ (wᵢ)²
       wᵢ = (Lifetime total invested in industry group i) ÷ (Lifetime total invested across all
       industry groups)

Appendix E
Figure E1: Distribution of buyout fund Net IRR (pre- and post-benchmarking)

The left side of the table above shows the distribution of Net IRR for buyout funds. Net IRR is
based on the fund’s cash flows, and treats any unrealised value as a final cash flow. The measure
is net of fees and carried interest. The right side of the table shows the distribution of
benchmarked Net IRR for buyout funds. The benchmarked metric is created by subtracting the
Net IRR index of the corresponding buyout market and vintage year from each fund’s Net IRR.
We use MSCI’s Burgiss Private Capital Indexes, and the market is defined by geography (North
America, Asia or Europe).

Figure E2: Distribution of VC fund Net IRR (pre- and post-benchmarking)

The left side of the table above shows the distribution of Net IRR for VC funds. Net IRR is based
on the fund’s cash flows, and treats any unrealised value as a final cash flow. The measure is net
of fees and carried interest. The right side of the table shows the distribution of benchmarked Net
IRR for VC funds. The benchmarked metric is created by subtracting the Net IRR index of the
corresponding VC market and vintage year from each fund’s Net IRR. We use MSCI’s Burgiss
Private Capital Indexes, and the market is defined by geography (North America, Asia or
Europe).

                                          33
Appendix F
Figure F1: Distribution of buyout proxy fund TVTC (pre- and post-benchmarking)

The left side of the table above shows the distribution of the ratio Total Value to Total Cost
(TVTC) for buyout sector proxy funds. A proxy fund includes all of the buyout deals from the
same GP within the same sector during a three year interval. The TVTC of a proxy fund is
defined as the sum of the realised and unrealised values of all its deals, divided by the sum of the
total costs of those deals. The right side of the table shows the distribution of benchmarked
TVTC for buyout sector proxy funds. We create the benchmarked measure by subtracting the
logged pooled TVTC of the corresponding sector and vintage year from each proxy fund’s logged
TVTC. The pooled TVTC is the capital weighted TVTC of all buyout deals in our data within the
same sector and investment year interval.

Figure F2: Distribution of VC proxy fund TVTC (pre- and post-benchmarking)

The left side of the table above shows the distribution of the ratio Total Value to Total Cost
(TVTC) for VC industry proxy funds. A proxy fund includes all of the VC deals from the same GP
within the same industry group during a three year interval. The TVTC of a proxy fund is defined
as the sum of the realised and unrealised values of all its deals, divided by the sum of the total
costs of those deals. The right side of the table shows the distribution of benchmarked TVTC for
VC industry proxy funds. We create the benchmarked measure by subtracting the logged pooled
TVTC of the corresponding sector and vintage year from each proxy fund’s logged TVTC.
 The pooled TVTC is the capital weighted TVTC of all VC deals in our data within the same
industry group and investment year interval.

                                          34
Appendix G
Table G1: Buyout performance quartile transition matrix over two fund cycles

The table above replicates Table 2 in Harris et al. (2023) and shows a probability quartile
transition matrix over two fund cycles for buyout funds. The column“Group” divides the funds as
follows: funds with a second previous fund are matched with their second previous fund
performance quartile, first funds of a GP in a fund family are sorted into the“First Time Funds”
category, and funds with no prior fund data that are not first in their fund family are assigned to
the “No Previous Fund” group. The distribution of each group’s fund performance across
quartiles is calculated. The table also presents the average Net IRR of each group. Quartiles are
pre-assigned to each fund using a Burgiss dataset, and represent their performance within the
most appropriate PE market.

Table G1 shows that weaker quartile persistence can be established for buyout funds when we
look at persistence over two fund cycles instead of one. GPs with second prior funds in the first
quartile perform in the top quartile 42% of the time and above the median 62% of the time. Top
to bottom flips occur only 15% of the time. Since the attrition rate is high, only 10 GPs have a
second previous fund which performed in the bottom quartile. Thus, limited conclusions can be
drawn on persistence in bottom quartile performance. While the average Net IRR decreases with
the second previous fund quartile, the groups’ average Net IRRs are not significantly different
from each other. First time funds have the same average performance as GPs with prior second
quartile results, but there are no significant differences across first time funds and the other
groups. The relatively even distribution of funds with missing second previous data suggests that
the data is missing at random. Overall, few conclusions can be drawn on persistence over two
fund cycles using this method due to the low sample sizes and high attrition rates.

                                          35
Table G2: VC performance quartile transition matrix over two fund cycles

The table above replicates Table 2 in Harris et al. (2023) and shows a probability quartile
transition matrix over two fund cycles for VC funds. The column“Group” divides the funds as
follows: funds with a second previous fund are matched with the second previous fund
performance quartile, first funds of a GP in a fund family are sorted into the“First Time Funds”
category, and funds with no prior fund data that are not first in their fund family are assigned to
the “No Previous Fund” group. The distribution of each group’s fund performance across
quartiles is calculated. The table also presents the average Net IRR of each group. Quartiles are
pre-assigned to each fund using a Burgiss dataset, and represent their performance within the
most appropriate PE market.

Table G2 shows that, similarly to buyout funds, VCs show weaker persistence when looking
over two fund cycles than over one. GPs with second previous funds in the top quartile perform
in the top quartile 35% of the time and above the median 59% of the time. A top to bottom flip
only happens 11% of the time. However, due to high attrition rates, only 21 GPs performed
below the median two fund cycles ago. This makes it hard to investigate persistence in poor
performance. First time funds rank between funds with previous first and second quartile
performance. None of the groups’ average Net IRRs are significantly different from each other.
The performance of funds without a second previous fund is skewed towards higher
performance, suggesting that data might not be missing at random. As for buyout funds, few
conclusions can once again be drawn on persistence over two fund cycles using this method due
to the low sample sizes and high attrition rates.

                                          36
Appendix H
Table H1: VC persistence regressions when scaling fund-to-fund over one fund cycle

The table above replicates Table 6 in Harris et al. (2023) and shows OLS regressions on our VC
scaling subsets, one for funds that scale between 25-100% and another for funds that scale
above 100%, over one fund cycle. We regress current benchmarked Net IRR on previous
benchmarked Net IRR. Our sample consists of 57 funds that scale 25-100% and 40 that scale
>100%. Robust standard errors (HC0) are reported in parentheses. The number of observations,
R², adjusted R², residual standard error, and F-statistics are provided as additional indicators of
model fit and robustness. The regression is run as follows for each subset:

       Current Benchmarked Net IRR = β0 + β1⋅ Previous Benchmarked Net IRR + ε

Table H2: VC persistence regressions when scaling fund-to-fund over two fund cycles

                                          37
The table above replicates Table 8 in Harris et al. (2023) and shows OLS regressions on our VC
scaling subsets, one on funds that scale between 50-200% and another for funds that scale above
200%, over two fund cycles. We regress the current benchmarked Net IRR on the second previous
benchmarked Net IRR. Our sample consists of 40 funds that scale 50-200% and 24 that scale
>200%. Robust standard errors (HC0) are reported in parentheses. The number of observations,
R², adjusted R², residual standard error, and F-statistics are provided as additional indicators of
model fit and robustness. The regression is run as follows for each subset:

    Current Benchmarked Net IRR = β0 + β1⋅ Second Previous Benchmarked Net IRR + ε

Appendix I
To look at the effect of sector concentration on performance, we identify the degree of sector
concentration of the GPs in our deal data. We classify each GP as belonging to one of three
categories: specialist, focused, or generalist. To identify specialists we follow the method used by
Brown et al. (2023) to calculate a Herfindahl-Hirschman indices score (HHI) for each GP. We
calculate HHI by summing the squared lifetime portfolio weights in each sector for GPs with
buyout funds, and in each industry group for GPs with VC funds (see Appendix D). While
Brown et al. (2023) use fund level weights as they study fund level specialisation, we use
lifetime portfolio weights since we are interested in consistent sector performance by GPs across
funds. The score can range between [0,1] and a higher value indicates a higher degree of
specialisation. The distribution of HHI is skewed to the right with a median of 0.40 for buyout
and 0.34 for VC (see Appendix D). We set a threshold of 0.35 to classify a GP as a specialist
within the sector or industry in which they are overweight. In cases where a GP does not meet
this threshold but has more than 35% of their lifetime deals and total investment cost
concentrated in a single sector/industry, they are classified as focused within that sector/industry.
GPs who do not meet the requirements to be classified as either specialists or focused are
classified as generalists.

                                          38
Table I1: Buyout persistence regressions by sector controlling for sector concentration

The table above replicates Table 6 in Harris et al. (2023) and reports the results from OLS
regressions on our buyout sector subsets – consisting of our sector proxy funds – including
scaling and sector concentration dummies. One of the scaling dummies is coded one when sector
proxy funds scale between 25-100% over one fund cycle, and the other when they scale above
100%. The dummy variable “Specialist” is coded one if a fund’s GP is specialist in the same
sector as the proxy fund. The dummy variable “Focused” is coded one if a fund’s GP is focused
in the same sector as the proxy fund. If there are no specialist or focused GPs within the sector
sample, the dummies are not included in the regression. We measure sector concentration by
calculating the HHI scores for all GPs. These are calculated by taking the sum of the squared
total deal portfolio sector weights of each GP in their lifetime. The score can range between
[0,1] and a higher value indicates a higher degree of sector concentration. We set a threshold of
0.35 to classify a GP as a specialist within the sector in which they are overweight. A GP is
classified as focused if more than 35% of their deals as well as more than 35% of their total
costs are in the same sector, but their HHI score is below 0.35. Current performance is regressed
on previous performance. Performance is measured using benchmarked (logged) TVTC. Our
sample consists of 332 Consumer proxy funds, 205 Industrials proxy funds, 118 Health Care
proxy funds, and 156 Information Technology ones. Robust standard errors (HC0) are reported
in parentheses. The number of observations, R², adjusted R², residual standard error, and
F-statistics are provided as additional indicators of model fit and robustness. The regressions are
constructed as follows for each sector subset:

                                          39
  Current Benchmarked TVTC = β0 + β1 ⋅ Previous Benchmarked TVTC + D₁⋅ Scale Increase
          25-100% + D₂ ⋅ Scale Increase >100% + D₃ ⋅ Specialist + D₄⋅ Focused + ε

Table I1 repeats the regressions in Table 8 on our buyout sector proxy funds while including
dummies for sector specialisation and focus. We only identify matched specialists in the
Consumer and Industrials subsets – in which being specialist has no significant effect on
performance – limiting any conclusions on the effect of specialisation on performance.
Moreover, we do not identify any significant effects of being focused within a sector. Thus, we
do not find any conclusive evidence of sector concentration affecting performance.

Table I2: VC persistence regressions by industry controlling for industry concentration

The table above replicates Table 6 in Harris et al. (2023) and reports the results from OLS
regressions on our VC industry subsets – consisting of our industry proxy funds – including
scaling and industry concentration dummies. One of the scaling dummies is coded 1 when
industry proxy funds scale between 25-100% over one fund cycle, and the other when they scale
above 100%. The dummy variable “Specialist” is coded one if a fund’s GP is specialist in the
same industry as the proxy fund. The dummy variable“Focused” is coded 1 if a fund’s GP is
focused in the same industry as the proxy fund. If there are no specialist or focused GPs within
the industry sample, the dummies are not included in the regression. We measure industry
concentration by calculating the HHI scores for all GPs. These are calculated by taking the sum
of the squared total deal portfolio industry weights of each GP in their lifetime. The score can
range between [0,1] and a higher value indicates a higher degree of industry concentration. We
set a threshold of 0.35 to classify a GP as a specialist within the industry in which they are
overweight. A GP is classified as focused if more than 35% of their deals as well as more than
35% of their total costs are in the same sector, but their HHI score is below 0.35. Current
performance is regressed on previous performance. Performance is measured using
benchmarked (logged) TVTC. Our sample consists of 332 Consumer proxy funds, 205 Industrials
proxy funds, 118 Health Care proxy funds, and 156 Information Technology ones. Robust

                                          40
standard errors (HC0) are reported in parentheses. The number of observations, R², adjusted R²,
residual standard error, and F-statistics are provided as additional indicators of model fit and
robustness. The regressions are constructed as follows for each industry subset:

  Current Benchmarked TVTC = β0 + β1 ⋅ Previous Benchmarked TVTC + D₁⋅ Scale Increase
          25-100% + D₂ ⋅ Scale Increase >100% + D₃ ⋅ Specialist + D₄⋅ Focused + ε

Table I2 repeats the regressions in Table 9 on our VC industry proxy funds while including
dummies for industry specialisation and focus. We identify no matched specialists in our VC
subsets and do not find any effect of being focused on performance. Thus, we once again make
no conclusive findings on the effect of concentration on performance.

                                      8. AI Disclosure

We have used the AI tool ChatGPT to check for grammar errors as well as to debug R code and
format R tables/figures.

                                          41