PRIVATE EQUITY OWNERSHIP
IN TIMES OF CRISIS

EXAMINING THE FINANCIAL RESILIENCE OF SWEDISH
PRIVATE EQUITY-BACKED COMPANIES DURING THE
COVID-19 CRISIS

NOAH SJÖBERG

SIMON MELANDER

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2025
EXAMINING THE FINANCIAL RESILIENCE OF SWEDISH PRIVATE EQUITY-
BACKED COMPANIES DURING THE COVI D-19 CRISIS

Abstract:

Whether private equity (PE) ownership enhances or limits firm resilience during times of crisis
has been explored in previous studies, particularly using data from British companies. To extend
this research, we examine Swedish firms during the Covid-19 crisis, comparing the performance
of PE-backed companies to that of closely matched non-PE-backed peers. Our analysis finds no
statistically significant differences in financial resilience between the two groups during the
pandemic. This contrasts with earlier UK-based findings and may reflect structural differences in
national PE markets or the relatively milder economic impact and policy response in Sweden.
However, the relatively small sample size in our study may have limited the ability to detect subtle
but meaningful effects. These results highlight that the impact of PE ownership on crisis resilience
is context-dependent and underscore the importance of region-specific research in understanding
these dynamics.

Keywords:

   Empirical Corporate Finance, Private Equity, Covid-19 pandemic

Authors:

   Noah Sjöberg (25685)
   Simon Melander (25796)

Tutors:

   Mustafa Bulut

Examiner:

  Ramin Baghai

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics

                                    2
I. Introduction

A common belief is that the saddling of debt on portfolio companies by private equity (PE)
investors increases financial fragility. The acquired firms must make large debt repayments for the
additional leverage taken on by the PE firm, which may reduce profitability and limit financial
flexibility. However, Bernstein, Lerner, and Mezzanotti (2019) challenge this view, showing that
PE-backed firms in the UK exhibited higher market share growth and asset expansion compared
to non-PE-backed firms during the 2008 financial crisis. These findings indicate that private equity
ownership can, in certain instances, strengthen a firm's financial resilience rather than increase its
vulnerability.

The broader impact of private equity investment patterns during financial crises, however, remains
poorly understood. On the one hand, the cyclicality of private equity activity, combined with the
high leverage imposed on portfolio companies, may amplify financial sector shocks and contribute
to economic volatility. On the other hand, private equity firms often provide operational expertise,
strategic guidance, and access to capital, which could strengthen portfolio firms in times of crisis.
Additionally, the pressure to deploy capital in booming markets may lead to the financing of lower-
quality firms (Kaplan and Strömberg, 1993), making PE-backed companies more vulnerable to
economic downturns. Moreover, increased fundraising and investment activity in these periods
may strain the ability of private equity firms to effectively support and monitor their portfolio
companies when financial conditions deteriorate (Bernstein et al. 2019).

Since the 2008 financial crisis, analyzed by Bernstein et al. (2019), the world has faced further
challenges, most notably during the Covid-19 pandemic. The pandemic prompted an
unprecedented level of policy intervention to mitigate its effects on business and society. Lavery
and Wilson (2024) conducted a study similar to Bernstein et al (2019), focusing on the Covid-19
crisis. They highlight both similarities and key differences between the pandemic and previous
downturns like the global financial crisis. While both crises were marked by significant uncertainty,
the financial crisis stemmed from imbalances between the financial sector and the real economy,
resulting in a contraction of money and credit. In contrast, the Covid-19 downturn was driven by
a global health crisis with no such pre-existing financial imbalances. Unlike prior crises, which
businesses could somewhat anticipate (e.g., demand drops, financing issues, supply chain
disruptions), the pandemic acted as an unexpected shock that radically disrupted both the economy
and working practices. Rapid changes in regulations, restrictions on operations, and a shifting
business landscape created a more profound and widespread impact than other economic
downturns.

Despite vast differences in the nature of the 2008 financial crisis and the crisis during the pandemic,
the results of Lavery et al. (2024) and Bernstein et al. (2019) show some striking similarities in the

                                    3
resilience of PE-backed firms during times of crisis. Both studies found that, in general, PE-backed
firms demonstrated stronger financial performance compared to non-PE-backed firms, with higher
levels of market share retention and asset growth. However, Lavery et al. (2024) also noted that
the specific challenges posed by the pandemic, such as operational restrictions and health-related
uncertainty, created new hurdles for businesses, which were not present in the financial crisis. This
difference suggests that while PE-backed firms may be more resilient overall, the nature of the
crisis, whether financial or health-related, can influence the extent to which their resilience is tested.
As a result, understanding the different factors that shape a firm’s performance during such crises
is crucial for assessing the true impact of private equity ownership on long-term financial stability.

While the studies by Lavery et al. (2024) and Bernstein et al. (2019) focus on the experiences of
British companies during the crises, this thesis aims to extend their findings by examining whether
PE-backed firms in Sweden showed greater financial resilience during the Covid-19 financial
crisis. The economic conditions and policy responses in Sweden differed in significant ways from
those in the UK, making it important to test whether the conclusions drawn in the UK context
apply elsewhere. For instance, the Swedish government implemented various support measures
during the pandemic, such as direct financial aid and loan guarantees, as detailed by Ekholm,
Nordström Skans, Persson and Åkerman (2022), which may have had a unique impact on Swedish
businesses. By analyzing firm performance across key financial metrics, this study will contribute
to the ongoing debate about whether private equity ownership acts as a stabilizing force or a risk
amplifier during times of economic distress. The relevance of this question is underscored by the
transition from a prolonged period of near-zero or negative interest rates to a higher-rate
environment, where rising borrowing costs could disproportionately affect highly leveraged firms.
Focusing solely on Swedish companies, this study will offer insights into how local economic
policies and conditions influenced the resilience of PE-backed firms during the pandemic.

This thesis investigates whether Swedish private equity (PE)-backed companies demonstrated
greater financial resilience during the Covid-19 crisis compared to non-PE-backed companies.
This question is particularly relevant given the unique nature of the pandemic, which was marked
by a global health emergency, widespread business disruptions, and extensive policy interventions.
The distinct Swedish response, markedly different from that of many other countries, makes this
context especially valuable for studying how PE ownership may influence firm resilience in times
of crisis. The study assesses this by comparing key financial indicators such as profitability,
liquidity, and leverage across PE-backed and non-PE-backed firms, as well as examining how
these metrics evolved throughout the pandemic period. In addition to financial performance, the
analysis considers non-financial aspects of resilience, such as how firms adapted operationally
through workforce adjustments or shifts in business models, to understand whether PE ownership
played a role in shaping adaptive responses during the crisis.

To examine potential differences in resilience between PE-backed and non-PE-backed firms, a
sample of Swedish PE-owned companies was first identified. These firms were then matched with
                                    4
comparable non-PE-backed Swedish companies based on pre-pandemic characteristics, including
industry, equity ratio, total assets, and return on assets, to construct a control group with similar
baseline attributes. The financial performance of the two groups during the Covid-19 crisis was
subsequently compared using a difference-in-differences regression framework. Unlike previous
studies by Bernstein et al. (2019), Lavery et al. (2024), and Kacer, Wilson, Zouari and Cowling,
(2025), this analysis found no statistically significant differences in financial resilience between
PE-backed and non-PE-backed firms.

Several factors may explain why these findings diverge from those of prior research. Most notably,
this study focuses on Swedish firms, whereas the earlier studies investigated British companies,
suggesting potential structural differences in the private equity sectors across countries. Moreover,
given that Sweden adopted a notably less restrictive response to the pandemic, as emphasized by
Andersson and Jonung (2023), the economic shock may have been milder than in countries that
implemented strict lockdowns. This may have reduced the scope for private equity ownership to
influence firm outcomes. Lastly, the relatively small sample size in this study may have limited
the statistical power to detect meaningful differences between the groups.

This study contributes to the existing literature by examining how private equity ownership
influences firm resilience during economic crises, specifically within the Swedish context. By
focusing exclusively on Swedish companies, the research controls for country-specific factors such
as government interventions, economic support policies, and the broader macroeconomic
environment. Sweden’s distinct approach to managing the Covid-19 pandemic, marked by
comparatively lenient restrictions and targeted support measures, sets it apart from countries like
the UK, where prior studies have been conducted. Our findings suggest that private equity
ownership may not exert the same effect across regions, either due to structural differences in the
Swedish PE industry or because the milder economic impact of the pandemic in Sweden reduced
the scope for PE ownership to shape firm outcomes. As such, the study highlights the importance
of considering national context when evaluating the role of private equity during crises, while also
acknowledging the limited generalizability of its findings beyond the Swedish setting.

Literature Review

The resilience of PE-backed firms during economic downturns has been a focal point in financial
research. Bernstein, Lerner, and Mezzanotti (2019) investigated this by examining the 2008
financial crisis. Their study revealed that PE-backed companies increased investments relative to
their peers during the crisis, supported by greater equity and debt inflows. This effect was more
pronounced among financially constrained firms and those whose PE investors had substantial
resources at the crisis's onset, leading to higher asset growth and increased market share for these
companies during the downturn. It was also shown that even though the PE-backed firms
experienced both higher levels of equity and debt financing, their leverage ratios stayed
approximately the same throughout the crisis.
                                    5
Building upon this foundation, recent studies have explored the performance of PE-backed firms
during the Covid-19 pandemic. For instance, Kacer, Wilson, Zouari, and Cowling (2025) analyzed
British entrepreneurial firms that received equity financing before the pandemic. Their findings
suggest that private equity-backed firms, particularly those with active investor involvement,
exhibited greater resilience during the crisis, highlighting the importance of investor support in
navigating economic challenges.

Similarly, Lavery and Wilson (2024) examined the performance of PE-backed firms during the
Covid-19 pandemic. The research indicated that, on average, PE-backed firms were more resilient
compared to closely matched industry peers during the pandemic. However, this outperformance
was less pronounced than in the pre-pandemic period, suggesting that it was primarily due to
investors selecting firms that were already well-positioned to perform better, rather than their
active support during the crisis.

While these studies provide valuable insights into the performance of PE-backed firms during
economic crises, including both the 2008 financial crisis and the Covid-19 pandemic, they focus
solely on British companies. This study aims to contribute to this literature by examining the
financial resilience of PE-backed firms throughout the Covid-19 pandemic, with a specific focus
on Swedish companies. Given that Sweden implemented different lockdown measures and fiscal
policies compared to countries like the UK, the results of this study may be influenced by these
contextual differences. This approach may also provide new insights into whether the findings
from UK-based studies apply in other national contexts. By narrowing the scope to Sweden, this
research will help determine whether the conclusions of previous studies hold in different settings,
thereby enriching our understanding of PE-backed firms' performance during times of crisis.

                                    6
II. Background

Private equity and Financial Fragility

Kaplan et al. (2009) argue that private equity investments tend to be cyclical, with activity peaking
when interest rates are low and debt financing inexpensive. Often, this inflow of capital leads to
increased competition for deals, which results in acquisition of lower-quality firms and higher
leverage levels in the portfolio companies. This elevated leverage along with potentially weaker
fundamentals is thought to increase the financial fragility of PE-backed firms, especially during
crises.

Nevertheless, the connection between financial resilience and PE ownership is not that simple.
Although it can be argued that the high leverage affiliated with PE transactions raises the risk for
bankruptcy, De Silva et al. (2022) found no significant increase in bankruptcy rates among PE-
backed companies, when controlling for leverage. These findings suggest that the financial
structures enacted by PE owners may not inherently lead to distress.

On the other hand, as was outlined by Bernstein et al. (2019), a potential upside of PE investors is
that, due to their contacts within the industry, the PE investors may be better positioned to support
their portfolio companies in times of crisis. Furthermore, Lavery et al. (2024) argue that the
operational expertise and active governance PE owners provide may improve firm efficiency and
adaptability. This raises the possibility that PE-backed firms are not only resilient because of
external support, but also because they were selectively acquired for their underlying strengths and
growth potential.

Covid-19 Financial Crisis

In early 2020, as the coronavirus spread, multiple countries in Europe implemented lockdowns,
which had a huge adverse effect on the economy. Muggenthaler et al. (2021) found that the
economic impact varied depending on the severity of restrictions, sectoral composition, and fiscal
support. The recession was largely driven by a decline in private consumption, as reduced spending
opportunities and uncertainty led to increased precautionary savings. Differences in economic
structures and policy responses further influenced the pace of recovery, raising concerns about
long-term economic divergences across the region.

Sweden, on the other hand, was unique on the world stage by not pursuing especially stringent
measures to curb the spread of the virus. Instead of imposing strict lockdowns, the country relied
on voluntary social-distancing measures, allowing businesses to remain open and economic
activity to continue with fewer disruptions. As a result, Sweden avoided the severe economic

                                    7
downturns experienced by many of its European counterparts, with relatively small losses in output
and a fiscal position that remained notably strong throughout the crisis. As found by Andersson et
al. (2023), this approach minimized the economic costs of the pandemic while achieving a
comparable outcome in excess mortality.

In Sweden, the PE industry have grown significantly of the past decades, making Sweden one of
the most active PE markets in Europe relative to its size. According to Andersson et al. (2025),
Swedish PE firms manage large volumes of capital and play a prominent role in both the domestic
and international investment landscape. However, while the sector can contribute positively to
economic growth by fostering restructuring and innovation, Andersson et al. (2025) also highlight
the potential financial risks due to the high leverage often employed in PE transactions, as well as
the increasing use of less transparent financing structures such as private credit funds and leveraged
loans.

This study will focus exclusively on Swedish companies to control for country-specific factors,
such as government interventions and local economic conditions, which may influence firms'
resilience during the Covid-19 crisis. Sweden’s approach to managing the pandemic differed
significantly from that of countries like the UK, with distinct policy measures and business support
systems. As a result, the findings from studies based on UK companies may not directly apply to
the Swedish context. By concentrating on Swedish firms, this research aims to assess the impact
of private equity ownership on financial resilience during a crisis under Sweden's specific
economic and policy conditions. However, the findings may be limited in their generalizability to
other countries or contexts with different approaches to the pandemic and economic support.

                                    8
III. Data & Methodology

Data Source Description

The financial data used in this study was extracted from the Serrano database (Weidenman, Per
n.d.). This database contains aggregated financial data collected from Bolagsverket, Statistics
Sweden (SCB) and the Swedish Company Registration Office on both private and public Swedish
companies starting from 1997. The data includes, among other variables, key financial ratios such
as leverage ratios and company size. These variables have been used to access financial data of the
identified private equity-backed companies and to construct a control group of non-PE-backed
firms. Not all Swedish companies have their accounting period set from January first to December
     st
31 , thus the Serrano database has manipulated the financial data to allow for statistical analysis.
More precisely, to handle the situations where a company uses a broken financial year or for other
reasons does not use the calendar year. All financial statement data is converted into monthly
values and then added up to create financial statements for the entire year. Data on which
companies were backed by private equity firms have been sourced from CapitalIQ which is a
financial information platform that contains data on M&A transactions and IPOs.

The definitions of the main variables used for matching and analysis are presented below. The
Investment variable is constructed in the code by dividing capital expenditure by total assets. All
other variables have been used without modification and are taken directly from the Serrano
database.

                                           Adjusted Equity
                               𝐸𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 =
                                               Total assets
                                   Adjusted Operating Profit
                          𝑅𝑂𝐴 =
                                          Total Assets
                                         Captial Expenditures
                         𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 =
                                              Total Assets
                               Total Current Assets − Total Inventory
                  𝑄𝑢𝑖𝑐𝑘 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 =
                                         Total Current Liabilities
                          Financial costs − Financial expenses affecting comparability
   Interest rate on Debt =
                                                               𝐴𝑑𝑗𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑙𝑖𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑒𝑠

                                                  Net Sales
                         Asset turnover ratio =
                                                  Total Assets

                                    9
Difference in difference

To estimate the causal effect of private equity ownership on firm performance during the Covid-
19 crisis, we apply a difference-in-differences (DiD) regression framework, following the
approach of Bernstein et al. (2019). This method compares changes in outcome variables, such as
equity ratio, total assets, and return on assets, between a treatment group (PE-backed firms) and a
matched control group (non-PE-backed firms) before and after the onset of the crisis.

The DiD model is estimated using the following regression:

                               𝑦𝑗𝑡 = 𝛾 + 𝛾𝑗 ⋅ 𝑃𝐸𝑗 + 𝛾𝑡 ⋅ 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 + 𝛽 ⋅ (𝑃𝐸𝑗 ⋅ 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡) + 𝜀𝑗𝑡

where 𝑦𝑗𝑡 is the outcome variable for firm 𝑗 at time 𝑡 , 𝑃𝐸𝑗 is an indicator for whether the firm is
PE-backed and 𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 is an indicator for the post-crisis period. The coefficient 𝛽 captures the DiD
estimate, representing the average effect of PE ownership during the crisis.

To support the key DiD assumption, that both groups would have followed similar trends in the
absence of the crisis, we carefully matched the control group based on pre-crisis financial
characteristics and confirmed visually and statistically that the groups exhibited parallel trends
before the pandemic.

Constructing a group of private equity backed companies

To construct a dataset of companies that were backed by Private equity firms we used CaptialIQ
to screen for all transactions where the buyer was a private equity firm between the years of 2011
and 2019. By that means we only included buyouts and excluded Venture capital and growth equity
investment. This was done intentionally as different financing structures and strategies are often
employed by these kinds of investors. To ensure that the company had not experienced an exit, we
did additional screenings on transactions in CapitalIQ for IPO’s and exits to non-Private equity
firms. If it was found that a portfolio company had made an exit before 2020, we excluded it from
the dataset. Furthermore, we also manually looked up companies in case of doubt to find out if
they had made an exit by 2020.

CaptialIQ does not have information on national organization numbers which is what the Serrano
database uses as an identifier for each company. Thus, we used the LEI number for each of the
screened companies and manually looked up the Swedish organization number (bolagsnummer)
through the website Lei Lookup (n.d.). In the cases where there were no LEI number available in
CapitalIQ we manually added the organization number where possible by looking it up on
Allabolag (n.d.). In total, we were able to identify 220 private equity backed companies.

                                   10
The private equity backed companies were then matched to the Serrano database by organization
number, excluding companies that did not meet the following criteria. This was done to facilitate
the construction of a control group and allow us to conduct a regression analysis.

    (i) There was a match based on the organization-number in the Serrano database
    (ii) There is data available for all years under consideration (2017 - 2022)
    (iii) The legal form of the company was classified as a limited liability company
    (iv) The company was marked as active according to the ser_aktiv for all years under
           consideration

Furthermore, the variable ser_aktiv can be either 1 or 0 indicating whether the company is active
or not. According to Serrano, a limited liability company was deemed active if one of the following
criteria were met.

   • Net sales > 10 kSEK
   • Other operating income > 10 kSEK
   • Financial income > 10 kSEK
    • Financial expenses < -10 kSEK
   • The dividend amount > 10 kSEK
   • Total assets > 500 kSEK

To verify the legal form of each company, we used the Serrano variable ser_jurform, which equals
49 for limited liability companies. Additionally, only firms with complete data for all years from
2017 to 2022 were included in order to allow for a consistent comparison of historical performance
between PE-backed and non-PE-backed companies before and during the crisis. Companies with
missing data were excluded, which included a few that had gone bankrupt and others for which
financial data was unavailable despite no record of bankruptcy. These exclusions were necessary
to ensure the comparability of time series data and to avoid introducing bias from incomplete
observations. As a result, our analysis is limited to firms that remained active and reported data
throughout the full period. After applying these filters, data was available for 170 private equity-
backed companies.
Constructing a control group

For every private equity company, we matched it with two non-PE-backed companies. We only
included companies that met the criteria displayed below. This was done in order to facilitate the
creation of a control group and ensure that we had data on all the companies included in the study.
In the case that fewer than two companies match with a particular private equity backed company
we chose to exclude the private equity company in order to create a control group that was as
similar as possible to the treatment group. If more than two companies matched with a private
equity backed company, we used the normalized Euclidean distance between the matching
variables to find the closest matches. The decision to construct a relatively large control group

                                   11
(1:2) was made to increase the statistical validity of our analysis, which otherwise may be a
problem due to the relatively small group of identified private-equity-backed companies We chose
to base the matching on the year 2019 which was right before the crisis began. This was done to
make sure that the control group companies were as similar as possible to their private equity
backed counterparts going into the crisis.

    (i) Same Industry based on the Serrano BRANCH SECTOR variable.
    (ii) The legal form of the company was a limited liability company
    (iii) Similar equity ratio: equity ratio within 30% of the private equity backed company.
    (iv) Similar amount of total assets: Total assets fell within 30% of the private equity backed
         company.
    (v) Similar rate of Return on assets: Return on assets fell within a bandwidth of 30% of
           the private equity backed company.
    (vi) The company was marked as active according to the ser_aktiv for all years under
           consideration

Since private equity firms often employ a lot of leverage in their transactions this may tilt them to
invest more in certain industries. To avoid any bias that may arise by comparing companies that
operate in different industries we only match companies within the same industry.

PE-backed companies that could not be matched based on the criteria described above were
excluded from the dataset. In total, matches were found for 94 of the 170 PE-backed companies.
Each of these was paired with two non-PE-backed companies, resulting in a control group of 188
firms. The remaining 76 PE-backed companies were excluded because no suitable matches were
identified. This yielded a final test set of 282 companies: 94 PE-backed and 188 non-PE-backed.
Characteristics of treatment and control group

Table 1 shows in which industries these 282 selected firms operate, providing an overview of the
sectoral distribution of the companies included in the sample. As outlined in the table, the
“Industrial goods” sector was the most prevalent constituting 29.8% of the sample, followed by
the “Shopping goods” sector constituting 21.3%. In contrast, “Convenience goods”, “Finance and
Real estate” as well as “SNI07 missing” constituted only 2.1% of the total sample, respectively.
The smallest sector, however, is the sector “Other”. The sector “SNI07 missing” consisted of the
6 companies which did not have data on their SNI07 code.

                                   12
                           Table 1: Sample companies’ industries

As illustrated in Table 2, the matching was successful as all of the meassured variables very similar
between the group of private equity backecd companeis and non-private equity backed companies.
Further, the three variables we used for matching are all very similar between the two groups. To
further assess whether the differences in means were statistically significant or not, Welch’s t-test
was conducted for all variables. As shown in the table, all p-values exceed 0.15, indicating that
even at a 15% significance level, none of the mean differences are statistically significant. The
variable with the largest relative difference between the two groups is Number of Employees,
where the PE-backed firms, on average, had nearly 22.9 more employees than the control group.
However, the median difference is only 7.5 employees, suggesting that a few larger PE-backed
firms are skewing the average and driving most of the apparent difference. A similar pattern is
observed for the Quick ratio, which shows the second largest relative difference in means between
the two groups. However, the median for both groups is closer to each other indicating a good
match.

                            Table 2: Firm Characteristics in 2019

Nevertheless, for the difference-in-difference regression to be relevant, the two groups should also
have similar pre-crisis trends, not just similar metrics. To evaluate whether this is the case, Figure
1 shows how the mean of the variables Net Sales, ROA, Equity Ratio as well as Total Assets have

                                   13
evolved over the recent years before the pandemic to a couple of years after the pandemic started.
As illustrated in the figure, all of these key ratios followed a similar trend before the crisis began.
Although, the mean of the ROA for the PE-backed firms seems slightly more volatile than for the
control group, as it is higher in 2017, lower in 2018 and thereafter slightly higher again in 2019.
However, the difference is relatively modest, and both groups exhibited a positive trend leading
up to the crisis. This suggests that the groups followed similar pre-crisis trends, further supporting
the validity of the matching process.

Similar plots for the other variables Interest rate on Debt and Number of Employees, are shown in
Figure A.1 in the Appendix. The trends for Number of Employees appear similar between the two
groups, further supporting the validity of the matching procedure. In contrast, the variable Interest
Rate on Debt shows a downward trend for the control group, while the PE-backed firms display a
stable trend. For Shareholder Contribution per Assets, the groups follow diverging trends, with
the largest discrepancy observed in 2019. Although these differences indicate that the groups are
not perfectly aligned, the p-values for Welsh’s t-test shown in Table 2 for the variables indicate
that the groups are similar. Overall, the similarity across key variables suggests that the matching
is adequate for the purposes of this study.

Table 3 shows the one and two-year growth rates with 2019 as the base year of multiple financial
and non-financial metrics which further solidifies the fact that the companies in the two groups
had similar pre-pandemic trends and there is no statistically significant difference between the
growth rates between the two groups in any of the metrics measured.

                            Table 3: Firm Growth rates in 2019

                                   14
Figure 1: Financial measures over time

              15
IV. Results

Difference in differences analysis

To examine the financial resilience of private equity backed companies in relation to non-private
equity backed companies during the Covid-19 financial crisis, we created a “Post” dummy variable
that is set to 1 for the years 2020 to 2022, and 0 for the years 2017, 2018 and 2019 representing
whether the data entry is from before or after the crisis had begun. Another dummy variable was
also created, called “PE”, which was set to 1 for the PE-backed companies and to 0 for non-PE-
backed companies. This allows us to conduct a difference in difference analysis (DiD).

Following the methodology of Lavery and Wilson (2024), we performed a difference in difference
analysis of key financial metrics before and during the pandemic to investigate whether or not
there was a difference between private equity backed companies and non-private equity backed
companies during the crisis. Furthermore, we also looked at year by year effects of being private
equity backed, defined as PE*year. This was done to see if there was any difference between the
treatment and control group during any of the years. For the year by year effects, we used 2019 as
the base year and we also took the log of total assets and net sales to enable a comparison between
firms of different sizes.

              Table 4: DiD regression on firm performance during the pandemic

                                   16
The difference in difference regression on financial measures shows no significant relationship
between the interaction variable (PE * Post) in any of the baseline cases. Net Sales and Total assets
have positive coefficients for the baseline case but the result is not statistically significant (p >
0.05). Return on Assets has negative coefficients for both the baseline case and for every year
except 2017 in the year by year effects. However, this result was not statistically significant
(p>0.05 for all cases). Furthermore, the R-squared for all the regressions are low suggesting that
the model explains very little of the variation in the dependent variable.

Panel B displays the year-by-year effects of private equity ownership, no significant effect could
be observed for any of the variables (p>0.05) during any of the years. This suggests that PE-
ownership had no impact on firm performance in Sweden during the years of consideration.

Additionally, we conducted a second difference in difference analysis on four more variables,
Number of employees, Quick ratio, Asset turnover ratio and Investment. This was done to
investigate whether private equity ownership had any impact on liquidity and investment levels on
their portfolio companies’ vis a vis their non-private equity backed peers.

             Table 5: DiD regression on firm performance (secondary variables)

Again, we find almost no statistically significant differences between the two groups. For the
baseline case no variable differs at a significant level for any of the variables. However, for year-
by-year effects in 2017 we found a positive significant effect on asset turnover ratio, which was
statistically significant (p=0.02 < 0.05). This was, however, from before the crisis had begun.
Furthermore, the year-by-year effect on number of employees was negative and statistically

                                   17
significant for the year 2017. It is also worth noting that the R-squared values are very low,
indicating that the model has low explanatory power.
Robustness Check

To solidify the findings in this report and ensure their validity, a multitude of robustness checks
were carried out. First, we relaxed our matching parameters to include companies within a 40%
bandwidth of total assets, equity ratio and return on assets. However, the matching was still
constrained to the same industry to maintain comparability between the two groups. As expected,
this increases the number of firms that we were able to match and, as illustrated in Table A.1 in
the appendix, the matched group still closely resembles the treatment group. Table A.2 shows the
conducted regression and similarly to our results it found no significant effect on any of the
dependent variables. Looking at the secondary variables in Table A.3, we can see a slightly positive
statistically significant effect on asset turnover ratio for the years 2017 and 2018. This is in line
with our previous regression with the addition of 2018 also becoming statistically significant in
the robustness check.

Furthermore, we also reduced the matching bandwidth to 15%, this had a significant impact on the
number of companies that were able to match with a non-pe backed company. In total only 37
private equity backed companies were able to match with 74 non-private equity backed companies.
However, the groups were still similar to each other, as demonstrated in Table A.4, and further
solidified our results as we found no significant effect (Table A.5). As evident by Table A.6, none
of the secondary variables are significant in either of the baseline case or in the year-by-year effects.

In a third robustness check we reverted our constraints to a 30% bandwidth of the matching
variables but instead let the private equity backed companies match with 4 companies. In doing so
we excluded private equity backed companies that did not match with 4 or more non private equity
backed companies, thus this naturally reduced the size of our treatment group. Again, we find that
the matching was successful, as demonstrated in Table A.7, which can be found in the appendix.
Again, for the regression on the secondary variables we find no statistically significant effects in
the base case but a slightly positive significant effect on asset turnover in 2017 as illustrated in
Table A.9.

                                   18
V. Discussion

Contrary to the results of the previous studies on the resilience of PE-backed firms during crises,
by e.g. Bernstein et al. (2019), Lavery et al. (2024) and Kacer et al. (2025), we did not find any
significant difference in difference when studying PE-backed firms in Sweden during the Covid-
19 crisis. To ensure that any observed differences, or in our case lack thereof, arise from
organizational structure rather than balance sheet or investment characteristics, we created a
control group of non-PE-backed firms which aimed to have as similar as possible pre-crisis trends
as the group of PE-backed companies. As shown in Figure 1, the two groups showed very similar
trends, both before and during, in equity ratio, total assets as well as revenue (net sales). Due to
the similar development of these parameters both before and during the crisis, the difference in
difference regression did not yield significant results, which in turn implicates that, based on these
parameters, both PE-backed and non-PE-backed firms did not perform differently during the crisis.

When comparing return on assets (ROA), Figure 1 shows that the PE-backed and non-PE-backed
groups exhibited slightly different trends prior to the crisis. The non-PE-backed firms maintained
a relatively stable ROA, whereas the PE-backed firms experienced some volatility, with a decline
between 2017 and 2018 followed by an increase between 2018 and 2019. Despite these differences,
no statistically significant variation was found in either the pre-crisis growth (Table 3) or the pre-
crisis ROA levels (Table 2). The same holds true for the other variables studied, no significant
differences were observed in either the growth rates or the variable levels before the crisis. This
provides further evidence that the two groups were broadly comparable before the onset of the
crisis.

Although Lavery et al. (2025) found differences between PE-backed firms and non-PE-backed
firms, their findings suggest that the differences between these two groups were less than before
the crisis, as well as significantly less than the 2008 financial crisis, as found by Bernstein et al.
(2019). Lavery et al. argue that these smaller differences can be explained by the PE-investors'
inability to affect the abrupt drop in demand for certain goods and services during the pandemic,
compared to during the financial crisis 2008 where they could use their strategic expertise,
substantial financial resources, and extensive networks of consultants, financial institutions, and
operational partners to offset some of the crisis’s negative effects.

Building on these arguments, we can compare the difference in economic downturns in the UK
with those in Sweden during the pandemic. As Andersson et al. (2023) shows, the economic
downturns in Sweden were much less severe due to the lesser lockdown policies. Hence,
companies operating in Sweden was generally less affected by the crisis than companies operating
in countries with stricter lockdowns, as for example the UK. This lesser overall impact could thus
explain why our results had trouble finding differences between the two groups. Hence, both the
lesser possibility for PE-investors to offset the consequences of the Covid-19 crisis compared to
                                   19
other crises, as well as the lesser overall economic impact of the Covid-19 crisis in Sweden
compared to other countries may be reasons which explain our results.

Another possible explanation for our differing results is that the Swedish private equity industry
may operate differently from its British counterpart, potentially making the influence of PE
ownership during crises less pronounced in Sweden. To explore this further, a similar study could
be conducted using data from the 2008 financial crisis to examine whether significant differences
between PE-backed and non-PE-backed firms emerged in that context. If such differences were
found, it would support the interpretation that the lack of divergence in our Covid-19 results is
primarily due to the relatively milder economic impact of the pandemic in Sweden. However, until
such comparative analyses are conducted, definitive conclusions cannot be drawn. It is also
important to note that the relatively small sample size in this study may have limited the statistical
power to detect subtle but potentially meaningful differences between the groups.

This paper was further limited to the company data that could be found in the Serrano database
which by nature primarily focuses on financial data and metrics. Thus, there were very limited
investigations into non-financial performance metrics have been conducted and thus the research
may have missed potential non-financial effects such as brand recognition or well-being of
employees.

Conclusion

This thesis investigated whether Swedish PE-backed firms exhibited greater financial resilience
during the Covid-19 crisis compared to their non-PE-backed counterparts. Using a difference-in-
differences regression approach, a sample of Swedish PE-backed firms was matched with similar
non-PE-backed firms based on pre-crisis financial characteristics. The two groups were then
compared across key financial indicators such as equity ratio, total assets, revenue, and return on
assets throughout the pandemic.

Contrary to findings in earlier studies on British firms, this analysis found no statistically
significant differences in performance between PE-backed and non-PE-backed companies during
the Covid-19 crisis. Several explanations are possible: first, the relatively mild economic downturn
in Sweden, due to less restrictive lockdown policies, may have reduced the overall stress on firms,
thus limiting the potential impact of PE ownership. Second, structural differences in the Swedish
private equity industry may mean that PE ownership plays a less pronounced role during crises
than in countries like the UK. Finally, the relatively small sample size could have limited the
study’s ability to detect subtle effects. These findings suggest that the effects of PE ownership on
crisis resilience are context-dependent and emphasize the need for regionally nuanced research.

                                   20
Since this study’s focus was limited to Sweden which took lenient measures during the Covid-19
pandemic, future research should look at differences between PE backed firms and non-PE backed
firms across Europe and consider to what extent the strictness of a country's lockdown affected
performance. Such a study could also take variables such as GDP-growth for each country and see
if it had any impact on private equity backed companies. To complement this further research on
the financial fragility of private equity owned firms during the 2008 financial crisis in Sweden
would support a more substantial conclusion on whether it is the business environment in Sweden
that differs from the UK or that private equity backed firms simply did not perform better during
the Covid-19 crisis. The timeframe under consideration was also limited by the Serrano database
which only contains data up until the year 2022 at the time of writing. It is possible that the
timeframe is too short and close to the pandemic to see the full aftermath of the crisis and that a
longer time horizon would have yielded different results.

                                   21
References

Allabolag. (n.d.). Company information database. https://www.allabolag.se (Accessed 2025-04-
15)

Andersson, F. N. G., & Jonung, L. (2023). The Covid-19 Lesson from Sweden: Don’t
Lockdown. (Working Papers; No. 2023:10). https://doi.org/10.1111/ecaf.12611

Andersson, M., Kärnä, A., & Myers, S. (2025). Private equity in Sweden: A financial stability
perspective (Staff Memo). Sveriges Riksbank.

Bernstein, S., Lerner, J., & Mezzanotti, F. (2019). Private Equity and Financial Fragility during
the Crisis. The Review of Financial Studies, 32(4), 1309–1373.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/48616827

De Silva, C., Del Gaudio, B.L., Gervasoni, A., & Lertora, M. (2025). Private equity and financial
distress: A bibliometric literature review, Research in International Business and Finance,
Volume 74, 102674, ISSN 0275-5319, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ribaf.2024.102674.

Ekholm, K., Nordström Skans, O., Persson, T., & Åkerman, A. (2022). Företagsstöden under
pandemin [Report to SOU 2022:10 Sverige under pandemin]. Statens offentliga utredningar.
ISBN 978-91-525-0338-6.

Kacer, M., Wilson, N., Zouari, S., & Cowling, M. (2025). Entrepreneurial finance and the
survival of equity-funded firms in crisis periods: the case of COVID-19. Small Bus Econ.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11187-025-01009-2

Kaplan, S. N., & Strömberg, P. (2009). Leveraged Buyouts and Private Equity. The Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 23(1), 121–146. http://www.jstor.org/stable/27648297

Lavery, P., & Wilson, N. (2024). The performance of private equity portfolio companies during
the COVID-19 pandemic, Journal of Corporate Finance, Volume 89, 102641, ISSN 0929-1199,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcorpfin.2024.102641.

LEI Lookup. (n.d.). LEI Lookup – Legal Entity Identifier search tool. Retrieved April 21, 2025,
from https://www.lei-lookup.com/

Muggenthaler, P., Schroth, J., & Sun, Y. (2021). The heterogeneous economic impact of the
pandemic across euro area countries. ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 5/2021. European Central

                                   22
Bank. Accessed 2025-04-01 from: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/economic-
bulletin/focus/2021/html/ecb.ebbox202105_03~267ada0d38.en.html.

S&P Capital IQ. (n.d.). Apple Inc.: Public company profile. Retrieved 2025-04-28, from S&P
Capital IQ database.

Weidenman, Per. “The Serrano Database for Analysis and Register-Based Statistics.” at Swedish
House of Finance Research Data Center. Accessed April 15, 2025,
https://www.hhs.se/en/houseoffinance/data-center/

                                   23
Appendix

Definitions

Definition of additional variables

 Serrano Variable Name Definition
 bransch_borsbranch_konv or BRANCH        Groups each company based on SNI07 code
 SECTOR                                into one of the following industries:
                                            10 = Energy & Environment
                                                15 = Materials
                                                 20 = Industrial goods
                                                22 = Construction industry
                                            25 = Shopping goods
                                            30 = Convenience goods
                                              35 = Health & Education
                                                40 = Finance & Real estate
                                               45 = IT & Electronics
                                           50 = Telecom & Media
                                                60 = Corporate services
                                              98 = Other
                                             99 = SNI07 missing
 Number of employees Serrano variable which is set to the number of
                                                 employees according to data in the financial
                                                 statements.
 ser_jurform Numbered value in the serrano database based
                                                on legal form of the company.
                                                  22 = Shipping partnerships (Partrederier)
                                              23 = Mutual funds (Vardepappersfonder)
                                                 31 = Partnerships/Limited partnerships
                                           (Handelsbolag/Kommanditbolag)
                                                    41 = Joint-stock banks (Bankaktiebolag)
                                              42 = Insurance companies
                                                (Forsakringsaktiebolag)
                                                 49 = Limited liability companies (Aktiebolag)
                                              51 = Cooperatives (Ekonomiska foreningar)
                                                    81 = Public entities (Statliga enheter)
                                                82 = Primary municipalities
                                         (Primarkommuner)
                                             83 = Local federations (Kommunalforbund)
                                               84 = County councils (Landsting)
                                                85 = Social insuranceoffices (Allmanna
                                                 forsakringskassor)
                                                  87 = Public bodiescorporate and institutions
                                                   (Offentliga korporationer och anstalter)

                                   24
                                               88 = Mortgage associations
                                                    (Hypoteksforeningar)
                                                  89 = Regional state agencies (Statliga
                                               regionala myndigheter)
                                              92 = Mutual insurance companies
                                               (Omsesidiga forsakringsbolag)
                                               93 = Savings banks (Sparbanker)
                                                  96 = Foreign legal entities (Utlandska
                                                   juridiska personer)

Robustness Checks

                 Table A.1: Robustness check 1 - Firm characteristics in 2019

                                   25
Table A.2: Robustness check 1 – regression output

                  26
Table A.3: Robustness check 1 – regression output (Secondary variables)

      Table A.4: Robustness check 2 - Firm characteristics in 2019

                           27
          Table A.5: Robustness check 2 – regression output

Table A.6: Robustness check 2 – regression output (Secondary variables)
                           28
Table A.7: Robustness check 3 - Firm characteristics in 2019

     Table A.8: Robustness check 3 – regression output

                      29
Table A.9: Robustness check 3 – regression output (Secondary variables)

                           30
Additional Graphs

                     Figure A.1: Additional financial measures over time
AI disclosure

AI tools have been used to help troubleshoot and write code in python and in some cases, we used
it to assist us with grammar, spell checking and formulating certain sentences in the text.

                                   31