
The Entrepreneurial Ecosystem of Kosovo: A Field Study of Local Startup
Entrepreneurs
Abstract:
   I explore the entrepreneurial ecosystem of Kosovo by analyzing the experiences and
   mindsets of 16 local startup entrepreneurs. Using semi-structured interviews and
   thematic analysis based on Braun & Clarke’s (2006) qualitative framework, I identify
   five key themes: structural barriers to entrepreneurship, cultural and psychological
   challenges, the global spread of Kosovo's diaspora, innovation in adversity, and
   entrepreneurial mindset and values. The findings highlight crucial external and
   internal challenges, such as an underdeveloped infrastructure and a cultural risk
   aversion, as well as intrinsic advantageous traits across the subjects, such as
   creativity and resilience. The themes are deeply interconnected, and suggest
   applications in the form of specific policy decisions and programs aimed at altering
   cultural perceptions. However, the findings are preliminary in the field and highlight
   the need for more extensive and targeted research.
Keywords:
   Kosovo, Entrepreneurship, Entrepreneurial Ecosystem, Startups, Economic
  Development
Authors:
   Victor Atarodi (25669)
Tutors:
   Ye Zhang, Associate Professor, Department of Finance
Examiner:
   Ramin Baghai, Professor, Department of Finance
Special Acknowledgements:
   I want to express my sincerest gratitude to Innovation Centre Kosovo (ICK) and
   Styrelsen för Internationellt Utvecklingssamarbete (SIDA) for their extensive
   contribution with resources and guidance, this project would not be possible without
   their support.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Victor Atarodi, 2025

                                   1
1 Introduction
        In this paper I investigate the characteristics of the entrepreneurial climate
of the country of Kosovo. Entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial activities are
widely considered a cornerstone for a country’s sustained financial and economic
growth; and innovativeness, creativity, and motivation among entrepreneurs are
crucial for driving this growth. The research basis for this concept is strong.
Multiple prominent research papers (Andrews, Chatterji, Lerner, & Stern, 2022;
Doran, McCarthy, O’Connor, & Nsiah, 2018; Gautam, & Lal, 2021; Valliere, &
Peterson, 2010; & Galindo-Martín, Méndez-Picazo, & Castaño-Martínez, 2020)
showcase studies that find correlations between innovation, entrepreneurship, and
economic growth. Gautam & Lal (2021) find the correlation between
entrepreneurship and economic growth to be significantly positive, while
Galindo-Martín et al. (2020) find a similar relationship between innovation and
economic growth. Andrews et al. (2022) presents a volume of studies breaking
down these contributions by sector. For developing countries, the positive effects
of entrepreneurial activities are more often hindered by a variety of systemic
inefficiencies. Doran et al. (2018) and Valliere & Peterson (2010) find either an
absence of or a negative relationship between entrepreneurship and economic
growth for low-income countries, but positive ones for developed countries,
indicating frictions preventing the entrepreneurial benefits to translate to
economic growth.
       Modern research within development economics also stresses the
importance of tailoring decision-making and policies to the targeted country’s
specific economic, financial, and cultural context, and that “one-size-fits-all
approaches” often fall short. A variety of influential and critically acclaimed
studies support this perspective. Acemoglu & Robinson’s (2012) book “Why
Nations Fail” investigates the importance of institutions to sustained economic
growth, and highlights how country-specific factors should be prioritized over
universal models. El-Erian & Spence (2008) examines some challenges that
developing countries face in reaching sustained growth, specifically targeting the
cases of China and India, and how they have tailored their growth strategies to
their unique situations. Diwan (2010) discusses the more specific meanings and
applications of country-specific solutions as a preferred measure over simplistic
economic theory. Khuong (2013) compares economic growth paths of Asian
countries, emphasizing open-mindedness and the hunger for learning to a
successful growth strategy, as well as taking account of the local context.
Delechat, Melina, Newiak, Papageorgiou, & Spatafora (2024) elaborates the
discussion with case studies of developing countries showcasing a correlation
between economic diversification and a variety of economic improvements like
faster economic growth and higher incomes per capita. The increased
entrepreneurial frictions in developing economies, combined with the concept of
context-dependent decision-making, forms the idea of mainly focusing on data
from one specific developing country which the goal is to understand more about.
       Kosovo is a young nation relative to the rest of the world. Its formal
declaration of independence was conducted in 2008, and 102 out of 193 United
Nations member states currently recognize Kosovo. It fulfills most of the
fundamental criteria for statehood that were originally set out in the 1933
Montevideo Convention, including a settled population, a defined territory, a

                                 2
functioning government, and an ability to enter into foreign relations. Kosovo is
currently a member of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, but
the government has pushed for more international recognition since its
independence. Despite diplomatic support from most of the European Union, the
United Kingdom, and the United States, resistance from powerful non-recognizers
like Russia and China has blocked the country from entering important
international organizations like the United Nations. The relationship to its border
country Serbia has been complicated and tense for decades, and is deeply rooted
in ethnic and political conflicts. Since Kosovo’s independence, Serbia has not
only refused to recognize it, but has also actively lobbied against and blocked
Kosovo from establishing itself internationally.
       These difficulties and tensions have played a major role in Kosovo’s
financial and economic situation. Since its independence, economic growth has
been moderate, with GDP averaging at around 4% annually (World Bank Group,
2023), and the economy showing high resilience against global shocks like the
pandemic and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine (United States Department of State,
2024). However, the country’s GDP/capita, which is around $6 000 in current US
dollars (World Bank Group, 2023), is currently the second-lowest in Europe, only
higher than Ukraine which is in the midst of war. Additionally, there are
significant underlying problems to the economy that have raised concerns both
domestically and internationally. Firstly, Kosovo’s unemployment rate is one of
the highest in Europe, and it is especially severe for the younger generations of
the workforce, averaging at above 20% in the last ten years for the entire
workforce and around 50% for the youth unemployment rate (Trading Economics,
2023). Secondly, the country has a large informal sector estimated to account for
about 35% of GDP (Cojocaru, 2017), and corruption is widespread throughout the
government and various institutions (United States Department of State, 2024).
Thirdly, the country is heavily dependent on foreign aid, and a disproportionate
size of its GDP comes from remittances from abroad (United States Department
of State, 2024). These factors play into Kosovo being a developing country with
about 23% of the population living below the poverty line (UNICEF Kosovo
Programme, 2022).
       Kosovo is in strong need for an increased academic focus, especially from
a financial and development economic standpoint. The country’s entrepreneurial
climate is a relatively underexplored field academically. The need for urgent
action is also highlighted by the idea of path dependency for nations (Leithner &
Libby, 2017), underlining how the quality of initial choices can have magnified
implications for the future situation of the country, where those implications can
either increase or restrict future choice options (Greener, 2025). An increased
understanding of a country’s unique situation and problems can be essential for
gaining an initial understanding on how to solve them. For Kosovo, understanding
the entrepreneurial ecosystem can improve the understanding about issues like the
high unemployment rate, since job opportunities are partially dependent on
whether companies are able to flourish in their industry. As for the high
remittance reliance and the large informal sector, these problems tend to decrease
in a well-functioning job market and a generally effective formal economic
system, making them indirectly relevant as well.

                                 3
       Multiple notable entrepreneurial studies have been performed in other
countries than Kosovo. Mainly, prominent and extensive research projects have
been conducted in both developing and developed economies, or major cities
within those, about the entrepreneurial ecosystem and country policies. Examples
of countries having been placed under the lens are Kenya (Holm & Ankarkrona,
2016), Indonesia (Qoriawan & Apriliyanti, 2022), Israel (Senor & Singer, 2009),
Poland (OECD, 2014 & 2019), India (Pathak & Mukherjee, 2020), China (Zhao,
Xu, Vasa, & Shahzad, 2023), and Ireland (OECD, 2019). The majority of these
kinds of studies use a qualitative-based methodology, either fully or to a large
extent. Many of them base their conclusions on some variant of interviews, most
often semi-structured, showing the scientific strength of this kind of data
collection form in terms of extensiveness and possibility to reach novel
conclusions. Additionally, many studies specifically interviewed individuals
connected to the startup scene, although some provided nuance by also
interviewing other groups of people connected to e.g., support organizations,
government officials, historians, venture investors, etc. Some articles also
provided methodological triangulation through combining the qualitative data
with existing quantitative documents.
       In Kosovo specifically, some studies have been performed as well, but the
more insightful studies focusing on other countries are generally more prominent
and scientifically rigorous. Papers focusing on the Kosovo entrepreneurial climate
in particular include Avdiaj, Berisha, Krasniqi, & Ramadani (2024), Sopjani
(2019), Saranda, Florin, & Besnik (2019), Sahiti (2021), Mustafa, Pula-Shiroka,
Krasniqi, Ramadani, & Kryeziu (2023), Stojčetović (2022), and Hima (2024).
While Mustafa et al. (2023), Stojčetović (2022), and Hima (2024) collect data
through surveys, Sopjani (2019), Saranda et al. (2019), and Sahiti (2021) instead
review existing documents. Only Avdiaj et al. (2024) base their study on
semi-structured interviews, and those are with representatives of incubators.
However, qualitative studies involving interviews are crucial for improving the
general understanding within fields highly characterized by people, attitudes, and
relationships, just like national entrepreneurship climates. The notable studies in
other countries mentioned in the above paragraph are ideal examples of
qualitative field studies yielding insightful results, including Qoriawan &
Apriliyanti (2022), Senor & Singer (2009), and Zhao et al. (2023). Additionally, a
crucial group that is underrepresented within such qualitative Kosovar studies are
entrepreneurs themselves, not just incubator personnel. Hence, there is a clear gap
in the literature within the Kosovar entrepreneurial ecosystem.
       To bridge these research gaps, I examine the entrepreneurial climate of
Kosovo using self-conducted and semi-structured interviews with Kosovar
entrepreneurs. To decrease survivorship bias, I specifically target startup
entrepreneurs. The research is descriptive, and the main objective is to widen the
general understanding of the Kosovar entrepreneurial ecosystem, as well as to
understand the primary factors influencing entrepreneurial success or failure. The
data collection involves 16 interviews and a separate survey filled in by 15 of
those subjects. The interviews are the main data source for the analysis, while the
survey is brief and serves the purpose of bringing background information and
improving the overall analysis. Most of the interviews are done face-to-face, but
some are performed online. All of the interviews are video recorded. The aim is

                                 4
for every interview to be as rich of information as possible. Therefore, all of them
are 30-50 minutes long. Although the questions prepared for the interviews are
standardized, they are also open-ended to allow the participants to share their own
experiences freely. Data is collected about a variety of aspects regarding the
subjects’ professional experiences, lives, and mentalities. Instead of creating a
formal setting, the data collection depends on free-flowing conversations where
the discussion can smoothly go from topic to topic naturally.
       Based on the in-depth qualitative data about experiences, values, and
mindsets, thematic analysis is applied to identify the most broad and recurring
trends across the transcripts. Braun & Clarke’s (2006) prominent paper about
thematic analysis serves as a benchmark for the data analysis. An open and
exploratory approach is maintained throughout the entire process to attempt to
catch novel, subtle, and perhaps unexpected insights. Although qualitative
research always is characterized by some inevitable subjectivity, it is vital to avoid
unnecessary rigidity by limiting the data collection and analysis to any one aspect,
for example the financial system or the economic stage of the country. Keeping an
open mind is ideal for providing a strong overall investigation of the
entrepreneurial climate. The exploratory nature of the study implies a necessity to
avoid excessive expectations or predefined factors or themes. The thematic
analysis also allows for a distinction between individual differences and collective
struggles, whether they be based on psychological issues or practical ones. The
findings and conclusions emphasize the need for future research within the area
and country.
       The findings comprise of five themes, which are all different yet
interconnected: structural barriers to entrepreneurship, cultural and psychological
challenges, the global spread of Kosovo's diaspora, innovation in adversity, and
entrepreneurial mindset and values. The first three themes encompass different
kinds of external and internal challenges to entrepreneurs within the ecosystem,
while the remaining two themes instead focus on internal and adaptive strengths
observed among the entrepreneurs, increasing their chances of success and
combating the difficulties. These five themes, although having individual
meanings, together depict a complex and interconnected entrepreneurial
ecosystem that is constituted by individual mindsets and actions, as well as
systemic limitations and inefficiencies.
       The first theme identifies a variety of external challenges, mostly
connected to systemic constraints. The main areas of this theme are an
underdeveloped infrastructure, limited access to funding and customers, as well as
weak institutional systems and governmental inefficiency. These factors are
regularly described as the main challenges that are actively hindering
entrepreneurial success. On the other hand, the second theme focuses on
challenges that stem from psychological challenges and cultural values.
Entrepreneurs depict a local culture that views failure as shameful, and
discourages entrepreneurial risk-taking. Also, they describe a widespread distrust
in institutions and the government, likely a result of the inefficiencies from the
first theme. The third theme focuses on a specific external challenge that is
especially prevalent across the interviews, which is the global spread of the
Kosovar diaspora. This global status is a double-edged sword. On the one hand, it
leads to a large loss of resources and human capital for Kosovo. On the other

                                 5
hand, it serves as a useful network and community for the individual
entrepreneurs, with a global access to resources and knowledge. The last two
themes focus on different identified traits among the entrepreneurs that are
advantageous for their entrepreneurial success in different ways. The fourth theme
specifically focuses on innovativeness and creativity, a trait enabling
entrepreneurs to overcome tough challenges such as those related to the first three
themes. Entrepreneurship in Kosovo often involves having the odds stacked
against you, but high creativity enables entrepreneurs to solve difficult situations
involving severe barriers and minimal resources. The final theme instead focuses
on other prevalent traits, mainly resilience, ambition, and national pride, which
together substantially help the subjects in enduring entrepreneurial hardships,
especially considering how entrepreneurs rarely succeed with their first venture.
Creativeness is hence often not enough. Resilience and ambition are also crucial
traits to increase the chances of enduring the systemic and psychological
challenges.
       The findings suggest that specific policy decisions and a generally
increased awareness among specific stakeholder groups can be beneficial to foster
a more supportive startup climate. Targeted infrastructure and institutional
reforms, leveraging untapped diaspora resources, and adjusted educational
programs are some concrete practical applications. However, the limitations of the
study, mainly a limited sample size and scope, stress the need for more extensive
studies to better understand the situation regarding entrepreneurs and other
stakeholder groups.
       The methodology and findings of this paper extend from the existing
Kosovar entrepreneurship literature by providing a more extensive qualitative
foundation for its findings, as opposed to mainly relying on surveys and previous
studies like Mustafa et al. (2023) and Stojčetović (2022). They also extend the
literature from the qualitative study by Avdiaj et al. (2024) by mainly focusing on
startup entrepreneurs and hence incorporating the perspectives of the stakeholder
group most directly affected by the factors of the entrepreneurial climate.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data
and the methodological details, including practical details and the research design.
Section 3 provides a brief overview of the five themes that constitute the results,
and Section 4 includes the analysis of these themes. Section 5 discusses
limitations and practical applications of the findings, as well as future studies.
Finally, Section 6 concludes the thesis, summarizing the research objective, the
key findings, and their implications.

                                 6
2 Data & Methodology

2.1 Contacts & Details
       I carried out the study as a part of a bachelor thesis project for the
Stockholm School of Economics, through the Department of Finance. The field
study itself was mainly based in the city of Pristina, which is the capital of
Kosovo. The research was made possible due to the project plan being awarded
the “Minor Field Studies” grant, which is given out by the public Swedish
institution Styrelsen för Internationellt Utvecklingssamarbete (SIDA) to bachelor
and master thesis projects to be carried out in developing countries. The time
spent in Kosovo was two months, between mid-February and mid-April 2025,
where the data was collected. The data analysis and report writing was done in
April and May 2025.
       For the project I had multiple points of contact for guidance and
assistance. In Kosovo, the on-site supervisor was Henrik Riby, who is the Head of
Development Cooperation at the embassy of Sweden in Pristina. He was my main
point of contact throughout the study, and assisted the project in case of any
potential issues faced. The supervisor in Sweden was Karin Fernler, who is the
Program Director of the BSc in Business and Economics at the Stockholm School
of Economics. The study itself was carried out in full cooperation with the
Innovation Centre Kosovo (ICK), which is a business incubator and Kosovo’s
leading integrator of startups and innovative businesses. They aim to aid startups
with growth and employment (Innovation Centre Kosovo, 2024). The
organization fully assisted the research, and their office in Pristina served as the
main point of work. Additionally, they also provided interview rooms with
flexible booking possibilities, as well as connected the project to the relevant
startup entrepreneurs that were used in the research. Specifically, Managing
Director Dorina Grezda and Project Officer Jeta Zhaveli were my main contacts
from ICK. Lastly, associate professor Ye Zhang and professor Ramin Baghai from
the Department of Finance in the Stockholm School of Economics aided the
research project with scientific feedback and logistical help regarding the
university’s requirements.

2.2 Research Design

2.2.1 Research Objectives
       The project is a field study, and hence belongs to the category of
descriptive research. The study seeks to broaden the understanding of the
entrepreneurial climate of Kosovo. More specifically, it examines the possibilities
of entrepreneurial success in the country, and seeks to understand what factors are
causing the present situation. It ultimately suggests tangible factors that need to
change in order to improve the situation, although it does not analyze how these

                                 7
factors should change. The findings are a stepping stone for future research about
Kosovo’s development.

2.2.2 Data Collection
       The data collection mainly takes the form of semi-structured interviews
with startup entrepreneurs, and a digital multiple choice questionnaire sent out to
them. The study is mainly qualitative, meaning that the interviews are the data
source with the primary focus for the analysis, while the quantitative data from the
survey are brief and hence not statistically significant on its own. The survey data
is instead used to improve the overall analysis.
       Participants in the study are selected through purposive sampling, meaning
that only startup entrepreneurs with direct involvement in the startup ecosystem
are included in the sample. One-on-one interviews are carried out with all the
entrepreneurs chosen for the study, except for one pair of individuals who
participate in the interview together. The interviews are done face-to-face to the
extent that the participants are available to meet. Most times, the on-site location
is an interview room at the office of ICK. Another possible location is at the office
of the participant’s company. If the only possible meet-up location is in another
city in Kosovo than Pristina, travel for the project is necessary. Nevertheless,
some individuals are only able to conduct the meeting online within the time
frame of the study, either due to tight schedules to meet in person or because they
work from abroad. For those that are only available online, the digital meeting
platforms Google Meet and WhatsApp are used instead. However, some kind of
call is required to include the participants in the study. Entrepreneurs that only
have the option to write down and send their answers via email are not included.
After getting verbal consent from the participants, all of the interviews are video
recorded for the later data analysis stage. Anonymity is also ensured prior to the
interview, and it is emphasized that no individual or company names will be
released in the final paper. The survey takes the form of a digital questionnaire,
which is filled out on a computer by the on-site participants in connection to the
interview, and sent out digitally to the online participants before or after the
interview.
       In total, 16 startup entrepreneurs are interviewed, and 15 of those have
filled out the survey. The aim is to include as many participants as possible in the
study, but there are some constraints limiting this number. Firstly, the time frame
is only two months, and the interviews are time-consuming to conduct since they
involve reaching out, discussing, planning, booking a room, executing, and
ultimately transferring the video file to a hard drive. Secondly, not all
entrepreneurs respond to the emails and messages, despite multiple reminders.
Lastly, the whole study is a one-man project, and there are practical constraints.
Nevertheless, the aim for the sample size is 12 or more, which can be a suitable
number for qualitative research when the individual items are rich in information
(Vasileiou, Barnett, Thorpe, & Young, 2018). A multitude of factors are put into
place to ensure richness in information for each data item, described further down.
       The survey is created and sent out through Google Forms and consists of
10 simple multiple-choice questions. The purpose of the survey is to gather
standardized background information about the participant, in order to have a

                                 8
fundamental analytical basis in case some background is not covered during the
interview. The list of survey questions are displayed in Figure 1 below.

       In order for the data analysis to be scientifically well-founded with the
given sample size, it is vital that the individual interview items are as rich of
information as possible. This is attempted through having longer interviews and
allowing the discussion to be free-flowing. The interviews vary in length
depending on participant availability, but are all in the span of 30-50 minutes
long. The questions prepared for the interviews are standardized and open-ended
in order to avoid rigidity and allow the participants to share their own experience
freely. The list of predetermined interview questions are displayed in Figure 2
below. They are phrased to account for different aspects of the participants’

                                 9
professional experiences, lives, and mentalities. Additionally, the predetermined
questions mainly work as a structure for the interview, and they are not followed
word-by-word, nor are they answered in the same order for every interview.
Instead, the aim is to make the participants view the interview more as a
discussion than a formal setting, and to let the conversational flow of the
discussion go from topic to topic naturally. The purpose of this aim is for the
participants to feel more comfortable sharing their genuine thoughts and for the
interview to be more smooth and effective. As long as the conversation stays
within some boundaries of the overall subject, it also further allows the
participants to share their experience on their own terms, and for each interview to
be richer in context-relevant information, as opposed to forcing every participant
to focus on questions that they may not have much to talk about. Moreover, more
complex, contextual, and probing follow-up questions are asked during the
discussion in order to get a better understanding of the respondent’s mentality and

                                10
views. The questions require explanation, justification, and examples of previous
statements, and give the respondents chances to elaborate on how and why they
feel the way they do. It is therefore vital that the interviews are semi-structured, as
opposed to structured.
       The interviews are the main data source of the project, and hence more
focus is put into phrasing the qualitative open-ended questions, as well as
perfecting the interview technique. The quantitative close-ended survey questions,
although useful as a complimentary data source, do not have as much focus
throughout the study.
        The resources available were vital for the study. Mainly, the grant provided
prior to the field study gave the financial opportunity to make the project happen
in the first place. Apart from that, the contacts both in Sweden and Kosovo were
useful resources, both for their advice and for the tangible benefits provided, most
notably ICK’s contact lists of entrepreneurs, as well as their office used for the
interviews and other work. Apart from that, the main resources used were a
personal computer, phone, and an external hard drive for storing the video
recordings of the interviews.

2.2.3 Data Analysis
       The survey data is standardized and is hence used to create simple
statistical measures for comparison purposes. It is displayed as ten simple pie
charts, one for each question in the survey. The survey pie charts are found in the
appendix (Figures A1-A10).
       The main analysis tool used for the qualitative interview data is thematic
analysis. It is defined as a method for identifying, analysing and reporting patterns
within data (Braun & Clarke, 2006). Relative to other qualitative data analysis
methods, it is a simple and flexible technique that still provides robustness. It can
give the data rich and intuitive meaning, which can help gaining novel insights
from complex and extensive datasets. The prominent paper “Using thematic
analysis in psychology” by Braun & Clarke (2006) is used as a benchmark for the
data analysis. The techniques and framework outlined in the paper are widely
regarded as a common practice for conducting thematic analysis for qualitative
data sources, and the paper is the most cited qualitative framework paper, as well
as the third-most-cited article published this century overall. The general
framework for the thematic analysis can be summarized as the following:
        1. Transcribing the data & familiarizing oneself with it
        2. Generating initial codes
       3. Searching for themes
       4. Reviewing themes
       5. Defining and naming themes
        6. Producing the report and presenting the data

       The term “codes” above is referring to features of the data that appear
interesting to the analyst (Braun & Clarke, 2006), and coding is a method of
simplifying and shortening the data down to more meaningful constituents.
“Themes” hence refers to patterns of coded material that can be interpreted in a
meaningful way with reference to the research topic. Based on the themes

                                 11
identified from the coded material, further analysis of them is applied before the
ultimate report is compiled (Braun & Clarke, 2006). This framework has been
used extensively among large qualitative studies in the last decades from a wide
range of research areas (e.g., Sovacool, Iskandarova, & Hall, 2023; Aslam &
Rana, 2022; & Doherty & Stavropoulou, 2012).
       As emphasized by Braun & Clarke (2006), a crucial element to thematic
analysis involves having an reflexive dialogue from the perspective of the
researcher and its role in the analytical process. Thematic analysis is hence more
than just identifying patterns in qualitative data, but also to acknowledge one’s
own strengths and shortcomings. This also applies to other steps of the project, for
example the data collection. With this in mind, I hereby certify that I was
inevitably shaped by my own background, mindset, and assumptions, in all stages
of the process ranging from designing the interview questions to constructing the
themes. The fact that I am an outsider to Kosovo’s entrepreneurial ecosystem
brought a perspective of objectivity informed by academic knowledge and
secondary sources in the form of interviewing individuals who experienced the
targeted phenomena firsthand. However, it also posed a limitation since it limited
my capacity in fully capturing nuanced cultural meanings in the transcripts, as
well as during the interviews themselves.

                                12
3 Results

3.1 Survey Results
       The results from the ten survey questions are shown as pie charts in the
appendix of this paper, numbered A1-A10. The main takeaways from the survey
results are summarized in this section. Most of the subjects are young, almost
90% of them are between 18-44 years of age. Around two thirds of them are
males. Almost all of them have either a bachelor’s or master’s degree as their
highest level of education. All of their startups have been going on for at least a
year, with many of them for over three years. Around 75% of the participants’
startups are in the technology industry. Most of them have a team of 2-5
employees in total, and none of them are fully working by themselves. Personal
savings is the main source of startup funding. Most entrepreneurs have some kind
of mentor or support network to rely on. Almost every entrepreneur has
previously founded another startup. Most of the subjects founded their current
venture to attempt to solve a social issue or to satisfy a personal passion, while
financial independence is a less important motive.

3.2 Interview Results
       Below is a list of the five main themes identified through the thematic
analysis, explained briefly. These themes are further described and motivated in
the next section, with reference to the research question.

3.2.1 Theme 1: Structural Barriers to Entrepreneurship
       This theme includes a variety of structural barriers categorizing an
underdeveloped startup ecosystem, as described by the entrepreneurs. Some
examples of barriers are limited access to funding, poor infrastructure, slow and
inefficient systems within institutions, and minimal governmental support. Almost
every single entrepreneur interviewed discusses external problems that make their
business harder to start and manage, and that decreases their chances of success.
Based on the sample interviewed, this topic is a wide and crucial area for
understanding the Kosovo entrepreneurial climate, and hence a main theme in this
analysis.

3.2.2 Theme 2: Cultural and Psychological Challenges
       The second section includes various cultural and psychological factors
mentioned repeatedly throughout the interviews. For example, it appears as
though cultural norms discourage entrepreneurial risk-taking, viewing failure as
shameful. Additionally, there is a distrust in formal institutions, leading to a
preference for informal actions in the business environment. These challenges are
also aspects that are regularly mentioned by many entrepreneurs. Cultural and
psychological challenges, although different concepts, are closely interrelated and

                                13
influential to each other, hence why they are bundled into the same theme. This
section covers mostly internal challenges as a result of mindsets, beliefs, and
fears, that can be both individual or as a result of culture or history.

3.2.3 Theme 3: The Global Spread of Kosovo's Diaspora
       The third theme includes a more specific aspect: the Kosovar diaspora
dispersion. The characteristics of the diaspora are ones of a double-edged sword.
On the one hand, the diaspora is a tight-knit community helping each other out
and providing essential support like knowledge, funding, and networks. The
global spread increases the width of assistance that can be provided to users of the
network. On the other hand, the diaspora appears to be too concentrated outside
the country borders, as many talented individuals prefer staying abroad after
education. The outward migration of Kosovo’s human capital is ongoing.
Entrepreneurs repeatedly talk about family, colleagues, or friends moving abroad
to work or base their business in. They also mention how this phenomenon can
drain the country of local talent and potential that could contribute to its
development. This theme is a unique category that stems mainly from external
factors of the diaspora situation.

3.2.4 Theme 4: Innovation in Adversity
       This section concerns itself solely with a specific internal aspect of the
entrepreneurial climate, which is the individuals’ ability to think creatively and
overcome challenges, especially those mentioned in the first theme. Kosovar
entrepreneurs seem to often innovate creatively with minimal resources, relying
on the informal economy and self-made solutions to navigate systemic
constraints. Despite often severe practical obstacles, for example the structural
barriers brought up above, their creativity often allows them to still find success
despite seemingly low odds. The interviews reveal a pattern of creativity and
adaptation to difficult and sometimes rapidly changing circumstances, for
example building product prototypes without a lab, selling in informal ways, or
finding self-made innovations.

3.2.5 Theme 5: Entrepreneurial Mindset and Values
       The last theme is about internal aspects that act to the advantage for the
entrepreneurs and their chances of startup success. While the second theme covers
the challenges, this theme covers other identified characteristics such as resilience,
ambition, pride, as well as a desire to improve their society and create value. The
entrepreneurs in the sample repeatedly exhibit these traits, which have helped
them endure practical hardships and personal struggles, as well as giving them the
strive and motivation to start the business ventures in the first place. This force is
often mentioned as a positive force to improve Kosovo’s social and economic
development, and discussed as a way to persist even when the odds are against
oneself.

                                14
4 Theme Analysis

4.1 Dissecting the Themes
        This section concerns itself with a deeper analysis of each theme, carefully
dissecting the five areas in a coherent and logical manner as described by Braun &
Clarke (2006). Sufficient data extracts are provided to demonstrate the validity of
the themes identified. Due to anonymity reasons, the entrepreneurs will be
referred to as a number from one to 16, in the order they were interviewed (e.g.,
“Entrepreneur 1”).
       Figure 3 below is comparing the themes based on two dimensions. The
first one is the degree that the circumstances surrounding the theme are based on
external factors (e.g., societal problems) and internal factors (e.g., individual

mindsets, values, traits, and psychological challenges). The general idea is that
internal factors stem from within a specific subject’s mind, while external ones
stem from the outside and are generally outside the subject’s control. The term
“culture” is in this context ambivalent and context-dependent, which is a widely
recognized concept in organizational studies and is explained in prominent papers
such as Hudson (2022). In this comparison, I deem cultural factors external if it is
not a part of the subject’s mindset, or influencing it in a major way. If a cultural

                                15
aspect is a cornerstone to some part of the subject’s mindset, it is an internal
factor. However, sometimes this is hard to determine, and both sides might have
some degree of truth to them.
       The other dimension measures the nature of the theme in terms of whether
it focuses on problems and challenges (problem-oriented) or solutions and
advantageous circumstances (solution-oriented).

4.1.1 Structural Barriers to Entrepreneurship
       External obstacles in the form of systemic inefficiencies are a dominant
and recurring theme across the interview transcripts. Entrepreneurs repeatedly
describe how their ventures are constantly hindered by these challenges. Not only
are there a substantial prevalence of these challenges, but they are also often
mentioned in connection to each other, and as multiple causes to the same main
problem. This indicates that these external barriers may not be isolated
difficulties, but should instead be seen as correlated and interconnected ones. It
also paints a picture of Kosovo’s entrepreneurial climate as insufficient, and
shows a lack of well-developed local startup ecosystems in a turbulent
environment, despite the help of useful business incubators like ICK. Below are
the most commonly mentioned societal problems.

 a) Underdeveloped Infrastructure
       A generally underdeveloped infrastructure is one of the most common
trends identified throughout the entire study. It is such a general area, in fact, that
the following sub- themes can be seen as more specific categories of this one.
This category includes the general remarks and trends that represent the overall
theme broadly. Some notable data extracts (from now on referred to as DEs) from
the interviews that efficiently defines this problem are shown below.

DE1: Entrepreneur 1
“We lacked the development infrastructure. We had universities, but not so much
money on technology, not so much money on infrastructure. [...] We didn't succeed
because we didn't have a lot of support and to make such a product come to life,
it's something really interesting. And that product was really something
innovative.”

       The above quotation brings up general infrastructure issues, and highlights
how these constraints end up preventing a seemingly innovative product from
reaching the market. This phenomenon is not uncommon with developing
economies, and often results in a waste of time and potential, ultimately to the
detriment of consumers.

DE3: Entrepreneur 13
“I think we are in 2000-2003, in that sense, in technology.”
[Talking about the transitioning to Software as a Service (SaaS) in Kosovo
compared to in the US]

                                16
DE4: Entrepreneur 6
“Usually, most of the time the machines that are in Kosovo compared to Europe
are a little bit older because we don't have the market. [...] So they [some
companies] opt to go to a used machine that most of the time is not adaptable or
communicates with the software.”

       DE3 and DE4 emphasize lacking infrastructure in the sense of outdated
technology, products, and inputs that affect the whole business environment in the
sense that it makes it less efficient compared to countries like the US and Western
European nations.

 b) Limited Access to Funding & Customers
       A specific aspect of Kosovo’s infrastructure that is particularly
emphasized is the difficulties getting access to funding. The entrepreneurs depict a
disproportionately high struggle of passing the bar for funding from banks, angel
investors, venture capitalists, or even friends and family. Additionally, the lacking
infrastructure appears to have resulted in a large mistrust in startups, not only
from investors but also from customers, who are heavily reluctant into committing
to any business only based on the company size. This can be seen in Figure A7 in
the appendix, showing how a large proportion of funding comes from personal
savings. It is also illustrated in the below DEs.

DE5: Entrepreneur 14
“I had potential customers early on tell me: ‘We like what you're doing. This is
interesting. We know it would help us, but we don't work with startups. We work
with Microsoft, Google, and other big companies. So we will work with you once
you are outside the startup phase. We know startups fail, so call us back in five
years. If you're still around, we will talk again.’”

DE6: Entrepreneur 1
“You need money. You are coming from Kosovo. Nobody's trusting you to give you
an investment, even if it's 50,000 euros. Nobody's willing to invest.”

DE7: Entrepreneur 3
“These two grants [that they won] were the first and only sources of investment
that we got. So the app was mostly active between this year, so 2017 and 2019.
And then we had a stopping point…”

       Customer and investor distrust are main features of the above quotations,
showing the struggles that entrepreneurs face in scaling their startup, both in
acquiring financing and attracting customers. Apart from an inefficient
infrastructure, originating from Kosovo is a disadvantage in itself since it
discourages both domestic and international investors from committing to a
project, even though they might like the idea and the person. They seem to
generally view Kosovo startups as too risky, which the interviews indicate is a
hard barrier to overcome.

                                17
 c) Weak institutional systems & Governmental Inefficiency
       Lastly, institutions and the government are recurring topics when it comes
to Kosovo’s infrastructure. The government is often described as bureaucratic and
stagnant, and institutions as inefficient. Moreover, the institutional and
governmental processes seem not only ineffective, but also slow to change, often
due to red tape regulations and corrupt individuals in power. For institutions
specifically, the educational sector is mentioned as a main cause of entrepreneurial
struggles, through a lack of knowledge about the financial system and other
important subjects, as depicted in the first subtheme. Other areas, such as business
registration, product testing, and taxes, are also repeatedly described as inefficient.

DE8: Entrepreneur 3
“Some of these [business] procedures have taken a lot of time, for example, from
business registration to just any changes with taxes. And so I can say that in the
past months that took us a lot of time.”

DE9: Entrepreneur 1
“Another problem we had was that they were not so flexible. So just imagine
doing a basic testing for your product, we had to wait a month or 45 days.”

DE10: Entrepreneur 4
“They started [with the implementation of a law on tourism], but it was in the
parliament for two years. The implementation started six months after they voted.
They should have started with the implementation earlier, but they didn't.”

       Multiple entrepreneurs interviewed are struggling from the inefficient
institutional and governmental systems, and that they affect their business
profitability by wasting valuable time to complete different processes fundamental
to their startups.
        Ultimately, the relevant DEs indicate that interconnected structural barriers
together pose a huge external threat against emerging startups that are otherwise
promising. These barriers come in the form of an underdeveloped infrastructure,
characterized by funding challenges, customer distrust, inefficient institutions, and
bureaucratic governmental systems. It is clear that the current nature of Kosovo’s
economy provides insufficient support for the startup ecosystem, and that local
entrepreneurs operate within a state that has not yet evolved the support systems
common in Western countries.

4.1.2 Cultural and Psychological Challenges
       Although external obstacles are a major challenge, the importance of
certain internal and cultural challenges should not be overlooked. Many of the
interview subjects heavily emphasize internal and cultural factors that have posed
major complications for their entrepreneurial visions. Mainly, they depict a local
culture that views failure as shameful, and that hence discourage any kind of
entrepreneurial risk-taking. Additionally, another common thread is a widespread
distrust in institutions and the government, which both appears to be a

                                18
psychological and cultural phenomenon, likely a consequence of the systemic
inefficiencies described in the first theme. Lastly, this section also includes
individual internal challenges that appear to be unique to only one subject, or just
are not observed on a wider scale. Below are some DEs that symbolize the issues
related to this theme.

DE11: Entrepreneur 9
“We were raised in a way that failure is not an option because you have no other
backups, you have nothing. So you have to fight not to fail.”

DE12: Entrepreneur 1
“It’s not easy because we [Kosovo] have a lot of political problems, I would say.
And when you have internal problems, you are not able to think longer term.”

DE13: Entrepreneur 16
“I struggle to keep consistent. I just have this issue, whenever something goes too
good, I just start to become complacent.”

       These DEs refer to the three subcategories mentioned above. DE11 refers
to the cultural fear of failure, DE12 to institutional distrust, and DE13 is an
example of an individual issue that was not identified to be a clear trend
throughout the data. Together, they are meant to clarify the psychological trends
that emerge from the study, and to establish that the internal challenges of the
second theme is also a relevant aspect alongside the external ones, and that both
need to be acknowledged in order to get a good grasp around the issues that the
entrepreneurs face.

4.1.3 The Global Spread of Kosovo's Diaspora
       This theme constitutes a specific aspect of external barriers, and is
purposefully not brought up when discussing the first theme. Additionally, this
theme also includes positive aspects, not only the negative consequences of the
circumstances surrounding Kosovo’s diaspora. The Kosovar diaspora, on the one
hand, is heavily spread outside the country borders, with many talented
individuals living and working abroad. This includes the entrepreneurial
ecosystem, with many Kosovars moving to the US or Western Europe to pursue
their entrepreneurial visions, which is a large loss of resources and human capital
for Kosovo. Many entrepreneurs interviewed are based, or have previously been
based, in other countries, for example Austria, the US, the UK, and Germany. On
the other hand, the global nature of the diaspora makes it more useful as a network
and community for the individual entrepreneurs, as it includes a larger proportion
of international knowledge, funding, and tools than it otherwise would have. This
lays the foundation for a more widespread network where individuals can get help
with specific questions about other countries’ systems. The global spread of the
diaspora may be disadvantageous for the country, but beneficial for individual
entrepreneurs using the network.

                                19
DE14: Entrepreneur 1
“People from our diaspora, so mainly in the United States, in Switzerland, In
Germany. So they were successful there, and started companies there. [...] I would
say the diaspora contributed a lot. [...] And usually smart people move to
advanced countries.”

DE15: Entrepreneur 11
“I feel like most of the people from my generation kind of follow the same path
and end up working in an international context, for companies either in Germany
or Austria or some of these German speaking countries, where most of the
availability is.”

       DE14 and DE15 mentions the lucrative nature of international
establishment for Kosovars, as opposed to locally in Kosovo. DE14 also brings up
the power of the network due to its global presence, but also emphasizes the
problem of draining Kosovo of its human capital. This indicates that the diaspora
is a double-edged sword due to its global characteristics, having some good
consequences but ultimately functioning to the detriment of Kosovo and its
developmental future.

4.1.4 Innovation in Adversity
       The challenges central to the first three themes lay the foundation for the
remaining two ones, which are more solution-focused, rather than
problem-focused. These final themes are also both mainly internally-originated.
This theme focuses specifically on an innovative trait that was a common element
of the conversations. Many entrepreneurs show an ability to think creatively and
overcome tough challenges, often those difficulties connected to a developing
country brought up in the first theme, as well as a rapidly changing business
landscape. This includes facing situations involving severe barriers, for example
minimal resources, forcing some to rely on the informal economy and their own
innovative solutions. This wide imagination for solutions is a fundamental factor
for many finding success despite having the odds stacked against them. Examples
of specific actions are included in the DEs below.

DE16: Entrepreneur 5
“I found the tire, I carried the tire, I washed the tire, taking all the stones from the
tire and then, trying to figure out what works. [....] A lot of people didn't really
help to be honest. [...] So I went to one store and then I found this woman and she
was selling some materials. [...] So I bought one and I took it with me and used it
as the seat. [...] I didn't know how to use the staplers but had to learn. I made a
lot of mistakes along the way, but then at the end I finished it.”
[Talking about the innovative solutions the entrepreneur had to come up with to
produce furniture by tires and raw materials, all by herself]

DE17: Entrepreneur 13
“The first problem is how to do the hardware, how to produce and mass produce
it. It's unreliable and complex. After that, the problem was to make this product

                                20
into a business, and make money out of it. [...] But we noticed that in some
countries like Kosovo, waste is not separated here, and everyone is just thrown
together. We saw that it could be a really cool product, but we also sensed that it
might not be scalable. [...] The biggest problem was that it was more a product for
business to government. [...] What we tried to do is we placed ads and made a
really cool design of the smart bin. It had LEDs and cool shapes. In the end, we
did deals with Coca-Cola and other big brands…”
[Talking about a variety of struggles that the entrepreneur managed to overcome
to implement a business idea about Kosovo’s waste management systems]

DE18: Entrepreneur 11
“My grandfather in Yugoslavia made jeans to young students and just sold them
at masses, kind of building a business out of it and just making sure that his family
was provided for and we had enough to survive.”

       The above DEs reflect the innovativeness described about this theme, and
illustrate the importance of such a trait for succeeding with their goals and visions.
DE16 and DE17 tell detailed stories of specific struggles and how they were
ultimately overcome. DE18 emphasizes creativity when it comes to selling the
product, and how that is crucial for surviving in times of extreme hardship.

4.1.5 Entrepreneurial Mindset and Values
       The last theme is, like the previous, internal and solution-focused. It
covers identified entrepreneurial characteristics, other than innovativeness, that
appear to be highly advantageous for success chances. The most prevalent ones in
this study are resilience, ambition, national pride, as well as an altruistic desire to
improve their society by creating value. Many of these traits come across as being
fundamental to their values, and a substantial part of their overall mindset, not just
regarding their business but also towards their personal life. Additionally, these
attitudes help the subjects endure entrepreneurial hardships related to the first few
themes. It might also be a root cause enabling the innovative mindset from the
fourth theme to be utilized, for example through high resilience and ambition
despite failures, ultimately enabling them to find the right solution. Oftentimes,
despite creativity, it does not seem like success comes on the first try for almost
any entrepreneur, but instead these attitudes make them keep going. This is visible
in Figure A9 in the appendix, showing how 80% of the subjects have previously
funded a startup. This phenomenon, combined with apparent national pride and
altruistic desires, is often mentioned as a positive drive for Kosovo’s
development, as is described by some of the DEs below.

DE19: Entrepreneur 12
“That's why I always say that not all of these people [other entrepreneurs in
question] could be leaders. That's what it's like being a leader, even if it's a
failure, you should have the power to get up again and to motivate others. So if
you go down, then who will do it for you?”

                                21
DE20: Entrepreneur 8
“Well, before blaming others, I always try to find the root cause of the project
because that's the approach. It also applies in projects.”

DE21: Entrepreneur 5
“One year it took me, for one hundred times I ruined it and destroyed it.”
[Discussing the entrepreneur’s process in producing a prototype for a product]

      DE19 and DE21 emphasize resilience and ambition, with DE19 also
focusing on leadership. DE20 also focuses on endurance but in a context of
keeping yourself calm and collected when facing adversity.

DE22: Entrepreneur 1
“When you go out, talk with people, they ask a lot about how successful you are,
what you have done your last year, or how things are going. So it's also about how
to be successful and that drives people to become more and more entrepreneurial.
[...] They [Kosovars abroad] later opened a branch in Kosovo with developers
there.
[Referring to a national drive to succeed, not primarily for personal gain but
instead for the sake of the nation]

       Here, DE22 refers to the traits of national pride and desires to improve
their society. It can also be seen in Figure A10 in the appendix, where around half
of all the subjects primarily have had a social problem in mind when initiating
their venture. This part goes to some extent against the third theme which
underlines the global diaspora and loss of human capital. However, both can be
true at once, as evident by the last part emphasizing that although some Kosovars
moved abroad for personal gain, some of them gave back to the local business by
opening branches back home, even though this is far less profitable than other
business opportunities. In other words, while there is a clear tension related to the
global diaspora, the national loyalty still returns some of the resources back to
Kosovo again. Lastly, in line with Kosovo’s population being relatively young, a
majority of the startup entrepreneurs included in the study are below the age of
35, as can be seen in Figure A1 in the appendix. This paints a picture of Kosovo’s
younger generations being the resilient and ambitious force that the hope in the
country’s future primarily lies on. All in all, this theme’s DEs embody the general
mindset of many of the subjects included in the study, and concludes the last, but
not least, theme of the analysis.

4.2 Integrating the Themes
       There is an increasing urgency to use systems thinking when conducting
any kind of analysis, especially those within the area of business and
development. This is for example depicted by Vargo, Koskela-Huotari, Baron,
Edvardsson, Reynoso, & Colurcio (2017), and their application of systems
thinking on markets. One important aspect of this is to look at multiple parts of a

                                22
larger system as a whole, and try to analyze how they are influencing each other,
as well as the overall system. With this framework in mind, it is essential to look
at the themes simultaneously, from an overall perspective of the Kosovo startup
ecosystem.
       While each theme has emerged independently, they are also deeply
interconnected. The themes and their causal relationships are summarized in
Figure 4 below. The structural barriers identified in the first theme are likely a
root cause to the other four themes, either directly or indirectly. Mainly, the

common psychological responses characterizing the second theme can be seen as
a direct effect of the barriers, instead of as long-standing and fundamental cultural
attitudes. For example, the institutional and governmental distrust is a clear
consequence of the inefficient institutional and governmental systems. The risk
aversion is indicated in the data to be substantially caused by the poor
infrastructure in general, since a poor infrastructure increases probability of
failure, which in turn reinforces the fear of taking such risks. The high odds of
failure is indicated by, for example, DE5 and DE6, which explicitly states the
unnecessary hardship that is faced although the entrepreneurs may have done

                                23
everything they can do to provide a high-quality product and a sustainable
business strategy. The structural barriers are also likely a major cause of the
diaspora’s global spread, as illustrated in the third theme. Although other more
economic factors such as higher wages and more demand are also likely causes
behind this outward migration, it is undeniable that the systemic problems are also
a driving force. The structural barriers may very well be another blockade from
the profitability of Kosovo’s business environment catching up with the West,
indicating that these two categories of causes have a reciprocal relationship.
Additionally, the diaspora’s global traits are also indicated to have an impact on
the second theme’s risk aversion, as suggested by DE14 and DE15. The fact that
the diaspora already is highly international can be a reinforcing factor to the fear
of failure domestically, as many entrepreneurial role models pave the path of
moving abroad for succeeding with their career goals. The outwardly migrating
human capital can also be one cause of the structural barriers, as the loss of
valuable resources slows down the development of the country that is needed to
surpass those barriers.
       When analysing causal relationships, the fourth and fifth themes have
similar positions. They both show that adversity does not necessarily imply
passivity. On the contrary, a common response is with domestically advantageous
character traits such as creativity, resilience, and national pride. It is not clear to
what extent these traits are culturally embedded, and if so, how far back they
would date. Either way, DE18 and DE19 suggest that these traits are a response to
generational hardships, and that they are brought out when an individual has no
other choice. The traits themselves may to some extent be genetically passed on,
and to some extent be brought out by the environment. What is evident, however,
is that difficulties that Kosovar entrepreneurs face can bring out these strong
behaviors, whether the attitudes existed before or not. Hence, the external and
internal challenges from the first three themes can be thought of as causing these
behaviors to become particularly significant, forcing the entrepreneurs to adapt
their mindset if they want to succeed. One good example of this is DE22, which
depicts a determined mentality to succeed domestically despite the constraints
faced. DE21 and DE19 also reinforces this view, and illustrates a resilient mindset
where entrepreneurs just keep going no matter how much it takes.
       Taken together, the themes form a complex ecosystem involving external
and internal forces, both obstacles and responses. In accordance with the systems
thinking framework, this emphasizes the need to understand Kosovo’s
entrepreneurial climate not as a series of isolated factors, but instead as a
connected system of a multitude of aspects, and as a platform where individual
characteristics, societal structures, and cultural attitudes constantly interact.

                                24
5 Discussion

5.1 Limitations
       The findings of this study, although interesting, should be used with
caution with respect to some methodological limitations. Firstly, the sample has a
relatively small size and scope compared to other qualitative studies. In total, 16
subjects are used, and although this sample size should be enough for studies like
this when the data items are rich in information (Vasileiou et al., 2018), a sample
size around 50 and above would provide a significantly more nuanced image.
Additionally, all of the subjects are accessed through ICK, or through friends of
previous subjects, limiting the scope of the study to a specific network within the
Kosovar entrepreneurial ecosystem. Although the importance of ICK’s work
likely means that the network has a broad reach, some groups of startups and
entrepreneurs might be underrepresented, especially those located in more rural
regions and those who for some reason are unaffiliated with ICK. While the data
collection process itself has been rich and in-depth, both of these factors limit the
generalizability of the findings. The study’s time and resource constraints are the
main reasons for the limitations to the size and scope of the sample. Also, since
the ecosystem is highly informal, contacting startup entrepreneurs without an
established network would likely be significantly more difficult, and a longer
presence in the country would be needed, as well as knowledge of the language, to
rely on word-of-mouth recommendations to reach these groups.
       Another limitation is the possibility for sampling biases. The purposive
sampling technique through ICK indicated that there may be a risk of survivorship
bias, where mainly the active and flourishing startups are brought to light. This
risk also increases due to voluntary participation through online contact methods.
The potential underrepresentation of failed or struggling startups may lead to an
underestimation in the results of the severity of external and internal challenges
entrepreneurs face, as well as an overestimation of their levels of innovativeness,
resilience, and ambition. Application of the findings should hence be used with
awareness of the sample selected.
       Lastly, as noted in the reflexive dialogue in the methodology section, the
qualitative process always has its limitations due to the researchers’ own bias. No
matter the level of precaution, everyone has some degree of subjectivity due to
their background, mindset, and values, which inevitably will affect the research
process. I acknowledge this subjectivity. Furthermore, the fact that I am not native
to the country of Kosovo, do not speak their official language, nor have visited the
country before, pose limitations in interpreting more subtle cultural nuances
within the interview data. Although it brings a perspective of objectivity to the
analysis, it is possible that some more embedded attitudes or values of the
entrepreneurs are not fully captured, or misinterpreted, for this reason.

                                25
5.2 Practical applications
        Despite the exploratory and descriptive nature of the research, the findings
of this study provides valuable insights into the entrepreneurial ecosystem of
Kosovo, an otherwise underexplored but nevertheless crucial factor for the
nation’s development. With the limitations in mind, the findings can provide local
politicians, incubators, and other agencies looking to foster a more supportive
startup system with an increased awareness. For example, they can be informed
about the urgent need for improved infrastructure and formal access to capital,
institutional reforms to decrease bureaucratic processes and gain public trust, as
well as more formal diaspora initiatives to leverage the global network of
mentors, funding, and knowledge. Additionally, educational programs can aim at
reducing the fear of risk, not just in an entrepreneurial context, by fostering a
more balanced and sound attitude to failure. Nevertheless, this research is
descriptive and has limitations, and serves to initiate a preliminary understanding
about the Kosovar startup climate. Therefore, practical responses should also be
grounded by more extensive studies, highlighting the need for continuing research
within the field, which is discussed in the next section.

5.3 Future studies
       The need for future research targeting the Kosovar entrepreneurial
ecosystem is high, both for more extensive studies and more specific ones. This
poorly understood yet important field can benefit from a variety of research
designs. Firstly, given this study’s limited sample size and scope, future research
with larger sample sizes and broader scopes, but otherwise similar methodological
processes, are needed to validate these findings. For example, future studies can
benefit from targeting entrepreneurs not directly connected to any main
entrepreneurial network like ICK, for example rural businesses, which can
increase representation of an otherwise hidden group in a partly informal
economy like Kosovo. It can also be beneficial to include other stakeholder
groups in future qualitative studies for a more nuanced perspective, for example
politicians, investors, incubator staff, or more entrepreneurs from the global
diaspora. Additionally, future research should be more targeted into the specific
themes that appear prevalent surrounding the entrepreneurial ecosystem, for
example specifically measuring the mechanisms of the structural and
psychological challenges identified, as well as investigating the characteristic
traits of Kosovar entrepreneurs while minimizing survivorship bias through a
broader entrepreneurial representation as described above.
       Moreover, using different methodologies can provide a more robust
scientific foundation, for example using a fully quantitative procedure, or using
methodological triangulation in a more balanced sense. Quantitative studies can
also give more concrete results that can have more direct applications, although
the research procedure may be more complex in this context. One type of more
resource-extensive research that can be done are longitudinal studies ranging over
longer periods of time to more deeply enhance the understanding of the
ecosystem’s more embedded mechanisms. Lastly, comparative research using

                                26
Kosovo and other countries, with the exact same procedure for all subjects, can
more clearly reveal how Kosovars are unique, and how practical applications can
be fine-tuned to encompass their culture to the largest extent possible.

                                27
6 Conclusion
       The main objective of this field study is to widen the general
understanding of the Kosovar entrepreneurial ecosystem and to understand the
primary factors influencing entrepreneurial success or failure. The research is
fundamentally motivated by Kosovo’s status as a young, developing, and
conflict-affected nation with limited previous research concerning itself with the
entrepreneurial climate.
       The findings encompass different kinds of external and internal challenges
and advantages to entrepreneurs within the ecosystem. Notable challenges include
an underdeveloped infrastructure, limited funding options, low customer trust,
inefficient institutions, cultural risk aversion, and an ongoing outward migration
of human capital. Advantages come in the form of characteristic traits like
innovativeness, resilience, and national pride. Although having individual
meanings, these aspects together depict a complex and interconnected
entrepreneurial ecosystem that is constituted by individual mindsets and actions,
as well as systemic limitations and inefficiencies.
       The findings serve as an initial extension of the underexplored
entrepreneurial landscape, and attempt to encourage an increased academic focus
on the Kosovar context. They suggest that specific policy decisions and a
generally increased awareness among specific stakeholder groups can be
beneficial to foster a more supportive startup climate. Targeted infrastructure and
institutional reforms, leveraging untapped diaspora resources, and adjusted
educational programs are some concrete practical applications. However, the
restricted sample size and scope, the risk of sampling biases, and thematic
subjectivity are some limitations emphasizing the need for future studies within
the field for more well-grounded decision-making. There is a need for more
extensive studies, both broader and more narrow ones, to better understand the
situation regarding entrepreneurs and other stakeholder groups. Additionally,
different research designs, like using quantitative data analysis, could provide
additional nuance.

                                28
7 References

Acemoglu, D., & Robinson, J., 2012, “Why Nations Fail”.

Andrews, M., Chatterji, A., Lerner, J., & Stern, S., 2022, “The Role of Innovation
and Entrepreneurship in Economic Growth”, National Bureau of Economic
Research, ISBN: 978-0-226-81078-2.
URL:https://www.nber.org/books-and-chapters/role-innovation-and-entrepreneurs
hip-economic-growth

Aslam, A., & Rana, I. A., 2022, “The use of local climate zones in the urban
environment: A systematic review of data sources, methods, and themes”, Urban
Climate, Vol. 42.
URL:https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212095522000384

Avdiaj, B., Berisha, G., Krasniqi, B., & Ramadani, V., 2024, “Why startups fail in
an emerging economy: perspectives from startup incubators in Kosovo”,
International Journal of Globalisation and Small Business, Vol. 14 No. 2.
URL: https://www.inderscienceonline.com/doi/abs/10.1504/IJGSB.2024.142333

Braun, V., Clarke, V., 2006, “Using thematic analysis in psychology”, Qualitative
Research in Psychology, Vol. 3 Issue 2.
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1191/1478088706QP063OA

Cojocaru, A., 2017, “Jobs Diagnostic Kosovo”, World Bank Group, Jobs Series
Issue No. 5, 41-48.
URL:https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/814361497466817941/pdf/Ko
sovo-Jobs-Diagnostic.pdf

Delechat, C., Melina, G., Newiak, M., Papageorgiou, C., & Spatafora, N., 2024,
“Economic Diversification in Developing Countries: Lessons from Country
Experiences with Broad-Based and Industrial Policies”, International Monetary
Fund, ISBN: 9798400240201.
URL:https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/Departmental-Papers-Policy-Papers/Iss
ues/2024/07/20/Economic-Diversification-in-Developing-Countries-Lessons-from
-Country-Experiences-with-532135

Diwan, I., 2010, “Revisiting the "country-specific solution"”, World Bank Blogs.
URL:https://blogs.worldbank.org/en/governance/revisiting-the-country-specific-s
olution

Doherty, C., & Stavropoulou, C., 2012, “Patients' willingness and ability to
participate actively in the reduction of clinical errors: A systematic literature
review”, Social Science & Medicine Vol. 75 Issue 2.
URL:https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0277953612002808

                                29
Doran, J., McCarthy, N., O’Connor, M., & Nsiah, C., 2018, “The role of
entrepreneurship in stimulating economic growth in developed and developing
countries”, Cogent Economics & Finance, Vol. 6 Issue 1.
URL:https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/23322039.2018.1442093

El-Erian, M., & Spence, M., 2008, “Growth Strategies and Dynamics: Insights
from Country Experiences”, World Economics Journal, Vol. 9 Issue 1.
URL:https://www.gsb.stanford.edu/faculty-research/publications/growth-strategie
s-dynamics-insights-country-experiences

Galindo-Martín, M., Méndez-Picazo, M., & Castaño-Martínez, M., 2020, “The
role of innovation and institutions in entrepreneurship and economic growth in
two groups of countries”, International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behavior &
Research, Vol. 26 No. 3.
URL:https://www.emerald.com/insight/content/doi/10.1108/ijebr-06-2019-0336/f
ull/html

Gautam, S., & Lal, M., 2021, “Entrepreneurship and Economic Growth: Evidence
from G-20 Economies”, Journal of East-West Business, Vol. 27 Issue 2.
URL:https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/10669868.2020.1859427

Government Offices of Sweden, 2023, “Government presents new direction for
development assistance”.
URL:https://www.government.se/press-releases/2023/12/government-presents-ne
w-direction-for-development-assistance/

Greener, 2025, “path dependence”, Britannica.
URL:https://www.britannica.com/topic/path-dependence

Hima, D., 2024, “Determinants of Youth Entrepreneurship in Kosovo”, Rochester
Institute of Technology.
URL:https://repository.rit.edu/theses/11840/

Holm, K., & Ankarkrona, G., 2016, “The Entrepreneurship Ecosystem and its
supports in Nairobi - in Nairobi - A Qualitative study of their relationships”,
Lunds Universitet, ISBN: 16.
URL:https://www.lu.se/lup/publication/8892379

Hudson, M. F., 2022, “Short‐ and long‐term strategies for navigating
research‐ambivalent organizational cultures besetting embedded researchers”,
Learning Health System, 7(2).
URL:https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10091197/

Innovation Centre Kosovo, 2024, “About - ICK”.
URL:https://ickosovo.com/about

Khuong, M. V., 2013, “The Dynamics of Economic Growth”, Elgar Online,
eISBN: 9780857939647.

                                30
URL:https://www.elgaronline.com/monobook/9780857939630.xml

Leithner, A. C., & Libby, K. M., 2017, “Path Dependency in Foreign Policy”,
Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Politics.
URL:https://oxfordre.com/politics/display/10.1093/acrefore/9780190228637.001.
0001/acrefore-9780190228637-e-376

Mustafa, I., Pula-Shiroka, J., Krasniqi, B., Ramadani, V., & Kryeziu, L., 2023,
“Informal Entrepreneurship in Kosovo: An Institutionalist Approach”, Emerald
Publishing Limited, Leeds.
URL:https://www.emerald.com/insight/content/doi/10.1108/978-1-83753-454-820
231009/full/html

OECD, 2014, “Graduate Entrepreneurship in Poland”.
URL:https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/graduate-entrepreneurship-in-poland_
3812a064-en.html

OECD, 2019, “Local entrepreneurship ecosystems and emerging industries: Case
study of Pomorskie, Poland”.
URL:https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/local-entrepreneurship-ecosystems-an
d-emerging-industries_8fd63992-en.html

OECD, 2019, “SME and Entrepreneurship Policy in Ireland”.
URL:https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/sme-and-entrepreneurship-policy-in-ir
eland_e726f46d-en.html

Pathak, S., & Mukherjee, S., 2020, “Entrepreneurial ecosystem and social
entrepreneurship: case studies of community-based craft from Kutch, India”,
Journal of Enterprising Communities: People and Places in the Global Economy,
Vol. 15 No. 3
URL:https://www.emerald.com/insight/content/doi/10.1108/jec-06-2020-0112/full
/html

Qoriawan, T., & Apriliyanti, I., 2022, “Exploring connections within the
technology-based entrepreneurial ecosystem (EE) in emerging economies:
understanding the entrepreneurship struggle in the Indonesian EE”, Journal of
Entrepreneurship in Emerging Economies, Vol. 15 No. 2.
URL:https://www.emerald.com/insight/content/doi/10.1108/jeee-02-2021-0079/fu
ll/html

Sahiti, F., 2021, “Institutions and entrepreneurial activity: a comparative analysis
of Kosovo and other economies”, Journal of Entrepreneurship and Public Policy,
Vol. 10 No. 1.
URL:https://www.emerald.com/insight/content/doi/10.1108/jepp-08-2020-0056/fu
ll/html

                                31
Saranda, L., Florin, P., & Besnik, K., 2019, “MAPPING BUSINESS START-UP
ECOSYSTEM IN KOSOVO”, Ekonomski vjesnik/Econviews - Review of
Contemporary Business, Entrepreneurship and Economic Issues, 32(2).
URL:https://hrcak.srce.hr/ojs/index.php/ekonomski-vjesnik/article/view/8615

Senor, D., & Singer, S., 2009, “Start-up Nation: The Story of Israel's Economic
Miracle”.

Sopjani, X., 2019, “Challenges and Opportunities for Startup Innovation and
Entrepreneurship as tools towards a knowledge-based economy: The Case of
Kosovo”, Rochester Institute of Technology.
URL:https://repository.rit.edu/theses/10215/

Sovacool, B. K., Iskandarova, M., & Hall, J., 2023, “Industrializing theories: A
thematic analysis of conceptual frameworks and typologies for industrial
sociotechnical change in a low-carbon future”, Energy Research & Social
Science, Vol. 97.
URL:https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214629623000142

Stojčetović, B., Marković, S., & Arsić, L., 2022, “Entrepreneurial potential and
intentions of students in Kosovo and Metohija”, BizInfo (Blace), Vol. 13 No. 1.
URL:https://www.academia.edu/85430679/Entrepreneurial_potential_and_intenti
ons_of_students_in_Kosovo_and_Metohija

Trading Economics, 2023, “Kosovo Youth Unemployment Rate”.
URL:https://tradingeconomics.com/kosovo/youth-unemployment-rate

UNICEF Kosovo Programme, 2022, “Annual Report 2021”.
URL:https://www.unicef.org/kosovoprogramme/reports/annual-report-2021

United Nations, 2024, “The 17 Sustainable Development Goals”.
URL:https://sdgs.un.org/goals

United States Department of State, 2024, “Investment Climate Statements:
Kosovo”.
URL:https://www.state.gov/reports/2024-investment-climate-statements/kosovo/

Valliere, D., & Peterson, R., 2010, “Entrepreneurship and economic growth:
Evidence from emerging and developed countries”, Entrepreneurship & Regional
Development - An International Journal, Vol. 21 Issue 5-6.
URL:https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/08985620802332723

Vargo, S. L., Koskela-Huotari, K., Baron, S., Edvardsson, B., Reynoso, J., &
Colurcio, M., 2017, “A systems perspective on markets – Toward a research
agenda”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 79.
URL:https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S014829631730098X

                                32
Vasileiou, K., Barnett, J., Thorpe, S., & Young, T., 2018, “Characterising and
justifying sample size sufficiency in interview-based studies: systematic analysis
of qualitative health research over a 15-year period”, BMC Medical Research
Methodology, Vol. 18 No. 148.
URL:https://bmcmedresmethodol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12874-018
-0594-7

World Bank Group, 2023, “GDP growth (annual %) - Kosovo”.
URL:https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.KD.ZG?locations=XK

World Bank Group, 2023, “GDP per capita (current US$) - Kosovo”.
URL:https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD?locations=XK

Zhao, X., Xu, Y., Vasa, L., & Shahzad, U., 2023, “Entrepreneurial ecosystem and
urban innovation: Contextual findings in the lens of sustainable development from
China”, Technological Forecasting and Social Change, Vol. 191.
URL:https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0040162523002111

                                33
8 Appendix

8.1 AI Disclaimer
        This paper incorporates the use of AI for certain aspects of the process.
ChatGPT version 4o is utilized for some assistance with the research design
process, specifically interview and survey construction, data analysis, structure of
the document, and questions regarding academic writing. However, the use of AI
is never the sole base of any part of the project, and is only used for gaining a
better understanding of the subject. It is always used with caution and critical
thinking.

                                34
8.2 Survey Pie Charts

                                35
36
37
38
39