
Analyst Recommendations and Gender: Measuring the Performance
of Newspaper Stock Recommendations

Abstract:

  This study measures the effect that stock recommendations published by
  financial newspapers can have on actual stock prices and how that effect
  depends on the gender of the person making the recommendation. We
   construct a dataset with 3170 stock recommendations published by the
   Swedish financial newspaper Dagens Industri over three years and find
  evidence that recommendations have a direct effect on short-term stock
   returns and that this effect is stronger if the recommendation was made by a
   man, even after controlling for stock characteristics. One year after each
  recommendation, the stock had on average underperformed the benchmark
   index and no significant differences between male and female
   recommendations can be observed, further suggesting that the initial
   differences in price movements depend on how readers perceive the articles
   rather than differing abilities in predicting stock returns.

Keywords:

  Analyst recommendations, Behavioral finance, Gender, Newspaper
   recommendations, Stock returns, Swedish stock market

Authors:

   Axel Legelius (25749)
   Sofie Raab (25855)

Tutor:

   Paula Roth, Postdoctoral Researcher, Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Ramin P. Baghai, Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Axel Legelius and Sofie Raab, 2025

                                                                     1
                             I. Introduction

Analyst recommendations can significantly impact stock performance, as
demonstrated by Womack (1996) who found that buy and sell recommendations can
lead to substantial and sustained market reactions. However, previous research has
focused primarily on sell-side research and left out one of the most widely consumed
sources of investment advice channels; newspaper articles. Financial media,
especially business-oriented newspapers, serve as a notable channel for broadcasting
stock recommendations to the public. According to the Press Gazette (2025),
financial news channels are some of the most subscribed to in the world, with The
Wall Street Journal, The Financial Times and The Economist having an estimated
4,225,000, 2,860,000 and 1,187,000 subscribers respectively.
       This paper offers new insight as to how the market reacts to what in previous
research has been an underrepresented source of stock recommendations. It targets
private and unsophisticated investors to a larger extent than professional investors,
by analyzing recommendations published in the Swedish financial newspaper
Dagens Industri (DI). We categorize data spanning over three years (2022 to 2025),
recording both data from the articles (such as the name and gender of the person
making the recommendation, hereafter referred to as the “recommender”) and the
recommended stock (e.g. stock price during the days before and after the publication
of the article, market beta and shares outstanding for the stock recommended).
      Our main research question is whether stock recommendations published in
Dagens Industri have a direct effect on observed stock prices and whether this effect
depends on the gender of the person making the recommendation. We therefore
focus on the short-term abnormal returns. Furthermore, we aim to determine if there
is a difference between the market response to recommendations made by women
compared to those made by men. As such, we aim to uncover potential gender biases
in how investment advice is received and acted upon by investors.
       According to Dagens Industri, of their over 600,000 weekly readers, a
majority are men (71% men and 29% women for the printed subscription, and 76%
men and 24% women for the online subscription, di.se). Compared to other Swedish
newspapers, DI is more popular among younger readers. Additionally, DI readers
more frequently have university degrees and higher incomes compared to readers of
other newspapers. DI readers are also more likely to live in large cities and tend to
have more right-leaning political views (Statista, 2024).
       We have elected to focus solely on stocks traded on the Stockholm-based stock
             1
exchanges as we hypothesize that the effect of a Swedish newspaper recommending
stocks is unlikely to have an effect on international stock prices. With this limitation,
our data contains more than 3,000 recommendations of stocks listed on the
Stockholm stock exchanges. We look at both buy and sell recommendations, but in
the instances where the recommendation is to hold, or to keep an eye on, we exclude
these from our dataset. Buy recommendations make up more than 90% of our
sample. We find that DI articles often feature both recurring appearances and

1
 Nasdaq Stockholm, First North, First North Premier, Nordic Growth Market, Spotlight Stock Market

                                                                         2
multiple recommendations within the same article, with our sample consisting of 217
individuals. Women appear in fewer articles and make on average fewer
recommendations per article, with 32 women (14.75%) in our dataset responsible for
7.44% of the recommendations. On average, the men who appeared made on average
16.50 recommendations throughout the three-year period while women only made
an average of 7.38 recommendations each.
      To calculate abnormal returns for the stock recommendations, we construct
an index based on our dataset. This includes all stocks on the Stockholm stock
exchanges that were recommended in Dagens Industri at least once during our
measurement period (excluding since then delisted stocks) with weights based on the
number of times the stock was recommended. This way, all stocks in our sample
effectively act as a control group on the days when they are not recommended. We
will hereafter refer to this as the “DI Index”. Over the period of our study, the DI
Index had a total return of 9.43%, compared to 7.82% for the OMXS30 and -0.32%
for the OMXSPI, which could reflect a general ability of the recommenders in our
sample to select stocks with long-term potential, but it could also be a result of
underlying stock characteristics or chance.
      The results in our study show that the recommended stocks outperformed the
DI Index in the short run, with abnormal returns during the first five trading days
after the recommendation being on average 0.98 percentage points for buy
recommendations and -0.45 percentage points for sell recommendations. The
recommended stocks were on average on an upward (for buy) or downward (for sell)
trend in excess of the index returns even before the recommendation was published,
which could be a result of analysts preferring to recommend stocks with the correct
momentum and/or the content of the recommendations becoming known to some
investors in advance (e.g. if the financial institutions behind the recommendations
act upon them before publication). The effect is at its largest on the day of the
recommendation, or first trading day after the recommendation if the exchange was
closed on the day of publication, which we attribute to readers acting upon the
recommendations, as even if analysts are skilled at predicting future performance,
the ability to time the market with enough precision to predict the correct day to
make the recommendation is unlikely.
      Our results on differences in short-term abnormal returns based on the
gender of the recommender are not fully conclusive. We find no significant difference
for the first three days after the recommendation. However, on the fourth and fifth
day, recommendations made by women underperform those made by men 0.70 and
0.92 percentage points respectively. These differences become larger when
controlling for stock characteristics, suggesting that readers respond similarly to the
male and female recommendations at first, but keep the recommendations of the
men in mind longer, sustaining the market reactions. When following up on the
recommendations one year later, there is no significant difference between male and
female recommendations, further supporting the conclusion that the difference in
market response to the recommendations is a result of how readers perceive the
recommendations rather than underlying stock characteristics.

                                                                         3
                          II. Previous research

       The aim of our study is to investigate whether investors listen to the advice
published in Dagens Industri to the extent that stock prices are affected by the
recommendations. Thus, we primarily look at the short-term market reaction to both
buy and sell recommendations. One of the first studies on market response to stock
recommendations was constructed by Womack (1996). He investigates the impact of
analysts' buy and sell recommendations on stock prices, with the aim of determining
whether recommendations provide valuable information that moves the market,
both in the short term and long term. Findings show strong evidence that stock
prices are significantly influenced by analyst recommendations, although the market
reaction to buy and sell recommendations is significantly asymmetric, with the
market responses to new sell recommendations being of greater magnitude both in
the short- and long term. Jegadeesh, Kim, Krische and Lee (2004) find that
recommendation changes by analysts capture qualitative aspects of a firm's
operations (e.g., managerial abilities, strategic alliances, intangible assets, or other
growth opportunities). It is possible that changes in analyst recommendations reflect
news about a firm's competitive position in its industry, and that analysts bring some
new information to market. The finding of Jegadeesh et al. (2004) would suggest
that analysts make valuable recommendations with qualitative information and that
these have an effect on the market. Our results indicate that the market reacts to the
stock recommendations made in Dagens Industri, even though the context differs
from previous studies. Although Jegadeesh et al. (2004) and Womack’s (1996)
studies aim to determine stock-picking abilities and the quality of recommendations,
our study looks at the name and appearance of the analyst making
recommendations, primarily investigating if there is a difference in immediate
market response to recommendations made by women compared to those made by
men.
      Kumar, Niessen-Ruenzi, and Spalt (2015) also examine market responses,
comparing the effect of names but examining biases rooted in perceived ethnicity.
They show that mutual funds managed by individuals with foreign-sounding names
experience lower fund inflows, even when controlling for performance and a wide
range of fund and manager characteristics. While the focus is on ethnicity, similar
findings could apply to gender, with investors having less trust in either men or
women in a way that affects their decision-making. Fang and Huang (2017)
introduce a relational dimension by examining how “social connectedness”,
measured through shared educational backgrounds, between analysts and corporate
insiders (defined as company officers and directors) affect the market response to
stock recommendations. They measure social connectedness based on alumni ties to
three degrees; the first being that the analyst and one officers/directors of the
company attended the same university, the second being that they attended the same
school (e.g. the business school) within the university and the third, and strongest,
being that they attended the same school during overlapping periods. Results show

                                                                         4
that alumni connections increase the market response of buy recommendations,
particularly when the analyst is male. Their study determines that while gender alone
does not significantly influence the short-term market reaction, the interaction
between gender and social connectedness does, implying that men benefit more from
these relational advantages. This not only aligns with our study’s focus on how
non-performance-based factors like gendered names may skew market response to
financial advice, but also highlights how other biases (such as the familiarity bias or
in-group bias) may affect the genders differently. In our paper we consider how
frequently the analyst returns to make recommendations. We find that women are
called back less often compared to men, and Fang and Huang’s (2017) study could
suggest that this would lead to a stronger market response to male
recommendations, since they would benefit relatively more from recognition with the
readers of Dagens Industri. Additionally, we find men make up a majority of readers
of Dagens Industri, and as men might trust the recommendations of other men more
than those of women, due to the biases recognised in the study.
       Next, we control for the experience of the analysts making recommendations.
Bradley, Gokkaya and Liu (2017) find that analysts with prior experience within the
same industry as the company they are analyzing produce earnings forecasts that are,
on average, 3.6% more accurate than those of analysts without relevant industry
experience. The effect is found to persist even after controlling for factors like task
difficulty and brokerage prestige. Furthermore, earnings forecast revisions by
analysts with related industry experience elicit more significant market responses
compared to those made by analysts without such experience. This would suggest
that investors place greater trust in forecasts from analysts with previous experience
from the industry. Taking inspiration from Bradley et al (2017), we have found the
LinkedIn accounts of a majority of the people making stock recommendations in
Dagens Industri, and recorded previous industry experience as a dummy variable if
we find work experience from a company similar enough to be considered a close
competitor to the recommended stock.
      Li, Sullivan, Xu and Gao (2013) examine gender differences among sell-side
analysts, focusing on performance, risk-taking behavior, and career outcomes. Their
study finds that female analysts' recommendations yield similar abnormal returns to
those of male analysts but with lower idiosyncratic risk, suggesting that female
analysts tend to take less risks than their male counterparts. In the context of our
study, this disparity could entail that recommendations made by women in Dagens
Industri are made with less confidence, leading to a weaker market reaction. Our
findings, however, show that women featured in Dagens Industri recommend riskier
stocks, as we control for the beta. Contrasting Li et al. (2013), Kumar (2010) also
investigates gender differences in equity analysts' forecasting abilities, with the
conjecture that only female analysts with superior skills enter the profession due to
perceived discrimination and self-selection. Through analysing performance and
risk-taking behavior, he finds that female analysts (in contrast to the findings of Li et
al.) provide more “bold” and accurate earnings forecasts than their male
counterparts, particularly in market segments where female representation is lower.

                                                                         5
Despite receiving relatively less media coverage, the market reacts more strongly to
their forecast revisions, suggesting that investors recognize the superior abilities of
female analysts. The lack of female representation in media coverage is clearly
distinguishable in our study as well, with women both recommending fewer stocks
per article and being less likely to appear in a future article. Additionally, women
more often “share” one article with other recommenders while men are more likely to
be the only recommender in an article. Interestingly, the context behind Kumar’s
(2010) study and ours could explain why the market doesn’t react more to
recommendations made by women in Dagens Industri. Our study targets private and
less sophisticated investors, compared to professional investors in the 2010 study. It
is possible that although professional investors recognise the abilities of female
analysts, readers of Dagens Industri are less rational in their investment decisions,
or hold greater biases. It could also be the case that the barriers to entry to feature as
a recommender in Dagens Industri are lower compared to becoming an analyst at a
brokerage firm, which would entail that the theory of female analysts with superior
skills only exist in Kumar’s (2010) study and is not applicable to ours.

                             III. Data collection

      For our analysis, we construct a dataset using all articles published by Dagens
Industri (DI) under the sections “Aktietips” (Eng: “Stock Recommendations”) and
“Veckans Aktie” (Eng: “Stock of the Week”) between the 1st of March 2022 and the
28th of February 2025, i.e. a three-year time span. The articles under Aktietips cite
either reporters at DI, representatives of various financial institutions or private
investors who discuss and recommend both Swedish and international stocks. The
articles under Veckans Aktie are written by DI reporters who analyze one stock in
depth every week and provide a recommendation. These stocks are typically Nordic
and the recommendations are followed up upon one year later, sometimes with a
new recommendation.
      In our dataset, each observation consists of one recommendation. For a
recommendation to be included, we require a statement made by either an external
individual or by the author themselves, clearly suggesting buying or selling a specific
stock. Thus, simply mentioning a stock is not enough for it to be included. We do not
require the person to explicitly recommend a certain action, but consider it enough if
they e.g. state that the current stock price is low or high in relation to what they
believe the stock price should be, or that they expect a certain stock to rise in the
future, as those statements may also influence readers to buy or sell stocks.
Whenever there is ambiguity on whether a statement should be included or not, we
thoroughly discuss it to ensure consistency on how persuasive a recommendation
must be to be included. We only include recommendations of stocks listed on one of
the Stockholm-based stock exchanges as the effect of a Swedish newspaper
recommending stocks is likely to have the largest impact on returns for Swedish
stocks, while the international stocks recommended are typically larger and traded
by more people and financial institutions unfamiliar with Dagens Industri (e.g. DI

                                                                         6
recommending Nvidia or Apple is unlikely to have any observable effect). In a few
cases, the recommendations relate to securities other than equities, e.g. bonds,
funds, commodities and cryptocurrencies, but these are not included as they are not
comparable to each other for the purposes of this analysis. In case the same stock is
recommended by multiple people in the same article or in two different articles from
the same day, the recommendation is included only once if they are of the same
gender and is excluded completely if they are of different genders, as both
recommendations are followed by the same stock price movements and thus we
cannot disentangle any variation based on gender for those recommendations. This
leaves us with 3,170 recommendations originating from 761 unique articles.
       For each recommendation, we collect the date of publication, the name of the
analyst, the gender of the author, whether the author is an external party referenced
or the DI reporter writing the article, the number of recommendations made in the
same article (including both buy and sell recommendations of Swedish and foreign
stocks), whether the observation is a buy or sell recommendation, and the link to the
article. We also include a dummy for articles published under Veckans Aktie, since
those are likely to be more influential, and for the recommendations made by an
external party we include a dummy for whether the article itself was written by a
woman in order to study whether that has any effect.
       Each observation is matched with daily stock-price data retrieved from Yahoo
Finance which has daily data on almost all actively traded Swedish stocks. We use the
adjusted close prices (to account for stock splits and any dividends paid out) of the
five trading days prior to the recommendation, the day of the recommendation if it
was made on a trading day and the five following trading days. For all
recommendations made prior to the 1st of April 2024, we also collect the price one
year after the recommendation was made in order to follow up on the quality of the
recommendations. For 89 of the observations, the recommended stock has since
then been delisted from the Stockholm stock exchanges, causing the data to be
removed from Yahoo. The most common reason for delisting was takeovers in an
                                                             2
M&A transaction, as was the case for 10 stocks  recommended in total on 61
                                                                                            3
occasions in our sample. Other reasons for missing data were bankruptcy,  being
                                                                                     4
delisted from Nasdaq Stockholm while still being listed abroad,  voluntary
              5                                                     6
liquidation,  disciplinary actions by the stock exchange  and switching from one
                                         7
Stockholm exchange to another. There are also two recommendations each in the
data for Aegirbio and Media and Game Invest which have since both changed their

2
 Byggfakta Group Nordic HoldCo AB (4), Calliditas Therapeutics AB (7), Concentric AB (4), Kindred
Group PLC (10), Nordic Waterproofing Holding AB (6), OX2 AB (19), Permascand Top Holding AB
(2), Scandinavian Biogas AB (1), Swedish Match AB (7), Torslanda Property Investment AB (1)
3
 Azelio AB (1), Brighter AB (2), Re:NewCell AB (2), SAS AB (6).
4
 Millicom International Cellular S.A. (10) was delisted from Nasdaq Stockholm in March 2025, but
remains listed in the United States.
5
 Creaspac AB (5) was liquidated in August 2024 after no appropriate acquisition target was found.
6
 ISR Immune System Regulation Holding AB (1) was deemed in violation of disclosure rules and
delisted from the Nasdaq First North Growth Market in May 2023.
7
 Scandinavian Astor Group AB (1) switched from the Spotlight Stock Market to the NGM Nordic SME
Exchange in August 2024. The data from before the switch was not carried over to the new listing on
Yahoo Finance.

                                                                         7
names to Magnasense and Verve respectively, changing their tickers in the process.
For these stocks, Yahoo has only retained the data from after the name changes. To
avoid survivorship bias, the 93 observations with missing values are instead matched
with stock price data from Börsdata, the usage of which is less practical for the
purposes of this paper, but which retains historical data on delisted stocks.
      To account for the possibility that readers are more likely to act on the
recommendations made by recommenders they perceive to be more experienced and
knowledgeable, we include a variable for the years of experience of the recommender
based on the information in their LinkedIn profile. We define years of experience as
time passed since the completion of their first recorded higher education of at least
two years (typically a bachelor’s degree). When no education is recorded or there are
no years associated with the education we use the oldest recorded professional
experience. For the few cases where the recommender has no LinkedIn profile, we
look to other sources such as Wikipedia or the website of their company and use the
earliest professional experience or education that is publicly available. When no
other information can be found, which is sometimes the case for the reporters
working at DI, we use their first appearance in DI as a proxy. This is not a perfect
measure of experience, but is sufficient as a proxy for perceived experience as a
control variable. Based on Bradley et al. (2017), we also include a binary variable for
whether the recommender has prior experience within the recommended company
or one of its competitors. For this, we also use experiences recorded on LinkedIn and
conduct a qualitative analysis for which companies are related enough to the
recommended stock. Our definition considers if the recommender has worked
(regardless of task or title) at a company generally considered to be a direct
competitor to the stock recommended. To clarify, this variable regards experience as
an analyst as industry experience, for instance, if this is applicable to the stock
recommended. To illustrate, an observation with a recommender with experience
from the retail bank Swedbank AB recommending the retail bank Nordea Bank Abp
would count as industry experience, but a recommender from the investment bank
Carnegie Investment Bank AB recommending the same stock would not count as a
recommender with industry experience.
      We also match stocks with their current betas, calculated by Avanza as a
measure of risk, and the current implied shares outstanding, reported on Yahoo
Finance, in order to calculate market capitalization.

                          IV. Descriptive statistics

       Due to recurring appearances, our sample consists of the recommendations of
216 individuals. 32 of them are women, representing 14.75% of the recommenders.
However, only 7.44% of the recommendations were made by women as men tend to
make more recommendations in total. On average, each man who appeared made

                                                                         8
                                  Table I
                    Summary Statistics
This table presents the summary statistics of the numeric variables of the used dataset. The statistics
for recommendations per article are calculated in two different ways; on the article level which shows
the average number of recommendations for each unique article, and on the observation level which
shows the summary statistics of the variable in the data, giving a higher weight to articles with more
observations and includes recommendations of foreign stocks. The table excludes the data on daily
share prices in absolute numbers and implied shares outstanding on their own, but includes market
capitalization, calculated as the shares outstanding multiplied by the share price the day before the
recommendation.

 Number of recommendations in the sample 3170

 Female recommenders 7.44%

 Buy recommendations 90.88%

 External (someone other than the author making the                                 82.68%
 recommendation)

 Female author (if external recommender) 17.44%

 Veckans Aktie (Stock of the Week) 4.51%

 Industry experience 7.19%

                                                    Mean Median St. Deviation

 Experience of the recommender (time since first           23 years 23 years 11 years
 degree)

 Recommendations per article (article level) 4.14 3 3.77

 Recommendations per article (observation level) 8.11 7 5.78

 Beta of the recommended stock 1.00 1.01 0.39

 Market capitalization of the recommended stock (day    160 Bn SEK 34 Bn SEK 340 Bn SEK
 before)

                                                                   8
16.59 recommendations throughout the three-year period while women only made
7.38 recommendations each. This is driven both by men being more likely to appear
again after each appearance and by men making more recommendations in each
                                   9
article in which they appear. Despite this, recommendations made by women are
part of articles with more overall recommendations being made, indicating that
women are more likely to be included in an article referring to multiple people while
men are more likely to be the only recommender in an article.

8
 The 114 recommendations made by multiple men on the same day are included once for each person
behind it in order to find the number of recommendations each man is part of on average. Thus, this is
calculated as: (number of male recommendations + 118)/(number of male individuals).
9
 When excluding recommendations with multiple names, each man in the sample appears on average
in 5.03 articles while women only appear in 3.22 articles. Similarly, each man recommends 3.27
stocks per article while women only recommend 2.89 stocks. If the articles with multiple names are
included, the difference is even larger.

                                                                         9
                                  Table II
             Variable Means Segmented by Gender
This table presents the means of the numeric variables of the used dataset, segmented by gender. The
table excludes the data on daily share prices in absolute numbers and implied shares outstanding on
their own, but includes market capitalization, calculated as the shares outstanding multiplied by the
share price the day before the recommendation.

                                                                Male Female

 Number of recommendations in the sample 2934 236

 Buy recommendations 90.35% 97.46%

 External (someone other than the author making the                   84.59% 58.90%
 recommendation)

 Female author (if external recommender) 17.85% 10.14%

 Veckans Aktie (Stock of the Week) 3.95% 11.44%

 Experience of the recommender (time since first degree) 23 years 18 years

 Recommendations per article (observation level) 7.90 10.58

 Beta of the recommended stock 1.00 1.02

 Market capitalization of the recommended stock (day before) 162 Bn SEK 133 Bn SEK

 Industry experience 7.02% 9.32%

       Summary statistics for all numeric variables in the dataset are presented in
Table I and segmented based on gender in Table II. Out of the 3,170
recommendations in our sample, there are 2,881 (90.88%) buy recommendations
and 289 (9.12%) sell recommendations. Men were more than three times as likely to
recommend selling a stock compared to women, recommending that action in 9.65%
of the cases while women only recommended selling in 2.54% of the cases. This poses
a challenge to our study as there are only six sell recommendations made by women
in our sample, making comparisons for sell recommendations difficult.
Recommendations made by women are also less likely than those made by men to be
made by an external recommender (59% compared to 85%) as the proportion of
women among the reporters at DI is higher than the proportion among externals
(18% of reporters at DI are women compared to 5% of external recommenders).
      To measure stock performance, most literature uses abnormal returns to
better isolate the stock price movements attributable to the recommendation. To
calculate abnormal returns, a benchmark index is required. Indices of
Stockholm-listed stocks, e.g. the OMXSPI which includes all shares traded on
Nasdaq Stockholm and the OMXS30 which includes the 30 most traded stocks, can
be used, but they may not reflect the characteristics of the stocks typically
recommended in DI. To find an index that as closely as possible reflects the stocks
recommended, we construct one based on our dataset. Our index, the “DI Index”,

                                                                        10
includes all stocks that were recommended at least once, excluding foreign stocks
and those that have since been delisted, with weights based on the number of times
each stock was recommended. The return of the constructed index over time is
presented and compared to the OMXSPI and the OMXS30 in Figure I. The “DI
Index” closely follows the movements of the other indices, especially the OMXS30,
sometimes underperforming it and sometimes overperforming it. Over the period 1st
of February 2022 to 31st of March 2025, the DI Index had a total return of 9.43%,
compared to 7.82% for the OMXS30 and -0.32% for the OMXSPI. This
outperformance could reflect a general ability of the analysts in our sample to select
stocks with long-term potential, but it could also be a result of underlying stock
characteristics or chance. When investigating short-term abnormal returns, the DI
Index could be a suitable benchmark. In expectation, the stocks generally perform
like the index so if they consistently outperform it in the short run following a
recommendation, that could be a result of readers acting upon the recommendations.
This way, all stocks in our sample effectively act as a control group on the days when
they are not recommended.
      The mean daily returns of buy and sell recommendations are plotted against
the mean returns of the indices in Figure II. On average, buy recommendations
outperformed all indices while sell recommendations underperformed and had
negative returns. The difference between the performance of the recommendations
and the DI Index from five trading days before to five trading days after (i.e. the ten
days abnormal return) was on average 1.53 percentage points for buy
recommendations and -1.34 percentage points for sell recommendations. The
recommended stocks were on average on an upward (for buy) or downward (for sell)
trend in excess of the index returns even before the recommendation was published,
which could be a result of analysts preferring to recommend stocks with the correct
momentum and/or the content of the recommendations becoming known by some
investors in advance. The latter could be the case if for example the financial
institutions behind the recommendations act upon them before they are published, if
people within the social circle of the recommenders learn about the
recommendations in advance or if the recommendations are published elsewhere
first. The largest change however, happens on the day of the recommendation, or
first trading day after the recommendation if the exchange was closed on the day of
publication, with one-day mean returns of 0.62% for buy recommendations and
-0.34% for sell recommendations. This is likely a result of readers acting upon the
recommendations as even if recommenders are skilled at predicting future
performance, they should be unlikely to time the market with enough precision for us
to observe the largest abnormal returns specifically on the day of publication,
especially since there is likely a lag between the person making the recommendation
and it being published. Recommendations in DI typically have a long-term focus and
thus their intention is typically not to predict short-term abnormal returns, further
suggesting that the high average returns on the day of publication are a result of
market reactions to the information provided in the recommendation.

                                                                             11
Figure I. Performance of an index based on the stock recommendations in the sample,
compared to the OMXSPI and the OMXS30. This figure shows the performance over time of a
custom index which includes all stocks that were recommended at least once in our sample, excluding
those that have been delisted since the recommendation. The stocks are weighted by the number of
times they were recommended. The performance of the DI Index (red) is compared to the OMXS30
(green) which includes the 30 most traded stocks on the SSE and the OMXSPI (blue) which includes
all stocks traded on the SSE.

Figure II. Average performance of recommended stocks and benchmark indices before
and after each recommendation. This figure shows the mean accumulated returns for the five
days before the recommendation, the day of the recommendation and the five days after for both buy
and sell recommendations as well as three benchmark indices. The recommendations were made on
day 0, but for weekends and bank holidays, the first trading day after the recommendation is used as
the same-day return as that is the first opportunity for the market to react to a recommendation.

                                                                        12
Figure III. Average performance of buy-recommended stocks and benchmark indices
before and after each recommendation, segmented by gender. This figure shows the mean
accumulated returns for the five days before the recommendation, the day of the recommendation and
the five days after for buy recommendations as well as three benchmark indices. Recommendations
are divided based on the gender of the person behind them, although no controls are included. The
recommendations were made on day 0, but for weekends and bank holidays, the first trading day after
the recommendation is used as the same-day return as that is the first opportunity for the market to
react to a recommendation.

      Returns to buy recommendations segmented by gender are presented in
Figure III. The returns to male and female recommendations are similar for the first
few days, with those made by women slightly outperforming those made by men.
However, on the third day, the stocks recommended by women seem to lose
momentum while those recommended by men continue rising. These results should
however not be assigned much weight since no control variables have been
introduced yet.
       In our empirical analysis, we use accumulated abnormal returns from the day
before the recommendation was published in order to find the impact of the
recommendation on stock prices. Mean abnormal returns with the DI Index as a
benchmark are presented in Table III where buy recommendations are segmented by
gender, but not sell recommendations due to the low number of them made by
women. The recommendations made by women seem to strongly outperform the
recommendations made by men in the first two days after the recommendation, but
then their accumulated excess returns decrease while the male recommendations
continue outperforming the DI Index for all five days. This is however still without
control variables so multiple factors could explain the differences.

                                                                        13
                                     Table III
          Abnormal Returns of Recommended Stocks
This table presents the mean accumulated abnormal returns of the recommended stocks for each of
the following five trading days after the recommendation with buy returns segmented by gender.
Abnormal returns are calculated as the accumulated return from the adjusted close price the day
before the recommendation, subtracting the return of the DI Index in the same time period. For
recommendations made on weekends and holidays, same day returns are calculated using the
adjusted close price of the first trading day after the recommendation. All abnormal returns are stated
in percentage points.

                                                 Buy      Buy     Buy       Sell
                                                    (aggregate)   (male)   (female)   (aggregate)

 Same day 0.67 0.65 0.86 -0.15

 First day 0.84 0.81 1.12 -0.50

 Second day 0.87 0.84 1.31 -0.42

 Third day 0.96 0.97 0.92 -0.48

 Fourth day 0.95 0.98 0.70 -0.39

 Fifth day 0.98 1.03 0.49 -0.45

                          V. Empirical strategy

       Using the data described above, we construct the following OLS regression:

                 𝑎𝑏𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 = β  + β 𝑓𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑒 + β 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠 + 𝑢
                                               𝑖      0      1           𝑖      2                   𝑖

      For each specification, we run six regressions with different measures of
abnormal returns; one for the same day the recommendation was published (or the
first trading day after if the recommendation was made on a weekend or public
holiday) and one for each of the following five trading days. Abnormal returns are
measured against the “DI Index”, an index constructed based on the recommended
stocks with constant weights based on how many times each stock was recommended
throughout the sample. We use this index as it represents the general return
characteristics of the recommended stocks as closely as possible, minimizing the
possibility that measured short-term abnormal returns are a result of the underlying
index not matching the types of recommendations issued.
       In the first stage, we include control variables related to the characteristics of
the recommender and the article in which the recommendation is published. These
include whether the recommender is an external party referred to by DI, years
passed since completing their first degree of higher education, the number of
recommendations present in the same article and whether the article was published
under Veckans Aktie. The “external” variable could capture a wide variety of factors

                                                                        14
which differ between articles referring to others and those where DI produces the
analysis, including quality of recommendations, reader trust in the recommender,
article structure and how much the article is promoted by DI. Experience could
matter if readers place different amounts of trust in the recommender depending on
how old or experienced they are perceived to be, while more experienced analysts
might also make more accurate forecasts. The number of recommendations in the
same article is included as more stocks being mentioned might dilute the effect that
each recommendation has on its respective stock price. The stocks recommended
under Veckans Aktie receive an in-depth analysis and are typically more highlighted
in channels of article distribution (potentially read by more people) with a clear
indication on whether DI recommends buying or selling the stock. Thus, if DI
recommendations have an effect on stock prices, it should be larger for Veckans Aktie
recommendations.
       We then include control variables related to the characteristics of the
recommended stocks themselves. We control for market risk, market capitalization
and whether the stock is from an industry related to the recommender’s prior
experience. In a traditional asset pricing model, the only variable predicting
differences in expected returns across stocks in the same market is beta, i.e. a
measure of market risk. The mean beta for stocks recommended by women is slightly
higher than their male counterparts which would suggest that stocks recommended
by women should perform worse in times of market downturn and better in times of
market upturn. Market capitalization is included to account for the possibility of
smaller stocks being subject to larger market reactions following a recommendation
as less known stocks may stand out more to readers when recommended while
smaller market capitalizations also make stock prices more sensitive to changes in
demand. In line with Bradley et al. (2017) who showed that recommendations made
by analysts with previous experience from the same industry generally perform
better, we include a control variable for whether the recommender has related
experience as defined above.
      While we would like to study the effects of recommender gender on stock
performance for both buy and sell recommendations, the low sample size for sell
recommendations, especially those made by women, makes such an analysis
uninformative, although regression results are included in the Appendix (A2).

                               VI. Results

       First, we study differences in the short-term performance of buy
recommendations made by men and women, controlling only for characteristics
related to the recommender (e.g. if they are external) and the recommendation (e.g.
number of recommendations published in the same article). The day-by-day results
are summarized in Table IV. We find that, holding the control variables constant,
stocks recommended by women underperform those made by men for all trading
days during the first week, except the second trading day after the recommendation.
However, the difference is only significant at the 5% level for the fourth and fifth day

                                                                        15
                               Table IV
   Effect of Gender on Buy Recommendation Performance
The dependent variable in the OLS models below is accumulated abnormal returns of the
recommended stock, from the close of the day before publication to the respective day. External is a
binary variable for if the recommender is an external party referred to by the author of the article.
Experience is measured in years since first completed higher education. No. of recommendations
refers to the number of recommendations of both Swedish and international stocks in the article the
recommendation was published in. Veckans Aktie is a binary variable for if the article was published
under that section. Standard errors are clustered by article, and t-statistics are shown in parentheses.
***, ** and * indicate significance at the 0.1%, 1% and 5% levels respectively.

 Day Same day Day one Day two Day three Day four Day five

 (Intercept) 1.20        1.55        1.51        1.53        1.31        1.22
                              (4.79)***   (4.21)***   (3.86)***   (3.05)**    (2.48)*    (2.09)*

 Female -0.08      -0.02      0.19       -0.40      -0.70      -0.92
                                (-0.41)     (-0.09)     (0.45)      (-1.20)     (-1.98)*    (-2.49)*

 External -0.54      -0.76      -0.71       -0.85      -0.83      -0.68
                                (-2.61)**    (-2.46)*     (-1.96)      (1.99)*     (-1.89)     (-1.51)

 Experience -0.00      -0.00      0.00       0.01       0.01       0.01
                               (-0.22)     (-0.28)     (0.04)      (0.68)      (0.97)      (1.10)

 No. of recommendations -0.02      -0.02      -0.02      -0.01      0.00      -0.00
                                (-2.05)*     (-1.12)      (-1.19)      (-0.59)     (0.07)     (-0.15)

 Veckans Aktie 2.52       2.18       1.94       2.43       3.31       3.37
                              (6.01)***   (4.43)***  (3.39)***   (3.71)***   (4.51)***   (4.23)***

   2
 R                         0.052 0.029 0.017 0.019 0.025 0.019

 Observations 2881 2881 2881 2881 2881 2881

which is consistent with the findings in Figure III where male and female
recommendations have similar performance at first, before the stocks recommended
by women lose momentum and experience a decrease in abnormal returns earlier
than those recommended by men. What this depends on is not obvious, but potential
mechanisms are discussed in Section VII.
      Interestingly, recommendations made by external parties underperform those
made directly by DI reporters. This could be because part of the information
provided in external recommendations has already been acted upon before
publication (e.g. if the financial institution they work for has acted upon their
analysis or published it in another forum) and/or because readers perceive there to
be conflicts of interest, i.e. the reporters at DI have an incentive to produce
high-quality analyses in order to retain readers while those working for an external
company may have other incentives, which could make readers less likely to trust the
investment advice. Experience does not have any significant effect which could be
either because readers do not value age and experience highly enough for any effect
to be visible or because our variable for experience does not capture how old or

                                                                        16
experienced readers perceive the recommender to be or the quality of their
experiences, while it is also subject to measurement error. Recommendations
published under Veckans Aktie strongly outperform other recommendations,
suggesting that more in-depth focus on one stock makes readers more likely to act
upon the recommendation. It could also be the case that some readers don’t read all
stock recommendations and, if so, may read Veckans Aktie as one of the select few as
it is highlighted by the newspaper. This would suggest that Veckans Aktie would be
recommended to more readers compared to regular recommendations, which could
explain why it would be traded more compared to other recommended stocks.
       To account for the possibility of the differences in stock performance coming
from men and women recommending stocks with different characteristics, we also
control for the risk of the recommended stocks (measured through market beta) as
stocks with a higher beta generally react more strongly to market events and have
higher expected returns, although actual returns are typically lower during market
downturns. We also control for firm size as smaller (and by extent less well-known)
firms would be expected to be affected more by being highlighted in DI than larger
firms that many of the readers already have investments in. We use the logarithm of
market capitalization in line with Jegadeesh et al. (2004). We also include a binary
variable for whether the recommender has related experience to the industry, based
on the findings of Bradley et al (2017). The results from this regression are specified
in Table V. We find that stocks with a higher beta generally performed worse after a
recommendation, although this effect is only significant for four out of the six days
we assess. Market capitalization has a significant negative correlation with
post-recommendation abnormal returns which would support our hypothesis that
smaller and less known stocks are affected more by recommendations published in
DI. Since women generally recommended smaller stocks, the coefficient for
recommendations made by women is now negative for all days with more negative
effect sizes for days two, three and four and larger t-statistics for days two, three, four
and five despite a lower sample size stemming from missing values. We do not find
any significant effect of related industry experience. In the end, our results suggest
that there is a difference in short-term abnormal returns depending on the gender of
the recommender with stocks recommended by women underperforming those made
by men by 0.91 percentage points in the first five trading days, although the results
are not fully conclusive.
      If the difference in short-term performance between recommendations made
by men and women after introducing our controls depends entirely on differences in
how the recommendations are perceived by readers, it should follow that long-term
returns are not significantly affected by the gender of the recommender, given that
readers likely only react closely after publication and over time, prices adjust to large
amounts of other information.
       To test this hypothesis, we run the same regressions for the performance of
the recommended stocks one year into the future. We now measure abnormal
returns, both in relation to the DI Index and in relation to the OMXS30. Previously,
mean abnormal returns in relation to the DI Index indicated the performance of the

                                                                        17
                                 Table V
             Controlling for Stock Characteristics
The dependent variable in the OLS models below is accumulated abnormal returns of the
recommended stock, from the close of the day before publication to the respective day, stated in
percentage points. External is a binary variable for if the recommender is an external party referred to
by the author of the article. Experience is measured in years since first completed higher education.
No. of recommendations refers to the number of recommendations of both Swedish and international
stocks in the article the recommendation was published in. Veckans Aktie is a binary variable for if the
article was published under that section. Market capitalization is calculated as the current shares
outstanding multiplied by the adjusted close price of the day before the recommendation. Industry
experience is a binary variable indicating if the recommender has worked in the recommended
company or one of its competitors. Standard errors are clustered by article, and t-statistics are shown
in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 0.1%, 1% and 5% levels respectively.

 Day Same Day Day One Day Two Day Three Day Four Day Five

 (Intercept) 10.34       13.13       13.42       13.74       13.37       14.03
                         (8.27)***    (7.83)***    (6.59)***   (5.99)***   (6.07)***   (4.66)***

 Female -0.05       -0.02       -0.01       -0.38       -0.73       -0.91
                           (-0.23)      (-0.09)      (-0.03)      (-1.26)     (-2.09)*    (-2.58)**

 External -0.48       -0.73       -0.70       -0.82       -0.78       -0.55
                            (-2.42)*     (-2.48)*      (-1.94)      (-1.96)      (-1.82)      (-1.21)

 Experience 0.00       0.00       0.00       0.01       0.02       0.02
                            (0.26)       (0.39)       (0.54)       (1.40)       (1.77)       (1.68)

 No. of                   -0.03       -0.02       -0.03       -0.02       -0.01       -0.01
 recommendations       (-2.96)**     (-1.63)      (-1.53)      (-1.13)      (-0.42)      (-0.36)

 Veckans Aktie 1.98        1.52        1.27        1.65        2.43        2.56
                          (4.96)***    (3.19)**     (2.23)*      (2.52)*    (3.37)***    (3.17)**

 Beta -0.36       -0.32       -0.64       -0.54       -0.69       -1.09
                           (-2.10)*      (-1.44)      (-2.18)*      (-1.59)     (-2.09)*    (-2.78)**

 Market capitalization     -0.36       -0.46       -0.46       -0.48       -0.47       -0.49
 (log)                   (-8.00)***   (-7.63)***   (-6.30)***   (-5.80)***  (-5.87)***   (-4.54)***

 Industry experience 0.21        0.02        -0.17       -0.15       0.02        0.17
                            (1.24)       (0.10)      (-0.50)      (-0.36)      (0.04)      (-0.41)

   2
 R                     0.101 0.076 0.052 0.046 0.049 0.038

 Observations 2654 2654 2654 2654 2654 2654

stocks after a recommendation in relation to how they perform when they have not
been recommended. For one year later, the same logic applies, but given the large
amount of stocks recommended throughout a year and that we only have three years
in our data, the interpretation may not be as straightforward, i.e. we only measure
whether the stocks performed better on average the years after they had been
recommended more frequently. Thus, we also measure abnormal returns in relation
to the OMXS30 which, as we showed in Section IV, closely follows the performance

                                                                        18
                               Table VI
               One-Year Abnormal Returns
This Table shows the mean one-year abnormal returns of the buy recommendations published prior to
the 31st of March 2024. The benchmark indices used are the DI Index constructed from the
recommendations in our sample with weights based on how often each stock was recommended and
the OMX Stockholm 30 Index (OMXS30). All values are stated in percentage points.

 Benchmark Index DI Index OMXS30

 All recommendations -2.26 -1.08

 Male recommendations -2.29 -1.13

 Female recommendations -1.94 -0.45

of the DI Index. Mean one-year abnormal returns, segmented by gender and
benchmark index, are presented in Table VI. We find that on average, both male and
female recommendations underperformed both indices over the year after the
recommendation, suggesting that recommendations published in DI do not add
value in the long run. Furthermore, the stocks recommended by women
outperformed those made by men by 0.35 to 0.68 percentage points, depending on
the index, however these values do not account for any of the characteristics that we
controlled for previously.
       Since the OMXS30 represents the returns readers could have achieved if they
had invested in an index fund rather than following the recommendations by DI, we
use that as the main benchmark from now on. Regression results with the same
control variables as before are reported in Table VII. Female recommendations have
a negative coefficient in the first regression, but when controlling for beta, the
coefficient turns positive, however it is not statistically significant in either of the
regressions. In fact, none of the variables except beta and, in the first regression, the
number of recommendations (potentially due to chance) have a significant
coefficient, even if they affected short-term abnormal returns. The same holds true
when using the DI Index as the benchmark instead. The smaller t-statistics could
partly be a result of smaller sample sizes (stemming from the last 11 months of
recommendations not being included), although given how low the t-statistics are,
we find the lower sample size unlikely to fully explain the lack of significance. Our
results suggest that all of the characteristics identified to affect post-recommendation
returns, except for beta, mainly have an effect in the short term. This could in turn
suggest that the significant results previously found are indicative of the
recommendations having a direct effect. For example, there seems to be no
significant difference in the ability of men and women to predict long-term returns,
yet there is some evidence of a difference of stock performance in the short run which
is presumably a result of how recommendations are perceived by readers. Similar
interpretations could hold for external recommendations performing worse and
Veckans Aktie recommendations performing better in the short run while no
significant results can be found in the long run. Perhaps the strongest evidence for
this is that market capitalization had a highly significant negative effect on

                                                                        19
                               Table VII
         One-Year Abnormal Returns with Controls
The dependent variable in the OLS models below is accumulated abnormal returns of the
recommended stock, from the close of the day before publication to one year later, stated in
percentage points. Abnormal returns are calculated using the OMX Stockholm 30 Index as the
benchmark. External is a binary variable for if the recommender is an external party referred to by the
author of the article. Experience is measured in years since first completed higher education. No. of
recommendations refers to the number of recommendations of both Swedish and international stocks
in the article the recommendation was published in. Veckans Aktie is a binary variable for if the article
was published under that section. Market capitalization is calculated as the current shares outstanding
multiplied by the adjusted close price of the day before the recommendation. Standard errors are
clustered by article, and t-statistics are shown in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate significance at the
0.1%, 1% and 5% levels respectively.

 Dependent Variable One-Year Return

 (Intercept) -1.75        8.37
                                                                             (-0.42)      (0.52)

 Female -2.31       0.13
                                                                             (-0.75)      (0.04)

 External -5.45       -3.64
                                                                                (-1.36)      (-0.92)

 Experience 0.08       0.09
                                                                              (0.94)       (1.05)

 No. of recommendations 0.48       0.36
                                                                              (2.05)*      (1.58)

 Veckans Aktie 0.48       0.67
                                                                                  (0.77)       (0.11)

 Beta -17.62
                                                                                           (-6.12)***

 Market capitalization (log) 0.27
                                                                                        (0.58)

 Industry experience 0.90
                                                                                         (0.35)

   2
 R                                                           0.009 0.038

 Observations 2147 1980

short-term abnormal returns while the coefficient for one year later is positive and
insignificant which would suggest that smaller stocks react more strongly to being
recommended due to being less well-known and more sensitive to changes in
demand while in the long run, market capitalization does not matter much for stock
performance.

                                                                        20
                                  Table VIII
       Effects on the Days Before the Recommendation
The dependent variable in the OLS models below is accumulated abnormal returns of the
recommended stock, from the close of five days before publication to the respective day, stated in
percentage points. External is a binary variable for if the recommender is an external party referred to
by the author of the article. Experience is measured in years since first completed higher education.
No. of recommendations refers to the number of recommendations of both Swedish and international
stocks in the article the recommendation was published in. Veckans Aktie is a binary variable for if the
article was published under that section. Market capitalization is calculated as the current shares
outstanding multiplied by the adjusted close price of the day before the recommendation. Industry
experience is a binary variable indicating if the recommender has worked in the recommended
company or one of its competitors. Standard errors are clustered by article, and t-statistics are shown
in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 0.1%, 1% and 5% levels respectively.

 Day Day -4 Day -3 Day -2 Day -1

 (Intercept) 0.86       2.60       3.59       4.82
                                                      (1.19)      (2.16)*      (2.07)*     (2.62)**

 Female 0.07       -0.17       -0.27       -0.40
                                                     (0.38)      (-0.65)      (-0.92)      (-1.25)

 External 0.08       0.35       0.49       0.69
                                                      (0.58)       (1.57)       (1.83)      (2.26)*

 Experience 0.00       0.01       0.01       0.01
                                                       (1.12)       (0.75)       (0.79)       (0.81)

 No. of                                            0.01        0.01        0.01        0.01
 recommendations                                 (1.50)      (0.91)      (0.63)      (0.47)

 Veckans Aktie 0.11       -0.04       0.30        0.31
                                                    (0.39)      (-0.10)      (0.64)      (0.58)

 Beta -0.13       -0.17       -0.52       -0.65
                                                      (-0.83)      (-0.72)      (-1.87)      (-1.98)*

 Market capitalization                               -0.04       -0.11        -0.14       -0.19
 (log)                                                  (-1.31)      (-2.16)*      (-1.89)     (-2.46)*

 Industry experience -0.02       0.89        1.37        0.80
                                                    (-0.09)      (0.97)      (0.99)       (0.71)

   2
 R                                          0.003 0.005 0.006 0.007

 Observations 2654 2654 2654 2654

                        VII. Robustness checks

       In our analysis of short-term abnormal returns, we find a significant effect of
gender where recommendations made by women perform on average 0.91
percentage points worse than those made by men during the first five days with all
controls included. Since the main stock characteristics have been controlled for and
no significant effect persisted over time, our results indicate that the difference is

                                                                        21
related to how the articles are perceived rather than men and women selecting
different types of stocks. We can however test this further by running the same
regressions on the days before the recommendation was published to observe
whether the difference persists. The results are presented in Table VIII. We find few
significant coefficients overall and none for gender which further supports the idea
that stock recommendations have an impact on stock returns after publication that
cannot be attributed to other stock characteristics.

                            VIII. Discussion

       By analysing three years of self-constructed data, we have been able to observe
a significant difference in the impact of stock recommendations published in Dagens
Industri depending on the gender of the recommender, however we do not know the
underlying cause of this difference.
      We find that female recommenders of stocks traded on the Stockholm stock
exchanges featured in the Swedish financial newspaper Dagens Industri are met with
lower abnormal returns on their recommendations within the first five trading days
after publication compared to their male counterparts, when controlling for
recommender and stock characteristics. When observing the trends for male and
female recommendations, we observe that the recommendations perform similarly
for the first three days before the female recommendations start experiencing
negative returns while the male recommendations continue performing well. There
seems to be no significant difference in the ability of men and women in predicting
long-term returns, as the one-year return indicated no significant difference as
illustrated by Table VII. The evidence of a short-term difference gives an indication
as to how recommendations are perceived by readers, as recommendations made by
men and women in the long term perform in a similar manner.
      One potential cause of the difference is that a majority of readers of Dagens
Industri are male. As highlighted by Fang and Huang (2017), social connections and
common ground can be vital for building trust, meaning that more readers might
trust investment recommendations made by male recommenders over those made by
women. Furthermore, as men are more likely to make recurring appearances as
recommenders in the segment, they are more likely to be recognised, adding another
layer of connectedness with readers. One could also speculate that readers respond
similarly to male and female recommendations upon publication as they have similar
returns, but then the male recommendations are more talked about in the days after,
leading to more people acting upon them a few days later.
      Another potential mechanism could be how men and women are portrayed
and portray themselves differently. Our qualitative analysis after reading more than
800 articles is that men are generally more assertive with their recommendations
and express more confidence in their own ability to recommend stocks while women
tend to be a bit more prone to reasoning around the recommendations which might
make readers less likely to act upon their recommendations.

                                                                        22
      While we have explored potential reasons for the differences, we can only
speculate which is one key limitation of our study. We simply do not know why
female recommendations perform worse; if it depends on behavioral biases among
readers, if there are omitted variables or if our results are simply due to chance.
Another limitation is that some of our variables are prone to measurement errors.
For example, we have not managed to create a common variable for experience and
thus there are variations in the interpretation of that variable for different people
which has likely brought in an attenuation bias into our study, making experience
seem less relevant than it is. Another limitation is that some recommenders appear
very often. As demonstrated in the Appendix (A1), the ten most frequent
recommenders represent more than 30% of the recommendations. These ten people
are exclusively men so if some of them are generally more trusted by the readers, it
could skew our results. Due to these limitations, more research is needed to fully
understand the phenomenon.
       If our findings are interpreted as evidencing a gender bias, they could have
implications in the broader financial industry, showcasing that despite Swedish
culture being generally known for promoting gender equality, there are still problems
that should be considered across the sector.

                            IX. Conclusion

      Using data collected from the stock recommendations published by Dagens
Industri, we contribute to the literature on the effect of analyst recommendations on
stock prices by exploring recommendations more aimed at private investors than
what previous literature has done. We find evidence that buy recommendations have
a positive impact on stock returns while sell recommendations have a negative
impact. While previous literature has suggested that female analysts produce more
accurate forecasts, we find the opposite evidence as stocks recommended by women
have lower abnormal returns than those produced by men, especially a few days after
the publication when accumulated returns for female recommendations start
decreasing while the male-recommended stocks keep rising. We do not manage to
explain these differences by men and women recommending different types of stocks
as there is no significant difference in long-term or pre-recommendation
performance and coefficients become larger when controlling for risk and market
capitalization. Our findings thus suggest that readers perceive recommendations
made by women differently from those made by men. We explore potential reasons
for this which could include that the majority of DI’s readers are men who may feel
more connected to male recommenders and that men and women are portrayed
differently in DI articles. There are however some limitations to our study, including
risks of measurement error in the control variables and a lack of conclusive evidence
on the mechanisms of the difference. It is also not obvious what the results of the
study could be used for or if similar effects exist for other newspapers, either in
Sweden or abroad. Some interesting extensions to the study could include gathering
more of the same data to see whether the effects vary over time and conducting a

                                                                        23
similar study for a similar newspaper in another country to measure how attitudes
differ across cultural contexts. It could also be interesting to delve more in-depth into
how the articles are written, for example analyzing how much text is dedicated to
men and women on average.

                                                                        24
                            X. References

Bradley, Daniel, Gokkaya, Sinan and Liu, Xi. “Before an Analyst Becomes an Analyst:
Does Industry Experience Matter?” The Journal of Finance 72, no. 2 (2017): 751-791

Fang, Lily Hua, Huang, Sterling. “Gender and connections among Wall Street
analysts.” Review of Financial Studies 30, no. 9 (2017): 3305–3335.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, Kim, Joonghyuk, Krische, Susan D. and Lee, Charles M. C.
“Analyzing the Analysts: When Do Recommendations Add Value?” The Journal of
Finance 59, no. 3 (2004): 1083-1124

Dagens Industri. “Audiences” Undated. Available at:
 https://di.ocast.com/sv/audiences

Dagens Industri. “Audiences” Undated. Available at:
https://di.ocast.com/sv/audiences/-12

Kantar Sifo. “Räckviddsrapport. ORVESTO Konsument 2024:2.” 15 Oct 2024.
Available–at
https://www.kantarsifo.se/sites/default/files/reports/documents/rackviddsrapport
_orvesto_konsument_2024_2.pdf

Kumar, Alok. “Self-Selection and the Forecasting Abilities of Female Equity
Analysts”. Journal of Accounting Research 48, no. 2 (2010): 393-435

Kumar, Alok, Niessen-Ruenzi, Alexandra, Spalt, Oliver. “What’s in a name? Mutual
fund flows when managers have foreign-sounding names.” Review of Financial
Studies 28, no. 8 (2015): 2281–2321.

Li, Xi, Sullivan, Rodney N., Xu, Danielle and Gao, Guodong. “Sell-Side Analysts and
Gender: A Comparison of Performance, Behavior, and Career Outcomes.” Financial
Analysts Journal 69, no. 2 (2013): 83-94

Press Gazette. “100k Club: 2025 ranking of world’s biggest news publishers by digital
subscribers.” 13 Feb 2025. Available at:
https://pressgazette.co.uk/paywalls/digital-subscribers-100k-club-ranking-worlds-b
iggest-paywalled-news-publishers-2025/

Statista. “Daily newspapers: Dagens Industri (Di) readers in Sweden Consumer
Insights report” 2024. Available at
https://www.statista.com/study/90919/daily-newspapers-dagens-industri-di-reader
s-in-sweden/

                                                                        25
Womack, Kent. “Do Brokerage Analysts' Recommendations Have Investment
Value?” The Journal of Finance 51, no. 1 (1996): 137-167

                                                                        26
                           XI. Appendix

           A1. Most Common Recommenders
This table shows the most common authors and the number of recommendations they have issued,
including joint recommendations (i.e. recommendations that were made by multiple people on the
same day). Note that all ten are men.

 Name Role, Company Number of
                                                                          Appearances

 Anders Rudolfsson Stock Broker, DNB 175

 Esbjörn Lundevall Equity Strategist, SEB 125

 Karl Hedberg Head of Equities, Carnegie 109

 Robert Oldstrand Equity Strategist, Swedbank 97

 Semir Hasanbegovic Reporter, Dagens Industri 95

 Mattias Isakson Chief Strategist, Swedbank 94

 Stefan Cederberg Equity Strategist, SEB 90

 Oskar Ekman Former Head of Brokerage, Erik Penser Bank 82

 Marcus Hernhag Reporter, Privata Affärer 73

 Martin Björsell Market Analyst, Nordea 70

                                                                        27
             A2. Effect of Sell Recommendations
The dependent variable in the OLS models below is accumulated abnormal returns of the
sell-recommended stock, from the close of the day before publication to the respective day, stated in
percentage points. External is a binary variable for if the recommender is an external party referred to
by the author of the article. Experience is measured in years since first completed higher education.
No. of recommendations refers to the number of recommendations of both Swedish and international
stocks in the article the recommendation was published in. Veckans Aktie is a binary variable for if the
article was published under that section. Market capitalization is calculated as the current shares
outstanding multiplied by the adjusted close price of the day before the recommendation. Industry
experience is a binary variable indicating if the recommender has worked in the recommended
company or one of its competitors. Standard errors are clustered by article, and t-statistics are shown
in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 0.1%, 1% and 5% levels respectively.

 Day Same Day Day One Day Two Day Three Day Four Day Five

 (Intercept) -6.72       -10.92      -12.66       -9.27       -5.47       -6.08
                           (-2.44)*    (-2.64)**    (-2.52)*     (-1.52)      (-0.60)     (-0.60)

 Female 0.92       1.06        2.14       2.05       2.82       2.32
                             (1.48)      (2.41)*      (2.43)*     (2.06)*      (1.91)       (2.12)*

 External 0.35       0.41        0.18       0.39       0.58       0.40
                           (0.95)      (0.64)      (0.18)      (0.34)      (0.50)      (0.49)

 Experience -0.01       0.02       0.02       -0.01       0.02       0.02
                            (-0.29)      (0.76)       (0.77)      (-0.41)      (0.42)      (0.52)

 No. of                    0.08        0.01        0.12        0.15        0.18        0.21
 recommendations         (1.95)       (1.94)       (1.45)       (1.36)       (1.60)      (2.08)*

 Veckans Aktie -3.09       -2.26       -1.36       -1.80       -1.23       -0.97
                            (-1.95)      (-1.05)      (-0.53)      (-0.75)      (-0.53)      (0.68)

 Beta -0.43       0.12        0.18        0.01       -0.02       0.08
                            (-1.37)      (0.23)      (0.52)      (0.04)      (-0.06)      (0.18)

 Market capitalization      0.25        0.35        0.42       0.30       0.10        0.11
 (log)                      (2.45)*      (2.31)*      (2.29)*      (1.35)       (0.30)      (0.29)

 Industry experience 0.17        -0.81       -0.38       -0.41       -1.35       -1.86
                             (0.19)      (-0.84)      (-0.33)      (-0.43)      (-1.01)      (-1.22)

   2
 R                      0.128 0.078 0.061 0.049 0.026 0.025

 Observations 262 262 262 262 262 262

                            XII. AI Disclosure

We disclose that there has been no use of AI tools for data collection, interpretation
or analysis, or for constructing the paper. No AI has been used to write or edit any
text that can be found in this paper, or write code directly used in the study. The AI
tool Chat-GPT has, however, been used to aid with coding through general questions
about commandos and functions in R, but no code has been directly copied from any
AI tool into the script.

                                                                        28