MISPRICED AND
MISUNDERSTOOD?

THE IMPACT OF LIQUIDITY ON TRACKING ERRORS IN
EUROPEAN ETFS

MARIA BANG

VIKTORIA JONASON

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2025
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

Mispriced and Misunderstood? The Impact of Liquidity on Tracking Errors in
European ETFs

Abstract:

   This thesis investigates how liquidity affects tracking errors in European passive
   ETFs. To examine this relationship, we apply panel regressions with fixed effects
   and double-clustered standard errors, controlling for return volatility and fund
   characteristics. Based on a sample of 494 ETFs from 2000 to 2024, we find that
   lower liquidity – measured by the relative quoted half spread – is strongly associated
   with higher pricing-based tracking errors, particularly weakening the price alignment
   between ETF market prices and their Net Asset Values (NAVs). This finding
   supports earlier evidence while extending it to the European ETF market. In contrast,
   tracking errors between NAVs and benchmark indices appear less sensitive to
   liquidity. The results highlight the importance of market liquidity for ETF pricing
   efficiency and underscore the challenges posed by Europe’s fragmented trading
   landscape.

Keywords:
   ETFs, Liquidity, Tracking Errors, Arbitrage, Panel Regression
Authors:
   Maria Bang (25736)
   Viktoria Jonason (25735)
Tutors:
   Ran Guo, Assistant Professor
Examiner:
   Ramin Baghai, Associate Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Maria Bang and Viktoria Jonason, 2025

                                   1
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

                        1 Introduction

Imagine an investment product designed to mimic the market but that, at times, seems
to move to its own rhythm. Passive Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs) seek to replicate
their underlying indices – yet in Europe, this aim is often complicated by frictions not
immediately visible to investors. Since their launch in 1993, ETFs have grown from a
niche investment alternative to become one of the most popular product offerings in the
asset and wealth management space (PwC, 2022). By the end of 2024, global ETF
Assets Under Management (AUM) reached a total value of USD 14.6 trillion, where
European ETFs accounted for nearly USD 2.3 trillion (PwC, 2025). Despite this growth,
the European ETF landscape remains underdeveloped relative to the U.S., as ETFs
represent around 40% of the retail investment market – compared to just 10% to 15% in
Europe (Kealy et al., 2025). One feature of the European market worth highlighting is
its concentration, where a large portion of ETF investments are directed towards only a
handful of large, highly liquid funds, which leaves many ETFs with low trading activity
and limited investor attention.
        This underdevelopment is not merely a function of scale, but also of structure.
According to a report by Vanguard from 2024, European ETFs do not only suffer from
lower average trading volumes – around 15 times lower than the U.S. ETFs – but also
from a fragmented trading landscape where investors must navigate between different
execution venues, currencies and fees. This structural fragmentation has been shown to
dilute order-book depth, limit liquidity availability, and reduce the efficiency of
arbitrage mechanisms (Vanguard, 2024).
        ETF liquidity plays an important part in pricing efficiency. In principle,
arbitrage by Authorized Participants (APs) ensure that ETF prices remain closely
aligned with their Net Asset Values (NAVs). The APs actively facilitate the creation
and redemption of ETF shares in the primary market, as well as assembling the
underlying ETF portfolios. Through this process, the supply of ETF shares is adjusted,
which helps keep the ETF’s market price in line with the value of its underlying assets
(Blackrock, 2023). However, APs often struggle to maintain price alignment between
ETFs and their underlying assets, specifically when liquidity is limited on either side of
the trade. Insufficient liquidity can limit APs ability to execute arbitrage profitably and
this can result in persistent mispricing, wider bid-ask spreads, and ultimately higher
tracking errors – which is the deviation between the ETF’s return and that of its
benchmark index (Bae and Kim, 2020).
        This issue becomes more than just a technical flaw; illiquidity undermines the
key mechanisms that allow ETFs to deliver cost-effective index tracking. In this
context, one might ask – are European ETFs, despite their design, sometimes mispriced
and misunderstood? When ETFs are illiquid, APs may struggle to trade at favorable
prices, either when establishing arbitrage positions or when closing them to realize
profits. Low ETF illiquidity could therefore discourage APs from engaging in arbitrage
unless potential profits clearly outweigh trading frictions, which leads to wider bid-ask
spreads or postponed arbitrage actions. Such delays in arbitrage can result in higher
transaction costs and allow pricing deviations to persist longer than they otherwise
would in more liquid environments (Bae and Kim, 2020). These challenges are
especially pressing in Europe, where the ETF market is fragmented across multiple
national exchanges and regulatory regimes. This results in hindered market-maker
activity, and increases the cost of executing arbitrage trades. Consequently,

                                   2
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

fragmentation exerts an indirect, yet potentially substantial influence on worsening
illiquidity and impairing price efficiency.
        As a response, Euronext, the pan-European stock exchange group, announced in
2025 a proposal to consolidate over 3300 Exchange-Traded Product (ETP) listings from
its seven exchanges – Milan, Amsterdam, Paris, Oslo, Brussels, Dublin, and Lisbon –
into a single venue. By consolidating listings onto a single platform, Euronext thus aims
to concentrate trading activity, thereby enhancing liquidity. Improved liquidity can
facilitate more efficient price discovery and decrease the cost of trading ETFs;
benefitting both institutional and retail investors. Enhanced liquidity resulting from
consolidation can lead to more accurate pricing of ETFs relative to their underlying
assets. This accuracy can minimize tracking errors, since ETFs would be better
positioned to reflect the performance of their benchmark indices. A unified trading
venue can furthermore streamline the arbitrage process, enabling authorized participants
to more effectively align ETF prices with their Net Asset Values (NAVs). (Johnson,
2025)
       Although the relationship between liquidity and ETF tracking errors has been
examined in U.S. markets (e.g. Bae and Kim, 2020; Ackert and Tian, 2008), empirical
evidence for European ETFs remains limited. Existing studies that do include European
ETFs often rely on small samples, short time frames, and do not focus on liquidity as a
central factor (e.g. Tsalikis & Papadopoulos, 2019). As European ETF markets grow in
importance, it is crucial to understand the mechanisms that distort their performance;
not only for academics, but for practitioners, regulators, and investors alike. This study
addresses this gap by investigating how liquidity influences ETF tracking errors in the
European market.
        This thesis examines the extent to which ETF illiquidity contributes to tracking
errors in the European ETF market. We explore this relationship over a 25-year period
(2000 to 2024), covering 494 passive ETFs, listed on European exchanges. Our
contribution to the literature is threefold. Firstly, we focus exclusively on Europe, where
liquidity is affected by unique structural fragmentation across exchanges. Secondly, our
dataset spans more than two decades and includes major financial disruptions such as
the global financial crisis in 2008 and the COVID-19 pandemic. Lastly, we apply
multiple tracking error measures and a robust panel regression framework with double-
clustered standard errors to enhance the credibility of the findings. Our hypothesis is
that illiquid ETFs exhibit larger tracking errors.
        To test this hypothesis, we estimate the tracking errors using three different
methods: (i) absolute return differences, (ii) regression-based – and (iii) standard
deviation-based tracking errors. ETF liquidity is proxied using the relative quoted half-
spread based on end-of-day ask and bid prices. We compute both annual and daily panel
regressions and control for factors such as AUM, ETF type, NAV return volatility, as
well as index return volatility. Furthermore, fixed-effects and double-clustered standard
errors are applied to mitigate time series and cross-sectional dependencies.
        We find that the illiquidity’s effect on European tracking errors is
multidimensional. ETF pricing-based tracking errors (ETF versus NAV, and to some
extent, ETF versus Index) are sensitive to market liquidity conditions, whereas index
replication-based deviations (NAV versus Index) are relatively insensitive to such
frictions. The consistency of findings across regression types and robustness checks
provides evidence that ETF illiquidity plays a central role in shaping pricing
misalignments in the European ETF market.

                                   3
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

       This thesis is organized as follows. In Section 2 we will review the existing
literature on which our study is based on. In Section 3, fundamental concepts are
presented. In Section 4, we explain the data collection process and the research method
used to examine our research question, including our liquidity measure and the
regression models. In Section 5, the empirical findings are presented. Section 6
investigate the robustness of our model. Lastly, we provide concluding remarks in
Section 7.

                    2 Literature Review

The effect of liquidity on asset returns have previously been widely studied. Earlier
work on the topic, such as Amihud and Mendelson (1986) establish a linear relation
between expected return and illiquidity, where a larger bid-ask spread leads to a higher
required yield on stocks. Further studies provide additional evidence that illiquidity is
priced, for instance Pastor and Stambaugh (2003) demonstrate that stocks with higher
sensitivities to innovations in market liquidity earn significantly higher returns, and
Acharya and Pedersen (2005) develop a liquidity-adjusted CAPM model and find that
stocks with higher exposure to different liquidity risks have higher average returns
(Acharya and Pedersen, 2005) (Pástor and Stambaugh, 2003). For ETFs, the liquidity
effect is amplified due to the dual-market structure in place; ETFs are traded on
secondary markets, such as major stock exchanges, but their shares are created and
redeemed by authorised participants in the primary market. Liquidity constraints in
either market can thus impair the arbitrage mechanism, when the authorised participants
are not able to keep prices aligned by trading efficiently in both the fund and the
underlying basket of assets. This affects how accurately an ETF can replicate its
benchmark index and will widen bid-ask spreads and raise the total cost of ownership
(Bae and Kim, 2020).
       Holden et al. (2014) provide a comprehensive framework for understanding and
measuring market liquidity. They discuss the concept of commonality in liquidity, where
liquidity levels tend to co-move across assets, which is something that is particularly
relevant to ETFs, as the ETF liquidity is closely linked to that of its underlying assets.
This concept is further emphasized by Bae and Kim (2020), whose work show that ETF
liquidity is closely linked with the liquidity of the assets in the underlying index the
fund aims to replicate. The paper by Holden et al. (2014) also discusses how market
structure and regulation influence liquidity. The authors posit that liquidity significantly
depends on factors such as exchange transparency, tick-size regulations, and the
existence of algorithmic or high-frequency trading, with their analysis indicating that
more transparency and reduced fragmentation in the market lead to improved liquidity,
decreased trading expenses and a strengthened price efficiency. (Holden et al., 2014)
       Bae and Kim (2020) present one of the most thorough studies on the
implications of ETF liquidity. They investigate the effect of ETF liquidity on ETF
tracking errors, returns and volatility in the U.S. ETF market. Their study finds that
illiquid ETFs have sizable tracking errors, and that this effect is more pronounced when
the underlying assets are less liquid. Furthermore, they find that liquidity risk earns a
premium, where this risk contributes approximately 14.2 basis points (0.142%) to the
annualized return difference between portfolios that have been categorized by liquidity

                                   4
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

levels. This means that a positive liquidity premium exists in the U.S. ETF market,
implying that illiquid ETFs yield higher expected returns as compensation for elevated
liquidity risk. Additionally, the study identifies how illiquidity reduces the effectiveness
of arbitrage. When the ETF or its underlying assets are illiquid, the APs face higher
costs and risk when executing arbitrage trades to replicate the ETF’s underlying index.
Consequently, the APs may delay the trades until the ETF’s price deviation from its net
asset value is significant, or they may demand higher spreads to compensate for the
execution risk. In other words, when the cost of executing arbitrage is too high relative
to the price deviation, APs may refrain from immediate action. This hesitancy can lead
to persistent pricing mismatches and increased trading costs for investors. Our study
extends this analysis to the European ETF market, which differs in structure and
regulatory context. (Bae and Kim, 2020)
       Ackert and Tian (2008) complement Bae and Kim’s (2020) view by
investigating the role of liquidity and arbitrage in the pricing efficiency of U.S. and
country ETFs. Their research compares U.S. ETFs, which are typically priced close to
their NAV, with country ETFs – which often experience significant mispricing, and
show that there is a non-linear (inverted-U) relationship between liquidity and pricing
deviations. At low liquidity levels, increased trading can worsen the mispricing,
whereas at higher levels of liquidity more trading improves pricing efficiency and
decreases the ETF’s deviations from its NAV. Additionally, the authors find that for
U.S. ETFs, higher liquidity is generally associated with lower fund premiums. This
aligns with the previously mentioned idea that higher liquidity facilitates arbitrage and
corrects mispricing. Although this article focuses on international ETFs traded in the
U.S., during an earlier and shorter time period (2002-2005), Ackert and Tian’s findings
still support the core proposition of this thesis; namely that liquidity is a key
determinant of ETF price accuracy. (Ackert and Tian, 2008)
       While Ackert and Tian’s (2008) work highlight how liquidity levels affect the
pricing efficiency of ETFs, Ben-David et al. (2018) examine how ETFs themselves can
create volatility in the broader market, especially through their impact on the underlying
assets that they track. Ben-David et al. find that stocks with higher ETF ownership
exhibit significantly higher volatility compared to stocks with lower ETF ownership.
Furthermore, the study finds that if the increase in stock volatility caused by ETFs to
some extent is non-diversifiable, and it may constitute a form of systematic risk for
certain investors. ETF ownership might therefore call for a risk premium, when market
participants require higher compensation for bearing this ETF-induced risk. This is also
shown in the study, when the stocks with higher ETF ownership tend to earn higher
average returns. (Ben-David et al., 2018)
       Empirical studies on European ETFs are sparse. Tsalikis and Papadopoulos
(2019) examine how well funds replicate their benchmark indices from a sample of 15
American and European ETFs. Using three different methods for estimating tracking
errors, the authors find that American ETFs consistently appear to exhibit lower
tracking errors than European ETFs. Furthermore, the authors analyze the factors that
affect tracking errors and posits that fund size and expense ratios are some of the factors
with the highest influence. Although this study examines European ETFs, only a small
sample of 10 European funds are used, and the authors do not examine liquidity as one
of the factors affecting tracking errors. Our study aims to examine a larger sample of
European ETFs, and includes liquidity as a factor affecting tracking errors. (Tsalikis and
Papadopoulos, 2019)

                                   5
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

        In spite of the growing ETF literature, relatively few studies focus particularly
on how liquidity affects European ETFs. The European market is further complicated
by its complex market structure and fragmentation, with multiple listing venues,
different settlement systems and regulatory frameworks, which all contribute to higher
trading costs and wider bid-ask spreads. As Vanguard (2024) outlines, fragmentation in
the market can dilute the order book depth, which makes it harder for investors and APs
to smoothly match buy and sell orders. This results in a reduction in the overall liquidity
available to support arbitrage. This structural complexity may thus aggravate the
liquidity challenges highlighted in the studies focused on the U.S. market. (Vanguard,
2024)
        This structural issue in the European market has gained increased attention in
recent years. Johnson (2025) reports that Euronext, the pan-European stock exchange
group, is proposing a consolidation of over 3300 exchange-traded product (ETP)
listings from its seven exchanges into a single venue. The goal is to concentrate trading
activity, thereby enhancing liquidity, improving pricing efficiency and decreasing
trading costs. Improved liquidity would also support more effective arbitrage, which
will help align ETF prices closer to their NAVs, as well as reducing tracking errors.
These developments reinforce the significance of liquidity as a central concern for
investors in European ETFs and underscore the importance of investigating its effects in
the context of this thesis. (Johnson, 2025)
        To conclude, the literature establishes three stylised facts. Firstly, liquidity is
priced and directly affects ETF investors via bid-ask spreads, volatility and a liquidity-
risk premium. Secondly, the efficiency of arbitrage decreases under illiquidity, which
leads to persistent mispricing and larger tracking errors. Thirdly, the European market
structure is complex and uniquely fragmented; something that suggests that liquidity
costs documented in the U.S. may be even more pronounced in the European market –
although systematic evidence is scarce. This thesis contributes to the literature by
focusing on the European ETF environment, investigating whether liquidity exerts a
similar influence on tracking errors. Thus, an open question remains: to what extent
does liquidity drive tracking errors in European ETFs? Addressing this gap is the
central contribution of the present thesis.

                  3 Fundamental Concepts

3.1 Exchange Traded Funds

An Exchange Traded Fund (ETF) offers investors a way to pool their money in a fund
that holds a collection of assets such as stocks, bonds, or commodities. By holding a
basket of securities, an ETF thus reduces the risk associated with investing in individual
assets. ETF shares are traded at market prices on stock exchanges; differing from
mutual funds, which are priced based on their Net Asset Value (NAV) at the end of the
trading day. The ETF price is typically different from the fund's NAV per share,
because the ETF's market price fluctuates during the trading day, due to factors such as
the underlying prices of the ETF's assets and the demand for the ETF. (U.S. Security
and Exchange Commission, 2024)

                                   6
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

      While both ETFs and Closed-End Funds (CEFs) are traded continuously through
an exchange, the two differ as most ETFs are open-ended funds, which means that
shares can be issued and the Assets Under Management (AUM) can grow continuously.
CEFs on the other hand, is a type of mutual fund that issues a fixed number of shares
through an Initial Public Offering (IPO) and these shares are then traded on the
secondary market. The fund will hence always have a specific amount of capital
invested. (Horton, 2024)
       While an active ETF uses a portfolio manager's investment strategies to try and
outperform a benchmark – often a specific index – passive ETFs instead try to match
the performance of a benchmark without active decision-making by fund managers,
which leads to it tending to be lower-cost than active ETFs (McWhinney, 2024). The
passive ETF does not attempt to outperform the benchmark but rather mirrors its returns
by holding the same assets in similar proportions (Liberto, 2024).
        An index-based ETF aims to earn the return of the market, or the subset of the
market, that it aims to replicate, less the fees. An index is designed to, as closely as
possible, measure the value of a certain market or a segment of that market. Index ETFs
normally are among the lowest-cost ETFs, due to their minimal portfolio turnover and
very low research costs (Ferri, 2024). Index-based ETFs also allow investors to reach
foreign markets at a relatively low transaction cost (Bae and Kim, 2020).
        The core risk of an index-based ETF stems from the market risk linked to the
index it follows. Apart from this index-related risk, investors may also face additional
risk if the ETF does not accurately replicate the performance of its underlying index.
This means that discrepancies between the ETF’s returns and the index returns, or its
NAV returns can present an extra layer of risk for investors. (Bae and Kim, 2020)
       Although ETFs are generally traded on major stock exchanges, their shares are
created and redeemed in the primary market. Because ETFs trade both in primary and
secondary markets, their shares can exhibit two prices simultaneously: the market price,
which is determined through exchange trading, and the NAV, which reflects the value
of the underlying securities. Under no-arbitrage conditions, ETF returns are expected to
track their NAVs on a daily basis. However, several factors can cause discrepancies
between the two. (Bae and Kim, 2020).
       ETFs carry different underlying assets, and therefore have different fund
characteristics. These characteristics affect liquidity, and generally liquidity
transformation is higher in ETFs tracking less liquid underlying securities such as bond
ETFs (Grill et al., 2018). A common type is the Equity ETF, which covers large or
small business or stocks from a specific country (Blackrock, 2021).

                                   7
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

                  4 Data and Methodology

Our analytical approach builds on insights from prior research. In this section, we
provide an overview of the composition of our data set and our methodology. We first
introduce the initial sample selection of ETFs, and then outline the steps taken to
process and refine the data. Lastly, we describe the analytical techniques applied in our
empirical analysis.

4.1 ETF Description

The data sample used in this thesis contains ETFs that have been listed and traded on
any European stock exchange between 2000-01-01 and 2024-12-31. Moreover, the data
includes all ETFs that have been listed, merged, and delisted during this time period.
       In order to properly investigate liquidity’s effect on ETF returns and tracking
errors, actively managed funds are excluded from the sample. This is due to the fact that
actively managed funds are designed to create excess returns, and they typically deviate
more from underlying indices, which can affect tracking errors, depending on the
investment style of the ETF manager (Bae and Kim 2020). Being able to separate the
liquidity effect of an ETF from the investor management style is difficult, and thus it is
reasonable to exclude actively managed ETFs when doing an analysis of the liquidity
effect on tracking errors. Therefore, the sample for the thesis will only include passive
index-based ETFs. As shown in Figures 1 and 2, ETF listings have surged during the
selected timeframe, especially since 2015, which is predominantly by funds in
Luxemburg and equity ETFs.

                                       Figure 1
                         ETF Counts by Domicile

Figure 1 illustrates the total number of ETFs created and delisted over the sample period. The black line
represents the development for the total number of active European ETFs each year. The coloured bands
represent the contribution each domicile has to that total.
            Active European ETFs by Domicile (2000-2024)

                                   8
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

                                       Figure 2
                      ETF Counts by Asset Type

Figure 2 illustrates the total number of ETFs created and delisted over the sample period. The black line
represents the development for the total number of active European ETFs each year. The coloured bands
represent the contribution each ETF type has to that total.
           Active European ETFs by Asset Type (2000-2024)

4.2 Data Collection and Processing

The data on European ETFs was extracted from the Stockholm School of Economics’
Refinitiv Eikon database, using a Fund screen. In the initial screen, all ETFs with a
passive management approach, that have either been active, delisted or merged within
Europe during the specified time period were extracted. All European countries, as well
as other relevant areas such as the Eurozone were added as a geographical focus criteria
in the screen. The initial sample consisted of 1330 ETFs, and included information on
ETF name, ISIN code, geographical focus, asset currency code, asset type, and the name
of the fund manager benchmark, also called the underlying index.
       The initial sorting made after the extraction of the data was by excluding all
ETFs which did not have any ISIN Code available. Without the ISIN Code, it was not
possible to use formulas to extract the relevant data. It was not achievable to manually
search for the ISIN Code, as each ETF might trade on several exchanges and therefore,
we would perhaps not obtain ETF data in the same currency as the underlying
benchmark, depending on which exchange we were to choose in the manual extraction.
This reduced the sample size to 1247 ETFs.
       The second sorting made was by excluding all ETFs where the underlying
benchmark was not provided or available on the Lipper database, consequently reducing
the sample to 847 ETFs. The reason for this is because the study aims to investigate
passive ETFs, which are tracking an underlying index.
       The Fscreen in Eikon is normally used to extract data on Funds, and not
necessarily indices, so benchmark tickers were not always readily available. We

                                   9
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

therefore had to complement the formula-based extractions with manual retrival of the
remaining underlying index tickers. This was done by searching the name of each index
in the Refinitiv Eikon database and retrieving the correct ticker. For some underlying
indices, neither using a formula, nor manually searching yielded a valid ticker, and the
number of ETFs were thus reduced to 772.
       Furthermore, to account for the fact that some ETFs might be traded in another
currency than that of the underlying index, we used the underlying index ticker and a
formula in excel to retrieve the currency of the benchmark index. There were 93
underlying indices which did not provide any currencies, and the sample size was hence
reduced to 679 ETFs. Additionally, we computed an IF function in Excel, which would
only return the ETFs where the underlying index had the same currency as the ETF
itself, reducing the sample to 533 ETFs. Lastly, domiciles outside of Europe were
removed to concentrate the study on the European ETF market, yielding a final sample
of 494 funds.
       To extract all relevant data, formulas were created through the Refinitiv Eikon
add-in in Excel. Using the ISIN Code of each ETF, as well as the ticker ID on the
underlying indices, we obtained daily data on the ETFs’ bid price, ask price, close price,
NAV and shares outstanding, as well as close price data on the ETFs’ underlying
indices, for the sample period 2000-01-01 to 2024-12-31. The next step was matching
the trading dates in the sample with the data available, which was done through the
Excel function index-match. Table 1 present a summary of the data collection process
and the final sample size.

                                       Table 1
                     Data Processing and Sample Size

Table 1 illustrates the steps in processing our data, from the initial screen to the final data sample. Due
to the long sample period, and many criterias needed to be fulfilled, the final sample ended up consisting
of 494 European ETFs.

 Segmentation Number of ETFs removed Number of ETFs remaining

 Initial Screen 0 1330
 ISIN Code not available 83 1247
 Index not available on Lipper database 400 847
 No benchmark ticker available 75 772
 No currency for benchmark ticker 93 679
 Currency match, ETF & Index 146 533
 Domicile outside Europe 39 494
 Final Sample 494

4.3 Explanation of Selected Time Frame
The selected time frame covers the period 1 January 2000 until 31 December 2024 for a
number of reasons. In 2000, the first European ETF was launched and started trading on
Deutsche Börse (Stoxx, 2025). Hence, the sample begins in early 2000 and aligns with
the introduction of the first European ETF and the start of the European ETF market.
       Extending the sample to the end of 2024 ensures capturing the most recent full-
year data, along with several financial disruptions, such as the COVID-19 pandemic,

                                  10
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

where the sample experienced a record in delisting rate of 9.5%. We deliberately omit
the Global Financial Crisis (2007-2009) as an isolated event from our regressions,
because too few ETFs were active within this time frame.
       The European ETF market saw substantial growth in 2016, partially due to the
introduction of new product launches, particularly smart-beta ETFs (EY, 2016). Thus,
as the European ETF market took off in 2016, the COVID-19 pandemic is a better
timeframe to analyze. Since the introduction of the first European ETF, the market has
seen substantial growth. Table 2 provides a summary of the European ETF market
development for the selected time frame.

                                       Table 2
                        ETF Counts by Year

Table 2 shows the number of ETFs that have been Created and Delisted over the studied period, based on
the ETFs that have data for shares outstanding available. The column Active indicate the total number of
active ETFs during that particular year, and the delisting rate reveal the percentage of delisting over the
past year and is calculated by dividing the number of delisted ETFs for the current year with the number
of active ETFs in the end of the past year.
 Year Created Delisted Active (N) Delisting Rate (%)
 2000 1 0 1 NA
 2001 1 0 2 0
 2002 1 0 3 0
 2003 0 0 3 0
 2004 4 0 7 0
 2005 2 0 9 0
 2006 2 0 11 0
 2007 5 0 16 0
 2008 0 0 16 0
 2009 9 0 25 0
 2010 3 0 28 0
 2011 1 0 29 0
 2012 1 0 30 0
 2013 14 0 44 0
 2014 4 0 48 0
 2015 8 0 56 0
 2016 211 0 267 0
 2017 44 0 311 0
 2018 27 0 338 0
 2019 42 1 379 0.3
 2020 45 36 388 9.5
 2021 11 18 381 4.6
 2022 12 5 388 1.3
 2023 20 15 393 3.9
 2024 8 23 378 5.9

                                  11
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

4.4 Comparison of Our Data Sample with Related Studies

Our data sample differs from that of other studies in several ways. Firstly, it covers a
time-period longer than that of any other literature – 25 years compared 20 years in Bae
and Kim (2020). The sample period also covers events that have not been covered by
previous literature, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the war in Ukraine and
the Gaza war.
        Furthermore, the geographical focus in this study differs from previous research,
as we only consider European ETFs. Although Tsalikis and Papadopoulous (2019)
examines some European ETFs, their sample size is only 15 ETFs – 10 of whom are
European.
       Lastly, our final data sample includes 494 ETFs, which exceeds both the
average, and the median sample size used in prior studies. Table 3 below provides a
summary of the main features of the samples in related studies.

                                       Table 3
                 Sample Comparison with Prior Studies

Table 3 compares our sample to that of other relevant studies. Our sample includes more recent data,
covering years well after 2012, and our sample size is both larger than the average and the median of the
sample sizes for the previous studies.

                                                                              Total Number of
 Research Geographical Area Time Period
                                                                     ETFs

 Ackert & Tian (2008) U.S. 2002 to 2005 28
 Tsalikis & Papadopoulos (2019) U.S & Europe 2010 to 2018 15
 Bae & Kim (2020) U.S. 1993 to 2012 1307
 Our Sample Europe 2000 to 2024 494

4.5 Measuring Illiquidity

The daily individual ETF illiquidity is proxied by the relative quoted half-spread, which
is a widely accepted measure of market illiquidity and transaction costs. As defined in
Equation 1, the relative quoted half-spread is calculated as half the difference between
the quoted ask and bid prices, divided by the midpoint of the two quotes. The midpoint
price, shown in Equation 2, is defined as the average of the bid and ask prices.

                                                                            𝐴          𝐵
                                                𝑃  𝑡 − 𝑃  𝑡
                                𝑅𝑄𝐻𝑆𝑡 =                                         (1)
                                                           2 𝑥 𝑃̂ 𝑡

Where
                                                                        𝐴          𝐵
                                           (𝑃  𝑡 + 𝑃  𝑡)
                                   𝑃̂ 𝑡 =                                               (2)
                                      2

                                  12
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

While Bae and Kim (2020) primarily use the relative effective half-spread as their
liquidity measure, the relative quoted half-spread has also been employed in their study
to assess the effects of liquidity on ETF tracking errors. The relative effective half-
spread requires high-frequency trade-level data, including individual trade prices and
the prevailing quote midpoint at the time of each trade. This data is not available
through the Refinitiv Eikon database. In contrast, the relative quoted half-spreads rely
on end-of-day bid and ask prices, which are available in the Refinitiv Eikon database -
making it a practical proxy for liquidity in studies based on daily data.
       It is preferred to use daily level measures over monthly level measures when
examining the effect of liquidity on tracking errors, as APs conduct arbitrage activities
on a daily basis. These activities influence ETF pricing and can lead to daily
fluctuations in tracking error. Hence, a monthly-based liquidity measure would be less
suitable for capturing these short-term fluctuations in the study. (Bae and Kim, 2020)

4.6 Estimating Tracking Errors

Tracking errors are estimated using several methods. First, we estimate the return
differences between (i) the ETF and its NAV, (ii) the NAV and the underlying index
and (iii) the ETF and its underlying index. This is done using the daily closing price of
the ETFs and the underlying indices, along with the daily NAVs. Daily tracking errors
are then calculated by taking the absolute value of the return differences, as seen in
Equations 3 (i), 4 (ii) and 5 (iii).

                                                                  𝐸𝑇𝐹         𝑁𝐴𝑉
                             |𝐸𝑇𝐹 − 𝑁𝐴𝑉|𝑖,𝑡 = |𝑅𝑖,𝑡     − 𝑅𝑖,𝑡     | (3)

                                                                  𝑁𝐴𝑉         𝐼𝑁𝐷
                             |𝑁𝐴𝑉 − 𝐼𝑁𝐷|𝑖,𝑡 = |𝑅𝑖,𝑡     − 𝑅𝑖,𝑡    | (4)

                                                                    𝐸𝑇𝐹         𝐼𝑁𝐷
                             |𝐸𝑇𝐹 − 𝐼𝑁𝐷|𝑖,𝑡 = |𝑅𝑖,𝑡     − 𝑅𝑖,𝑡    | (5)

In addition, annual tracking errors are further computed using two different methods.
Firstly, regression-based tracking errors are defined as the absolute difference between
one and the estimated regression coefficient (𝛽̂  ) from regressing two return types on
another. This approach is applied to the three return pairs: ETF returns versus NAV
returns (ETF-NAV), (Equation 7), NAV returns versus Index returns (NAV-IND),
(Equation 9), as well as ETF returns versus Index returns (ETF-IND), (Equation 11).
       Equation 6 shows the ETF versus NAV tracking error, which estimates how
closely the ETF market price tracks its NAV. Deviations may indicate pricing
inefficiencies, market frictions or inability for the APs to keep the ETF price aligned
with its NAV.

                          (𝐸𝑇𝐹 − 𝑁𝐴𝑉)𝑖,𝑡 = |1 − 𝛽̂ 𝐸𝑇𝐹  ,𝑁𝐴𝑉  | (6)
                                                                                                                                         𝑖,𝑡          𝑖,𝑡

                                  13
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

Where
                                       𝐸𝑇𝐹                 𝑁𝐴𝑉
                                 𝑅𝑖,𝑡     = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑅𝑖,𝑡     + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡 (7)

Equation 8 illustrates the NAV versus Index tracking error. This regression explains
how well the ETF’s underlying portfolio replicates the benchmark index and captures
tracking issues due to index replication, fund expenses or portfolio construction.

                          (𝑁𝐴𝑉 − 𝐼𝑁𝐷)𝑖,𝑡 = |1 − 𝛽̂ 𝑁𝐴𝑉  ,𝐼𝑁𝐷   | (8)
                                                                                                                                         𝑖,𝑡          𝑖,𝑡

Where
                                       𝑁𝐴𝑉                  𝐼𝑁𝐷
                                 𝑅𝑖,𝑡     = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑅 𝑖,𝑡     + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡 (9)

Furthermore, Equation 10 presents the ETF versus Index tracking error, which captures
the total tracking error between the ETF market price and the benchmark index. This
measure combines both sources of deviation – NAV misalignments, and index tracking
imperfections.

                          (𝐸𝑇𝐹 − 𝐼𝑁𝐷)𝑖,𝑡 = |1 − 𝛽̂ 𝐸𝑇𝐹  ,𝐼𝑁𝐷  | (10)
                                                                                                                                         𝑖,𝑡         𝑖,𝑡

Where
                                        𝐸𝑇𝐹                  𝐼𝑁𝐷
                                  𝑅𝑖,𝑡     = 𝛼 + 𝛽𝑅𝑖,𝑡     + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡 (11)

Secondly, the annual tracking errors are also calculated by taking the standard deviation
of the return difference between the two return types multiplied by the square root of
252, to annualize the tracking errors. This method captures how volatile the tracking
difference is, which means that the higher the standard deviation is, the more the ETF
deviates from its benchmark over time. The standard deviation-based tracking errors can
be seen in Equations 12 (i), 13 (ii), and 14 (iii).

                                                                    𝐸𝑇𝐹         𝑁𝐴𝑉
                𝜎(𝐸𝑇𝐹 − 𝑁𝐴𝑉)𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑆𝑡𝑑𝐷𝑒𝑣(𝑅𝑖,𝑡     − 𝑅𝑖,𝑡    ) ∗ √252 (12)

                                                                    𝑁𝐴𝑉         𝐼𝑁𝐷
                𝜎(𝑁𝐴𝑉 − 𝐼𝑁𝐷)𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑆𝑡𝑑𝐷𝑒𝑣(𝑅𝑖,𝑡     − 𝑅𝑖,𝑡    ) ∗ √252 (13)

                                                                     𝐸𝑇𝐹         𝐼𝑁𝐷
                 𝜎(𝐸𝑇𝐹 − 𝐼𝑁𝐷)𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑆𝑡𝑑𝐷𝑒𝑣(𝑅𝑖,𝑡    − 𝑅𝑖,𝑡    ) ∗ √252 (14)

                                  14
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

4.7 Effect of ETF Illiquidity on Tracking Errors

To investigate the effect of illiquidity on tracking errors, we conduct three panel
regressions. The regression framework is based on the model used by Bae and Kim
(2020), with adaptations made to account for data availability and ETF characteristics.
        In all regressions, the dependent variable is tracking error, which has been
estimated using three methods: (i) the regression-based method, (ii) the standard
deviation-based method and (iii) the daily absolute return difference method. The main
independent variable is the ETF illiquidity measure, which is proxied by the relative
quoted half-spread. A higher value of this measure indicates lower liquidity, i.e. higher
levels of illiquidity.
       To control for other factors that may influence ETF pricing behavior, we include
several control variables; NAV return volatility, Index return volatility, Log(AUM), and
dummy variables for the ETF types. Annual NAV and index return volatility are
computed as the standard deviation of daily log-return for each year, scaled by the
square root of 252 to annualize (see Appendix). Log(AUM) is annualized by the natural
log of daily shares outstanding and NAV, and averaging these on a yearly basis (see
Appendix). The illiquidity is annualized through averaging the daily illiquidity across
all trading days and including a small error term so the log value cannot be zero as a
value (see Appendix).Volatility of the underlying index is to account for scenarios
where large index movements may cause return deviations, forcing APs to rebalance
more frequently, which consequently widens the gap between ETF and Index returns.
Similarly, NAV return volatility is to control for deviations in the ETFs Net Asset
Value, where higher volatility can signal more frequent portfolio turnover, resulting in
increased tracking deviations. Log(AUM) is included to control for fund size. ETFs
hold different fund characteristics, which consequently impacts liquidity in different
ways. Thus, it is necessary to account for the ETF type when computing regressions on
illiquidity, and hence we include asset-type dummy variables to control for these
structural changes in liquidity. The dummy variables on ETF type capture the
systematic differences between the varying product categories, which all have distinct
trading and liquidity profiles, influencing tracking errors differently.
        The three regression models are structured as follows. Model one is a yearly
panel regression, where the regression-based tracking error is regressed on the ETF
illiquidity measure. Furthermore, the model includes year fixed effects.
       Model two is also a yearly panel regression, but with the standard deviation-
based tracking error as the dependent variable. The yearly averages are computed in the
same way as for model one, and it includes year fixed effects.
        Model three is, unlike the other two models, a daily panel regression, where
daily tracking errors are regressed on the daily ETF liquidity measure. The model
includes daily fixed effects to control for market-wide shocks or events affecting all
ETFs on a given day. Table 4 reports a summary of the different regression models.
       Each regression model is estimated over the full sample period. Given that
liquidity can deteriorate substantially during periods of market stress, we also analyze
subsamples corresponding to major market crises, specifically the COVID-19 pandemic
period between 2020 and 2021 (de Vette et al. 2023). This allows us to assess whether
the impact of liquidity on tracking error becomes more pronounced during crisis
periods.

                                  15
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

        In our panel data, there is a risk that errors may be correlated within each ETF
over time, as well as across different ETFs within the same year due to common shocks,
such as events that affect many, or all ETFs simultaneously – for instance geopolitical
events or macroeconomic announcements. Such crisises can impact the returns of
numerous ETFs in the same year, which introduces correlation in their residuals. By
simply ignoring these time-based dependencies, there is a risk of underestimating
standard errors, which in turn can inflate the t-statistics and thus increase the risk of
falsely identifying variables as statistically significant. To address this issue, we use
double-clustered standard errors, clustering by both fund and time frame; yearly for the
two first models and daily for the third model. This method ensures that our significance
levels reflect the true variability in the data and that they are not distorted by underlying
dependencies in the sample data.
        To assess the significance of the observed effect, we conduct a hypothesis test.
In this context, we use a two-tailed test-statistic to evaluate whether the estimated
coefficients from the regression models are statistically different from zero. The test-
statistic is used to account for both positive and negative deviations from the null. The
null hypothesis is that the beta coefficient for the relative quoted half-spread (our proxy
for ETF illiquidity), is equal to zero – implying that changes in ETF liquidity have no
effect on tracking error. The alternative hypothesis is that the coefficient differs from
zero, and if t exceeds the critical threshold we reject the null and conclude a statistically
significant relationship. Since our sample size is large (N > 30) if follows from the
Central Limit Theorem (CLT) that the estimated coefficient 𝛽̂  is approximately
normally distributed under the null hypothesis, as seen in Equation 15. The two-tailed
test-statistic is specified in Equation 16, where the standard error of the estimated
coefficient is adjusted using double-clustered standard errors.

                                     𝛽̂  ~𝛮[0, 𝑉𝑎𝑟(𝛽̂  )] (15)

                                                                                               𝛽̂
                                  𝑡 =                                   (16)
                                                  𝑆𝐸(𝛽̂  )

                                  16
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

                                       Table 4
                       Regression Summary

Table 4 compares the three different regressions used to investigate the effect of liquidity on tracking
errors. Number one is a yearly regression, based on the regression-based tracking errors, while number
two is based on the standard deviation-based tracking errors. In the third regression, daily regressions of
the daily tracking errors are made on the ETF illiquidity. All regressions employ the same control
variables. Instead of double clustering the standard errors on the fund and year level, like regression one
and two, the third regression double clusters the standard errors on fund and day level.

Number 1 2 3

                                                                             Daily Absolute Return
Tracking Errors Regression-based Standard Deviation-based
                                                                                   Difference

Regression type Yearly panel regression Yearly panel regression Daily panel regression

Fixed Effects Year Year Day
                      Double Clustered: Fund     Double Clustered: Fund    Double Clustered: Fund
Standard Errors
                          & Year Level             & Year Level             & Day Level
                    NAV Return Volatility     NAV Return Volatility    NAV Return Volatility
                      Index Return Volatility     Index Return Volatility    Index Return Volatility
Control Variables          Log (AUM)             Log (AUM)             Log (AUM)
                     Dummy variable: ETF     Dummy variable: ETF     Dummy variable: ETF
                                                1                                   2                                  3
                          Type                  Type                  Type

4.8 Data Limitations

We identify several limitations in our sample data that may affect the robustness and
generalizability of our findings.
       First, although our final data sample includes 494 ETFs, not all of them contain
information on all relevant variables. As a result, only the ETFs with sufficiently
complete data, can be used in key parts of the analysis, such as the regression models.
This means that the effective sample may be skewed, for instance toward larger or more
liquid ETFs that are more likely to have a more complete data coverage. Smaller ETFs,
or those with shorter lifespans or lower trading activity, may therefore be
disproportionally excluded from the analytical results, even though they are present in
the overall dataset.
       Second, we restricted our sample to ETFs trading in the same currency as their
underlying benchmark. While this enhances comparability between ETF and index
results, it excludes ETFs operating in multi-currency environments. This introduces a
potential sampling bias, as the excluded 146 ETFs represent approximately 11% of the
initial sample of 1330 ETFs.

1
 ETF Type: Bond, Equity and Money Market. The full sample contains Alternatives, Bond, Equity and
Money Market.
2
 ETF Type: Bond, Equity and Money Market. The full sample contains Alternatives, Bond, Equity and
Money Market.
3
 ETF Type: Bond, Equity and Money Market. The full sample contains Alternatives, Bond, Equity and
Money Market.

                                  17
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

        Third, during data collection, we relied in part on manual retrieval of underlying
index tickers when automated formula-based extraction failed. This process may have
introduced human error, potentially affecting the accuracy and completeness of the final
sample.
       Although Refinitiv Eikon is a well-established financial data provider, its
coverage of European ETFs is not exhaustive. As evidenced during the data screening
process, it does not cover nor have data on all European ETFs. This creates a risk of
coverage bias and could limit the generalizability of the study’s conclusions to the
broader European ETF market.
        Lastly, in the subsample analyses (particularly for the COVID-19 period), the
annual regressions based on regression- and standard deviation-based tracking errors,
includes only 244 ETF-year observations. Such small sample can lead to imprecise
coefficient estimates, larger standard errors and higher sensitivity to outliers. While the
crisis period results offer valuable insights into stressed market dynamics, they should
be interpreted as exploratory rather than definitive.

           5 Empirical Findings and Discussion

This section presents the main empirical results of the study. We begin with a
descriptive overview of the annual tracking errors observed in the ETF sample,
followed by an analysis of distributions between ETF, NAV and Index returns. Next,
we examine the time series relationship between illiquidity and tracking deviations, and
finally, we assess the influence of ETF illiquidity on tracking errors though a series of
regression models.
       Table 5 presents summary statistics for the two types of annual tracking errors.
The standard deviation-based tracking errors between the ETF and the NAV returns (σ
(ETF−NAV)) suggests that ETF prices, on average, relatively closely, but not perfectly
follow their NAVs. This suggests that market pricing and arbitrage by APs generally are
effective. For the NAV versus Index standard deviation measure, the average tracking
errors are lower, but the standard deviation is higher, which implies that some ETFs
replicate their indices very well, while others have larger tracking issues. The mean
tracking error between ETFs and the Index (σ (ETF−IND)) is the highest among the
standard deviation-based metrics at 0.38%. This is expected, as it reflects the total
tracking error and shows that the deviations add up when both the ETF and the NAV do
not track the underlying assets or index correctly.
        The regression-based tracking errors (θ), are overall larger than the standard
deviation-based tracking errors (σ). While the standard deviation-based tracking errors
(σ) reflect the average deviation in returns, the regression-based tracking errors (θ)
captures structural mismatches in returns, where a high value reflects that return
differences consistently under- or overreact to changes in the underlying measure. This
means that while an ETF may track its NAV or underlying index well on a day-to-day
basis, and thus have a low value of standard deviation-based tracking errors, it could fail
to proportionally replicate the benchmark over time, and hence have a high value of the
regression-based tracking errors. This, based on the summary statistics, seems to be the
case for the European ETFs.

                                  18
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

       The mean of the regression-based tracking error for the ETF versus NAV return
difference is about 8.63%, indicating that ETF prices do not move perfectly in sync with
their NAVs. Furthermore, the standard deviation is high, at 20.22%, meaning that while
some ETFs track their NAVs rather closely, other ETFs have substantial variation. On
average, NAV returns deviate by 6.88% from the benchmark index. This reflects
tracking inefficiencies at the portfolio level. The high standard deviation for NAV
versus Index (20.68%) signals that some ETFs replicate indices well, while others
deviate significantly. Lastly, the overall tracking error between the ETF return and the
Index return is, as expected, the highest value since it includes both ETF versus NAV
tracking issues, and NAV versus Index replication issues. The relatively high mean and
large standard deviation of θ(ETF−IND) indicate that many ETFs deviate from the
indices, both on average and in terms of volatility.
       For the summary statistics, these results are in line with Bae and Kim (2020). In
general, ETFs track NAVs better than they track their underlying indices, whether it is
measured by regression-based or standard deviation-based tracking errors. NAVs
typically track the indicies more closely than ETFs, though some tracking error remains.
This suggests that ETF returns are prone to deviate from their index or NAV return due
to external market factors that are beyond the control of fund managers. Furthermore,
the highest average tracking error and variability occur between the ETFs and the
indicies, reflecting the combined effects of both ETF return deviation and the NAV
replication problems.

                                       Table 5
              Summary Statistics for Annual Tracking Errors

Table 5 presents a summary of the estimated annual tracking errors for the ETFs, with both the
regression-based tracking errors, as well as the standard deviation-based tracking errors, measured from
their inception date until either the end of the sample period or their delisting date.
 Tracking Error Mean Standard Deviation
 σ (ETF−NAV) 0.32% 0.24%
 σ (NAV−IND) 0.19% 0.54%
 σ (ETF−IND) 0.38% 0.55%
 θ (ETF−NAV) 8.63% 20.22%
 θ (NAV−IND) 6.88% 20.68%
 θ (ETF−IND) 13.86% 30.20%

Table 6 further displays the average cross-sectional correlations of the estimated annual
tracking errors. One interesting result is the strong correlation between σ(NAV−IND)
and σ(ETF−IND) of 0.915. This suggests that the standard deviation-based tracking
error for NAV versus Index is a major driver of the standard-deviation based tracking
error for ETF versus Index. The results also show moderate correlations between
σ(ETF−NAV) and σ(ETF−IND) (0.404), which indicates that ETF price deviations
from its NAVs contribute somewhat to the total tracking error (ETF-IND), but less than
the NAV versus Index mismatch. For the regression-based tracking errors, the ETF
versus NAV tracking errors correlate moderately with the ETF versus Index tracking
errors (0.652), meaning that if an ETF does not move toghether with its NAV, it is also

                                  19
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

likely that they will not move in sync with its index. Lastly, the θ(NAV−IND) and
θ(ETF−IND) have a strong correlation of 0.732, where a poor NAV versus Index
replication strongly affects the ETF versus Index tracking errors. The regression-based
tracking errors are rather strongly correlated with the standard deviation-based tracking
errors for each measure (0.541 for ETF-NAV, 0.376 for NAV-IND and 0.304 for ETF-
IND), which, similarly to Bae and Kim (2020), indicates that the two types of tracking
errors used are reasonably robust and in line with each other.

                                       Table 6
          Cross-Sectional Correlations for Annual Tracking Errors

Table 6 presents the average cross-sectional correlations of the estimated annual tracking errors for the
ETFs, measured from their inception date until either the end of the sample period or their delisting date.

                σ(ETF−NAV) σ(NAV−IND) σ(ETF−IND) θ(ETF−NAV) θ(NAV−IND) θ(ETF−IND)

 σ(ETF−NAV) 1.000
 σ(NAV−IND) 0.187 1.000
 σ(ETF−IND) 0.404 0.915 1.000
 θ(ETF−NAV) 0.541 0.036 0.191 1.000
 θ(NAV−IND) -0.136 0.376 0.275 0.066 1.000
 θ(ETF−IND) 0.194 0.226 0.304 0.652 0.732 1.000

Although the preceding tables provide summary statistics and correlations that describe
the overall tracking performance of ETFs in the sample, they do not show how tracking
errors vary across different types of ETFs, or over the sample period. To further
investigate these dynamics, a graphical analysis of the cross-sectional relationships
between ETF returns and NAV returns (Panel A), as well as between NAV returns and
Index returns (Panel B) has been employed. These plots are shown for (i) the full
sample over the entire sample period, and (ii) the oldest ETF (iShares STOXX Europe
600 Health Care (DE)) in the sample. Under ideal market conditions – without frictions,
APs’ actions should ensure that the daily returns of ETFs, their NAVs and the
underlying index align closely, since any deviations would be eliminated through
arbitrage.
       Figure 3 presents the cross-sectional relationships between ETF returns and
NAV returns (Panel A) and between NAV returns and benchmark index returns (Panel
B) for the full sample. Each black dot represents the time series average of daily returns
for an individual ETF, between its inception date until its delisting date, or the end of
the sample period. The red line shows the fitted regression line, while the green dotted
line represents the 45-degree line, which serves as a benchmark for perfect tracking –
indicating equality between the two return-series.
       In Panel A, the fitted slope coefficient is 0.85, which means that the ETF returns
reflect approximately 85% of the variation in NAV returns. This suggests that ETF
market prices do not completely incorporate changes in their NAVs, which means that
                                                                             2
there is some degree of market pricing inefficiency in the sample. The R of 60.6%
implies that NAV returns explain around 61% of the cross-sectional variation in ETF
returns.

                                  20
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

       In Panel B, the fitted coefficient is lower at 0.70. This means that NAV returns
reflect only 70% of changes in index returns, and thus there are larger tracking
inefficiencies at the portfolio replication level (NAV versus Index), compared to the
market pricing level (ETF versus NAV). This notion aligns with the strong correlation
                                                                           2
(0.915) between σ(NAV−IND) and σ(ETF−IND) from Table 6. The R is higher at
66.5%, suggesting that index returns explain more of the variation in NAV returns than
NAV returns explain ETF returns.

                                       Figure 3
           Return Distributions Across ETFs, NAVs and Indices

Figure 3 illustrates the cross-sectional relationships between ETF returns and NAV returns (Panel A),
and between NAV returns and benchmark index returns (Panel B), for all ETFs in the sample. Each black
dot represents the time series average of daily returns for an individual ETF between its inception date
until its delisting date or the end of the sample period. The red line shows the fitted regression line, while
the green dotted line represents the 45-degree line, which serves as a benchmark for perfect tracking.
      Panel A: ETF vs. NAV Panel B: NAV vs. Index

Figure 4 shows the same cross-sectional panels as Figure 3, but instead of showing the
entire sample, it only presents the returns for an individual ETF – namely the oldest one
in the sample. The oldest ETF in the sample is iShares STOXX Europe 600 Health Care
(DE), which was incepted on the 25th of April 2001. Overall, the ETF show very strong
tracking performance at both the market pricing level (ETF versus NAV), as well as the
portfolio replication level (NAV versus Index). In Panel A, the fitted coefficient is 0.95.
This indicates that the ETF returns respond to 95% of the variation in NAV returns,
                                                                2
which is a high degree of co-movement. Furthermore, the R is 86.5%, which indicates
that the ETF pricing closely reflects that of the underlying assets. This suggests that
arbitrage mechanisms function effectively and that iShares STOXX Europe 600 Health
Care (DE) trades with relatively low pricing deviations – likely because of its long
history and familiarity in the market.
        Panel B shows that nearly all index return movements are reflected in the NAV,
                                                                          2
as seen in the high fitted coefficient of 0.96. Additionally, the high R  (92.5%) indicates
that the ETF’s portfolio replicates the underlying index closely, with only small
deviations over time.
       The results demonstrate significant variation in ETF tracking performance
across the full sample. While the oldest ETF exhibit fairly high alignment with both its

                                  21
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

NAV and index returns, the full sample has notable deviations, especially at the
portfolio replication level (NAV versus Index). These results are in line with those of
Bae and Kim (2020), although the European ETFs in our sample generally exhibit
weaker tracking quality than the U.S. ETFs in their study.

                                       Figure 4
      Return Distributions Across ETF, NAV and Index for the Oldest
                        ETF

Figure 4 illustrates cross-sectional relationships between ETF returns and NAV returns (Panel A) and
between NAV returns and benchmark index returns (Panel B) for the ETF “iShares STOXX Europe 600
Health Care (DE)”, which tracks the underlying index “STOXX Europe 600 Health Care TR EUR”. The
red line depicts the fitted regression line, and the black dots represents the average of daily returns from
25/04/2001 to the end of the sample period. The green dotted line is the 45-degree line, which serves as a
benchmark for perfect tracking.
      Panel A: ETF vs. NAV Panel B: NAV vs. Index

While the prior analysis focused on cross-sectional variation in tracking performance, it
does not account for market frictions. To capture these effects, the time series
relationship between ETF illiquidity and tracking deviations is examined. Figure 5
illustrates this connection by plotting historical time series of illiquidity and the absolute
values of return differences from 2008 to 2024. The graph shows that both ETF-NAV
tracking deviations and illiquidity increase substantially during periods of financial
stress. During the COVID-19 pandemic in early 2020, there is a sharp and simultaneous
spike in both the ETF-NAV gap and the illiquidity measure, which signals that there are
substantial pricing frictions and weakened arbitrage.
       This pattern is consistent with the concept of commonality in liquidity described
by Holden et. al (2014), where liquidity conditions co-move across assets. During
periods of market volatility, declines in both ETF and underlying asset liquidity
presumably reinforce one another, which leads to increased pricing difficulties and
tracking errors.
       In addition to the spike during the COVID-19 pandemic, similar patterns are
visible during other periods of market crisis, for instance during the 2008-2009 Global

                                  22
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

Financial Crisis and the 2009-2010 European Sovereign Debt Crisis. Each of these
periods are marked by a simultaneous increase in the ETF-NAV gap and market
illiquidity. These results thus suggest that under extreme market conditions, ETF prices
are more likely to diverge from their underlying NAVs because of reduced liquidity and
wider trading costs. Although the NAV-Index gaps generally are smaller and more
stable, they also exhibit a temporary increase during these periods, which reflects
disruptions in portfolio replication.
       Over the longer term, both illiquidity and tracking deviations show a downward
trend after 2012. This indicates market maturation and could be a result of improving
liquidity conditions, or more efficient ETF pricing in European markets. It could also be
a result of a larger number of ETFs being available in the market, which flattens out
averages.

                                       Figure 5
      Daily Time Series of Illiquidity Measures and Return Deviations

Figure 5 depicts the connection between ETF illiquidity and ETF tracking errors over time, where
historical time series of illiquidity and absolute values of return differences from 2008 to 2024 are
plotted. The red line represents the average illiquidity, which is the cross-sectional average of the relative
quoted half-spread of all ETFs. Furthermore, the blue line represents the average absolute value of
return differences between ETF and NAV returns (ETF-NAV). Lastly, the light blue dotted line is the
average absolute value of return differences between NAV and Index returns (NAV-IND).
                Illiquidity and Return Gaps (2008-2024)

The daily time series of illiquidity measures and return deviations provides visuals that
points towards a positive relationship between ETF illiquidity and tracking errors,

                                  23
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

especially during periods of market stress. However, this visual analysis does not
control for other potentially confounding factors. To formally examine this relationship,
panel regressions of the regression-based tracking errors on ETF illiquidity are
estimated.
       Table 7 summarises the results for both the full sample, as well as the COVID-
19 subperiod, and allows for assessment of whether illiquidity has a statistically
significant impact on regression-based ETF tracking errors, and if this relationship is
intensified during a specific period with systemic volatility (the COVID-19 subperiod).
The table presents some interesting results. The beta-coefficient for the Log ETF
illiquidity is positive and statistically significant only for θ(ETF–NAV) (ß = 0.040, t =
4.215), and non-significant for the NAV versus Index (θ(NAV–IND), (ß = 0.004, t =
0.159)), and ETF versus Index tracking errors (θ(ETF–IND), (ß = 0.042, t = 1.378)).
This signals that the illiquidity is primarily associated with ETF pricing inefficiencies
between the ETF prices and their NAVs, and not with their replication qualities of
NAVs on indices. In conditions with more liquidity, the arbitrage mechanisms are thus
more effective in keeping ETF prices aligned with NAV than they are in replicating the
underlying index. This implies that market frictions primarily impact ETF pricing, and
not portfolio replication (NAV versus Index). The θ(NAV–IND) and θ(ETF–IND) are
in this regression not significantly affected by the illiquidity measure, which suggests
that replication issues of the NAV on the index are partly independent of trading
frictions.
       Another interesting result is that the money market ETFs have strongly positive
and significant coefficients for θ(ETF–NAV) (ß = 0.223, t = 3.359) and θ(ETF–IND) (ß
= 0.352, t = 2.800). This means that money market ETFs consistently show higher
pricing and total tracking errors. This is likely due to infrequent trading in the
underlying instruments.
       In the COVID-19 subsample, the coefficients for NAV return volatility and
Index return volatility are exceptionally large in magnitude. As an example, the
coefficient on NAV return volatility is ß = 166.873 for θ(NAV–IND) and ß = 188.559
for θ(ETF–IND). Additionally, the Index return volatility has similarly large and
opposite-signed coefficients; ß = −167.104 for θ(NAV–IND), and ß = −189.346 for
θ(ETF–IND). Albeit these large values, the test statistics associated with these
coefficients do not exceed the standard significance thresholds. These results thus raise
concerns about multicollinearity, especially given the smaller number of observations in
the COVID-19 subsample (244 observations). Supporting this, the cross-sectional
correlation matrix in Table 6 reveals a very high correlation (0.915) between
σ(NAV−IND) and σ(ETF−IND), and strong correlations between θ(NAV−IND) and
θ(ETF−IND) (0.732), as well as between θ(ETF−NAV) and θ(ETF−IND) (0.652).
These strong correlations indicate that the components of tracking error are not fully
independent, which makes it difficult is isolate the effects of individual volatility
variables (NAV return volatilty and Index return volatility) without introducing
multicollinearity. As a result, the large coefficients observed during the COVID-19
period are likely attributable to shared underlying variation rather than independent
expanatory effect in the regression model. We thus interpret these results with caution.

                                  24
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

                                       Table 7
            ETF Illiquidity and Regression-based Tracking Errors

Table 7 presents coefficient estimates for annual regressions of ETF tracking errors on ETF illiquidity.
The dependent variable is the regression-based tracking error, which is calculated by taking the absolute
difference between one and the estimated regression coefficient (𝛽̂  ) from regressing two return types on
another. This approach is applied to the three return pairs: ETF returns versus NAV returns (Columns 1
and 4), NAV returns versus Index returns (Columns 2 and 5), as well as ETF returns versus Index returns
(Columns 3 and 6). The estimations for the full sample can be seen in Columns 1 to 3, while Columns 4 to
6 show the estimation results for the COVID-19 period. The most important independent variable is the
Log ETF Illiquidity, which is computed by taking the logaritm of the relative quoted half-spread, plus an
                   -4
error term of 10  to ensure that log(value) never is zero. Additional variables are defined in the Appendix
B. All regressions include year fixed effects, and test statistics based on double clustered standard errors
at the fund and year level are shown in parentheses. * denote significance at the 10% level, ** denote
significance at the 5% level, and *** denote significance at the 1% level.

                             All Sample COVID-19

                  θ(ETF–   θ(NAV–    θ(ETF–       θ(ETF–     θ(NAV–   θ(ETF–
                   NAV)     IND)      IND)         NAV)       IND)      IND)
 Variable (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
 Log ETF
                     0.040*** 0.004 0.042 0.035 0.076 0.106
 Illiquidity
                        (4.215) (0.159) (1.378) (1.680) (0.517) (0.560)
 NAV Return
                      0.805 19.069 21.032 −1.403** 166.873 188.559
 Volatility
                        (0.975) (1.064) (1.064) (−29.580) (1.634) (1.649)
 Index Return                                                                        −189.34
                     −1.025 −20.012 −22.711 1.265** −167.104
 Volatility                                                                  6
                      (−1.269) (−1.084) (−1.106) (22.719) (−1.634) (−1.653)
 Log(AUM) −0.002 −0.051 −0.052 −0.000 0.076 0.090
                       (−0.456) (−0.997) (−0.893) (−0.077) (2.078) (1.520)
 ETF Type: Bond 0.055* 0.442 0.470 0.084 0.313 0.357
                        (2.042) (1.386) (1.363) (1.278) (1.394) (1.530)
 ETF Type: Equity −0.023 0.126 0.125 −0.075 −0.145 −0.203
                       (−1.221) (1.158) (1.049) (−3.141) (−0.438) (−0.564)
 ETF Type: Money
                    0.223*** 0.130 0.352** 0.419 −0.007 0.616
 Market
                        (3.359) (1.429) (2.800) (3.880) (−0.043) (5.804)
 Number of
                     1069 1069 1069 244 244 244
 Observations
   2
 R                   0.198 0.063 0.075 0.263 0.271 0.264
 Year Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes

As a robustness check, the panel regression model for the regression-based tracking
errors is re-estimated using only log ETF illiquidity as the independent variable. All
other variables, such as log AUM, Index return volatility, NAV return volatility and
ETF type dummies have been omitted from the model. The simplified model allows us
to assess whether ETF illiquidity alone explains variation in tracking errors, and
whether previous results have been driven by confounding factors or multicollinearity.
The results, reported in Table 8 show that the log ETF illiquidity is not significantly

                                  25
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

associated with θ(ETF–NAV) or θ(ETF–IND), neither in the full sample, nor in the
COVID-19 subsample. For the θ(NAV–IND) tracking error, there is a negative and
weakly significant coefficient for the full sample (ß = −0.077, t = −1.809). This value is
rather small in magnitude, and the statistical significance of it disappears during the
COVID-19 period.
                                  2
       Of particular note, the R values are considerably smaller in the simplified
                                                                                                   2
model; ranging from 0.005 to 0.030, compared to the specified model where the R
values range from 0.063 to 0.271. This means that explanatory power of the
independent variable log ETF Illiquidity is somewhat stronger for the specified model
with control variables, compared to this regression. Thus, this points toward the
inclusion of controls help isolate the effect of ETF illiquidity more clearly.

                                       Table 8
           ETF Illiquidity and Regression-based Tracking Errors –
                               Diagnostic Test

Table 8 presents coefficient estimates for annual regressions of ETF tracking errors on ETF illiquidity.
The dependent variable is the regression-based tracking error, which is calculated by taking the absolute
difference between one and the estimated regression coefficient (𝛽̂  ) from regressing two return types on
another. This approach is applied to the three return pairs: ETF returns versus NAV returns (Columns 1
and 4), NAV returns versus Index returns (Columns 2 and 5), as well as ETF returns versus Index returns
(Columns 3 and 6). The estimations for the full sample can be seen in Columns 1 to 3, while Columns 4 to
6 show the estimation results for the COVID-19 period. The independent variable is the Log ETF
Illiquidity, which is computed by taking the logaritm of the relative quoted half-spread, plus an error term
      -4
of 10  to ensure that log(value) never is zero. All regressions include year fixed effects, and test statistics
based on double clustered standard errors at the fund and year level are shown in parentheses. * denote
significance at the 10% level, ** denote significance at the 5% level, and *** denote significance at the
1% level.

                              All Sample COVID-19

                   θ(ETF–    θ(NAV–   θ(ETF–      θ(ETF–    θ(NAV–   θ(ETF–
                    NAV)      IND)      IND)        NAV)      IND)      IND)
 Variable (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
 Log ETF Illiquidity −0.002 −0.077* −0.079 −0.043 −0.183 −0.277
                        (−0.127) (−1.809) (−1.546) (−1.674) (−0.928) (−1.031)
 Number of
                      1535 1535 1535 255 255 255
 Observations
   2
 R                     0.030 0.009 0.010 0.026 0.005 0.008
 Year Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes

In the second regression model, three types of standard deviation-based tracking errors;
ETF versus NAV, NAV versus Index, and ETF versus Index, are regressed on the log
ETF illiquidity measure and other control variables for both the full sample and the
COVID-19 period. Table 9 summarises the results. There are several interesting points
to be made. The first key finding is that the coefficient on log ETF illiquidity is positive
and highly significant for the standard deviation-based tracking errors on ETF versus
NAV returns (σ(ETF–NAV), (ß = 0.021, t = 4.804)) and for the ETF versus Index
returns (σ(ETF–IND), (ß = 0.020, t = 4.691)). For the NAV versus Index tracking error,

                                  26
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

the coefficient is still positive (ß = 0.003) although not significant (t = 1.201). These
findings are in line with those of Bae and Kim (2020) and suggests that illiquidity has a
strong effect on tracking errors where ETF returns are involved and implies that ETF
versus NAV returns and ETF versus Index returns are sensitive to trading frictions, such
as transaction fees or higher bid-ask spreads.
       The table also shows that NAV and Index return volatility are strongly
associated with the NAV versus Index tracking error. For the full sample, the NAV
return volatility is positive and significant for σ(NAV–IND) (ß = 1.479, t = 5.491) and
the Index return volatility is negative and significant for σ(NAV–IND) (ß = -1.385, t = -
5.092). The positive coefficient for the NAV return volatility could be expected, as
more volatile NAV returns will affect the NAV’s deviation from the underlying index
and result in higher tracking errors.
       Furthermore, the negative sign on the coefficient for Index return volatility
signals that as index return volatility increases, the standard deviation-based tracking
error between NAV and index decreases. This may seem counterintuitive, since we
would expect tracking errors to increase in volatile markets. One possible explanation to
this result is that when index returns are less volatile, the NAVs might not exactly
follow the index due to pricing practices and thus the tracking error increases. In
contrast, when index returns are more volatile, NAVs might be forced to respond more
directly, and thus, the return gap decreases, leading to lower tracking errors.
      Lastly, the bond type and money market type ETFs exhibit significantly higher
tracking errors. For the full sample, the coefficients for the Bond ETFs are positive and
moderately significant for the σ(ETF–NAV) and the σ(ETF–IND) tracking errors; (ß =
0.011, t = 2.406) for σ(ETF–NAV) and (ß = 0.012, t = 2.149) for σ(ETF–IND). During
the COVID-19 period, the coefficients are positive and larger in magnitude, although
not significant using the standard thresholds for statistical significance. The coefficients
for the money market type ETFs are positive and somewhat significant for the σ(ETF–
NAV) and the σ(ETF–IND) tracking errors; (ß = 0.019, t = 2.548) for σ(ETF–NAV) and
(ß = 0.017, t = 2.046) for σ(ETF–IND). These results are in line with the findings in
Table 7 and could be due to bond and money market ETFs often investing in underlying
instruments that trade less frequently or are harder to price in real time. As a result,
these ETFs may experience wider bid-ask spreads and limited arbitrage opportunities,
both of which contribute to elevated tracking errors.
       Although the COVID-19 subsample regression provides insight into tracking
behavior during a period of heightened market stress, the number of observations (244)
in the subsample are considerably smaller than in the full sample (1069). As a result, the
threshold for statistical significance is higher due to the reduced degrees of freedom,
which means that larger test statistics are needed to meet the ordinary significance
levels. Even though some coefficients in the COVID-19 regressions may seem
meaningful, they do not reach statistical significance at the standard thresholds and are
thus not the focus of interpretation.

                                  27
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

                                       Table 9
       ETF Illiquidity and Standard Deviation-based Tracking Errors

Table 9 presents coefficient estimates for annual regressions of ETF tracking errors on ETF illiquidity.
The dependent variable is the standard deviation-based tracking error, which is calculated by taking the
standard deviation of the return difference between the two return types. This approach is applied to the
three return pairs: ETF returns versus NAV returns (Columns 1 and 4), NAV returns versus Index returns
(Columns 2 and 5), as well as ETF returns versus Index returns (Columns 3 and 6). The estimations for
the full sample can be seen in Columns 1 to 3, while Columns 4 to 6 show the estimation results for the
COVID-19 period. The most important independent variable is the Log ETF Illiquidity, which is
                                                                                                          -4
computed by taking the logaritm of the relative quoted half-spread, plus an error term of 10  to ensure
that log(value) never is zero. Additional variables are defined in the Appendix B. All regressions include
year fixed effects, and test statistics based on double clustered standard errors at the fund and year level
are shown in parentheses. * denote significance at the 10% level, ** denote significance at the 5% level,
and *** denote significance at the 1% level.
                               All Sample COVID-19

                   σ(ETF–    σ(NAV–    σ(ETF–      σ(ETF–   σ(NAV–   σ(ETF–
                    NAV)      IND)      IND)       NAV)     IND)     IND)
 Variable (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
 Log ETF Illiquidity 0.021*** 0.003 0.020*** 0.024 0.001 0.023
                          (4.804) (1.201) (4.691) (5.958) (0.180) (5.210)
 NAV Return
                        0.748 1.479*** 0.602 −0.210 0.233 0.143
 Volatility
                         (1.628) (5.491) (1.610) (−0.728) (0.254) (0.161)
 Index Return
                      −0.638 −1.385*** −0.508 0.319 −0.206 −0.028
 Volatility
                        (−1.429) (−5.092) (−1.388) (1.297) (−0.227) (−0.032)
 Log(AUM) 0.001 0.005** 0.003 −0.001 0.003 0.001
                         (0.775) (2.448) (1.527) (−0.360) (1.532) (0.596)
 ETF Type: Bond 0.011** 0.003 0.012** 0.017 0.005 0.017
                          (2.406) (0.651) (2.149) (2.322) (0.767) (1.986)
 ETF Type: Equity −0.003 −0.000 0.003 −0.004 0.009 0.000
                        (−0.474) (−0.046) (0.424) (−0.385) (1.271) (0.007)
 ETF Type: Money
                      0.019** 0.013 0.017* 0.017 −0.001 0.015
 Market
                          (2.548) (1.523) (2.046) (2.078) (−0.207) (2.020)
 Number of
                      1069 1069 1069 244 244 244
 Observations
   2
 R                     0.445 0.443 0.375 0.404 0.075 0.362
 Year Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes

Table 10 presents the diagnostic results for the standard deviation-based tracking error
model, using log ETF illiquidity as the sole explanatory variable. The model confirms
that the relationship between ETF illiquidity and ETF versus NAV tracking errors is
robust, since the effect remains statistically significant even in the absence of controls.
This suggests that illiquidity levels are a key driver of pricing deviations between ETFs
and their NAVs.
       However, the fully specified model offers a more complete picture by
accounting for other structural and market-related influences, such as the fund size and
                                                 2
the ETF type. This is reflected in the higher R values, ranging from 0.075 to 0.445,

                                  28
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

compared to the simplified model with a range of 0.020 to 0.441. Examining for
instance the ETF versus Index tracking error for the entire sample period, we see that
the explanatory power increases from 0.065 to 0.375 in the fully specified model. In
summary, the consistency across the two models thus supports the reliability of the
main result, while the full model provides higher explanatory power.

                                      Table 10
       ETF Illiquidity and Standard Deviation-based Tracking Errors
                              – Diagnostic Test

Table 10 presents coefficient estimates for annual regressions of ETF tracking errors on ETF illiquidity.
The dependent variable is the standard deviation-based tracking error, which is calculated by taking the
standard deviation of the return difference between the two return types. This approach is applied to the
three return pairs: ETF returns versus NAV returns (Columns 1 and 4), NAV returns versus Index returns
(Columns 2 and 5), as well as ETF returns versus Index returns (Columns 3 and 6). The estimations for
the full sample can be seen in Columns 1 to 3, while Columns 4 to 6 show the estimation results for the
COVID-19 period. The independent variable is the Log ETF Illiquidity, which is computed by taking the
                                                                              -4
logaritm of the relative quoted half-spread, plus an error term of 10  to ensure that log(value) never is
zero. All regressions include year fixed effects, and test statistics based on double clustered standard
errors at the fund and year level are shown in parentheses. * denote significance at the 10% level, **
denote significance at the 5% level, and *** denote significance at the 1% level.
                               All Sample COVID-19
                    σ(ETF–    σ(NAV–   σ(ETF–      σ(NAV–    σ(ETF–   σ(ETF–
                    NAV)     IND)     IND)       IND)      IND)     NAV)
 Variable (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
 Log ETF Illiquidity 0.023*** −0.004 0.014 0.004 0.027 0.027
                           (6.332) (−0.456) (1.658) (2.060) (6.002) (5.677)
 Number of
                       1535 1535 1535 255 255 255
 Observations
   2
 R                      0.441 0.024 0.065 0.020 0.346 0.388
 Year Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes

The third panel regression model regresses daily absolute return gaps (|ETF–NAV|,
|NAV–IND| and |ETF–IND|) on ETF illiquidity and other controls. This is done for both
the full sample period, as well as the COVID-19 period. There are several interesting
results. Firstly, we find that the main independent variable log ETF illiquidity is highly
significant and positive for the ETF versus NAV tracking errors, as well as the ETF
versus index tracking errors; (ß = 0.001, t = 5.370) for |ETF–NAV| and (ß = 0.001, t =
4.838) for |ETF–IND|. The measure is however not significant for the |NAV–IND|
tracking errors, (ß = 0.000, t = 0.516). These results imply, similarly to the results found
in the standard deviation based tracking error regression model (Table 9), that illiquidity
consistently increases dailiy tracking errors where ETF returns are involved. In more
illiquid conditions, arbitrage becomes less effective, which allowes ETF prices to
deviate from their NAVs. Furthermore, as illiquidity does not significantly impact NAV
versus Index tracking on a daily basis, it is suggested that replication quality is
relatively stable, irrespectable of the ETF’s liquidity.

                                  29
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

       Another notable finding is that the NAV return volatility has a positive and
somewhat significant effect on NAV versus Index tracking errors, and ETF versus
Index tracking errors in the full sample ((ß = 0.464, t = 3.067) for |NAV–IND|, and (ß =
0.167, t = 2.080) for |ETF–IND|). When the underlying assets of an ETF fluctuate more,
i.e. have a high NAV return volatility, it becomes more difficult to accurately replicate
the benchmark index. This leads to an increase in NAV versus Index tracking errors,
and thus the positive coefficients are expected. Interestingly, the coefficient for the
NAV return volatility is not significant for the ETF versus NAV tracking error. This
implies that ETF versus NAV return differences are less sensitive to NAV volatility,
and could be a result of AP activity keeping ETF prices in line with their NAVs, even
when NAVs fluctuate. This interpretation is supported by Figure 3, Panel A, which
                                                                         2
shows a strong linear relationship between ETF and NAV returns (R =60.6%) and a
coefficient of 0.85. The tight clustering of observations around the fitted line indicates
that ETF prices tend to follow NAV returns closely, even when NAVs are volatile. This
pattern is aligned with the role of arbitrage mechanisms in correcting ETF mispricings
and may hence explain why the ETF versus NAV tracking errors appear relatively
insensitive to NAV return volatility in the regression results.
        Additionally, the Index return volatility is negative and significant for the NAV
versus Index tracking errors (ß = -0.432, t = -2.830). This result is in line with the other
models; when Index return volatility is low, NAVs may not fully adjust to benchmark
movements, which increases tracking errors.
       Another finding is that fund size (log AUM) is significant only for the NAV
versus index tracking error (ß = 0.000, t = 2.587). Although the coefficient is very
small, the result suggest that larger funds may experience slightly higher NAV versus
Index deviations. This result is in line with the coefficient in Table 9, and also
corresponds with Tsalikis and Papadopoulos (2019), who argue that fund size is one of
the factors with the highest influence on tracking errors. The model also reveal that the
ETF Type dummies are mostly insignificant in the full sample, indicating that daily
tracking errors are not strongly driven by ETF type.
       Examining the COVID-19 subsample period, we see that the log ETF illiquidity
measure remains positive and strongly significant for the ETF versus NAV tracking
errors, as well as the ETF versus Index tracking errors; (ß = 0.001, t = 3.692) for |ETF–
NAV| and (ß = 0.001, t = 3.134) for |ETF–IND|. The measure remains insignificant for
the |NAV–IND| tracking errors. This confirms that ETF mispricings are still sensitive to
liquidity levels, even during crises.
        It is worth noting that the coefficients in this panel regression model are
considerably smaller in magnitude compared to those in the annual tracking error
regressions. This difference is primarily driven by the frequency of the dependent
variable. While previous models examined annual tracking errors, this specification uses
daily absolute return differences. Thus, the tracking errors in this model reflect short-
term tracking deviations, which are typically much smaller in scale than the annual
tracking error measures, that instead capture accumulated or average deviations over
time, and hence appear larger in magnitude.

                                  30
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

                                      Table 11
         ETF Illiquidity and Daily Absolute Return Difference-based
                           Tracking Errors

Table 11 presents coefficient estimates for daily regressions of ETF tracking errors on ETF illiquidity.
The dependent variable is the daily tracking error, which is calculated by taking the absolute value of the
return differences between two return types. This approach is applied to the three return pairs: ETF
returns versus NAV returns (Columns 1 and 4), NAV returns versus Index returns (Columns 2 and 5), as
well as ETF returns versus Index returns (Columns 3 and 6). The estimations for the full sample can be
seen in Columns 1 to 3, while Columns 4 to 6 show the estimation results for the COVID-19 period. The
most important independent variable is the Log ETF Illiquidity, which is computed by taking the logaritm
                                                                    -4
of the relative quoted half-spread, plus an error term of 10  to ensure that log(value) never is zero.
Additional variables are defined in the Appendix B. All regressions include daily fixed effects, and test
statistics based on double clustered standard errors at the fund and daily level are shown in parentheses.
* denote significance at the 10% level, ** denote significance at the 5% level, and *** denote
significance at the 1% level.

                                All Sample COVID-19

                         |ETF–     |NAV–     |ETF–       |ETF–    |NAV–    |ETF–
                          NAV|       IND|       IND|         NAV|      IND|      IND|
 Variable (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
 Log ETF Illiquidity 0.001*** 0.000 0.001*** 0.001*** −0.000 0.001***
                             (5.370) (0.516) (4.838) (3.692) (−0.009) (3.134)
 NAV Return Volatility 0.259 0.464*** 0.167** 0.010 0.171 0.087
                             (1.532) (3.067) (2.080) (0.300) (1.654) (0.974)
 Index Return Volatility −0.221 −0.432*** −0.129 0.025 −0.161 −0.049
                           (−1.327) (−2.830) (−1.566) (0.794) (−1.551) (−0.532)
 Log(AUM) 0.000 0.000** 0.000 −0.000 0.000** 0.000
                            (0.681) (2.587) (1.446) (−0.071) (2.337) (1.012)
 ETF Type: Bond 0.000 −0.000 0.000 0.000* 0.000 0.000
                            (1.338) (−0.668) (0.994) (1.661) (0.041) (1.507)
 ETF Type: Equity 0.000 −0.000 0.000 0.000* 0.000 0.001**
                            (1.103) (−0.242) (1.426) (1.940) (0.742) (2.002)
 ETF Type: Money
                          0.000 −0.000 0.000 0.000 −0.000 0.000
 Market
                             (0.499) (−0.411) (0.252) (0.351) (−1.140) (0.205)
 Number of
                       191645 191645 191645 45429 45429 45429
 Observations
   2
 R                       0.222 0.306 0.203 0.236 0.092 0.222
 Daily Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes

To ensure robustness of the results found in Table 11, we now perform a diagnostic
regression using only log ETF illiquidity as our independent variable. The results,
presented in Table 12, confirm that ETF illiquidity remains a statistically significant
predictor of ETF return-based tracking errors (|ETF–NAV| and |ETF–IND|) across both
the entire sample, but also across the COVID-19 subperiod. As coefficients are
consistent in both magnitude and significance compared to the fully specified model, we
interpret that the observed relationship between ETF illiquidity and return-difference-
based tracking errors is not driven by confounding control variables. Conversely, the

                                  31
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

|NAV–IND| tracking error is still statistically insignificant, which reinforces the
conclusion that market liquidity primarily affects ETF pricing and not index replication.
                    2
Furthermore, the R values are lower in the simplified model. This confirms the
previously stated finding that control variables improve model fit.

                                      Table 12
         ETF Illiquidity and Daily Absolute Return Difference-based
                      Tracking Errors – Diagnostic Test

Table 12 presents coefficient estimates for daily regressions of ETF tracking errors on ETF illiquidity.
The dependent variable is the daily tracking error, which is calculated by taking the absolute value of the
return differences between two return types. This approach is applied to the three return pairs: ETF
returns versus NAV returns (Columns 1 and 4), NAV returns versus Index returns (Columns 2 and 5), as
well as ETF returns versus Index returns (Columns 3 and 6). The estimations for the full sample can be
seen in Columns 1 to 3, while Columns 4 to 6 show the estimation results for the COVID-19 period. The
independent variable is the Log ETF Illiquidity, which is computed by taking the logaritm of the relative
                                                   -4
quoted half-spread, plus an error term of 10  to ensure that log(value) never is zero. All regressions
include daily fixed effects, and test statistics based on double clustered standard errors at the fund and
daily level are shown in parentheses. * denote significance at the 10% level, ** denote significance at the
5% level, and *** denote significance at the 1% level.

                                 All Sample COVID-19

                      |ETF–    |NAV–    |ETF–       |ETF–     |NAV–    |ETF–
                      NAV|     IND|      IND|        NAV|      IND|      IND|
 Variable (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
 Log ETF Illiquidity 0.001*** −0.000 0.000** 0.001*** −0.000 0.001***
                          (5.500) (−0.851) (2.334) (4.066) (−0.172) (3.471)
 Number of Observations 290330 290330 290330 47632 47632 47632
   2
 R                       0.202 0.017 0.022 0.221 0.04 0.208
 Daily Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes

The regression models collectively indicate that ETF illiquidity is a consistent
determinant of ETF tracking errors involving ETF returns, especially between ETF
returns and their NAVs (ETF versus NAV), at both the daily and the yearly level.
Across both the standard deviation based and daily absolute return difference models,
illiquidity significantly increases ETF versus NAV and ETF versus index tracking
errors. However, in the regression-based tracking error model, the effect of liquidity is
significant only for ETF versus NAV and not for ETF versus Index tracking errors.
Since the regression-based tracking error variable aims to capture persistent tracking
inefficiencies over the sample, this result implies that the co-movement between ETF
and index returns is less affected by market liquidity, compared to the ETF versus NAV
alignment. As a result, we note that ETF pricing efficiency is most vulnerable to
liquidity issues in the short run. The diagnostic tests, which excludes control variables,
confirm the robustness of the ETF versus NAV and illiquidity relationship, since
coefficients remain stable and significant.
       Overall, NAV versus Index tracking errors remain largely unaffected by ETF
illiquidity in all model specifications, implying that replication deviations between the
NAV and the underlying index most likely are affected by factors other than trading

                                  32
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

frictions. Control variables, especially NAV and Index return volatility, are more
relevant in explaining NAV versus index tracking errors.

             6 Supplementary Robustness Checks

We apply a random-shuffle placebo test to the annual standard deviation-based tracking
errors (Table 9) and the daily absolute return difference-based tracking errors (Table
11). By randomizing each ETF’s illiquidity series across time, we break any true
relationship between the lagged liquidity (t-1) and the next period tracking error. In this
randomization, each ETF’s illiquidity values remain the same, but are randomly
assigned across time. We then reintroduce the one-period time lag for illiquidity at time
t-1 to predict tracking error at t.
        This test is repeated 500 times, so we receive 500 independent shuffles to
construct a null distribution, under which ETF illiquidity carries no predictive power for
tracking errors. If the true ß falls outside the 95% null interval, below the 2.5 percentile
or above the 97.5 percentile; we reject the null hypothesis and conclude that today’s
illiquidity has a statistically significant effect on tomorrows tracking error, and hence,
the results in Table 9 and Table 11 are further solidified.
       When we break the link between today’s illiquidity on tomorrows tracking
errors by randomly shuffling each ETF’s liquidity series, the estimated ß for every
tracking error measure for both Table 9 and Table 11 fall outside the null interval. This
is seen in Table 13 and is visually plotted in Appendix A. The results show that the true
ß from our previous regressions lie outside the 95% null interval, always above the
97.5% percentile. Hence, we can rule out that the True Illiquidity betas are driven by
chance for Table 9 and Table 11. Thus, the placebo test confirms the results that have
previously been shown – that there is a positive and significant effect between ETF
illiquidity and daily absolute return difference-based tracking errors (Table 11), as well
as for annual standard deviation-based tracking errors (Table 9).

                                      Table 13
             Random-Shuffle Placebo for Table 9 and Table 11

Table 13 shows the results of the random-shuffle placebo test for the six tracking-error measures used in
Table 9 (yearly standard deviation-based) and Table 11 (daily absolute return difference-based). The
main regressors remain the same, as those used in Table 9 and Table 11, alongside the true ß
coefficients. We randomly permute each ETF’s illiquidity series 500 times within each ETF to break any
existing relationship, and then compute a one-period lag placebo regressor and re-estimate the fixed-
effects regression using the same control variables. The rows Mean Null, 2.5% Null, and 97.5% Null
summarize the central 95% of the resulting placebo ß-distribution. Any results above or below these
thresholds signal that today’s illiquidity cannot predict tomorrows’s tracking errors.
                   σ(ETF–      σ(NAV–     σ(ETF–     |ETF–     |NAV–     |ETF–
                   NAV)       IND)       IND)      NAV|      IND|      IND|
 True Illiquidity ß 0.021 0.003 0.020 0.001 0.000 0.001
 Mean Null 0.012 0.002 0.012 0.000 0.000 0.000
 2.5% Null 0.010 0.001 0.010 0.000 0.000 0.000
 97.5% Null 0.014 0.003 0.014 0.000 0.000 0.000

                                  33
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

                        7 Conclusion

Mispriced and Misunderstood? This thesis aims to examine whether, and to what
extent, illiquidity in Europe’s fragmented ETF market is a primary driver of tracking
errors in European ETFs. The findings demonstrate that ETF illiquidity significantly
weakens the ETF price alignment relative to its NAVs, supporting the view that ETFs
are indeed mispriced when arbitrage mechanisms by authorized participants fail to
function efficiently. However, tracking errors between NAVs and benchmark indices
seem less linked to liquidity. This indicates that certain causes of ETF performance
deviations may still be misunderstood.
       These findings shed light on a key structural challenge in the European ETF
market; the fragmentation across multiple trading venues, all featuring different
currencies and trading hours. This fragmentation ultimately limits liquidity and leads to
sustained tracking errors. In this context, Euronext’s proposed consolidation of over
3300 ETPs into one single trading venue stands out as an interesting approach to
combat the problems posed by the liquidity dilution in the European market. By
concentrating trading activity and improving market liquidity, such a consolidation may
help reduce tracking errors in Europe. This could, as a result, enhance the alignment
between ETF prices, their net asset values and their underlying indices – ultimately
decreasing costs for investors.
      We further suggest that future research could usefully investigate how structural
changes – such as market consolidation – might improve liquidity and enhance ETF
tracking accuracy in the European market. As a final remark, while mispricing remains
a challenge, this thesis helps bring clarity into the mechanisms behind it – leaving the
European ETF market perhaps a little less misunderstood.

                                  34
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

                        References

Acharya, Viral V., and Lasse Heje Pedersen. 2005. “Asset Pricing with Liquidity Risk.” Journal
       of Financial Economics 77 (2): 375–410. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2004.06.007.
Ackert, Lucy F., and Yisong S. Tian. 2008. “Arbitrage, Liquidity, and the Valuation of
       Exchange Traded Funds.” Financial Markets, Institutions & Instruments 17 (5): 331–
        62. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0416.2008.00144.x.
Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson. 1986. “Asset Pricing and the Bid-Ask Spread.” Journal
        of Financial Economics 17 (2): 223–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-405X(86)90065-
         6.
Bae, Kyounghun, and Daejin Kim. 2020. “Liquidity Risk and Exchange-Traded Fund Returns,
       Variances, and Tracking Errors.” Journal of Financial Economics 138 (1): 222–53.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2019.02.012.
Ben-David, Itzhak, Francesco Franzoni, and Rabih Moussawi. 2018. “Do ETFs Increase
       Volatility?” The Journal of Finance 73 (6): 2471–2535.
        https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12727.
Blackrock. 2021. “Different Types of ETFs.”.
         https://www.blackrock.com/sg/en/ishares/education/types-of-etfs.
Blackrock. 2023. “Authorised Participants and Market Makers – Part 1.”
        https://www.blackrock.com/au/insights/ishares/authorised-participants-and-market-
       makers.
EY. 2016. “Integrated Innovation the Key to Sustainable Growth.” EY.
        https://eyfinancialservicesthoughtgallery.ie/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/Global-ETF-
        survey-2016.pdf.
Ferri, Richard A. 2024. “Index ETFs.” In Wiley Global Finance.
         https://www.fidelity.com/learning-center/investment-products/etf/types-of-etfs-
       index#:~:text=An%20index%2Dbased%20ETF%20seeks,to%20replicate%2C%20less
       %20the%20fees.&text=Most%20exchange%2Dtraded%20funds%20(ETFs,the%20perf
      ormance%20of%20an%20index.
Grill, Michael, Claudia Lambert, Philipp Marquardt, Gibran Watfe, and Christian Weistroffer.
        2018. “Counterparty and Liquidity Risks in Exchange-Traded Funds.” Financial
         Stability Review. European Central Bank. https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/financial-
         stability-publications/fsr/special/html/ecb.fsrart201811_3.en.html.
Holden, Craig W., Stacey E. Jacobsen, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam. 2014. “The Empirical
        Analysis of Liquidity.” SSRN Scholarly Paper. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research
        Network. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2402215.
Horton, Melissa. 2024. “Exchange-Traded Funds (ETFs) vs. Closed-End Funds: What’s the
        Difference?” In Investopedia. https://www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/052615/what-
        difference-between-exchange-traded-funds-etfs-and-closed-end-
       funds.asp#:~:text=ETFs%20are%20open%2Dended%20funds,the%20fund%20is%20%
       22closed.%22.
Johnson, Steve. 2025. “Euronext Plan to Consolidate ETF Trading Venues Sparks Scepticism.”
        Financial Times, 2025. https://www.ft.com/content/dd60a918-b8e9-4cf0-afc2-
       ab8697259d2a.
Liberto, Daniel. 2024. “Passive ETF: What It Is and How It Works.” In Investopedia.
         https://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/passive-etf.asp.
McWhinney, James. 2024. “Active vs. Passive ETF Investing: What’s the Difference?” In
        Investopedia. https://www.investopedia.com/articles/mutualfund/05/activepassive.asp.
Pástor, Ľuboš, and Robert F. Stambaugh. 2003. “Liquidity Risk and Expected Stock Returns.”
       Journal of Political Economy 111 (3): 642–85. https://doi.org/10.1086/374184.
PwC. 2022. “ETFs 2026: The next Big Leap.” https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/financial-
        services/publications/assets/ETF_2026_PwC.pdf.

                                  35
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

Stoxx. 2025. “25 Years of ETFs in Europe: A Revolution in Portfolio Trading.” 2025.
         https://stoxx.com/25-years-of-etfs-in-europe-a-revolution-in-portfolio-
       trading/#:~:text=On%20April%2011%2C%202000%2C%20the,EUR%2017%20billion
      %20under%20management.
Tsalikis, George, and Simeon Papadopoulos. 2019. “ETFS – Performance, Tracking Errors and
       Their Determinants in Europe and the USA.” Risk Governance and Control: Financial
        Markets and Institutions 9 (4): 67–76. https://doi.org/10.22495/rgcv9i4p6.
U.S. Security and Exchange Commission. 2024. “Exchange-Traded Funds.”
         https://www.investor.gov/introduction-investing/investing-basics/investment-
        products/mutual-funds-and-exchange-traded-2.
Vanguard. 2024. “Capital Market Fragmentation and the Impact on Total Cost of Ownership for
        European ETF Investors.”
        https://www.ie.vanguard/content/dam/intl/europe/documents/capital-market-
         fragmentation-and-the-impact-on-total-cost-of-ownership-for-european-etf-investors-
        eu-en-pro.pdf.
Vette, Nander de, Benjamin Klaus, Simon Kördel, and Andrzej Sowiński. 2023. “Gauging the
        Interplay between Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity.” European Central Bank.
         https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/financial-stability-
        publications/fsr/special/html/ecb.fsrart202305_01~830184261b.en.html.

                                  36
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

                     Appendix

Appendix A
The plots in Figure 6 are merely a visualization of the results in Table 13, plotting the
entire null distributions in grey for each of the six tracking errors. Although only one
line is drawn for each True ß, the upper limit of the null distirubtion (97.5 percentile) is
marked by the point beyond which the grey distribution thins out. The figure shows that
the red dotted line for the observed relationship between today’s ETF illiquidity on
tomorrows tracking error is stronger than would occur by chance.

                                       Figure 6
                 Null Distributions - Random-Shuffle Placebo

Figure 6 shows our random‐shuffle placebo distributions from Table 13. Each panel’s grey curve is the
density of 500 shuffled‐illiquidity β’s. The red dashed line is the true β from the original regression. The
top row plots the absolute‐difference errors (|ETF–NAV|, |NAV–IND|, |ETF–IND|) and the bottom row
the annual σ‐based errors (σ(ETF–NAV), σ(NAV–IND), σ(ETF–IND)). When the true β lies to the right
(or left) of the 2.5th–97.5th percentile of the null density, it indicates that our observed illiquidity effect is
highly unlikely to occur by chance.
    Random-Shuffle Placebo for Standard Deviation and Absolute
                         Tracking Errors

                                  37
                      Mispriced and Misunderstood?

Appendix B
                    Specification of Regression Variables

                              Formula

                                                             𝐴        𝐵
                                                  𝑃  𝑡 − 𝑃  𝑡
                                   𝑅𝑄𝐻𝑆𝑡 =
                                                           2 𝑥 𝑃̂ 𝑡
 ETF Illiquidity                  Where:
                                                        𝐴        𝐵
                                           (𝑃 𝑡 + 𝑃 𝑡)
                                      𝑃̂ 𝑡 =
                                   2

                                        𝐿𝑜𝑔(𝑅𝑄𝐻𝑆)𝑖,𝑡 = log (𝑅𝑄𝐻𝑆𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜀)
 Log ETF Illiquidity, daily
                                       −4
                             𝜀 = 10
                                        𝐿𝑜𝑔(𝑅𝑄𝐻𝑆)𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛(log(𝑅𝑄𝐻𝑆𝑖,𝜏 + 𝜀))
                                                                                                                                𝜏∈𝑡
 Log ETF Illiquidity, yearly
                                       −4
                             𝜀 = 10
 Log return ETF  𝐸𝑇𝐹
                                          𝑟𝑖,𝑡   = log(𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒𝐸𝑇𝐹𝑖,𝑡) − log (𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒𝐸𝑇𝐹𝑖,𝑡−1)
 Log return NAV  𝑁𝐴𝑉
                                          𝑟𝑖,𝑡    = log(𝑁𝐴𝑉𝑖,𝑡) − log (𝑁𝐴𝑉𝑖,𝑡−1)

                                           𝐼𝑁𝐷
  Log return index 𝑟𝑖,𝑡   = log(𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒𝐼𝑁𝐷𝑖,𝑡) − log (𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒𝐼𝑁𝐷𝑖,𝑡−1)
 NAV Return Volatility, Daily   𝑁𝐴𝑉
                                                                     |𝑟𝑖,𝑡    |
 NAV Return Volatility, Yearly                       𝑁𝐴𝑉
                                          𝑉𝑜𝑙(𝑁𝐴𝑉)𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑠𝑑(𝑟𝑖,𝑡   )𝜏∈𝑡 ∗ √252
 Index Return Volatility, Daily:   𝐼𝑁𝐷
                                                                     |𝑟𝑖,𝑡    |
 Index Return Volatility, Yearly:                     𝐼𝑁𝐷
                                          𝑉𝑜𝑙(𝐼𝑁𝐷)𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑠𝑑(𝑟𝑖,𝑡  )𝜏∈𝑡 ∗ √252
 Log (AUM), Daily:
                                            𝐿𝑜𝑔(𝐴𝑈𝑀)𝑖,𝑡 = log (𝑁𝐴𝑉𝑖,𝑡 ∗ 𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑡)
 Log (AUM), Yearly:
                                            𝐿𝑜𝑔(𝐴𝑈𝑀)𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛 [log(𝐴𝑈𝑀𝑖,𝜏)]𝜏∈𝑡
  AUM 𝐴𝑈𝑀𝑖,𝜏 = 𝑁𝐴𝑉𝑖,𝜏 ∗ 𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝜏

Appendix C

AI Disclosure

AI tools were used as a supplementary aid in the coding and writing process. The LLM
assisted in reviewing text for conciseness and providing grammar checks. It also
supported in coding and debugging tasks in R Studio.

                                  38