Public Office, Private Gains?

An Event Study on U.S. Congressional Stock Trades

ANNA GAO
KEVIN ÅHLQVIST

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2025
Public Office, Private Gains? An Event Study on U.S. Congressional Stock Trades
Abstract
   This thesis examines whether members of Congress earn abnormal returns on their
   investments and under what conditions such returns might arise. Using a dataset of 41
   851 stock transactions between 2012 and 2024, we use an event study methodology
   complemented by calendar-time portfolio regressions and sub-sample analyses. After
   adjusting for risk using the Fama–French Three-Factor model, we find no consistent
   evidence that congressional buy trades outperform the market on aggregate, while sale
   transactions show limited but statistically significant loss avoidance. However,
   sub-analyses reveal evidence of significant abnormal returns under specific conditions.
   Firstly, some congressional committees earn abnormal returns during crisis periods such
   as COVID-19 and the Russia-Ukraine invasion and trading stocks aligned with
   members’ committee jurisdiction. Furthermore, we find limited support of market
   reaction on disclosures of congressional trades by high-profile members. These findings
   indicate that although legislation may have reduced broad insider trading,
   outperformance in certain conditions suggest that informational advantages may exist,
   raising implications for market fairness and the adequacy of current regulations.

Keywords:
   Abnormal returns, Event study, Insider information, STOCK Act, U.S Congress
Authors:
   Anna Gao (25811)
   Kevin Åhlqvist (25381)
Tutor:
   Ran Guo, Associate Professor, Department of Finance
Examiner:
   Ramin Baghai, Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Anna Gao and Kevin Åhlqvist, 2025

                                    1
1. Introduction
In recent years, stock trading among members of Congress in the U.S. has come under increasing
public scrutiny and media attention. Many members of Congress actively trade stocks, often
while serving on committees that may grant them access to non-public, market-relevant
information. Between 2019 and 2021, 183 U.S. members reported trading stocks and other
assets, where the majority served on committees that potentially provided them with insider
information (Kelly, Playford, & Parlapiano, 2022). Notably, representative Ro Khanna has traded
stocks for a total volume exceeding 293 million USD, and during a span of one and a half month
the speaker of the house, Nancy Pelosi, made more than 250,000 USD on a single trade, which
was more than her yearly salary (Quiver Quantitative, n.d.). Moreover, during the early stages of
the COVID-19 pandemic, several members disposed of their holdings right before the crash, in
some cases following classified briefings about the severity of the virus outbreak. (Lane, 2020)

This has caused debates about the ethics of congressional trading and the adequacy of regulations
to prevent insider trading. In 2012, the STOCK act was passed with the aim to prevent
congressional insider trading by for example expanding the requirements for trade reporting. The
act requires members of Congress to report all trades over 1,000 USD within 45 days of the
transaction date. This also applies to trades made by children and spouses of the members.
However, there have been issues with compliance with the law. For example, 78 congress
members were found to have violated it in 2023. This might not come as a surprise since the fine
for violating the law is only 200 USD (Hayes, 2025). This implies that current regulations likely
open up for members of Congress to trade on potential informational advantage with minor
consequences. While corporate insiders are heavily penalized for similar behavior, members of
Congress operate under a separate legal framework. This leads many to view this as a
problematic double standard, as this behavior creates a principal-agent problem as private
financial gains conflict with public duty (Jensen and Meckling, 1976). If Congress members
profit from insider information, it could damage public confidence in the fairness of the political
system. By empirically testing whether congressional trades actually earn abnormal returns, this
study contributes to a deeper understanding of ethical governance, financial market fairness, and
the need for more effective regulatory oversight.

1.1 Research Questions
The debate over whether Congress members exploit informational advantages to earn abnormal
returns and whether current legislation is sufficient to prevent such trading highlights a reason
for empirical investigation. This leads us to our first research question:

    1) Do members of Congress in the US earn abnormal stock returns on average?

While this question addresses whether congressional trades generate abnormal returns on
average, previous research has found weak or mixed evidence, suggesting that outperformance
may be limited to a smaller group of individuals rather than being widespread across all
members. This raises the possibility that abnormal returns may come from specific informational

                                       2
channels or contexts. To explore this further, we extend the analysis by explicitly testing factors
such as committee membership to isolate potential abnormal returns and informational content of
trades. Committee membership, which differs in their legislative focus and proximity to specific
industries, may serve as one such channel. If members of certain committees consistently earn
higher abnormal returns, it could suggest unequal access to policy-relevant information. Hall,
Karadas, and Schlosky (2017) found that members serving on powerful committees during
2004-2010 earned significant abnormal returns after two terms in Congress, specifically those on
Finance, Financial Services, and Banking followed by Energy and Commerce, and Ways and
Means. This leads us to our second research question:

    2) Are abnormal returns for buy and sale transactions linked to members of Congress in
       certain committees?

It is also valuable to consider broader contextual factors, particularly periods of crisis, as
informational advantages and information asymmetry may become heightened for specific
committees. For example, during COVID-19, there were heightened legislative decisions with
substantial economical impact, such as the lockdown and stimulus packages. Senators including
Richard Burr and Kelly Loeffler were investigated after having sold stocks after private briefings
before the market crashed in early 2020 (Faturechi & Willis, 2020; Lane, 2020). Similarly,
multiple members of Congress traded defense stocks in early 2022 when geopolitical tensions
escalated following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine (Swope, 2022). These cases raise the question
of whether members of Congress’ investment performance and informational advantages are
amplified during major crises. Therefore, we have the third research question:

    3) Are there abnormal returns for buy and sale transactions during specific crisis situations
        for the different committees?

While this question addresses when trades occur, it does not account for which types of stocks
are traded, which could be an important factor when assessing potential informational
advantages. The Congress members can invest in stocks of a wide variety of sectors, with some
more related to their committee work. There are documented cases where members of Congress
traded stocks in industries under their own legislative oversight, emphasizing the need for stricter
regulations (Levinthal, 2021). This raises the question of whether abnormal returns are more
likely when members of Congress trade stocks in industries that their committee oversees, where
they might have increased access to non-public information. Thus, our fourth research question
is:

    4) Do members of Congress earn abnormal returns from buy and sell transactions in stocks
        in industry sectors related to their committee assignments?

In recent years, growing media attention and public scrutiny have led to a surge in retail investors
mimicking congressional trades in hopes of beating the market. Platforms like CapitolTrades,
QuiverQuant, and ETFs replicating congressional portfolios have gained popularity in recent
years. Another example is the Nancy Pelosi Stock Tracker, which tracks Nancy Pelosi’s trades,
reflecting her popularity among retail investors due to her perceived trading success and

                                       3
substantial personal wealth. From a behavioral finance perspective, this mimicking behavior can
be linked to information cascade and herding, where individuals follow perceived information
agents, such as Congress members, rather than relying on their own analysis (Palmer, 2022). In
this context, trades made by members of Congress can act as informative signals to the market.
This raises questions about whether this truly is a viable strategy for retail investors to generate
abnormal returns. Recent research provides support to this idea. Using 2012-2020 Senate data,
Abdurakhmonov, Snider, Ridge, and Hasija (2023) found that share prices tend to rise
significantly in the days surrounding public disclosures of stock purchases, with stronger effect
when the senator serves on a committee overseeing the firm. This suggests that markets may
interpret such disclosures as signals. This leads us to our fifth and final research question:

    5) Are there abnormal returns following the disclosures of congressional trades and is it a
       viable strategy to mimic them?

1.2 Hypotheses
For research questions 1-4 the same hypothesis structure can be applied where we divide the
hypothesis for Congress buy and sales in the following way.

H0a: There are no positive abnormal returns following buy transactions.

H1a: Congress members significantly outperform the market and earn positive abnormal returns
following buy transactions.

H0b: There are no negative abnormal returns following sale transactions.

H1b: Congress members significantly outperform the market by avoiding losses following sale
transactions, measured by negative abnormal returns following the sale transactions.

2. Literature review

2.1 Empirical Evidence on Political Insider Trading

The performance of investments made by U.S. Congress members and Senators have been
investigated in several papers. The paper which our thesis mainly aims to replicate and extend is
one the most cited papers in this topic, “Abnormal Returns from the Common Stock Investments
of the U.S. Senate” by Ziobrowski, Boyd, Cheng, & Ziobrowski (2004). They conducted an
event study and calendar-time portfolios on data from 1993-1998 and found that Senators in the
United States outperformed the market on a risk-adjusted basis by around 85 basis points per
month, indicating that they traded with “substantial informational advantages”. They also
investigated factors of outperformance such as party affiliation and tenure. They found no
significant difference between the parties, and that junior Senators outperformed senior ones. A
parallel study by Ziobrowski, Boyd, Cheng, & Ziobrowski (2011), “Abnormal Returns from the
Common Stock Investments of Members of the U.S. House of Representatives”, extended the

                                       4
earlier study to analyze trades of the House of Representatives between 1985-2001. They found
that House members earned significant abnormal returns of 55 basis points per month, which
reinforced the concerns about potential insider trading among Congress members.

However, subsequent research has questioned the prevalence of such outperformance. Eggers
and Hainmueller (2013) critiqued the earlier findings, pointing out potential data and
methodological limitations. Using an updated sample of 2004-2008, they found no evidence of
outperformance by Congress members, and that they even slightly underperformed a passive
index by 2-3% annually. A more recent paper from after the STOCK Act was passed, is one by
Belmont, Sacerdote, Sehgal, & Van Hoek (2022). Using data from 2012-2020 and an event study
slightly different to Ziobrowski et al. (2004), they found no consistent abnormal returns for the
Congress for House members or Senators, and that they even tended to underperform by a few
basis points over a six-month horizon. Furthermore, they explicitly test the COVID period, the
top percentiles of outcomes, trades made by members whose committee has oversight over the
traded stock, and members accused of insider trading. However, they found no significant
abnormal returns attributed to these factors, suggesting that informational advantage and
outperformance is likely limited to certain members. Also that systematic informational
advantage, if ever existed, has largely disappeared following the STOCK Act. However, even if
aggregate outperformance appears to diminish after 2012, it does not rule out possibilities of
more specific, context-dependent informational advantages. At the same time, literature offers
conflicting conclusions about whether Congress members warn abnormal returns on average,
further motivating our research.

2.2 Contribution
We primarily replicate and extend the study by Ziobrowski et al. (2004), drawing additional
inspiration from Belmont et al. (2022), with the aim to explore gaps in the existing literature.
While both of these studies examined factors that could explain abnormal returns, the analyses
were limited. In particular, they did not explore trading performance across committees.
Although some subsequent but less cited research such as Hall et al. (2017) have tested this more
explicitly, we contribute to a more refined understanding of when congressional trading may
reflect informational advantage by including periods of crisis and examining trades aligned with
committee responsibilities. Additionally, we extend previous studies by including the most recent
years up to 2024. By including this period, we capture the effects of the STOCK Act while
accounting for market disruptions, such as the COVID-19 crisis and the Russia-Ukraine
invasion. This broader time frame allows us to assess whether congressional trading
outperformance persists under different conditions. In doing so, our research not only aims to
add to literature, but also contribute to ongoing debates about ethics and fairness in financial
markets.

3. Data
Due to the reporting requirements introduced by the STOCK Act, we are able to access
congressional trading data for 2012-2024, obtained from QuiverQuantitative.com. The data in

                                       5
the years 2012-2013 are however very limited (see Figure 1). The number of trades increases
from 2014 until peaking in 2020 before reverting. The spike in trading activity coincides with the
COVID-19 pandemic, motivating our crisis-period sub-test.

Figure 1: Number of buy and sale transactions in the dataset per year from 2012 to 2024.

The data sample includes trades by members of both the Senate and The House of
Representatives, identified by ticker. For each transaction, the data has information such as
transaction date, disclosure date, name, trade size, and chamber. Each observation represents one
stock transaction, and we limit the transactions to buy and sale transactions and exclude
“exchange” transactions. The amount of the trades are divided wide into ranges ($1,001-$15,000,
$15,001-$50,000, $50,001-$100,000, etc.). Table 1 shows that the dataset consists of 41851
congressional trades in total, with buy and sell trades making up similar proportions for the
different ranges. The majority of the trades fall into the lowest bracket ($1,001–$15,000), and the
number of trades decreases as the amount range increases. We aggregate the trades of the same
stock made by the same individual on the same day using the midpoint of the range. After
cleaning the data, our dataset contains 41 851 transactions.

Table 1: Total number of buy and sell transactions for respective trade size range in USD.

                                       6
For each trade, the necessary market data to calculate returns and benchmarks is gathered. The
daily stock returns for all traded companies is retrieved from the CRSP database via Wharton
Research Data Services (WRDS). Each trade in our sample was matched via its unique identifier
PERMNO to retrieve its daily return time series. We retrieved daily returns of the CRSP Value
Weighted Index from WRDS and the Fama-French returns from French’s data library (French,
n.d.). Specifically, we use the Fama-French Three Factor (FF3) data, which provides daily
returns for the market factor, size factor (SMB), and value factor (HML), to construct expected
returns for each trade. These data allow us to compute abnormal returns under different
benchmarks (market-adjusted and multi-factor adjusted). All return data were aligned by date
with each trade’s event window for the event study analysis.

The dataset is further complemented with sector and committee information to conduct subgroup
analyses. Each traded stock was classified into a broad industry sector using CRSP’s ‘gsector’
classification which groups firms into 11 sectors such as Technology, Healthcare, Finance,
Utilities, etc. Data on congressional committee assignments for each person in our sample was
manually matched, primarily from public sources like GovTrack and the official Congressional
Directory. We recorded the committees on which each member served during the sample period.
Committee groups are manually consolidated into broader categories for interpretability (see
Table A5).

3.1 Data Limitations
Some limitations of the data can be noted. First, the data is based on self-reported disclosures
under the STOCK Act, which may be subject to omissions, introducing potential selection bias.
Second, some trades were excluded due to unmatched tickers that could not be matched when
standardizing to PERMNOs. Furthermore, trade sizes are reported in wide ranges, which may
distort trade-weighted returns. For this reason, the event study uses equal-weighted returns.
Another limitation of our dataset is that it does not allow us to link buy trades to subsequent sale
trades at the individual level, preventing the construction of true buy and sell matched portfolios.
Instead we rely on fixed period holdings of 255 days, which introduces assumptions about
investor behavior.

Regarding subgroup analysis, committee assignments were manually matched to members’
primary roles during the sample period. We acknowledge that some members changed committee
assignments over this time period. Due to data availability time constraints, the matching uses
primary committee roles during the period and does not dynamically update for mid-career
changes. This simplification could introduce some noise as a trade might be flagged as aligned
with a committee that the member joined after the trade. Lastly, committees are grouped into
broader categories for interpretability, potentially concealing differences between committees or
sector-specific responsibilities in the sector mapping.

                                       7
4. Methodology
The core methods to investigate whether U.S. Congress members earned abnormal returns is an
event study framework following Ziobrowski et al. (2004), complemented by calendar-time
portfolio regressions. For the event study, the WRDS event study tool is used to compare and
verify the manual results.

4.1 Event Study
In the event study, each event is defined as a stock transaction by a Congress member. Similar to
Ziobrowski et al. (2004), we construct two event samples, one for buy transactions and one for
sale transactions. Multiple event window lengths are considered to address whether any
abnormal performance manifests quickly or only over longer horizons. We use windows up to
one trading year like Ziobrowski et al. (2004) as it allows for gradual information diffusion, and
captures the effect of disclosure lags. Further, we adopt an estimation window of 500 days. The
long estimation period provides stable estimates for expected returns. The gap between the
estimation window and the event window is set to 50 days prior to the event to avoid
contamination of the event.

For each event, the abnormal returns (AR) are calculated using the difference between returns
and expected returns from a benchmark model. We use two different benchmarks for robustness,
the CRSP Value Weighted Index as the market-adjusted model, as well as the FF3 model,
following the studies by Belmont et al. (2022) and Ziobrowski et al. (2004). In the
market-adjusted model, the CRSP Value Weighted Index is subtracted from the stock return each
day to get the AR. This model assumes that the market index captures the baseline risk of the
stock and is a simple benchmark for a straightforward measure of outperformance relative to the
broader market. The FF3 model accounts for risk factors such as company size and value/growth
characteristics. This model is usually preferred as it controls for the size and value premia. If
congressional trades are systematically tilted toward small-cap or high book-to-market stocks,
the market-only benchmark could misattribute those style exposures to informational skill
without the SMB and HML factors. The FF3 model is defined as:

             𝑅   − 𝑅   = α + β  (𝑅   − 𝑅  ) + β  𝑆𝑀𝐵 + β  𝐻𝑀𝐿 + ε
                          𝑝,𝑡       𝑓,𝑡       𝑖       𝑖,1    𝑚,𝑡       𝑓,𝑡          𝑖,2        𝑡       𝑖,3        𝑡      𝑝,𝑡

The excess return is regressed on the parameters α , β  , β  , β  .
                                                                         𝑖  𝑖,1  𝑖,2  𝑖,3
          𝑅   : 𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛
                 𝑚𝑡
          𝑆𝑀𝐵 : 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 𝑜𝑓 𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟
                  𝑡
          𝐻𝑀𝐿 : 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 𝑜𝑓 𝑏𝑜𝑜𝑘 𝑡𝑜 𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘𝑒𝑡 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟
                                     𝑡
        ε  : 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟 𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑚
                     𝑝,𝑡
       α : 𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑎𝑏𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛
                                𝑖

                                       8
The abnormal returns are aggregated to average abnormal returns (AAR) to make analysis on a
portfolio level. The daily average AR is:

                                                                                𝑁
                                                1
                                  𝐴𝐴𝑅  = 𝑁 * ∑ 𝑤 𝐴𝑅
                                                                               𝑡                            𝑖      𝑡
                                                                       𝑖=1

            𝑁 : # 𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 (𝑏𝑢𝑦 𝑜𝑟 𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑙) 𝑖𝑛 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒
           𝑅  : 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 𝑜𝑛 𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑖 𝑜𝑛 𝑑𝑎𝑦 𝑡
                             𝑖𝑡
          𝑅   : 𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛, 𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝐶𝑅𝑆𝑃 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥 𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝑑𝑎𝑦 𝑡
                 𝑚𝑡
          𝑤 : 𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 𝑜𝑛 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑖, 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑑 𝑡𝑜 𝑏𝑒 1 𝑖𝑛 𝑎𝑛 𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑦 𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑓𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑜
                                 𝑖

This is summed for all transactions to get the cumulative average abnormal return (CAAR). The
CAAR for buy and sell transactions respectively is:

                                                                                                                                                𝑡
                              𝐶𝐴𝐴𝑅 =   ∑ 𝐴𝐴𝑅
                                                                           𝑡                         𝑡
                                                      𝑖=−255

For research question 2, we calculate CAARs in sub-samples. The trades are grouped by
committee affiliation, where a single trade may map to multiple committees if the transaction
was made by a member who belongs to several committees. The CAARs are then computed for
each committee.

Further, we test whether committee based performance varies conditionally during crisis periods,
specifically during COVID-19 and the beginning of the Russia-Ukraine war. Crisis periods are
defined using date cutoffs around the events, with a dummy variable for the specific period. The
COVID period is defined as the entire year of 2020, and Russia-Ukraine as January to June 2022.
The sector alignment is then tested for each committee by constructing a dummy variable
inspired by Belmont et al. (2022). The dummy variable equals 1 if the traded stock’s “gsector”
aligns with any of the trader’s committees (see Table A6 for exact mapping).

To investigate whether retail investors can earn abnormal returns by mimicking trades made by
Congress members, we use an event study with the disclosure date as the event. We use short
event windows up to 10 days to capture immediate market reactions to disclosures, assuming that
informational content or signaling is incorporated quickly and that longer windows risk
confounding the effect to unrelated market movements. Unlike the transaction-based event study
where we aggregate abnormal returns into CAARs for interpretability, we calculate CAR at the
individual level as the dependent variable as this allows us to test whether characteristics like
trader identity influence abnormal returns. We use regressions of the form:

                                       9
           𝐶𝐴𝑅  = β  + β 𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑒 + β 𝑁𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑦𝑃𝑒𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑖 + β (𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡2020 * 𝑁𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑦𝑃𝑒𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑖) +
                 𝑡     0     1              2                    3
                                  β (𝑃𝑜𝑠𝑡2020 * 𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑒) + ε
                                                           4                                          𝑡

We include a dummy to post-2020 disclosures, as interest in congressional trading heightened
after this, coinciding with emergence of platforms like CapitolTrades and QuiverQuant, making
disclosure data widely accessible. Year fixed effects control for time-specific market shocks, and
standard errors are clustered at the member level to account for within-person correlation across
disclosures. This specification isolates whether abnormal returns differ systematically following
disclosures by Nancy Pelosi or Senators, and whether effects intensifies post-2020, reflecting the
possibility that markets react differently to high-profile members or members perceived as
successful traders.

4.2 Calendar time portfolio
Ziobrowski et al. (2004) also uses a calendar-time portfolio to complement the analysis on
longer-run abnormal returns and uses this for statistical inference as this approach addresses
issues of cross-sectional dependence of many overlapping events in event studies. A rolling
portfolio is constructed each month containing buy and sale trades respectively, assuming a
holding period of 255 days (one trading year). The return is:
                                                                                                             𝑁
                                                                                    ∑ 𝑐  𝑅
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   𝑖,𝑡     𝑖,𝑡
                                                                                                 𝑖=1
                                       𝑅   =  𝑁
                                                          𝑝,𝑡
                                                                                   ∑ 𝑐
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        𝑖,𝑡
                                                                                                    𝑖=1

           𝑅   : 𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 𝑜𝑓 𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑓𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑜 𝑜𝑛 𝑑𝑎𝑦 𝑡
                      𝑝,𝑡
            𝑐   : 𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑑 𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑖 𝑓𝑟𝑜𝑚 𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒 𝑡𝑜 𝑡 − 1
                           𝑖,𝑡

Portfolios are built under two schemes, equal-weighted where each trade contributes equally, and
trade-weighted where weights are based on size of the trade using the midpoint of the broad
reported range. Monthly returns of rolling portfolios are regressed on the FF3 factors. The
hedged portfolio (buy - sale) captures the net abnormal return.

4.3 Statistical tests
To test the statistical significance of abnormal returns in the event study and the calendar-time
portfolio, we use t-tests under the assumption that abnormal returns are independently and
identically distributed. Given that our datasets for sales and buys include over 20,000 individual
transactions respectively, the Central Limit Theorem (CLT) supports the use of parametric tests
as the distribution of average abnormal returns approximates normality. While we cannot
guarantee strict independence, as some stocks may appear in multiple trades or cluster around
similar dates, leading to potential cross-sectional dependence and temporal correlation. The large
sample size mitigates this, it does not fully eliminate them. As such, statistical significance,
especially in the smaller subgroups or in shorter windows, should be interpreted with caution.

                                      10
4.4 Limitations
One limitation is that the long event windows in the event study risk beta drift and the inclusion
of unrelated firm news. Ziobrowski et al. (2004) flagged the same risk and therefore added a
monthly calendar‑time portfolio regression, which we include as a robustness check. We also use
multiple window lengths to ensure robustness. If we only find significance at one horizon, we
would be cautious, while consistency across horizons would strengthen results. However, one
limitation of this is that it assigns the same importance to small and large transactions, potentially
underrepresenting the impact of high-value trades. Nonetheless, Belmont et al. (2022) find that
using either an equally weighted or a trade-weighted methodology does not materially affect the
overall conclusions of their study. Based on this, we rely solely on the equally-weighted
approach in our analysis. While this simplifies comparisons, accounting for trade value could
yield a more precise estimate as it may understate the influence of larger trades. Additionally, we
do not construct buy‑and‑hold abnormal returns (BHAR) matched on size, value and industry, as
done by Belmont et al. (2022), as this method requires a more extensive benchmark dataset and
more time and coding than that was feasible within the scope of this thesis. Finally, committee
alignment is based on static membership and broad sector classifications. The mapping is
approximate and we acknowledge that it is somewhat rough and that some sector-committee
links may be imprecise.

5. Empirical Results

5.1 General Congress Trading
In the first section, we aim to answer the first research question by estimating cumulative
average abnormal returns (CAARs) for all congressional trades, using the FF3 model as the
benchmark.

5.1.2 Event Study Summary Statistics

                                        11
Table 2: Summary statistics of CAARs in % across selected event windows for buy transactions
for the event study using FF3 as benchmark. Windows are defined relative to the transaction day
(t = 0).

Table 3: Summary statistics of CAARs in % across selected event windows for sale transactions
for the event study using FF3 as benchmark. Windows are defined relative to the transaction day
(t = 0).

Table 2 and 3 report the distributions of CAARs across the selected event windows. Both tables
show substantial spread, with large outliers for both buy and sale transactions. As expected, the
standard deviation declines as the event window shortens, but even the five-day window has a
span of around 300%. While the magnitudes of variation are similar for buy and sale
transactions, buy transactions exhibit slightly more extreme negative returns. For both buy and
sale transactions, mean and median CAARs are negative across most pre-event and post-event
windows, indicating that congressional trades do not consistently generate abnormal returns. We
retain outliers in the analysis to reflect the full range of outcomes from congressional trades. The
outliers may represent precisely the trades of greatest interest, instances where informational
advantage could have yielded extraordinary gains or loss avoidance. Removing them would
compress variance and risk obscuring instances of informed trading, motivating the committee,
sector, and crisis-level analyses that follow.

                                      12
5.1.3 Event Study Results

Figure 2: Plot of the CAARs in % for buy (red) transactions and sale (blue) transactions over a
±255 window relative to the transaction day, with the FF3 model as benchmark. The solid lines
show mean CAARs and dashed lines the 95% confidence band based on t-statistics.

Table 4: CAARs in % with corresponding t-statistics and p-values for buy and sale transactions
across selected event windows, using the FF3 model as benchmark. P-values smaller than
0.0001 have been reported as 0.

Figure 2 illustrates a steady downward trajectory in CAARs for both buy and sale transactions,
both before and after the transaction date. Table 4 quantifies this pattern. We observed that buy
trades are significantly negative at the 1% level in every window. The short-run effect is small,
with -0.11% in the [0, 5] window, but decreases to -4.19% in [0, 255]. This suggests that

                                      13
Congress members on average do not generate positive abnormal returns in their buy
transactions, and in fact underperform relative to the FF3 benchmark.

Sale transactions also show significantly negative CAARs at the 1% level across all event
windows. The effect increases over time, from -0.0048% in the short-term [0, 5] post-event
window to -3.91% in the long-term [0, 255] post-event window. This suggests that Congress
members on average timed their stock sales before continued price declines, avoiding losses.
However, the presence of significantly negative CAARs in the pre-sale windows, indicates that
they on average sold stocks that had already declined prior to the sale. This could reflect for
example partial loss avoidance rather than anticipatory trading. We are cautious to attribute the
loss avoidance to the advantage gained from insider information. Additionally, across all
windows, the CAARs for the buy transactions are more negative in magnitude than CAARs for
the sale transactions, which contradicts the idea that members of Congress outperform due to
their stock-picking abilities. Overall, the results in this section suggest systematic
underperformance in buy transactions and modest ability to avoid losses in sales transactions.

5.1.4 Comparison Between the Market-Adjusted Model and FF3 Model Event Study
Using the CRSP value-weighted index as benchmark, buy trades seem to earn small but
significant abnormal returns of 0.013% and 0.078% in the [0, 5] and [0, 255] post-event
windows (see Table A1). However, the CAARs for buy transactions has a pre-event increase,
indicating that most abnormal performance is realized prior to the buy trades (see Figure A1).
The CAARs for sale transactions are negative in long term post-sale windows [0, 128] and [0,
255] at -0.34% and -0.74%, but is only significant at the 10% level in the [0, 128] window.

Using the market-adjusted model, the buy trades outperform with small positive significant
values of abnormal return for certain event windows. However, under the FF3 model, buy
transactions statistically significantly underperform. Using both models, the sale transactions
seem to exhibit results of a downward trajectory of CAARs after the sale date over the long-run,
but these numbers are more negative and only statistically significant under FF3. The
calendar-time portfolio (see Table 5) confirms this, with market beta being slightly larger than 1
and significantly positive weights on SMB and HML for the equally weighted buy and sale
portfolios. As there is a contrast in results between the using the CRSP Value Weighted Index
and the FF3 model, using a simpler benchmark could misleadingly suggest buy trades beat the
market. The proceeding analyses are therefore made with the FF3 as a benchmark in order to
keep a more conservative approach.

                                      14
5.1.5 Calendar time portfolio

Table 5: Calendar-time portfolio for equal-weighted (EW) and trade-weighted (TW) portfolios
for buy, sale, and hedged (buy-sell). The portfolio returns are regressed on the FF3 factors.
Coefficients represent excess returns and factor loadings. Portfolios are formed monthly and
held for 12 months. Statistical significance is based on t-tests.

To complement the event study findings, we construct calendar-time portfolios for robustness.
The results in Table 5 show that none of the portfolios generate an alpha significantly different
from zero. Compared to the event study that found significantly negative CAARs for buy trades,
the calendar-time portfolio indicates no significant underperformance. For sales, the event study
CAARs suggested the ability to avoid losses. Although the equally-weighted sale portfolio in the
calendar-time portfolio shows a small negative alpha, it is not statistically significant. We
therefore interpret possible outperformance in sales with caution.

5.2 FF3 Model Event Study By Committee
To examine whether committee membership affects trading outcomes, we group trades by the
committee memberships to which the trading members belong. Table A2 shows that trading
activity is highest among members of the “Financial Services and Economic Development”
committee, with a wide margin, with over 6,000 buy and sale transactions respectively. Other
active committees include “Foreign Affairs and Homeland Security”, “Agriculture and Natural
Resources”, and “Energy, Commerce, and Infrastructure”.

Tables A3 and A4 report FF3 adjusted CAARs across committees, for purchases and sales
respectively. For buy transactions, most committees have significantly negative post-event
CAARs, aligning with previous analyses. “Foreign Affairs and Homeland Security” is the only
committee that stands out with a significantly positive CAAR of 1.36% in the [0, 255] window.
In the short term [0, 5] window, “Appropriations and Budget”, “Judiciary and Oversight”, and
“Science, Technology, and Infrastructure” have significant but economically negligible CAARs.
In the [0, 50] and [0, 128] windows however, all committees have significantly negative CAARs.

                                      15
For sale transactions, we observe that in the long run windows [0, 255] and [0, 128], all
committees show significantly negative CAARs (see Table A4), aligning with the previous
results of loss avoidance in sale trades. However, in the short- and medium run, a few
committees such as “Energy, Commerce and Transportation” and “Science, Technology, and
Infrastructure” have positive CAARs in the [0, 50] window, but revert after.

5.3 FF3 Model Event Study By Committee During Crisis
The limited committee-level effects in Section 5.2 motivates extending the analysis to when
private information may be more valuable, namely major crisis periods. In this section, we focus
on trades made during COVID-19 and the Russia-Ukraine invasion, as these may serve as a
natural test of informational advantage at the committee level.

Table 8: Number of buy and sale transactions by committee, divided by crisis period
(COVID-19, Russia-Ukraine invasion), The ‘Other’ category includes all trades occurring
outside the two defined crisis periods in this study.

From Table 8 it can be observed that the trade volume varies across both committees and
periods. Notably “Judiciary and Oversight” record only 30 and 13 trades for buy and sale
respectively. Such small sample sizes could inflate standard errors. Thus CAAR estimates for
these committees should be interpreted with caution.

                                      16
Table 9: CAARs in % for buy transactions by committees across defined periods (COVID, Invasion, and Other) for
selected event windows. Positive CAARs are bolded. Statistical significance based t-tests is denoted by: ***p<0.01,
**p<0.05, *p< 0.1.

                                      17
Table 10: CAARs in % for sale transactions by committees across defined periods (COVID, Invasion, and
Other) for selected event windows. Positive CAARs are bolded. Statistical significance based t-tests is
denoted by: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                      18
Table 9 shows that the most significant outperformance for buy transactions is observed for
“Foreign Affairs and Homeland Security”. For the Russia-Ukraine invasion period, the
post-event CAARs are positive and significant at the 1% level for all windows, with a 12.95%
CAAR in [0, 255]. In Table 10, we observe that for sale transactions, the post-event window
CAARs are significantly negative in all post-event windows during this period. Worth noting
however, is that the pre-event CAARs for buy trades are positive and significant, and that the
pre-event CAARs for sales are significantly negative, suggesting that although their trades
outperformed after transaction, they bought stocks that had already performed well and sold
stocks that had already declined. Moreover, we observe significantly positive CAARs for buy
transactions in the [0, 128] and [0, 255] windows during COVID-19. However, the sale
transactions show significantly positive CAARs in all windows, suggesting they did not time
their sales well during this period. In the “Other” period, the buy CAARs are slightly negative,
indicating that outperformance exists particularly during periods of crisis. Our hypothesis
regarding powerful committees included “Foreign Affairs”, “Intelligence”, “Homeland
Security”, specifically during the invasion, all of which are included in this committee category
(see Table A5).

The “Appropriations and Budget” committee also exhibits significant results in the
Russia-Ukraine invasion period. The post-event buy CAARs are significantly positive across all
windows, reaching 5.48% in the [0, 255] window. At the same time, the pre-buy windows show
significantly negative CAARs, strengthening the support of well-timed trades. On the other hand,
post-sale CAARs are significantly positive, suggesting they were poorly timed and missed out on
gains.

Overall, “Education, Labor, and Health” have negative CAARs for buy transactions in the
“Other” period. We observe significant and slightly positive CAARs for the COVID-19 period in
the post-event windows [0, 255] and [0, 50] of 0.27% and 0.36% respectively. Simultaneously
the CAARs for the pre-event windows [-255, 0] and [-50, 0] are significantly negative,
suggesting well-timed trades. For sale trades, almost all post event-windows show significantly
negative CAARs, indicating loss avoidance. Together, this provides moderate support to the
hypothesis of abnormal returns due to insider information for this particular committee during
COVID-19.

The “Agriculture and Natural Resources” committee shows a significantly positive CAAR for
buy transactions in the [0, 255] post-event window during COVID-19, alongside with a
significantly negative CAAR in the [-255, 0] pre-event window. However, the results are not
consistent across other event windows and do not exist outside of this period, limiting the
generalizability of these findings.

For the “Financial Services and Economic Development”, buy transactions during the
Russia-Ukraine invasion yield slightly positive and significant CAARs in the post-event
windows [0, 128] and [0, 255]. In the same period, sale trades show significantly negative
CAARs in the corresponding post-even windows, suggesting well-timed trades. No similar
outperformance is observed during other periods.

                                      19
The “Judiciary and Oversight” committee shows mixed results. During COVID-19 the CAARs
for buy trades are significantly positive in all post-event windows, and are significantly positive
in the [0, 50] and [0, 128] windows during the invasion period. However, sale transactions during
these periods also show significantly positive CAARs in all post-event windows, which may
indicate poor timing. Also, the results should be interpreted with caution since a number of
transactions for this committee are relatively small (see Table 8).

5.4 FF3 Model Event Study By Committee, Crisis Period, and Sector Alignment
Building on evidence that some committees earn abnormal returns during crisis periods, the
following analysis extends the analysis by including the variable Aligned. Specifically, we test
whether the abnormal returns observed are concentrated in trades involving stocks in industries
aligned with the committee’s oversight area during crises. Such findings could provide a more
targeted support for the presence of information-based trading, potentially indicative of insider
advantage. Given the large number of subgroup analyses, the results presented in this section are
focused on the results that stand out the most, with full details in Table A8 and Table A9 in
appendix. It is important to note that several statistically significant results are based on
relatively small sample sizes (Table A7), which could limit the robustness and generalizability of
some of the findings. Thus, results should be interpreted with some caution.

Table A8 shows that “Foreign Affairs and Homeland Security” yielded large positive and
statistically significant CAARs for aligned buy transactions during the Russia-Ukraine invasion,
most notably 35.64% over the [0, 255] window. As observed in Table A9, the CAARs following
their sales during the Russia-Ukraine invasion are nearly neutral, suggesting no evidence of
outperformance. Aligned buys in this committee category also exhibit significant CAARs during
COVID-19, but are smaller in magnitude. In contrast, aligned sale transactions during
COVID-19 showed positive CAARs after sales, suggesting poor timing and missed gains.

“Agriculture and Natural Resources” achieved significantly positive CAARs for aligned buy
transactions during COVID-19, outperforming the non-aligned trades during this period.
Furthermore, aligned sales during COVID-19 yield significantly negative CAAR for the [0, 255]
period, suggesting outperformance of sales in the long term. However, this pattern does not hold
during the Russia-Ukraine invasion, where aligned buy transactions exhibit even larger
underperformance than non-aligned buy transactions.

“Education, Labor, and Health” exhibit large and significantly positive CAARs for both aligned
buy and sale transactions during the Russia-Ukraine invasion, making it difficult to draw
conclusions about the timing or informational advantages of these trades. During the COVID-19
period, this committee also showed no evidence of outperformance in aligned buy transactions.
However, aligned sale transactions during this period are followed by significantly negative
CAARs in the [0, 128] and [0, 255] windows. This could suggest that members calculatedly sold
stocks ahead of market decline.

                                      20
5.5 Event Study on Disclosures
This section presents the results from the event study on the disclosure dates, aiming to assess
abnormal returns around disclosures and address research question five.

Table 14: CARs in % selected event windows for buy disclosures. The dependent variable is
regressed on variables for Nancy Pelosi, Senate membership, and their interactions with a
post-2020 dummy. Year fixed effects are included and standard errors are clustered on a member
level.

Table 15: CARs in % selected event windows for sale disclosures. The dependent variable is
regressed on variables for Nancy Pelosi, Senate membership, and their interactions with a
post-2020 dummy. Year fixed effects are included and standard errors are clustered on a member
level.

Tables 14 and 15 show the estimated CARs around disclosure dates for buy and sale disclosures,
distinguishing post-2020 effects for Nancy Pelosi and Senate members. For buy disclosures, the
post-2020 and Senate interaction remains insignificant except for a small positive significant
value of 0.51% for the [0, 5] window. For sale disclosures, the Senate shows no significant
results for any period.

                                      21
For buy disclosures, the Nancy dummy is negative for all windows and significant in multiple
windows, whereas the Senate variable is insignificant for the majority of windows. The
interaction term for post-2020 and Pelosi is positive and significant in all post-event windows.
We also observe a potential pattern of reaction of the event as most pre-event windows are
significantly negative and post-event windows are positive and significant, suggesting a shift in
market perception. However, her post-2020 sale disclosures also yield positive CARs in all
windows, and also growing in magnitude in the post-event windows [0,1] to [0, 10]. For sales
disclosures, the Nancy dummy has significantly negative CARs in some post-event windows.

6. Discussion
In this thesis, our aim was to investigate whether members of the U.S. Congress earned abnormal
returns on their stock trades, and to identify specific conditions under which such returns may
occur. This includes committee assignment, crisis periods, and trading in related industries. We
also examined how the market reacts to the disclosure of these transactions, regarding the stock
prices, and the viability of strategies that mimic these trades.

6.1 General Congress Trading
Our event study and portfolio analysis show no evidence that members of Congress on an
aggregate level earn abnormal returns on their buy transactions, meaning that the null hypothesis
for research question 1 cannot be rejected for buy transactions. Results for buy transactions show
significant underperformance with the FF3 benchmark, while using the market-adjusted model
show weak evidence of abnormal returns, suggesting that the latter model may misattribute
factor exposure as alpha, overstating abnormal performance. This aligns with Fama and French
(1993) who argue that failing to control for systematic risk factors such as size and
book-to-market can lead to biased results about abnormal returns. This suggests that
congressional buy transactions may be tilted toward small-cap and value stocks, which is indeed
confirmed in the calendar time portfolio. The findings for buy trades align with Eggers and
Hainmueller (2013) and Belmont et al. (2022), who found no evidence of informed trading in
buy trades. They even found that buy trades underperformed benchmarks, suggesting that any
unusual positive trading performance is limited to a few members. Our results contradict the
results of Ziobrowski et al. (2004) who found evidence of positive abnormal returns using data
from the pre-STOCK Act period. An explanation of this could be that the STOCK Act has
reduced the willingness to act on insider information amongst the members of Congress, as our
results are similar to Belmont et al. (2022) who also use a dataset from the post-STOCK Act
period.

The results for sale transactions are more consistent for the both benchmarks in the event study,
strengthening evidence that members of Congress are able to avoid subsequent losses, potentially
reflecting informed trading. These findings align with Cherry, Heitz and Jens (2017), who found
that congressional outperformance is realized in sales rather than buys. However, results from
both benchmarks show that members of Congress tend to dispose of their holdings after the stock
return has already started to decline, potentially reflecting that they react to the trend rather than

                                      22
being informed. This could be due to for example loss aversion and the asymmetry of risk
preferences explained by behavioral biases (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979; Odean, 1998). Sale
transactions are apart from anticipated decline in performance, also driven by non-informational
motives such as liquidity needs, tax reasons, or portfolio rebalancing (Beneish and Vargus,
2002). Additionally, the calendar-time portfolio does not show statistically significant negative
alphas for the sale portfolios, weakening the support for outperformance in sale trades. Overall,
these results show no broad outperformance, with some, but inconsistent results that sale trades
outperform.

6.2 Committee Level Analysis
We further examined whether abnormal returns were concentrated in certain committees. We
find limited evidence that committee membership alone yields consistent abnormal returns.
Among all categories, only “Foreign Affairs and Homeland Security” shows significant
outperformance for buy transactions in the long run. In contrast, some committees deemed as
powerful by literature, did not show consistent or significant abnormal returns. For example, the
“Financial Services and Economic Development” committees showed significant
underperformance in all periods, contradicting with the Hall et al. (2017) who found that
Finance, Financial Services, Banking, and Ways and Means committees, which we categorized
as “Financial Services and Economic Development” (see Table A5), outperformed the most.
While this may indicate changing power over time, particularly since they used data from before
the STOCK Act, it also raises questions about whether informational advantage is contingent on
specific policy relevance of committees during certain time periods. When examining the results
for sale transactions, we find that many committees are able to avoid subsequent losses. Taken
together, these mixed results suggest that committee membership alone does not guarantee
informational advantage. Based on these results, we find weak support for the second research
question.

6.3 Crisis Periods
The findings in the subsequent analysis suggest that abnormal returns are more pronounced when
conditioning on crisis periods, partly supporting the third research question. Interestingly, we
find that the abnormal returns for buy transactions do not come from simply serving on the
“Foreign Affairs and Homeland Security” as the results in the previous sections suggests. The
results in this section indicates that those returns only exist during the defined crisis periods.
Another finding is that committees that did not outperform generally generated significant
abnormal returns during crisis periods. For instance, “Agriculture and Natural Resources”,
exhibited significant abnormal returns following buy transactions during COVID. These findings
suggest that it may not be committee membership per se, but the occurrence of high-impact
events where informational advantage from relevant committees pays off.

6.4 Sector Alignment
Incorporating sector alignment provides further insight to these findings. We find that some
abnormal returns during crises are concentrated in stocks aligned with the committee’s oversight.

                                      23
For instance, “Foreign Affairs and Homeland Security” showed large positive CAARs during the
Russia-Ukraine invasion for aligned buy trades compared to returns for non-aligned trades. This
includes sectors such as Industrials (see Table A6), which in turn includes defense stocks.
Foreign Affairs oversees arms exports and foreign military assistance, while Homeland Security
is responsible for national security and emergency preparedness. Given these roles, members
may have had early access to relevant policy developments, potentially informing their trades
during the Russia–Ukraine invasion. Similarly, “Agriculture and Natural Resources” exhibited
notable positive CAARs during COVID-aligned buy trades compared to non-aligned trades.
These results partly contradict Belmont et al. (2022), who found no significant outperformance
for the Congress overall when including a dummy for aligned sector. In contrast, our findings
suggest that when alignment is examined at the committee level and within specific crisis
periods, some evidence of abnormal return emerges. This indicates that informational advantages
may exist in more targeted contexts, even effects are not visible at the aggregate level.

However, we emphasize caution when interpreting these findings due to the limited sample sizes
for several committee–crisis–alignment combinations. For some committees in this analysis,
there is limited sample size of these aligned transactions which limits the statistical power and
robustness, raising a possibility that some observed effects are driven by noise. In some cases,
notably large CAARs such as Special and Select Committees' aligned COVID trades, 72.7%,
originate from small trade counts based on fewer than 10 trades (see Table A7). The inherent low
statistical power of these subgroups significantly raises the risk that these observed abnormal
returns represent statistical noise rather than genuine informational advantages.

6.5 Mimicking
Lastly, we examined abnormal returns around the disclosure date of trades. Overall, we find no
significant systematic market reaction to disclosures. These results differ from the results from
the study by Abdurakhmonov et al. (2023), who reported positive abnormal returns following the
disclosures of purchases using data from 2012-2020. In our results, Nancy Pelosi’s post-2020
disclosures of buy transactions stand out as they are followed by significantly positive abnormal
returns, suggesting that markets may perceive her trades as informative. This aligns with
increased public attention and the rise of platforms tracking her trades, likely prompting
mimicking behavior among retail investors. However, her sale disclosures also yield positive
abnormal returns, implying that the market does not interpret them as signals of negative
information. Abdurakhmonov et al. (2023) did not find significant effects following sales
disclosures and concluded that the market possibly viewed these as less informative. In our case,
the market could view the sales trades of Pelosi in a similar fashion, that they are not as
informative as her buy trades. An explanation to why the stocks she sells seem to return positive
abnormal returns after she sells them could be due to mere attention to the stocks and to her.
Retail investors might see the disclosures of her trades and buy the stocks regardless of the
direction the trades of Nancy Pelosi takes.

From a strategy perspective, our results suggest that a mimicking strategy following
congressional stock disclosures does not necessarily generate abnormal returns. Moreover, our

                                      24
analysis is constrained by short event windows and a limited number of disclosed trades for
Nancy Pelosi, warranting cautious interpretation.

6.6 Implications
This specific outperformance suggests that while the Congress as a whole does not beat the
market in their buy trades, certain groups or individuals seem to be exploiting informational
advantages under certain conditions. Together, our results suggest that the market inefficiencies
found two decades ago by Ziobrowski et al. (2004) are more narrow and no longer broad-based.
The fact that we still observe outperformance in specific sectors and in crises suggests that
informational advantages have not been fully eliminated after the STOCK Act. Also, it could be
argued that the pockets of outperformance, such as those that we identified, are enough to cause
cynicism and controversies around the legality of Congress trades and principal-agent conflicts.
This lends support to calls for even stricter regulation around trading for Congress members.

6.7 Limitations
While we document correlations between committee membership and trading performance, we
cannot establish a clear causal link. It is possible that more financially sophisticated members
self-select into certain committees. Our event study design attempted to isolate causal effects by
examining exogenous events such as COVID-19 and the Russia-Ukraine invasion, which
strengthen a causal interpretation in those scenarios. We also assume that the periods 2020, and
January-June 2022 are the crisis periods. However, in these periods there could have been other
confounding market moving-events such as Fed rate hikes in early 2022. These factors were not
explicitly controlled for, which may affect the interpretation of crisis-related results. Another
limitation is the high share of statistically significant CAARs, including in small subgroups. The
use of standard t-tests without accounting for serial correlation or cross-sectional dependence can
be a limitation of event studies with overlapping windows, which may lead to underestimated
standard errors. Methods such as Newey-West standard errors, clustering, or bootstrapping could
improve inference in future research. As such, while some patterns are suggestive, their
statistical robustness should be interpreted with caution. Moreover, the FF3 model was used for
the analyses. Omitting additional risk factors such as momentum and profitability could have left
residual risk in the abnormal returns. Incorporating a five-factor model or Carhart four factor
model would provide more robust benchmarks.

7. Conclusion
This thesis aimed to analyse whether Congress member trades generate abnormal returns using
Congress transaction data from 2012-2024. Using an event study framework as our main
methodology, complemented by calendar-time portfolio regressions and several sub-analyses, we
assess the presence, timing, and sources of potential informational advantage. We find no
consistent evidence that congressional trades beat the market in trades on an aggregate level after
adjusting for risk using the FF3 model. This aligns with recent post-STOCK Act research
suggesting that regulatory reforms may have reduced systematic insider trading. While we find

                                      25
some evidence of outperformance in sale transactions, particularly in avoiding post-sale losses,
these results are not significant in the calendar-time portfolio analysis, indicating limited
robustness. However, our sub-analyses reveal instances of abnormal returns under more narrowly
defined conditions. We find significant outperformance among a few committees during crisis
periods such as COVID-19 and the Russia-Ukraine invasions, as well as some evidence that
aligned stocks outperform during these periods. This suggests that abnormal returns and
informational advantages are not widespread, but rather event-driven and concentrated in certain
committees with relevant oversight. These findings contribute to literature by refining the
understanding of when and where potential insider trading risks may be concentrated. While our
results indicate that regulatory efforts like the STOCK Act may have reduced broad insider
trading, gaps remain, particularly during periods of heightened policy relevance. This has
important implications for the debate about the sufficiency of current legislation and the ethical
concerns surrounding congressional trading.

7.1 Future research
Given the public concern over potential insider trading in Congress and the limited academic
consensus on the issue, future research in this area is timely and important. Future studies could
further explore the mechanisms of political informational advantage. Firstly, the measurement of
political influence could be expanded to further clarify whether greater institutional power
translates into insider trading. Committee dummies could be complemented or replaced with
variables for hierarchical power, chairs, ranking members, or party leaders. Furthermore, given
our findings that abnormal returns appear around crisis events, it would be interesting to
investigate a wider set of periods or events such as financial crises, elections, roll-call votes, or
major legislative announcements. Finally, future research could expand on the scope of financial
instruments. We limited the analysis to common stock transactions, yet some Congress members
frequently trade options and other derivatives. Including these could offer a more complete view
of how potential insider advantages may be leveraged.

                                      26
References

Abdurakhmonov, M., Snider, R. E., Ridge, J. W., & Hasija, D. (2023). Perceptions of political
self-dealing? An empirical investigation of market returns surrounding the disclosure of
politician stock purchases. Strategic Management Journal, 44(5), 1168–1198
https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.3459

Belmont, W., Sacerdote, B., Sehgal, R., & Van Hoek, I. (2022). Do senators and house members
beat the stock market? Evidence from the STOCK Act. Journal of Public Economics, 207,
104602. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2022.104602

Beneish, M. D., & Vargus, M. E. (2002). Insider trading, earnings quality, and accrual
mispricing. The Accounting Review, 77(4), 755–791. https://doi.org/10.2308/accr.2002.77.4.755

Cherry, I., Heitz, A., & Jens, C. (2017, July 10). Change in Capitol: How a 60 Minutes exposé
and the STOCK Act affected the investment activity of U.S. Senators. SSRN.
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2905309

Eggers, A. C., & Hainmueller, J. (2013). Capitol losses: The mediocre performance of
congressional stock portfolios, 2004-2008. The Journal of Politics, 75(2), 535-551.

Fama, E. F., & French, K. R. (1993). Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds.
Journal of Financial Economics, 33(1), 3–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-405x(93)90023-5

Faturechi, R., & Willis, D. (2020, March 19). Senator Dumped up to $1.7 Million of Stock after
Reassuring Public about Coronavirus Preparedness. ProPublica. Retrieved from:
https://www.propublica.org/article/senator-dumped-up-to-1-7-million-of-stock-after-reassuring-p
ublic-about-coronavirus-preparedness

French, K. R. (n.d.). Data library. Dartmouth College. Retrieved from
https://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html

Hall, J. C., Karadas, S., & Schlosky, M. T. T. (2017). Abnormal returns from joining Congress?
Evidence from new members. Journal of Financial Economic Policy, 9(4), 450–474.
https://doi.org/10.1108/jfep-12-2016-0095

Hayes, A. (2025, April 16). STOCK Act: Meaning, Overview, Criticisms. Investopedia. Retrieved
from: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/stop-trading-on-congressional-knowledge-act.asp

Jensen, M. C., & Meckling, W. H. (1976). Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs
and ownership structure. Journal of Financial Economics, 3(4), 305–360.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-405X(76)90026-X

                                      27
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk.
Econometrica, 47(2), 263. https://doi.org/10.2307/1914185

Kelly, K., Playford, A., & Parlapiano, A. (2022, September 13). Stock trades reported by nearly a
fifth of Congress show possible conflicts. The New York Times. Retrieved from:
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2022/09/13/us/politics/congress-stock-trading-investigation
.html

Lane, S. (2020, March 20). Four senators sold stocks before coronavirus threat crashed market.
The Hill. Retrieved from:
https://thehill.com/homenews/senate/488593-four-senators-sold-stocks-before-coronavirus-threat
-crashed-market/

Levinthal, D. (2021, December 17). 'Conflicted Congress': Key findings from Insider's
five-month investigation into federal lawmakers' personal finances. Business Insider. Retrieved
from:
https://www.businessinsider.com/conflicted-congress-key-findings-stock-act-finances-investing-
2021-12

Odean, T. (1998). Are investors reluctant to realize their losses? The Journal of Finance, 53(5),
1775–1798. https://doi.org/10.1111/0022-1082.00072

Palmer, B. (2022, November 22). Understanding information cascades in financial markets.
Investopedia. Retrieved from:
https://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/052715/guide-understanding-information-casca
des.asp

Quiver Quantitative. (n.d.). Nancy Pelosi trading activity. Retrieved from
https://www.quiverquant.com/congresstrading/politician/Nancy%20Pelosi-P000197

Swope, P. (2022, May 26). War for Profit: The Problematic Ties between Congresspeople and
the Defense Industry - Brown Political Review. Brown Political Review. Retrieved from:
https://brownpoliticalreview.org/war-for-profit-the-problematic-ties-between-congresspeople-and
-the-defense-industry/

Ziobrowski, A. J., Boyd, J. W., Cheng, P., & Ziobrowski, B. J. (2004). Abnormal returns from
the common stock investments of the U.S. Senate. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis, 39(4), 661–676. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0022109000003161

Ziobrowski, A. J., Boyd, J. W., Cheng, P., & Ziobrowski, B. J. (2011). Abnormal returns from
the common stock investments of members of the U.S. House of Representatives. Business and
Politics, 13(1), 1–22. https://doi.org/10.2202/1469-3569.1308

                                      28
AI Appendix
ChatGPT-4 has been used for spell checking and improving grammar in the text, structure, and
rephrasing. Additionally, it has assisted in the data preparation and cleaning process. It has also
helped us in the coding process and helped with errors encountered.

Appendix

Figure A1: Plot of the CAARs in % for buy (red) transactions and sale (blue) transactions over a
±255 window relative to the transaction day, with the market-adjusted model as benchmark. The
solid lines show mean CAARs and dashed lines the 95% confidence band based on t-statistics.

                                      29
Table A1: CAARs in % with corresponding t-statistics and p-values for buy and sale transactions
across selected event windows, using the market-adjusted model as benchmark. P-values smaller
than 0.0001 have been reported as 0.

Table A2: The number of trades associated with each congressional committee. Note: some
members of Congress are part of several committees, so individual trades are counted for each
relevant committee. Therefore, the total trade countries in this table exceed the number of unique
trades in the dataset.

                                      30
Table A3: CAAR in % for buy transactions, grouped by congressional committee membership,
across selected event windows using FF3 as benchmark. Statistical significance is based on
t-tests.

Table A4: CAAR in % for sale transactions, grouped by congressional committee membership,
across selected event windows using FF3 as benchmark. Statistical significance is based on
t-tests.

                                      31
Table A5: Broad committee categories used in the analysis and their corresponding
subcommittees grouped under each category. These groupings were manually consolidated to
improve interpretability

                                      32
Table A6: Mapping between congressional committees and the industry sectors (gsector)
deemed relevant to their policy oversight. The alignment was constructed manually based on the
expected scope of each committee’s jurisdiction.

                                      33
Table A7: The number of buy and sale transactions conducted by members of each congressional
committee during the COVID-19 pandemic, the Russia–Ukraine invasion period, and all other
periods. Trades are further categorized by whether the traded stock's sector aligns with the
committee’s oversight responsibilities ("Aligned" = Yes).

                                      34
35
Table A8: CAARs in % for buy transactions grouped by congressional committee, crisis period
(COVID-19, Russia–Ukraine invasion, and Other), and whether the traded stock aligns with the
committee’s oversight area. CAARs are presented for selected event windows. Positive CAARs are bolded.
Statistical significance based t-tests is denoted by: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                      36
37
Table A9: CAARs in % for sale transactions grouped by congressional committee, crisis period
(COVID-19, Russia–Ukraine invasion, and Other), and whether the traded stock aligns with the
committee’s oversight area. CAARs are presented for selected event windows. Positive CAARs are bolded.
Statistical significance based t-tests is denoted by: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                      38