PAYOUT CHOICES

A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF THE IMPACT OF SHARE
REPURCHASE AND DIVIDEND INCREASE ANNOUNCEMENTS
ON ABNORMAL RETURNS IN SWEDEN

OSCAR NYMAN

TOM SÖDERSTRÖM

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2025
Payout Choices:  A Comparative Study of  the Impact of Share Repurchase and
Dividend Increase Announcements on Abnormal Returns in Sweden

Abstract:

   This thesis uses a dataset of dividend increase announcements and share repurchase
   announcements in Sweden between 2000 and 2019 to investigate their comparative
   impact on short-term market reactions by estimating cumulative abnormal return
   over short-run  event windows and long-term stock performance by calculating buy-
   and-hold abnormal returns over longer horizons. Our findings show that firms
   announcing dividend increases exhibit stronger and more significant average short-
   term cumulative abnormal returns  in windows around the announcement compared
   to firms announcing buybacks. In our buy-and-hold abnormal return analysis, we
   find both announcement types to show significant and in similar magnitude abnormal
   returns in the long-term windows following the announcement. This finding suggests
   an initial market underreaction for both types of announcements, especially
   buybacks, with a gradual incorporation into stock prices over time. Further, using a
   panel data regression with fixed effects for firms and time,  we find leverage, assets,
   and valuation at the time of announcement to be firm characteristics that strongly
   relate to long-run abnormal returns for both announcement types.

Keywords:

   Payout policy,  Signalling, Share  repurchase,  Dividend increase,  Announcements,
  Abnormal returns

Authors:

   Oscar Nyman  (25802)
   Tom Söderström  (25824)

Tutor:

   Michał  Dzieliński,  Assistant  Professor,  visiting from  Stockholm University

Examiner:

   Ramin Baghai, Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in  Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Oscar Nyman and Tom Söderström, 2025

                                   1
   Introduction
    Corporate payout policy is a cornerstone of financial decision-making, encom-
passing the ways in which firms choose to return excess cash to their shareholders.
In theory, under the assumption of perfect capital market conditions, a firm’s
choice of payout policy has no effect on its valuation (Miller and Modigliani,
1961). The theory implies that share repurchases and dividends are perfect sub-
stitutes and that neither affect shareholder value, which is dependent solely on
investment decisions and cash flow generation of firms. However, markets in the
real world deviate from these idealised conditions, making firms’ payout choices
economically meaningful.
    Historically, dividends have been the primary payout method for companies,
both in Sweden and internationally, reflecting a longstanding expectation of regu-
lar income for shareholders. However, since March 2000, when share repurchases
were legalised in Sweden, firms gained a new tool for distributing cash to investors.
Following this regulatory change, share repurchases have grown steadily in pop-
ularity and become a complement to dividends in Swedish capital markets. The
introduction of share repurchases marked a fundamental shift in corporate payout
policy in Sweden. Before the legalisation, firms that had surplus cash beyond
their investment needs were limited to retaining earnings or issuing extra, special
dividends. The choice of repurchasing shares changed firms’ payout strategies and
aligned Sweden with international trends. For example, in the United States, share
repurchases had increased substantially since the 1980s, gradually substituting
dividends (Grullon and Michaely, 2002). By the 21st century, share repurchases
surpassed dividends as the dominant form of payout in the U.S. (Skinner, 2008).
The Swedish legalisation of share repurchases thus creates a natural starting point
for our empirical analysis, a market which moved from firms having a single dom-
inant payout method to two viable options. Studying this transition gives insights
into how firms’ payout choices influence shareholder value in a relatively young
buyback market.
    According to signalling theory, firms that increase dividends do so to credi-
bly signal sustainable and strong future earnings (Bhattacharya, 1979; Miller and
Rock, 1985), while firms initiate share repurchase programs to signal stock un-
dervaluation (Vermaelen, 1981). Further, agency theory suggests that returning
free cash flow to shareholders, regardless of payout method, mitigates agency is-
sues by reducing funds under managerial discretion (Jensen, 1986; Easterbrook,
1984). However, the credibility and informational content of the signals differ, as
dividends are a long-term commitment to higher payouts, while share repurchases
can vary and offer more flexibility (Jagannathan, Stephens, and Weisbach, 2000).

                                2
Expanding on these theories, Allen, Bernardo, and Welch (2000) propose that div-
idends attract favourable investor clientele, particularly tax-exempt institutional
investors, that can improve firm oversight and governance.
    However, despite the theoretical appeal, evidence from practice shows doubts
in how close these theories match actual managerial thinking. Brav, Graham,
Harvey, and Michaely (2004) find little support for signalling, agency, or clientele
theories as conscious drivers of payout decisions. Managers instead report that
dividends are maintained to meet investor expectations and avoid negative market
reactions, while share repurchases are used opportunistically for their flexibility,
stock price support, and earnings-per-share management. Thus, the question of
how investors interpret the two forms of payouts remains open, as well as whether
short-term and long-term reactions between them differ. Given this context, the
central research question of this thesis is:

   How do share repurchase announcements and dividend increase announce-
ments compare in their effects on short-term and long-term shareholder value in
Sweden?

    This question is further divided into three sub-questions:
   Q1: How do short-term market reactions and abnormal returns compare
between share repurchases and dividend increase announcements?

   Q2: How do long-term abnormal returns compare following share repurchase
announcements and dividend increase announcements?

   Q3: How do firm characteristics and announcement variables influence the
long-term abnormal returns following payout announcements?

    The aim of this thesis is to contribute to existing studies with new empirical
evidence on the effects of corporate payout policy by examining how dividend
increase announcements and share repurchase announcements affect shareholder
value in the Swedish market. Sweden presents a particularly interesting setting for
this analysis due to its institutional setting, with concentrated ownership, strong
governance structure, and distinct tax treatments.
    This thesis makes three key contributions to existing literature. First, we
conduct a direct empirical comparison of dividend increase announcements and
share repurchase announcements using a consistent methodology and time period.
While most prior studies examine one payout type in isolation, this approach

                                3
allows us to assess the relative credibility, strength, and investor interpretation
of each payout announcement. Second, we link short-term effects with long-
term stock performance by analysing both cumulative abnormal returns (CARs)
in short, symmetrical windows around the announcement dates and buy-and-hold
abnormal returns (BHARs) over extended periods following the announcements.
By examining both, we are able to see if the initial reaction to the announcements
reflects lasting firm value or whether the information is gradually incorporated
into the stock prices. Third, explore how firm-specific characteristics influence
the long-run abnormal returns following the announcements, providing insights
into what types of firms benefit from which type of payout announcement type.
Collectively, these contributions aim to improve the understanding of how investors
react to different announcements of corporate payout policy in the Swedish market.
    Our findings reveal several notable patterns in how Swedish investors respond
to the different forms of payout announcements. We observe a more immediate and
significantly stronger market reaction to dividend increase announcements in com-
parison to share repurchase announcements. This pattern diverges from previous
evidence in more mature buyback markets, where share repurchase announcements
exhibit stronger and more statistically significant short-term announcement returns.
While in the short term, the market favours dividend increase announcements, our
long-term study shows statistically significant and very similar abnormal returns
for both payout announcement types across all observed horizons. This would
suggest an initial underreaction from the market for both payout types, especially
for buybacks, and a gradual incorporation of the information in the stock price
over time. Finally, our panel data regression analysis shows that firm characteris-
tics such as leverage, assets, and price-to-book ratio influence long-term abnormal
returns following payout announcements. Together, our findings indicate that divi-
dend increases have a stronger short-term signalling value in Sweden, and although
share repurchases are initially met with muted reactions, they offer comparable
and even slightly higher long-run abnormal returns.

             I. Theoretical Framework and Literature Review

    Payout policy has been extensively studied in finance theory, resulting in multi-
ple frameworks to understand how share repurchases and dividends influence firm
and shareholder value. Miller and Modigliani (1961) famously argue that under
perfect capital market conditions, absent of taxes, transaction costs, and informa-
tion asymmetry, a firm’s payout policy is irrelevant to its valuation. According

                                4
to this dividend irrelevance theory, shareholder value is solely determined by the
firm’s investment policy and cash flow generation and not by how earnings are
distributed. Investors who desire cash can replicate dividend payments by selling
a portion of their shares, making the payout choice of the firm irrelevant to their
overall wealth. This provides a baseline that any impact of payout policy on firm
value must stem from market frictions or imperfections.
   Information asymmetry does exist in reality, as management often possess
information about firm prospects that outside investors do not. Signalling theory
suggests that payout decisions can convey some of this private information to the
market. Lintner (1956) provides early support for this view and documents a high
reluctance from firms to cut dividends and only increase them after confirming that
earnings improvements are sustainable. Building on this, Bhattacharya (1979) and
Miller and Rock (1985) present models in which management commits to paying
higher dividends to signal confidence in future earnings. Maintaining dividends is
costly, and firms that are not able to sustain an increase will face market penalties.
Therefore, only firms with strong and stable cash flows can afford to send this
signal. An announced increase in dividends is thus interpreted as management’s
indication of robust future performance. Similarly, share repurchases can also serve
as signals under asymmetric information. Vermaelen (1981) formalises the idea
that open-market share repurchase announcements signal management’s belief of
stock undervaluation. Insiders, who possess superior information about the firm’s
actual value, are incentivised to repurchase shares when the stock is temporarily
undervalued. Therefore, under signalling theory, both dividend increases and
share repurchase announcements should cause positive market reactions, as the
information is incorporated into the stock price.
    Another set of theories focuses on agency conflicts between management and
shareholders. Separation of ownership and control can lead to managers not al-
ways acting in the best interest of the shareholder, especially if the firm generates
substantial free cash flow. Jensen (1986) introduced the free cash flow hypothesis,
arguing that in firms that generate cash in excess of their profitable investment op-
portunities, managers may engage in value-destroying behaviours. Management
could be tempted to invest in inefficient projects or spend on perks rather than
returning cash to shareholders. In this context, payouts play a crucial governance
role, as distributing excess cash to shareholders through dividend increases or
share repurchases can mitigate agency problems by reducing the resources under
managerial control. While signalling and agency theories dominate traditional
views on payout policy, a more recent perspective offers alternative motivations.
Allen et al. (2000) develop a model based on tax clientele effects, where dividend

                                5
payments attract tax-exempt institutional investors that enhance firm value through
effective monitoring. Firms of high quality use dividends to signal their type and
then benefit from the superior governance that institutions provide. Their model
also explains that firms smooth dividends over time to maintain this investor clien-
tele. They argue that share repurchases are less efficient in attracting institutional
investors as they lack the same regularity and commitment.
    Survey evidence from Brav et al. (2005), however, challenges how these theo-
retical motives reflect corporate behaviour. Based on responses from 384 CFOs in
the United States, they find that the primary reasons for dividends being maintained
are to meet investors’ expectations and avoid negative market reactions. They find
share repurchases to be used for other reasons, such as improving earnings-per-
share or responding to stock undervaluation. However, they find that if firms were
free of the constraint of their historical dividend payout policy, most would substi-
tute dividends for share repurchases. The lack of support for signalling, agency, or
clientele theories in practice highlights a gap between academic theory and actual
intentions of managers.
    As share repurchases have gained popularity, questions have arised regarding
whether they serve as substitutes to dividends. The substitution hypothesis posits
that firms may prefer share repurchases over dividends due to flexibility and tax
advantages. Grullon and Michaely (2002) analyse the rise of share repurchases in
the United States and find evidence of substitution driven by taxes. Expenditures on
share repurchases increased at an average annual rate of 26.1 percent between 1980
and 2000, while dividends increased by 6.8 percent. They find that many firms
did not necessarily cut existing dividends but rather used cash previously allocated
for dividend increases for share repurchases. Further, they find that investors treat
the two as substitutes, as firms that announced dividend cuts but simultaneously
repurchased shares experience little negative market reactions. Skinner (2008)
documents that by the 2000s, share repurchases had overtaken dividends as the
dominant form of payout in the United States, consistent with the substitution
hypothesis.
    Consistent with the signalling hypothesis, empirical research agrees that both
types of announcements, dividend increases and share repurchases, result in pos-
itive abnormal returns around the event. Peyer and Vermaelen (2009) report
that open-market share repurchase announcements see significant average CAR
of +2.39% in the three-day window around the announcement. An international
study by Manconi, Peyer, and Vermaelen (2019) finds that buyback announcements
outside of the United States see average significant positive abnormal returns of
1.42%. Grullon, Michaely, and Swaminathan (2002) find an average abnormal

                                6
return of 1.34% for dividend increase announcements in the same three-day win-
dow, and in another study, Grullon and Michaely (2004) find an average abnormal
return of 2.71% for share repurchase announcement in the same window.
   Guay and Harford (2000) provide one of the few studies directly comparing
the signalling roles of dividend increases and share repurchases, with the main
focus being cash flow implications. They find dividend increases to be associated
with permanent operating cash flow improvements, while share repurchases are
linked to transitory cash flow shocks. Moreover, their findings on stock returns
in a ten-day window around announcements show an average of 2.3% for share
repurchases and 1.19% around substantial dividend increases. The characteristics
of the payout and the firm are also analysed in their impact on the short-term returns,
showing more positive market reactions for firms with higher cash holdings and
lower market-to-book ratios.
    In addition to short-term effects, researchers have explored whether these pay-
out choices lead to any long-run abnormal returns for shareholders. Ikenberry,
Lakonishok, and Vermaelen (1995) find that share repurchases announced in the
period 1980-1985 saw average buy-and-hold abnormal returns of 16.02% in year
three, with a decreasing value of 14.55% in year four. The effects were smaller for
announcements in the following period, 1986-1990, where averages were 9.21%
in year three and 10.24% in year four. Further, they find that high book-to-market
firms experienced 45.3% buy-and-hold abnormal returns on average. Similarly,
Manconi et al. (2019) find that firms outside of the United States experience
abnormal returns between 21% and 32% over four years following share repur-
chase announcements. For dividends, Benartzi, Michaely, and Thaler (1997) find
that firms that increase dividends show strong past earnings growth but did not
experience superior earnings growth in subsequent years but did see significant
buy-and-hold abnormal returns of 8.0% on average in the three years after the an-
nouncements. Grullon et al. (2002) similarly find that dividend-increasing firms
tend to mature, with declining growth and investments, but that such firms exhibit
average three-year buy-and-hold abnormal returns of 17.44%.
    While the past empirical studies mentioned look at different samples and time
periods, their findings show positive short-term and long-term abnormal returns
for both share repurchase announcements and dividend increase announcements.
In the studies, buyback announcements have been found to produce greater ab-
normal returns on average, both with initial market reactions and long-term drifts,
when compared to dividend increases, which would indicate that its undervalua-
tion signal is perceived stronger than the signal of sustainable future earnings of
dividend increases.

                                7
                      II. Data and Sample Selection

    A. Data Sources and limitations

    Our empirical analysis is based on data from two main sources: S&P Capital
IQ and the Swedish House of Finance (SHoF) Research Data Center. These
databases collectively provide the necessary event data, firm financials, stock
prices, and factor returns.
   Capital IQ is the primary source for announcement data for firms on the
Stockholm Stock Exchange. For share repurchases, the database is used to obtain
information on announcement dates, the percentage of shares sought, and the
total number of shares sought in the program. For dividends, announcement dates,
dividend yields, and the announced increases are obtained. Moreover, the database
is also used to collect the firm-level financial data used as explanatory variables in
the panel data regression.
   Stock prices are obtained from SHoF’s database FinBas. We have extracted
daily stock prices, adjusted for corporate actions, of listed firms on the Stockholm
Stock Exchange from the time period 1999 to the latest available 2023 in order
to have data early enough for the estimation window for short-term expected
return calculations and late enough for the long-term abnormal return calculations.
Further, SHoF provides Fama-French (1993) factor returns for Swedish stocks.
We have extracted Fama-French three-factor data used for estimations of expected
returns for our short-term event study. Market return data for our market model
estimations is also extracted from the same database, which are daily returns
following the SIX Return Index, a value-weighted index including reinvested
dividends for all listed stock on the Stockholm Stock Exchange.
    While both Capital IQ and SHoF are well-established and widely used academic
research, they present some limitations to our study that affect our sample. First,
Capital IQ lacks full coverage and consistency for certain event details. Many
share repurchase announcements are missing planned program terms, which are
used as explanatory variables in our panel data regression. This could be due to
either a lack of data on Capital IQ or a lack of disclosure from repurchasing firms.
Further, dividend initiation announcements (first-time dividends) are sometimes
wrongly labelled as dividend increase announcements, and for a small number
of events, increases were recorded even though the announced dividend did not
exceed the prior year’s payout, these misclassified events have had to be manually
removed. Lastly, SHoF’s limitation of stock price data available up to 2023 and

                                8
FF3 factor data up to 2019 required us to restrict our sample.

    B. Sample Selection

   The sample of payout announcements in our study spans from 2000 to 2019,
which as previously explained is motivated by the Swedish share repurchase legal-
isation, and restricted due to data availability, and in order to be able to conduct a
long-term analysis.
    Our repurchase sample consists exclusively of open-market share repurchase
announcements to maintain consistency, and as these represent the most common
form of buybacks in Sweden. The sample for the short-term event study is con-
structed from all identified announcements on Capital IQ. Due to the use of the
percentage of share sought in a program as an explanatory variable in the panel data
regression, we have had to limit this sample to the announcements that include at
least one clear measure of the repurchase program’s intended size. If a percentage
is not available, but the number of shares is, it is calculated by dividing the number
of shares by the firm’s market capitalisation on the announcement date. While this
approach excludes a number of events with insufficient details for our panel data
regression, it is necessary in the comparison of the announcement types.
    For the dividend sample, we focus on announcements of increases in regular
(ordinary) dividends. To ensure a consistent comparison, we do not include
announcements of special dividends or stock dividends. The Capital IQ dividend
data is screened to include events where a firm’s board publicly announces a higher
regular dividend per share compared to the previous year. In a number of cases,
dividend increases are first “proposed” and then “approved” at a later date, in these
cases, we have excluded any later approvals from our sample. This is motivated
by the notion that we aim to capture the market reaction when the information first
becomes public, as it is not the later approval that is expected to trigger investor
response.
    Further, in order to capture meaningful investor responses, we choose to include
“substantial” dividend increases as defined by Guay and Harford (2000). These
are announcements in which the increase in dividends per share is larger than that
of the previous year or where no increase was made the prior year. This definition
helps exclude predictable and routine adjustments that are unlikely to convey new
information, ensuring that the included events represent deliberate decisions with
the potential to generate meaningful market responses. As mentioned, dividend
initiations are also excluded from the sample as such often represent a new stage
in a firm’s life cycle and a reduction in risk (Dyl and Weigand, 1998; Venkatesh,

                                9
1989).
    After constructing the initial list of dividend and share repurchase events fol-
lowing the above mentioned criteria, we check for data quality. A small number of
duplicates and conflicting entries, and a few misclassified dividend initiations, are
manually removed, and verified across sources, such as company news releases,
when possible. The final dataset consists of two samples, one for dividend increase
announcements and one for share repurchase announcements, each fulfilling the
consistency filters described. These samples form the basis for the empirical
analysis that follows.

                                 Table 1
                             Descriptive Statistics

This table reports descriptive statistics for the samples. In Table 1A, the total open
market share repurchases and the total dividend increases are presented under Total
Events. The initial cleaning removes all events that occurred after the cutoff date,
2019-12-27, cleans events that are missing a ticker or event date, and removes
dividend increases that are not substantial, i.e. larger than prior years increase or
after year with no increase. The number of firms that announce the clean events
are presented, as well as how many firms that announce both dividend increases
and buyback announcers in our sample. Table 1B reports mean firm characteristics
that are used in the panel data regression. The table reports the mean leverage,
cash-to-assets, assets, percentage of shares sought in buyback announcements,
dividend yield and the price-to-book ratio, (market value of equity/book value of
equity).

                    Table 1A. Event and Firm Summary
               Metric Buybacks Dividends
               Total Events 805 914
               Clean Events 637 559
               Unique Firms 116 168
               Firms in Both Types 91 91

                    Table 1B. Mean Firm Characteristics

                               10
              Characteristic Buybacks Dividends
               Leverage 1.645 1.023
               Cash-to-Assets 0.085 0.096
               Assets 142,428.243 91,171.890
               Pct Shares Sought 3.643 –
              Dividend Yield – 2.807
               Price-to-Book Ratio 2.865 4.961

                            III. Methodology

    This section outlines the empirical strategy employed to assess the shareholder
value effects of share repurchase and dividend increase announcements, with two
complementary approaches being applied. Firstly, a short-term event study fo-
cusing on cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) around the announcement dates
and a long-term analysis based on buy-and-hold abnormal returns (BHARs) over
longer post-announcement periods. Combining short-term and long-term analyses
allows us to capture both the immediate and sustained impact of payout announce-
ments. Further, we conduct a panel data regression to identify if firm-specific
characteristics can be determinants of long-run abnormal returns.

   A. Short-Term Event Study

    To measure the immediate stock price reactions to a substantial dividend in-
crease and share repurchase announcements, we follow a standard event study
methodology outlined by MacKinlay (1997). This approach, applied by Ikenberry
et al. (1995) and Manconi et al. (2019), calculates abnormal returns by com-
paring observed stock returns around an event to an expected return benchmark.
Each event is defined by an announcement date (day 0), which is the first public
disclosure of a repurchase program or dividend increase.
   Data is prepared by creating a pair of the event and firm and computing
the predicted excess return throughout the event window. The Capital Asset
Pricing Model and Fama-French three-factor model are then regressed on the
estimation window [-120, -20] to estimate the predicted excess return. Subtracting
the expected return from the actual return during the event window gives the
abnormal return for the different days. This is then summed to give the cumulative
abnormal return (CAR) for the three event windows.
   We consider several symmetric event windows around the announcement date,
specifically [-1, +1], [-2, +2], and [-3, +3] trading days to capture short-term

                               11
reactions. The windows measure the CAR over different short intervals, which
allows us to see if the market reaction is immediate or if it anticipates or lags the
announcement. Using multiple windows helps us assess robustness, a significant
effect in the [-1, +1] window would indicate immediate reaction, and including
the [-3, +3] window captures potential information leakage or delayed adjustments
surrounding the event. Using the market model, we regress the stock’s historical
return on the SIX Return Index over the pre-event estimation window [-120, -20]
trading days. The chosen window is long enough to obtain reliable estimates while
stopping well before the event to avoid contamination. Employing both the Cap-
ital Asset Pricing Model and the Fama-French three-factor model for robustness
ensures that the analysis captures potential risk adjustments and mitigates model
specification concerns. For robustness, the same method has been applied with
differing event windows. These results are reported in the appendix.

   B. Long-Term Buy-and-Hold Performance

    To examine long-run stock returns following announcements, we calculate buy-
and-hold abnormal returns, following the methodology used by Ikenberry et al.
(1995). BHAR measures the total difference in compounded returns between event
firms and a portfolio of matched firms for specific post-event horizons. This is to
test for any long-term drifts or reversals of returns not reflected in the short-term
reaction.
    For each event, we calculate the BHAR of the stock from the first calendar
month after the announcement up to the chosen horizons of 12, 24, 36, and 48
months. The BHAR model looks at the stock price data at the start of the event,
computes daily log returns, and aggregates them at the monthly level. These are
then summed and converted into total return for the horizon. The same process
is done for the matched benchmark portfolio. The abnormal return is calculated
by subtracting the return from the benchmark portfolio from the actual returns of
event firms in the event horizons studied.
    The benchmark portfolio is constructed based on market value of equity, and
book-to-market ratio. Firms are evaluated for the portfolio on the differences in
latest available market capitalisation and book-to-market ratio prior to the event.
The 10 nearest neighbors are used as the benchmark portfolio. The nearest neigh-
bors are based on a score calculated from the absolute value differences of peers
size and book-to-market ratio.
   For robustness, the same method has been applied but the BHAR was based
on a portfolio constructed only on the absolute differences in size. These results

                               12
are reported in the appendix.

   C. Panel Data Regression

    To investigate which firm characteristics explain the cross-sectional variation
in long-run outcomes, we conduct a panel data regression analysis. The structure
of our data, containing multiple observations of the same firms at different times,
makes a panel data regression analysis the most appropriate alternative to account
for unobserved heterogeneity that may bias our results. The panel estimations
account for fixed effects for firms and years. The firm fixed effects control for
time-invariant, unobserved characteristics within the different firms, while the year
fixed effects account for external shocks, such as market downturns. This reduces
the omitted variable bias and improves the accuracy of the results. Standard errors
are clustered to account for serial correlation within firms over time.
    This is to identify factors that make some announcements yield higher BHARs
than others. The approach is motivated by prior research suggesting that long-
term stock performance following payout announcements can depend on firm
attributes, such as size, valuation, and financial profile (Ikenberry et al., 1995). By
incorporating firm characteristics, we test whether some types of firms experience
larger long run gains following the both types of announcements.
    We specify a panel regression model where the dependent variable is long-term
abnormal returns for each event, approximated by the BHAR over 12, 24, 36 and
48 months, and the independent variables are firm-specific factors measured prior
to and at the time of the announcement date. The key characteristics are largely
in line with Guay and Harford (2000), and we use the price-to-book ratio as a
proxy for undervaluation. The following explanatory variables capture key firm
characteristics likely to influence abnormal returns: leverage, cash-to-assets ratio,
ln(Assets), percentage of shares sought in buyback announcement, dividend yield,
price-to-book ratio.
    The panel regression allows us to determine whether the long-run return is
related to characteristics of firms and if these characteristics differ between firm
types. It allows us to bridge our findings with the findings and predictions of
previous literature.

                        IV. Results and Discussion

                                 Table 2
     Cumulative Abnormal Returns Around Payout Announcements

                               13
This table reports the short-term cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) for dividend
increases and share repurchase announcements. CARs are calculated based on both
the market model (CAPM) and the Fama-French three-factor model (FF3). Event
windows are [-1, +1], [-2, +2], and [-3, +3] days relative to the announcement
dates. Significance levels are reported as: *** significant at the 1% level, **
significant at the 5% level, * significant at the 10% level.

    Table 2A. Short-Term Cumulative Abnormal Returns (CAR) – Buybacks
Model Window Mean CAR t-stat p-value N
CAPM CAR[-1,+1] 0.0027 1.4969 1.35e-01 531
                                          **
CAPM CAR[-2,+2] 0.0039        2.0304 4.28e-02 532
                                          **
CAPM CAR[-3,+3] 0.0046        2.1202 3.45e-02 532
FF3 CAR[-1,+1] 0.0025 1.4010 1.62e-01 531
                                          **
FF3 CAR[-2,+2] 0.0038        1.9688 4.95e-02 532
                                          **
FF3 CAR[-3,+3] 0.0047        2.1889 2.90e-02 532

   Table 2B. Short-Term Cumulative Abnormal Returns (CAR) – Dividends
Model Window Mean CAR t-stat p-value N

                                          ***
CAPM CAR[-1,+1] 0.0128         5.1954 3.01e-07 489
                                          ***
CAPM CAR[-2,+2] 0.0120         4.7613 2.53e-06 493
                                          ***
CAPM CAR[-3,+3] 0.0130         5.0229 7.13e-07 494
                                          ***
FF3 CAR[-1,+1] 0.0129         3.9071 1.07e-04 489
                                          ***
FF3 CAR[-2,+2] 0.0122         3.5133 4.83e-04 493
                                          ***
FF3 CAR[-3,+3] 0.0132         3.7331 2.11e-04 494

   A. Short-Term Announcement Effects

    Table 2 presents the results of the event study on cumulative abnormal returns
(CARs) surrounding dividend increase announcements and share repurchase an-
nouncements, measured over the three symmetric event windows [-1, +1], [-2, +2],
and [-3, +3]. The results are separately reported using both the Capital Asset Pric-
ing Model and the Fama-French three-factor model for calculations of expected
returns.
    The results for the dividend increase announcements show consistently positive
and highly statistically significant CARs across all event windows and both estima-
tion models. The mean CAR ranges from approximately +1.20% to +1.32%. The

                               14
T-statistics for dividends consistently exceed 3.5, with p-values below 0.01 in every
window, indicating a highly statistically significant market reaction. Notably, the
CARs remain relatively stable across all windows, showing only a slight variation
with a dip in the [-2, +2] window compared with the [-1, +1] window and a slight
increase in the [-3, +3] window. The observed pattern would suggest that most
price changes to dividend increases occur very close to the announcement date,
and extending the window does not materially change the market reaction.
    In contrast, share repurchase announcements produce smaller and less statisti-
cally significant abnormal returns. Mean buyback CARs range from approximately
+0.25% to +0.47% depending on the event window and estimation model, with
t-statistics varying between 1.40 and 2.19. In both estimation models, the p-value
is above the 0.1 threshold in the [-1, +1] window, while the two longer windows
show p-values below the 0.05 threshold, with window [-3, +3] CAR being the
most significant. This would suggest that any positive market reaction to share
repurchase announcements unfold more gradually in comparison to dividend in-
creases. Overall, the results show that dividend increases have a quicker, stronger,
and more statistically reliable positive market reaction than share repurchase an-
nouncements.
    The short-term event study results contribute important insights into how in-
vestors perceive the different forms of payout announcements in Sweden. Firstly,
the strong and significant reaction to dividend increase announcements is con-
sistent with the signalling theory (Bhattacharya, 1979; Miller and Rock, 1985),
which holds that dividend increases are credible signals of management’s confi-
dence in sustainable future earnings. The CAR remaining stable and statistically
significant across all event windows suggests that the market incorporates the in-
formation from the signal almost immediately upon announcement. The similarity
in CAR magnitudes between the widows indicate little evidence of any delayed
adjustments. Interestingly, there is a slight dip observed in the [-2, +2] window
compared to the [-1, +1] window. This could possibly reflect some degree of noise
or minor fluctuations in investor expectations prior to the announcement, but there
is no clear pattern of anticipation. The modest recovery of CAR in the broader
[-3, +3] window supports that the overall price reaction is anchored very close to
the actual announcement.
    The share repurchase announcements generate both smaller and less statisti-
cally significant short-term abnormal returns compared to the dividend announce-
ments. This finding stands in contrast to previous studies on U.S. firms such as
Peyer and Vermaelen (2009), who find significant and larger positive abnormal
returns on average around the announcements of share repurchases. Manconi et al.

                               15
(2019), who studied international firms, also found higher average and statistically
significant abnormal returns in the same event windows. Our results show higher
short-term abnormal returns around dividend announcements than around share
repurchase announcements, which is also in contrast to the comparative study by
Guay and Harford (2000), which finds higher announcement CARs for repurchase
announcements.
    An explanation for our results not aligning with those of previous studies could
be that the Swedish institutional setting is different. The younger Swedish buyback
market could mean that share repurchase announcements do not carry the equal
signalling strength as they do in other countries. One potential contributing factor
could be that announced repurchases in Sweden are not always completed, which
may make investors discount their credibility as signals of undervaluation. Further,
Swedish investors might value the payout certainty and commitment of dividend
increases over the flexible payout in buybacks, particularly as managers often show
reluctance to decrease dividends in the future (Lintner, 1956).
   The differences observed across event windows also provide information on
market efficiency (Fama, 1970). The relatively stable CARs around dividend
announcements across windows imply a fast incorporation of information. The
improvement in significance in the [-2, +2] and [-3, +3] windows for share repur-
chase announcements hints at a slower or more muted reaction, possibly reflecting
more uncertainty around the credibility and eventual execution of the announced
repurchase program.
    Finally, it must be acknowledged that the event studies assume no major con-
founding events in the event windows. Although short event windows reduce this
risk, some residual noise, such as other announcements from the companies at the
same time as the payout announcements, may still affect the results.
   To summarise, the evidence from our short-term event study suggests that
dividend increases are stronger and more credible positive signals in comparison
to share repurchases in Sweden, inconsistent with the findings of previous studies
on other countries. Further, we will analyse if these short-term patterns persist
over longer horizons.

                                 Table 3
    Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns Following Payout Announcements

This table reports the long-term buy-and-hold abnormal returns (BHARs) for div-
idend increase announcements and share repurchase announcements. BHARs are
calculated as the difference between the firm’s compounded return and the returns

                               16
of the benchmark portfolio of 10 matched firms based on size and book-to-market
ratio. The horizons are 12, 24, 36, and 48 months following the announcement
dates. Monthly returns are aggregated from the calendar month after the an-
nouncement. Significance levels are reported as: *** significant at the 1% level,
** significant at the 5% level, * significant at the 10% level.

       Table 3A. Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns (BHAR) – Buyback
  Event Type Horizon Mean BHAR t-stat p-value N Annualized
                                      ***
  Buyback 12m 0.0758     5.23 2.49e-07 537 0.0758
                                      ***
  Buyback 24m 0.1441     5.62 3.13e-08 537 0.0578
                                      ***
  Buyback 36m 0.2530     6.83 2.32e-11 537 0.0579
                                      ***
  Buyback 48m 0.4087     7.61 1.26e-13 533 0.0635

       Table 3B. Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns (BHAR) – Dividends
  Event Type Horizon Mean BHAR t-stat p-value N Annualized
                                      ***
  Dividend 12m 0.0707     4.74 2.76e-06 502 0.0707
                                      ***
  Dividend 24m 0.1553     5.47 6.95e-08 502 0.0586
                                      ***
  Dividend 36m 0.2507     5.76 1.44e-08 501 0.0726
                                      ***
  Dividend 48m 0.4028     6.49 2.05e-10 501 0.0627

   B. Long-term Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns

   Table 3 presents the buy-and-hold abnormal returns for firms announcing
dividend increases and share repurchase programs over horizons of 12, 24, 36, and
48 months. The BHARs are calculated relative to a matched benchmark portfolio
of the ten nearest neighbours based on book-to-market and market capitalisation.
Also, to provide a meaningful comparison between horizons we also report the
annualised BHARs alongside the cumulative values.
    Both payout types show statistically significant positive abnormal returns for
all observed time periods. The mean BHAR of share repurchase announcements
rises steadily from +7.58% at 12 months to +40.87% at 48 months, with relatively
stable corresponding annualised BHARs ranging from the lowest of +5.78% in the
24 month horizon to the highest of +7.58% in the 12 month horizon. The high
associated t-statistics and p-values, all well below 0.001, confirm the statistical
significance of these results. The dividend increases also yield positive and signif-
icant long-run abnormal returns, with mean BHARs of +7.07% after 12 months

                               17
and +40.28% after 48 months, with the annualised BHARs ranging from +5.86%
in the 24 month horizon to +7.26% in the 36 month horizon. Again, all t-statistics
and p-values show the results being highly significant. These findings show that
firms announcing either share repurchase or dividend increases experience sus-
tained abnormal returns in the years following the announcements, indicating that
both types of announcements convey valuable information that is not fully reflected
in the short-term market reactions in the days around the announcements.
    The findings in the long-term BHAR analysis reveal substantial and statistically
significant abnormal returns following both dividend increase announcements and
share repurchase announcements. These results stand in contrast to the modest and,
in the case of share repurchases, less significant short-term CARs observed in the
event study. The average BHARs for each time period suggest that, although the
initial market reaction is limited, especially for share repurchases, the information
conveyed through the payout announcements is gradually incorporated over time.
The results are consistent with the market underreaction hypothesis (Ikenberry et
al., 1995). However, we do acknowledge that these observed long-term abnormal
returns can vary with methodology (Fama, 1998).
   Notably, both share repurchase announcements and dividend increase an-
nouncements yield similar magnitudes of long-term BHARs across the different
time periods. However, share repurchases produce slightly higher average BHARs
in three out of four periods compared to dividend increases. Although minimal,
this difference is consistent with prior studies observing greater long-term abnor-
mal returns following share repurchase announcements (Ikenberry et al., 1995;
Manconi et al., 2019), compared to dividend increases (Benartzi et al., 1997).
These studies, however, only study one of the payout announcement types in
isolation, with differing samples and time periods. In our Swedish sample, the
differences in BHAR across the two types of payout announcements are modest
and vary between years. However, the slightly higher average BHARs for share
repurchase announcements in the 24 month and 36 month horizons align with the
theoretical prediction that share repurchases may convey a stronger signal of stock
undervaluation. This could also be due to the fact that, as seen in the short-term
event study, the information of dividend increase announcements is more quickly
incorporated into the stock price by the market, thus leading to less of a long-term
adjustment.
    The important implication of the result is that, while generating smaller and
less significant short-term CARs, the long-run BHARs indicate that investors
eventually recognise and respond to the underlying signal. Swedish investors
thus show a quicker and more positive short-term reaction to dividend increases

                               18
compared to buybacks, but gradually adjust for the value in the undervaluation
signal provided by share repurchase announcements. In comparison to the United
States and other more mature buyback markets, Sweden’s relatively recent history
of share repurchase legality could potentially have an impact on the different
investor interpretations of such announcements. The consistently positive BHARs
following share repurchase announcements suggest that the undervaluation signals
may not be fully priced in at the event but rather gradually incorporated, maybe as
the market observes the actual executions of the buyback programs.
    Furthermore, the similarity of magnitudes between share repurchase and divi-
dend increase BHARs likely stem from overlap in the payout behaviours, as many
firms in our samples conduct both share repurchases and dividend increases in
the same or adjacent years. This complicates the analysis of attribution and could
partially explain why the long-term BHARs are comparable following both types
of announcements. If the markets react cumulatively to multiple forms of payouts,
the isolated signal of each payout announcement becomes blurred, reducing the
observed difference in BHARs.
    The consistent upward trajectory of abnormal returns over the multiple yearly
horizons suggests a pattern of slow investor learning or information diffusion, pos-
sibly driven by the local institutional setting. Sweden’s concentrated ownership
structures and potential differences in analyst coverage and disclosure regulations
compared to previously studied markets may contribute to the slower market reac-
tion to payout announcement signals. In addition, our finding that both dividend
increase and share repurchase announcements produce large long-term BHARs,
despite relatively muted CARs, raises the question about the Swedish market’s
efficiency in processing such signals. If the market was fully efficient in incor-
porating all publicly available information, we would expect stronger short-term
reactions and weaker long-term drifts (Pettit, 1972). The presence of these drifts
in our result instead supports the view of partial initial pricing, with corrections in
the long term as the signals are confirmed.
    Finally, some caution should be applied when interpreting these long-term re-
sults patterns. Potential confounding factors such as overlapping announcements,
concurrent corporate events, and macroeconomic shifts during the long-term mea-
surement windows could bias results. For example, if a firm announces both a
substantial dividend increase and a share repurchase in close succession, or if ei-
ther announcement is followed by corporate events such as changes in investment
policy, earnings, or takeover activity, attributing the long-term stock performance
solely to the initial payout announcement becomes more difficult. Nevertheless,
the magnitude and consistency of the BHARs across horizons do point toward

                               19
a meaningful relationship between payout announcements and long-term share-
holder value in Sweden.
    In summary, the results of the long-term study support the hypothesis that pay-
out announcements convey valuable information that is not immediately reflected
in the stock price, While dividend increases signal earnings stability (Aharony
and Swary, 1980) and generate early positive market reactions, share repurchases,
although initially met with smaller and less significant market responses, lead to
marginally higher long-term abnormal returns. This suggests that both signalling
and underreaction (Ikenberry et al., 1995) mechanisms are present and also high-
lights the importance of analysing both short-term and long-term periods when
comparing corporate payout decisions.
   To further explore the drivers for long-term abnormal returns, we conduct
a panel data regression using firm-level characteristics and payout specifics as
independent variables. We use BHAR at 12, 24, 36, and 48 months as dependent
variables to analyse if the determinants of long-term abnormal returns persist or
vary over time. This approach allows us to investigate the consistency of payout-
related valuation effects across horizons, and to identify which firm attributes are
most predictive of post-announcement performance for each payout type.

                      Table 4 Panel Data Regression

   This table reports the results from panel data regression examining which
characteristics explain variation in long-run BHAR. The dependent variable is
BHAR at 12, 24, 36, and 48 months. The independent variables are leverage, cash-
to-assets, ln(assets), price-to-book ratio and payout-specific variables (Percentage
of shares sought in buyback and dividend yield). The regression includes firm and
year-fixed effects to control for unobserved heterogeneity and time-specific shocks.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Significance levels are reported as:
*** significant at the 1% level, ** significant at the 5% level, * significant at the
10% level. T-statistics are reported in parenthesis.

       Table 4A. Determinants of Buyback BHARs – Panel Regressions

                               20
                        (+1,+12) (+1,+24) (+1,+36) (+1,+48)
                                 **       ***       ***       ***
   Leverage 0.021     0.040     0.048     0.088
                           (2.34) (4.30) (6.40) (10.05)
   Cash-to-Assets 0.119 0.652 -0.247 -0.923
                           (0.40) (0.92) (-0.31) (-0.92)
                                  **        **        *        **
   Ln(Assets) -0.304     -0.452     -0.632     -0.870
                           (-2.55) (-2.36) (-1.96) (-2.15)
   % Shares Sought -0.006 -0.006 -0.003 -0.008
                           (-1.34) (-0.72) (-0.24) (-0.43)
                                 ***        ***        ***        ***
   Price-to-Book -0.043     -0.070     -0.080     -0.103
                           (-3.04) (-2.79) (-3.35) (-3.45)
   R-squared 0.106 0.108 0.076 0.093
   N 538 538 538 534
   Firm Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes
   Year Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes

    Table 4B. Determinants of Dividend BHARs – Panel Regressions
                        (+1,+12) (+1,+24) (+1,+36) (+1,+48)
                                 ***       **       **
   Leverage 0.066      0.136     0.138      0.167
                           (2.66) (2.56) (1.98) (1.40)
    Cash-to-Assets 0.572 0.235 0.345 0.054
                           (1.06) (0.38) (0.44) (0.04)
                                 ***        **        *
    Ln(Assets) -0.215     -0.338     -0.446     -0.493
                           (-2.85) (-2.00) (-1.91) (-1.37)
    Dividend Yield 0.005 0.003 -0.003 -0.010
                           (0.28) (0.09) (-0.06) (-0.20)
                                  ***                              ***
    Price-to-Book -0.029      -0.026 -0.028 -0.085
                           (-6.69) (-1.31) (-0.77) (-2.66)
    R-squared 0.100 0.045 0.036 0.063
   N 502 502 501 501
   Firm Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes
   Year Fixed Effects Yes Yes Yes Yes

C. Firm Characteristics and BHAR: Panel Data Regression Analysis

C1. Share Repurchases

                             21
    For share repurchases, leverage shows a positive and statistically significant
coefficient for all studied horizons. For the 12-month BHAR horizon, the lever-
age ratio shows a positive coefficient of 0.021, with a p-value below 0.05. The
longer horizons see an increase in both the statistical significance and the positive
coefficient. For these horizons, the p-value is below the 0.01 threshold, and the
coefficient is increasingly positive over the horizons, 0.040, 0.048 and 0.088. The
firms announcing share repurchases have cash-to-assets coefficients of 0.119 for
12 months, 0.652 for 24 months, and -0.247 for 48 months, but show no statistical
significance for buybacks over all horizons. The cash-to-assets ratio at the time of
the event does not have a statistically significant impact on the long-run abnormal
returns.
    The natural logarithm of assets shows statistical significance for most of the
horizons for buybacks with a negative coefficient, being the least significant in the
36-month horizon, still below the 0.1 p-value threshold. The natural logarithm of
assets shows the largest magnitude coefficients among the explanatory variables
for share repurchase BHAR. For the 12-month horizon, the coefficient is -0.304
with a p-value below 0.05, and for the 24-month horizon, the coefficient is -0.452
with a p-value of below 0.05. It is -0.632 for 46 months with a lower statistical
significance, with a p-value under 0.10. For the 48-month horizon, the coefficient
is -0.870 with a p-value under 0.05.
   The percentage of shares sought in share repurchase programmes does not
have a significant impact on the long-term returns of firms initiating buyback
programmes. The coefficients are negative, -0.006, -0.006, -0.003, and -0.008 for
the horizons 12 to 48 months, respectively, with none of them being statistically
significant. How many percent of the shares outstanding that the firm intends to
acquire in the programme does not have an effect on the abnormal return that the
firm experiences in the long run.
    The price-to-book ratio is significant for most of the models with negative
coefficients in all horizons. For the buyback announcers, the price-to-book ratio is
highly significant for all horizons, with p-values under 1%, but with coefficients of
-0.043, -0.070 -0.080 -0.103 for the 12-48 month horizons, respectively. A higher
price-to-book ratio, being an indicator of an overvalued company, has a negative
impact on the abnormal returns that firms experience in the long run.
    Higher leverage shows an effect on the long-term returns of the studied buyback
firms, which can have multiple explanations. For instance, the higher leverage
could increase risk in the firm, signal confidence from management, or decrease
agency costs. A higher leverage can be a signal from management that the firm
is confident it will be able to make its interest payments in the future. This, in

                               22
combination with a share repurchase programme, creates a strong signal that the
firm is confident in its abilities to both pay future interest payments, as well as
pay out excess cash now (Ross, 1977) Additionally, according to Jensen’s (1986)
control hypothesis higher debt can decrease the management’s ability to misuse
cash, which reduces the agency problem. However, the statistical significance
of cash-to-assets could indicate that this is not the reason for leverage driving
abnormal returns.
    The statistical insignificance of cash-to-assets as a determinant appears incon-
sistent with the agency theory of Jensen (1986) that lowering cash through payouts
should reduce the agency problem, as the lower cash in the firm resulting from the
payout should be value-creating due to the decrease of agency costs. The unique
market setting of Sweden could explain this, but this would need to be further
studied. In Sweden, high cash may not be a negative sign for investors due to,
for instance, stricter governance policies or lower perceived risk of management
engaging in NPV-negative projects. Another possible explanation could be that
the buyback announcement itself may not be enough of a signal that the cash of
the firm will decrease as the investor may not be convinced the buyback will be
completed.
    Firm size, measured here by the natural logarithm of assets, has a negative
coefficient. A reason for this could be that firms of larger sizes are more transparent
than smaller firms. The value of the signal of a buyback programme for a smaller
firm is larger as it carries more information. Bushman, Piotroski and Smith (2004)
find that firm size is positively and significantly linked to the financial transparency
of the firm.
    The statistical insignificance of the percentage of shares sought contradicts that
of Manconi et al. (2019), who find that firms with higher percentages sought to
receive higher returns. This could be interpreted as the market seeing the initiation
of a buyback programme being a strong signal from management, regardless of the
size of the programme. Swedish legislation could have an impact here, however,
as a firm can only buy back 10% of its outstanding shares in any programme.
The similarity of percentage sought, with 26.06% of our sample seeking to repur-
chase exactly 10% of the outstanding shares and many firms not reporting what
percentage of shares they seek to repurchase, may have an impact on the analysis.
    The negative coefficient of the price-to-book ratio aligns with theories of
undervaluation and signalling theory. This shows support for management using
share repurchase programmes as a tool to signal to the market that they believe
the share is undervalued (Vermaelen, 1981); Dittmar, 2000). The results point
to the market interpreting buyback announcements for firms with a lower price-

                               23
to-book ratio as a valid signal from management that they are undervalued. This
is in line with the findings of Vermaelen et al. (1995) that undervalued firms,
firms with a higher book-to-market ratio, perform better in the long run following
share repurchase announcements. Even though the initial reaction of buyback
announcements is lower in Sweden than what Manconi et al. (2019) observe in
other countries, the market takes in this information and adjusts for it.

   C2. Dividend increases

    For substantial dividend increases, leverage also has a positive coefficient, but
with decreasing statistical significance over longer horizons. The most statistically
significant coefficient is in the 12-month horizon, with a p-value below 0.01 and
a coefficient of 0.66. There is still moderate statistical significance for the 24
and 36-month horizons, with a p-value below 0.05, and with coefficients of 0.136
and 0.138, respectively. The companies studied with higher leverage experienced
higher abnormal returns, but the significance decreases for longer horizons.
    While the cash-to-assets coefficients are positive for all the horizons for divi-
dend increases, 0.572, 0.235, 0.345 and 0.054 for the horizons 12 to 48 months,
respectively, the results show no statistical significance, with all p-values being
above 10%
    For ln(assets), the statistical significance decreases the longer the horizons are,
indicating that other factors could be responsible for the long-term performance.
For the 12-month to 48-month horizons, the coefficients are -0.215, -0.338, -0.446
and -0.493, respectively, with p-value under 1% for the 12-month, 5% for the
24-month, 10% for the 36 months, and no significance for the 48-month horizon.
    The equivalent variable for the percentage sought, dividend yield, is not statis-
tically significant for any of the horizons. For the horizons 12 to 48 months, the
coefficients are 0.005, 0.003, -0.003, and -0.010, respectively. This indicates that
the announced dividend yield does not impact the abnormal returns that the firms
experience after the event.
    Price-to-book ratio has a negative coefficient, but it is only statistically sig-
nificant for the 12 and 48 month horizons with p-values under 1% for both these
horizons. The coefficients for the horizons 12 to 48 months are -0.029, -0.026,
-0.028, and -0.085. Whilst price-to-book ratio, an indicator of a company being
overvalued, has an effect over the two longer horizons.
   Leverage shows, consistent with the buyback announcements, positive and
statistically significant coefficients for dividend increases but with decreasing sig-
nificance over the longer horizons. The reason for this could be explained in the

                               24
same way as for share repurchases, by the agency and signalling theories. As
leverage restricts the capital that management can misuse, the value of the firm
should increase (Jensen, 1986). As dividends are usually viewed as less flexi-
ble than buybacks, as the findings of Jagannathan et al. (2000) indicate, having
high leverage in combination with a substantial dividend increase should signal
confidence that the firm is confident about their future ability both to pay their
interest payments and the higher dividend payments. The diminishing statistical
significance indicates that this indicator is not as predictive in the long run, where
other factors play a larger part in the long-run abnormal returns of the firm.
    The cash-to-asset ratio for dividend increases, as for buybacks, is not sta-
tistically significant. The same theories can be applied here as for dividends.
While it should theoretically be connected to the agency theory (Jensen, 1986),
our results do not show such a connection. This could be, similarly to buyback
announcements, because the dividend increase does not remove sufficient cash for
management to misuse, or the Swedish market may not have the same view on
high levels of cash in firms due to, e.g. different governance policies or lower
concerns for agency problems.
    The size of the firm’s assets shows, like in buybacks, a negative and significant
coefficient. Like leverage, the significance diminishes over the longer horizons,
possibly due to other factors playing a bigger part in the abnormal return of the
firm. The larger firms’ opaqueness could be an explanation for the higher returns
in smaller firms. This is in line with the findings of Bushman et al. (2004),
observing that larger firms are more financially transparent. This entails that the
information that the dividends increase carries more information about the future
cash flows that the firm will generate for the investor.
    The dividend yield at the time of the announcement lacks statistical significance
for all studied horizons. This indicates that the market does not view this as a way
to predict the performance of the firm after the announcement, even though one
might expect a higher yield to indicate undervaluation. This is consistent with the
findings of Brav et al. (2005), that dividends are used more as a tool to satisfy
the expectations of the investors, rather than for signalling. The market seems to
take the act of announcing a substantial dividend increase to be a more important
indicator than the dividend yield itself.
    The price-to-book ratio is, like in dividends, negative for all horizons but only
statistically significant for the 12 and 48-month horizons. The results support the
idea that undervaluation carries more information for investors, but the inconsis-
tency in statistical significance points to a weaker tie between dividend increases
and undervaluation. This is consistent with the findings of Lintner (1956) and

                               25
Bhattacharya (1979), who state that dividends are more tied to signals of prof-
itability and sustaining it in the long run.

   C3. Comparison

    While there are similarities between the panel data regression of dividends and
buybacks, there are some key differences. Leverage is a key indicator for both
types of payout alternatives for long-run abnormal returns. The higher leverage
in firms gives off stronger signals of future expected performance. The negative
coefficient of the price-to-book ratio implies that undervalued firms outperform
for either payout type. What is particularly interesting is comparing the magnitude
between the panels. For buybacks, the price-to-book ratio has a higher coefficient
and is highly statistically significant for all horizons, whilst the coefficient is lower
for the dividend issuers and only statistically significant for the 12 and 48-month
horizon. This supports the idea that buybacks are tied to undervaluation and
dividends are not. The findings on the size of the firm, measured by ln(assets),
point to payout announcements of smaller firms carrying stronger signalling value,
likely due to being less transparent and having less analyst coverage. The effect
is, however, larger and more statistically significant for the firms announcing
share repurchases. Cash-to-assets, percentage sought, and dividend yield were
all statistically insignificant. The mere act of a substantial dividend increase or
buyback is a more important factor to the market than the size of the payout.
    The overlap of firms that conduct both share repurchases and dividend increases
could be an explanatory factor as to why many of the variables have similar results.
The main determining factors for firms that have recently done a buyback are the
low price-to-book ratio, signalling undervaluation, high leverage, and smaller
assets. For dividends, smaller firms size, lower price-to-book ratio, and high
leverage are also most significant, but primarily for shorter horizons.

                            VI. Conclusion

    This thesis provides empirical evidence on the impacts of share repurchase and
dividend increase announcements on short-term and long-term shareholder value
in the Swedish market. By examining the use of these payout announcements over
a period of two decades, the study provides insights into how the Swedish market
interprets and reacts to the different changes in corporate payout policy.
    The findings show a clear distinction between how the market initially reacts to
the two forms of announcements. Dividend increase announcements consistently

                               26
generate significant positive abnormal returns around the announcement date,
while share repurchase announcements show smaller and less significant abnormal
returns. These findings suggest that, in the short term, the Swedish market values
the signal of confident future earnings in dividends highly, while the signal of
undervaluation in repurchases is interpreted with more skepticism.
    However, the short-term reaction differences eventually fade, as both types
of announcements are associated with positive significant abnormal returns over
longer horizons, with share repurchase announcements leading to a slight outper-
formance. While this likely reflects our overlapping sample as many firms use both
payout methods, the small difference indicates that the market adjusts for the initial
underreaction to buybacks in the long term. We find further that, for both types
of announcements, firm characteristics such as leverage, size, and market-to-book
significantly influence these long-term abnormal returns to different degrees. The
comparable variables dividend yield and percentage of shares sought, however,
show no significant correlation to their respective abnormal returns.
    These results reveal that Swedish investors assign different informational value
to the two payout announcements depending on the time frame. The central re-
search question of the thesis, how the two payout announcement types compare in
their effects on shareholder value, can thus be answered: dividend announcements
dominate short-term credibility, while share repurchase announcements deliver
comparable or slightly stronger long-term value. Importantly, the long-term ab-
normal returns following both types of payout announcements are influenced by
firm characteristics, indicating that investors interpret the signals in the broader
context of a firm’s financial profile.

                               27
  REFERENCES

   Aharony, Joseph, and Itzhak Swary, 1980, Quarterly dividend and earnings
announcements and stockholders return: An empirical analysis, The Journal of
Finance 35(1), 1-12.

   Allen, Franklin, Antonio E. Bernardo, and Ivo Welch, 2000, A theory of
dividends based on tax clienteles, The Journal of Finance 55(6), 2499-2536.

   Benartzi, Shlomo, Roni Michaely, and Richard Thaler, 1997, Do changes in
dividends signal the future or the past?, The Journal of Finance 52(3), 1007-1034.

    Bhattacharya, Sudipo, 1979, Imperfect information, dividend policy, and “the
bird in the hand” fallacy, The Bell Journal of Economics 10(1), 259-270.

   Brav, Alon, John R. Graham, Campbell R. Harvey, and Roni Michaely, 2005,
Payout policy in the 21st century, Journal of Financial Economics 77(3), 483-527.

    Brown, Stephen J., and Jerold B. Warner, 1985, using daily stock returns: the
case of event studies, Journal of Financial Economics 14(1), 3-31.

    Bushman, Robert M., Joseph D. Piotroski, Abbie J. Smith, 2004, What deter-
mines corporate transparency?, Journal of Accounting Research 42(2), 207-252.

   Dittmar, Amy K., 2000, Why do firms repurchase stock?, The Journal of
Business 73(3), 331-355.

   Dyl, Edward A., and Robert A. Weigand, 1998, The information content of
dividend initiations: additional evidence, Financial Management 27(3), 27-35.

   Easterbrook, Frank H., 1984, Two agency-cost explanations of dividends, The
American Economic Review 74(4), 650-659.

    Fama, Eugene F., 1998, Market efficiency, long-term returns, and behavioural
finance, Journal of Financial Economics 49(3), 283-306.

   Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the
returns on stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33(1), 3-56.

    Grullon, Gustavo, and Roni Michaely, 2002, Dividends, share repurchases, and

                               28
the substitution hypothesis, The Journal of Finance 57(4), 1649-1684.

   Grullon, Gustavo, and Roni Michaely, 2004, The informational content of
share repurchase programs, The Journal of Finance 59(2), 651-680.

   Grullon, Gustavo, Roni Michaely, and Bhaskaran Swaminathan, 2002, Are
dividend changes a sign of maturity?, The Journal of Business 75(3), 387-424.

   Guay, Wayne, and Jarrad Harford, 2000, The cash-flow permanence and in-
formation content of dividend increases versus repurchases, Journal of Financial
Economics 57(3), 385-415.

   Ikenberry, David, Josef Lakonishok, and Theo Vermaelen, 1995, Market un-
derreaction to open market share repurchases, Journal of Financial Economics
39(2-3), 181-208.

   Jagannathan, Murali, Clifford P. Stephens, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2000,
Financial flexibility and the choice between dividends and stock repurchases,
Journal of Financial Economics 57(3), 355-384.

    Jensen, Michael C., 1986, Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance,
and Takeovers, The American Economic Review 76(2), 323-329.

    Lintner, John, 1956, Distribution of incomes of corporations among dividends,
retained earnings, and taxes, The American Economic Review 46(2), 97-133.

   MacKinlay, and A. Craig, 1997, Event studies in economics and finance,
Journal of Economic Literature 35(1), 13-39.

   Manconi, Alberto, Urs Peyer, and Theo Vermaelen, 2019, Are buybacks good
for long-term shareholder value? Evidence from around the world, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 54(5), 1899-1935.

    Miller, Merton H., and Franco Modigliani, 1961, Dividend policy, growth, and
the valuation of shares, The Journal of Business 34(4), 411-433.

   Miller, Merton H., and Kevin Rock, 1985, Dividend Policy under asymmetric
information, The Journal of Finance 40(4), 1031-1051.

    Peyer, Urs, and Theo Vermaelen, 2009, The Nature and Persistence of Buyback
Anomalies, The Review of Financial Studies 22(4), 1693-1745.

    Pettit, R. Richardson, 1972, Dividend announcements, security performance,

                               29
and capital market efficiency, The Journal of Finance 27(5), 993-1007.

    Ross, Stephen A., 1977, The determination of financial structure: the incentive-
signalling approach, The Bell Journal of Economics 8(1), 23-40.

    Skinner, Douglas J., 2008, The evolving relation between earnings, dividends,
and stock repurchases, Journal of Financial Economics 87(3), 582-609.

    Venkatesh, P.C., 1989, The impact of dividend initiation on the informational
content of earnings announcements and return volatility, The Journal of Business
62(2), 175-197.

   Vermaelen, Theo, 1981, Common stock repurchases and market signalling:
An empirical study, Journal of Financial Economics 9(2), 139-183.

                               30
 APPENDIX

              Table 6. Panel Regression Variable Definitions
Variable Definition
Leverage The firm’s leverage ratio, defined as total liabilities to
                       market value of equity as of the announcement date.
Cash-to-Assets The ratio of the firm’s cash and cash equivalents to
                       total assets as of the announcement date.
% Shares Sought The announced plan terms of the percentage of out-
                       standing shares being repurchased in a program.
Dividend Yield The ratio of announced dividends per share to the share
                       price as of the announcement date.
Price-to-Book Market value of equity divided by book value of equity
                        (from latest pre-event price data).
Ln(Assets) The natural logarithm of a firm’s total assets as of the
                     announcement date.
BHAR The buy-and-hold abnormal returns, calculated from
                      one month after the announcement.

                              31
     Figure 1. Daily Abnormal Returns Around Event (Buybacks, FF3)

This table reports the abnormal returns for share repurchase announcements. The
abnormal returns are calculated based on both the Fama-French three-factor model
(FF3). The event window is [-3, +3]

                               32
    Figure 2. Daily Abnormal Returns Around Event (Dividends, FF3)

This table reports the abnormal returns for substantial dividend increase announce-
ments. The abnormal returns are calculated based on both the Fama-French three-
factor model (FF3). The event window is [-3, +3]

                                 Table 7
             Cumulative Abnormal Returns Robustness Test

This table reports the short-term cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) for dividend
increases and share repurchase announcements. CARs are calculated based on both
the market model (CAPM) and the Fama-French three-factor model (FF3). Event
windows are [-5, +5], [0, +2], and [-1, +2] days relative to the announcement dates.
Significance levels are reported as: *** significant at the 1% level, ** significant at
the 5% level, * significant at the 10% level. T-statistics are reported in parenthesis.

    Table 7A. Short-Term Cumulative Abnormal Returns (CAR) – Buybacks

                               33
Model Window Mean CAR t-stat p-value N
                                          **
CAPM CAR[-5,+5] 0.0046        2.12 3.40e-02 532
CAPM CAR[0,+2] 0.0018 1.02 3.10e-01 530
CAPM CAR[-1,+2] 0.0028 1.47 1.42e-01 531
                                          **
FF3 CAR[-5,+5] 0.0047        2.19 2.90e-02 532
FF3 CAR[0,+2] 0.0016 0.91 3.62e-01 530
FF3 CAR[-1,+2] 0.0026 1.36 1.75e-01 531

   Table 7B. Short-Term Cumulative Abnormal Returns (CAR) – Dividends
Model Window Mean CAR t-stat p-value N
                                         ***
CAPM CAR[-5,+5] 0.0130        5.02 7.13e-07 494
                                         ***
CAPM CAR[0,+2] 0.0100        4.02 0.00e+00 488
                                         ***
CAPM CAR[-1,+2] 0.0122        4.91 0.00e+00 490
                                         ***
FF3 CAR[-5,+5] 0.0132         3.73 2.11e-04 494
                                         ***
FF3 CAR[0,+2] 0.0100         2.88 4.00e-03 488
                                         ***
FF3 CAR[-1,+2] 0.0125         3.62 0.00e+00 490

                                 Table 8
            Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns Robustness Test

This table reports the long-term buy-and-hold abnormal returns (BHARs) for div-
idend increase announcements and share repurchase announcements. BHARs are
calculated as the difference between the firm’s compounded return and the returns
of the benchmark portfolio of 10 matched firms based on size and book-to-market
ratio. The horizons are 12, 24, 36, and 48 months following the announcement
dates. Monthly returns are aggregated from the calendar month after the an-
nouncement. Significance levels are reported as: *** significant at the 1% level,
** significant at the 5% level, * significant at the 10% level. T-statistics are
reported in parenthesis.

  Table 8A. Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns (BHAR) – Buybacks (Size-Only
                            Benchmark)
  Event Type Horizon Mean BHAR t-stat p-value N Annualized
                                      ***
  Buyback 12m 0.0735     5.03 6.07e-07 537 0.0735
                                      ***
  Buyback 24m 0.1364     5.24 2.82e-07 537 0.0506
                                      ***
  Buyback 36m 0.2338     6.27 1.13e-09 537 0.0582
                                      ***
  Buyback 48m 0.3941     7.28 2.27e-12 533 0.0617

                               34
  Table 8B. Buy-and-Hold Abnormal Returns (BHAR) – Dividends (Size-Only
                            Benchmark)
  Event Type Horizon Mean BHAR t-stat p-value N Annualized
                                      ***
  Dividend 12m 0.0700     4.64 2.06e-06 501 0.0700
                                      ***
  Dividend 24m 0.1232     2.83 4.86e-03 499 0.0554
                                      ***
  Dividend 36m 0.2226     3.82 1.55e-04 498 0.0705
                                      ***
  Dividend 48m 0.3848     4.80 2.00e-06 498 0.0652

   AI Appendix
   We have used ChatGPT for help with generating code in Python, and Gram-
marly to correct grammatical errors.

                               35