WARTIME WALLETS

ASSESSING THE FIRM-LEVEL IMPACT OF THE POST-2001
FISCAL SPENDING SHOCK

FABIAN LINDAHL

JAKOB STRÖMBERG

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2025
Wartime Wallets: Assessing the Firm-Level Impact of the Post-2001 Fiscal Spending
Shock

Abstract:
   Major shifts in government spending can transform corporate behavior, but not always
   in predictable ways. Following the sharp rise in U.S. defense spending after 9/11, we
   use panel data and a difference-in-differences strategy to assess how this fiscal shock
   affected defense contractors relative to other firms between 1998 and 2005. While
   contractors experienced significant revenue growth, this did not translate into higher
   profitability or job creation. Larger firms responded by increasing capital investment,
   whereas smaller firms accumulated cash reserves. These differences highlight the role
   of firm characteristics in shaping responses to fiscal stimulus and carry important
    implications for the design of policies aimed at encouraging productive investment.

Keywords:
   Fiscal Policy, Defense Spending, Corporate Investment, Firm Performance

Authors:
   Fabian Lindahl (25761)
   Jakob Strömberg (25825)

Tutors:
   Mustafa Bulut, Post Doctoral Fellow, Swedish House of Finance

Examiner:
   Ramin Baghai, Associate Professor, Department of Finance, SSE

Acknowledgement:
   We would like to thank Mustafa Bulut for his consistent support, sharp insights, and
   constructive feedback throughout the course of our thesis work. His guidance played
   a key role in shaping our research.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Fabian Lindahl and Jakob Strömberg, 2025
1. Introduction

Government spending plays an important role in supporting firms and stabilizing
economic activity, especially during periods of uncertainty or conflict. Understanding
how companies respond to such fiscal interventions is important for economic policy. In
a time of heightened rearmament, with conflicts unfolding across Europe and the Middle
East, understanding the downstream effects of increased military spending and its
consequences for defense contractors remains a vital economic concern.

The sharp increase in U.S. defense spending after 9/11 created an exogenous fiscal shock
that significantly affected firm-level financial performance and investment behavior.
Identifying the impact of fiscal interventions is typically difficult due to endogeneity,
since government spending is often targeted or reactive rather than random. In this case
the shock was driven by an external geopolitical event rather than economic conditions.
Thus, the post-9/11 defense spending surge offers a unique way to assess how defense
firms adjust their financial strategies in response to an unanticipated, massive fiscal shock
(Nakamura & Steinsson, 2014).

Implementing a difference-in-differences strategy using balance sheet and income
statement data from US public firms using Compustat covering the years 1998 to 2005,
this study compares firms with established defense-related government sales to a control
group of non-defense-contracting firms. This approach allows us to isolate the impact of
the defense spending shock on firm outcomes. The analysis focuses on key financial
metrics, including sales, profitability, capital expenditures, cash holdings, cash flow, and
employment, to capture both performance and investment responses. In addition, we test
for heterogeneous effects by firm size, to determine whether large and small contractors
reacted differently to the shock.

Our results indicate that defense contractors experienced a substantial increase in sales
relative to the control group following the fiscal shock. On average, firms with defense
contracts before the fiscal shock grew their sales faster than non-contracting firms.
However, this surge in revenue did not translate in proportional gains in profitability or
employment for the defense firms. In other words, the fiscal spending boost lifted top-
line revenues but had little immediate effect on bottom-line margins or job creation.

We also find important differences by firm size in how companies utilized the increase in
procurement. Large defense contractors responded to the demand shock by significantly
increasing capital investment and ramping up their capital expenditures (capex), whereas
smaller contractors did not show a significant increase in capex. Instead, small firms
accumulated cash, strengthening their liquidity and balance sheets rather than investing
in expansion. This difference in behavior suggests that firm-specific characteristics, such
as size, influence where additional revenue is channeled.

These insights are especially timely. With renewed global attention to military
rearmament and fiscal policy, understanding how defense spending influences corporate
behavior has direct implications for economic policy. Our results suggest that the effect
of the fiscal shock varied depending on firm size, influencing whether the increased

                                   1
revenues were reinvested in productive capacity or held as liquidity. Effective policy
design must therefore account for these firm-level dynamics to translate fiscal expansions
into long-term economic benefit.

2. Literature Review

Our study contributes to several strands of literature covering how a large increase in U.S.
defense spending affected the financial and operational outcomes of pre-existing military
contractors at the firm level. Identifying causal effects of fiscal policy is difficult, as
changes in government spending are often endogenous to economic conditions. However,
the 9/11 attacks and the subsequent military engagements constitute a rare, exogenous
shock, that led to a rapid and substantial rise in defense procurements. This setting
provides a way to isolate the impact of unexpected fiscal policy changes (Nakamura &
Steinsson, 2014).

Goldman, Iyer, and Nanda (2022) develop a valuable empirical framework for studying
the effects of government spending shocks by exploiting the surge in U.S. defense
expenditures following the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. While their primary
focus is on the credit supply channel, examining how defense-related spending
strengthened local bank balance sheets and spurred lending in indirectly affected areas,
they also illustrate how the 9/11 shock can be used to identify causal effects of fiscal
policy. Importantly, their findings demonstrate that the economic impact of government
spending is not uniform, even when the policy intervention is targeted at specific regions
or industries. Building on this logic, we focus on pre-existing defense contractors to
examine the heterogeneous firm-level responses to a sharp and exogenous increase in
demand. By examining the defense contractors themselves, we trace how the exogenous
demand spike flows through to the firm-level, looking both at investment and
performance metrics.

Prior research has also investigated how firms respond to public procurement. Studies
have shown that receiving government contracts can affect firm growth and financial
structure (Barrot & Nanda, 2020). However, Kim and Nguyen (2019) find that local
government spending can crowd out investment in listed firms, suggesting that higher
public spending does not always lead to improved firm performance. Whether this pattern
holds for firms directly supplying the defense sector after a large fiscal shock is the central
question we examine.

Goldman (2020) investigates how federal procurement during the 2008-2009 financial
crisis stabilized the performance of government contractors. The paper shows that firms
with pre-existing government contracts experienced significantly higher market
capitalization, capital expenditures, and access to credit relative to similar firms without
such contracts. Moreover, the stabilizing effect spilled over into neighboring firms and
sectors, particularly in areas with high economic slack. These findings highlight the role
of the government as a “customer of last resort,” with the ability to mitigate the impact of
demand shocks through targeted spending. While Goldman (2020) focuses on the
financial crisis period, our analysis examines whether similar effects exist following the

                                   2
post-9/11 defense spending surge, offering new insights into firm-level responses to a
different type of fiscal policy shock.

A foundational finding is that financially constrained firms tend to hold more cash,
particularly when faced with increased cash flows or uncertainty (Almeida, Campello &
Weisbach, 2004). Han and Qiu (2007) show that when cash-flow uncertainty rises,
financially constrained, typically smaller firms, increase their cash balances far more than
unconstrained firms. This pattern offers a useful framework for analyzing how defense
contractors managed their cash holdings, especially comparing how responses vary by
firm size.

In summary, while prior research has examined the macroeconomic consequences of
fiscal shocks and the credit channel effects of government spending, this study focuses
directly on the firm-level performance and investment responses of defense contractors.
By leveraging the exogenous nature of the post-9/11 defense spending surge, we extend
this literature by examining heterogeneous firm-level outcomes, particularly in relation
to firm size.

3. Background

3.1. Historical Context and Significance

The terrorist attack on September 11th, the 2008 financial crisis, and the COVID-19
pandemic have all led to massive fiscal stimulus from the government in different forms.
The 9/11 attacks triggered a profound shift in U.S. fiscal policy, particularly in defense
expenditure, impacting defense firms. In a time of great rearmament, with wars in Europe
and the Middle East, understanding the trickle-down effects of such increases in military
spending and their consequences for defense contractors remains a critical economic
question.

In the immediate aftermath of 9/11, the United States launched what would become
known as the "War on Terror," resulting in military campaigns in Afghanistan (2001) and
Iraq (2003) aimed at dismantling terrorist networks and preventing future attacks. This
global engagement necessitated a dramatic expansion in military spending that would
reshape both the defense industry and the broader economy for decades to come (Council
on Foreign Relations).

                                   3
Major U.S. Military and Defense Spending Events, 2001-2005 (Council on Foreign
Relations):

3.2. Defense Contracting

The scale of this fiscal response was unprecedented in recent history. In the U.S., total
national defense outlays surged from approximately $305 billion in 2001 to nearly $706
billion by 2011. As a share of GDP, defense spending grew from 3.0% to 4.7%, while its
proportion of total federal outlays increased from 16.4% to 20.1% (Elisabeth Sköns and
Sam Perlo-Freeman, 2011). By 2022, estimates suggest that total federal spending and
obligations for post-9/11 wars reached approximately $8 trillion, encompassing not only
direct military costs but also veterans' care, homeland security measures, and interest
payments on war-related debt (Aftergood, Ṣóyẹmí, Crawford, Peltier, Pemberton, &
Semler, 2021).

The U.S. defense contracting landscape is a complex ecosystem that extends well beyond
its most visible players. While prime contractors receive the bulk of defense funding, the
economic impact radiates through vast supply chains involving thousands of smaller
firms. These subcontractors help distribute military spending across varying industries,
labor markets, and geographic regions (Watts, 2008). Importantly, the timing of this
activity is not immediate, as defense contracts often span several years. These contracts
are often tied to long-term appropriations, meaning firms respond not just to current
spending, but to expected future outlays. This phenomenon, known as “fiscal foresight,”
describes how companies adjust investment, hiring, and production in anticipation of
future government expenditures (Ramey, 2011).

                                   4
4. Data

4.1. Data Sources

This study uses firm-level panel data from the Compustat North America database,
accessed through the Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS) platform. Two datasets
are employed. The primary source is the Compustat Fundamentals Annual file, which
provides standardized financial statement information for publicly listed firms across
North America, including data on assets, revenues, expenditures, and employment. The
second source is the Compustat Customer Segments file. This file contains a list of all
firm’s, which has a specific customer that represents 10% or more of its annual sales.

Although the empirical analysis focuses on fiscal years 1998 to 2005, the data was
initially downloaded for a broader period (1990-2010) for Fundamentals Annual file, and
all available years for the Customer Segments file to allow flexibility in sample
construction.

4.2. Sample Construction

The sample is restricted to U.S.-headquartered firms reporting in U.S. dollars under the
industrial format (INDL). Firms in the financial sector (Standard Industrial Classification,
SIC, codes 6000-6999), and observations with missing values for the key financial
variable “total assets” are dropped. These filters follow standard conventions, such as
Goldman et al. (2022) to help ensure comparability across firms and time. Additionally,
we also exclude Electric, Gas, and Sanitary Services firms (SIC codes 4900-4999), as
well as International Affairs Non-Operating Establishments (SIC codes >9000) due to
their distinct financial structures and limited relevance for analyzing corporate investment
behavior.

4.3. Variable Construction

From the cleaned Fundamentals Annual file, we construct the primary firm-level financial
variables used in the analysis. These include: LogAssets, LogSales, Return on Assets
(ROA), Cash Holdings, Employment, Capital Expenditures (capex), and Cash Flow,
explained in the variable table (Table 1).

                                   5
The summary statistics in Table 2 show that the sample includes firms with a wide range
of sizes and financial characteristics. Firm size and sales are right-skewed, with some
very large firms pulling up the mean, while most firms are smaller. There is also
substantial variation in employment and investment levels across firms. Table 3 compares
defense contractors and non-contractors in the year 2000 and shows that the two groups
are generally similar, though there are some notable differences. Defense contractors
appear to be slightly larger in terms of assets and have lower profitability and cash flow
on average. They also hold somewhat less cash, which may reflect different financial
strategies or risk exposure. Overall, the two groups are comparable but not identical
before the fiscal shock.

Sales and assets are log-transformed to reduce skewness and mitigate heteroskedasticity.
To address the influence of outliers, all variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th
            1
percentiles.  A “small firm” variable is created by identifying firms in the bottom 50th
percentile of assets for the year 2000.

SIC codes are used when controlling for industry-by-year fixed effects. These are
aggregated to the two-digit level (from the reported three or four digits) to group firms
into broader industry categories (e.g., manufacturing or finance-related sectors). This is
done by converting the SIC code into a four-character string (adding leading zeros if
necessary), extracting the first two digits, and then converting that value back into a
numeric variable for use in regressions.

4.4. Identification of Contractors

From the Compustat Customer Segments file, we identify all observations labelled with
the customer type "GOVDOM" (domestic government) and create unique customer IDs
based on customer names. These are manually classified into either defense-related or
general government agencies depending on their name. Names related to the Department
of Defense (DoD), such as “defense”, “army”, “navy”, “military”, or similar are classified
as defense. Firms are classified as a defense contractor if more than 10% of their revenue
is to a defense-related department, or as a government contractor if more than 10% of
their revenue is to the domestic government, in the year 2000.

The fiscal year alignment is adjusted using the transaction date (srcdate) in the customer
segment file: transactions occurring from January through May are attributed to the
previous fiscal year to ensure consistency with the firm-year structure in the
Fundamentals Annual file.

1
 Winsorization is applied using Stata’s winsor2 command, which replaces extreme values in the specified variables with the values
at a defined percentile threshold. This procedure is conducted after merging all datasets and constructing the final analysis sample to
ensure consistency across variables.

                                   6
5. Empirical Strategy and Identification

5.1. Research Design and Identification Assumptions

We adopt a difference-in-differences (DiD) strategy that leverages pre-existing variation
in firms’ exposure to military procurement. The treatment group consists of firms
classified as a defense contractor, while the control group consists of all other firms.

We define the post-treatment period as fiscal years 2002 to 2005. Choosing 2000 as the
baseline year for classifying the firms, ensures that treatment status is determined prior to
the exogenous increase in defense spending, removing the risk of reverse causality. This
approach strengthens identification by isolating firms that were already engaged in
defense-related sales before the policy change, rather than those who entered in response
to it. This identification strategy is similar to the one used by Goldman et al. (2022).

5.2. Econometric Specification

The baseline equation is specified as:

         𝑌𝑖𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽 × (𝑑𝑒𝑓𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑒 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑖 × 𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡) + 𝛾𝑖𝑡 + 𝛿𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡 (1)

In the baseline specification (equation 1), 𝑌𝑖𝑡 denotes a financial outcome for firm 𝑖 in
year 𝑡, such as ROA, capex, or LogSales. The variable 𝑑𝑒𝑓_𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑔𝑖 equals one if the firm
reported more than 10% of its revenues from defense-related departments in 2000, and
𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡 equals one for fiscal years 2002-2005, indicating the post-treatment period. The
term 𝛾𝑖 captures firm fixed effects, controlling for time-invariant firm characteristics,
while 𝛿𝑖 represents year fixed effects, which absorb common macroeconomic shocks and
secular time trends. The coefficient 𝛽 captures the average difference in outcomes
between defense contractors and non-contractors following the increase in defense
spending, relative to the pre-treatment period.

To strengthen identification, we estimate an extended version of the model that includes
                                                 2
industry-by-year fixed effects (Correia, 2016).  This is defined as interactions between 2-
digit SIC codes and fiscal years. Additional control absorbs unobserved, time-varying
shocks specific to particular sectors, such as industry-wide changes in demand,
technology, or regulation, that could otherwise bias the estimated treatment effect.

         𝑌𝑖𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽 × (𝑑𝑒𝑓𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑒 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑖 × 𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑡) + 𝜆𝑗𝑡 + 𝛿𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖𝑡 (2)

The extended specification of the model (equation 2), controls for time-varying industry-
level effects by including industry-by-year fixed effects. Specifically, 𝜆𝑗𝑡 represents fixed
effects for each combination of industry 𝑗 and year 𝑡, capturing unobserved factors that

2
  All regressions are estimated using the “reghdfe” command in Stata, which enables absorption of high-dimensional fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level to account for serial correlation in outcomes.

                                   7
affect all firms within the same industry in a given year, such as technological changes,
regulatory developments, or industry-wide demand shifts. This specification replaces the
year fixed effects from the baseline model, allowing for a more flexible control of sector-
specific trends. This is particularly important in the context of defense procurement,
where federal spending may be disproportionately concentrated in sectors such as
aerospace, communications, or heavy manufacturing, which are correlated with defense.

This identification strategy relies on the parallel trends assumption, that in the absence of
the policy shock treated and control firms would have exhibited similar trends in
outcomes. To account for this, several aspects of this assumptions has been analyzed.
First, the treatment and control groups in table 3 display comparable pre-treatment
characteristics, minimizing concerns about systematic baseline differences. Second,
visual inspection of pre-treatment outcome dynamics reveals low indication of diverging
trends prior to the shock for all variables (Figure 1A-F). This is consistent with the parallel
trends assumption. Finally, we assume that spillover effects are negligible, meaning that
changes in the outcomes of non-contractors are not driven by indirect effects from defense
contractors’ behavior.

6. Empirical Results

6.1. Firm-Level Results

6.1.1. Effect of Fiscal Shock on Firm Performance
We find that defense contractors experienced a substantial and statistically significant
increase in sales following the 9/11 attacks. The coefficient on the interaction term
Defense Contractor × Post in the LogSales regression is positive at a magnitude of 0.15-
0.21, and significant for all columns except column 3 (Table 4, Panel A). This indicates
that firms with pre-existing defense contracts saw their sales increase in relation to non-
defense contractors in the years after the shock. This divergence is significant, especially
considering that defense and control firms had nearly identical pre-shock sales levels
(Table 3). The effect persists and slightly strengthens when controlling for industry-by-
year fixed effects, suggesting that this revenue boost is directly attributable to their status
as defense contractors during the period of increased defense spending, rather than
reflecting broader industry-specific trends. This substantial increase in sales highlights
the direct economic stimulus provided to firms within the defense sector by the surge in
government procurement.

Despite the increase in sales, profitability as measured by ROA, is not significant in the
panel (Table 4, Panel B). This suggests that defense contractors may have faced higher
production costs or engaged in capacity expansions, diluting the potential capture in
economies of scale. It is also possible that government contracts, while boosting revenues,
came with tighter margins or required substantial upfront investments in compliance and
specialized production capabilities. Although the defense firms experienced a higher
profit in absolute terms, the revenue growth did not immediately translate into improved
asset efficiency or higher returns. The lack of a profitability jump in the short term may
be caused by a delayed payoff. Firms could be laying groundwork for future profitability

                                   8
at the expense of present margins, or simply experiencing diminishing returns due to
capacity constraints.

Similarly, cash flow is not significant (Table 4, Panel C). One possible explanation is that
while sales increased, defense contractors may have encountered longer payment cycles
due to the nature of government procurement processes, which often involve delayed
disbursements and complex contractual terms. Additionally, investments in production
capacity or machinery could absorb much of the immediate cash inflow. As a result, the
improved sales figures did not directly translate into higher cash flows.

6.1.2. Effect of Fiscal Shock on Firm Investments
Capex is statistically significant in columns 1 and 2, with an estimated magnitude ranging
from 0.13 to 0.17 (Table 4, Panel D), while not being significant for columns 3 and 4.
Thus, the overall increase in investment is primarily driven by larger firms, which
typically have better access to external capital markets and can more readily finance
capital-intensive projects. This enables them to increase investment more quickly in
response to rising demand.

The limited magnitude of the investment response from small firms, indicates that they
may have been cautious in translating higher revenues (controlling for industry-by-year
fixed effects) into long-term expansions of production capacity. One plausible
explanation is uncertainty regarding the duration of the demand shock. The wars in the
Middle East (following 9/11) may have been viewed as temporary conflicts, leading firms
to question whether elevated demand would persist. In such an environment, smaller
firms in particular may have lacked the financial resources or risk tolerance to commit to
irreversible investments in new factories or equipment. Instead, these firms may have
prioritized strengthening their balance sheets or increasing financial flexibility, a behavior
that becomes evident when examining their cash holdings.

Cash holdings show a notable and statistically significant effect for small firms (columns
3 and 4 in Table 4, Panel E) by approximately 0.04 following the defense spending surge.
In contrast, large contractors show no statistically significant change in their cash holding
levels. This pattern, where only small and likely more financially constrained firms
accumulate significant cash reserves, aligns closely with the theory of precautionary
saving. As demonstrated by Han and Qiu (2007), financially constrained firms tend to
increase their cash balances significantly more than unconstrained firms when faced with
rising cash-flow uncertainty. Our findings for small defense contractors reflect a similar
dynamic. Facing potentially uncertain future demand, these firms appear to have chosen
to build liquidity from the increased sales generated (controlling for industry-by-year
fixed effects) by the defense spending surge. This highlights a key difference in how
firms, depending on size, manage the financial benefits from such exogenous shocks, with
smaller firms prioritizing the accumulation of cash rather than committing to long-term
investments. This shows that, in contrast to large firms which increased their capex, small
firms instead chose to increase their cash holdings.

In terms of employment, we find no statistically significant effect across any specification
(Table 4, Panel F). This lack of hiring response suggests that defense contractors met the

                                   9
increased demand without a proportional increase in headcount. The absence of job
growth is also consistent with the uncertainty narrative. Defense firms could have been
hesitant to take on the commitments of new permanent hires without confidence that
higher demand would persist. Additionally, some defense projects may be capital- or
skill-intensive, limiting the need for many new workers in the short run, which could be
explained from the increase in capex.

6.2. Robustness Tests

To assess the credibility of the baseline results, we implement two key robustness checks
designed to mitigate potential confounding factors and validate our identification
strategy.

We conduct a falsification test with government contractors to validate that the observed
effects are attributable specifically to the defense spending surge rather than broader
government spending trends. We perform this test using an alternative treatment group,
government contractors. The regression is conducted excluding firms previously
categorized defense contractors, to not contaminate the data.

The second robustness test is a validity test excluding technology-related firms from the
control group. Our main analysis includes a broad range of industries in the control group,
allowing for a complete comparison. However, we recognize that the dot-com bubble
could be a major potential confounder affecting the original control group in the period
1998-2005. Therefore, we re-run our regression excluding technology-related firms from
the control sample. This provides a cleaner comparison group, less susceptible to the
simultaneous economic shock, allowing us to assess if our key findings for defense
contractors hold.

6.2.1. Falsification test with government contractors
In contrast to our main results for defense contractors, government contractors reveal no
statistically significant increase in LogSales (Table A1, Panel A). This lack of significant
effects on performance supports our primary finding that the impacts were specific to
defense contractors. A similar pattern is observed for cash holdings, which are significant
across the full sample of government contractors (Table A1, Panel E). This suggests that,
alongside increased investment, goverment contractors also prioritized strengthening
their liquidity positions. Consistent with the behavior of smaller defense contractors, this
may reflect a precautionary response to heightened uncertainty in the post-9/11
environment, with firms opting to retain cash reserves rather than fully committing
additional resources to long-term investments.

We find that capex has a positive and statistically significant effect for government
contractors, suggesting that part of the investment increase may reflect a broader rise in
public sector spending rather than being solely driven by the fiscal shock in defense
spending (Table A1, Panel D). However, this result does not invalidate our previous
findings, as these effects are not mutually exclusive. Increased investment activity may
have been driven by a combination of general public and defense spending.

                                  10
6.2.2. Validity test Excluding Technology Firms
When excluding technology firms, we find that the positive and statistically significant
effect on LogSales for defense contractors persists and is even more pronounced for small
firms (Table A2, Panel A), compared to the main results (Table 4, Panel A). This indicates
that the observed increase in sales among defense contractors is robust to the exclusion
of technology firms from the control group and is not simply driven by poor performance
within the original control group.

However, the results for ROA change notably. In this robustness test, ROA becomes
positive and statistically significant across all specifications (Table A2, Panel B). This
suggests that the previously insignificant ROA results in our main analysis may have been
influenced by the strong performance of the technology sector in profitability metrics
during the study period. Following the dot-com bubble, many tech firms shifted their
focus toward profitability after a period of aggressive spending and weak earnings (Ofek
and Richardson, 2003). This shift could have affected the profitability dynamics of the
control group in the main regression, making the relative increase in ROA for defense
contractors appear insignificant by comparison. These profitability gains suggest defense
suppliers captured quasi-rents from the rapid spending increase, consistent with
procurement arrangements that guarantee margins on costs.

7. Discussion

7.1. Limitations

The primary limitation of this thesis is its focus on a specific group of publicly listed
defense contractors, which excludes smaller private firms and subcontractors that also
played a significant role in the post-9/11 defense expansion. While this focus enables a
clean identification strategy based on available financial data, it limits the extent to which
the results can be generalized to the broader defense industry. However, this limitation is
common to all studies using firm-level financial data, as information for private firms in
the U.S. is not public.

Another limitation is the focus on short- to medium-term effects, with the analysis period
ending in 2005. This cutoff was chosen to avoid contamination from the Global Financial
Crisis, but it prevents an assessment of longer-term outcomes and whether the observed
firm-level adjustments persisted. Future research could explore other fiscal shock settings
which allow for examining the long-term durability of these effects.

7.2. Further Research

While this study focuses on the post-9/11 period, recent geopolitical developments raise
important questions that deserve further investigation. The sharp rise in global tensions
since our sample period calls for a closer look at how modern conflicts affect defense-
related supply chains. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in 2022, for example, triggered an
unprecedented surge in Western defense budgets (Tian, Lopes da Silva, Liang, &

                                  11
Scarazzato, 2024). Examining whether this shock has an influence on the operating
performance, investment, and employment of U.S. contractors could be of interest.

The European context is also highly relevant. After years of underinvestment, EU
member states have announced multi-year rearmament programs (Hansen, 2022).
Analyzing how domestic contractors respond to these spending increases compared to
similar firms elsewhere in the Union could reveal whether Europe’s fragmented
procurement structure limits the effectiveness of this stimulus or instead strengthens it
through increased regional cooperation.

8. Conclusion

Understanding how firms respond to sudden, large-scale fiscal shocks, is critical for
assessing the real-world effectiveness of government spending. This thesis examines the
sharp rise in U.S. defense expenditures after 9/11 to shed light on how such fiscal shocks
affect firm-level behavior. With the renewed focus on military spending amid global
tensions and active conflicts, understanding the downstream effects of defense budgets
on corporate decisions is central to ongoing economic policy debates.

Our central finding is that while firms with pre-existing defense contracts experienced
significant revenue growth compared to similar firms, these gains did not uniformly
translate into improved profitability or job creation. Larger firms responded by increasing
capital investments, rather than workforce expansion to meet increased demand. Smaller
firms did not increase capital investments but instead prioritized liquidity, accumulating
cash reserves. The result highlights how fiscal shocks impact firms unevenly, with
outcomes shaped not only by industry exposure but also by firm size. This suggests that
fiscal interventions of this kind inflate top-line revenues without directly improving
firms’ bottom lines.

Beyond the specific context of this fiscal shock, these findings offer broader insights for
future fiscal policy design. They underscore the importance of accounting for financial
frictions and firm heterogeneity when evaluating the effectiveness of demand-side
interventions. To maximize the long-term impact of fiscal policy, governments should
consider pairing spending programs with measures that reduce financing barriers and
encourage firms, particularly smaller ones, to invest confidently in future growth.
Understanding these heterogeneous firm-level responses is essential for designing
policies that effectively translate fiscal stimulus into desired economic outcomes.

                                  12
9. References

Almeida, H., Campello, M., & Weisbach, M. S. (2004). The cash flow sensitivity of cash.
The Journal of Finance, 59(4), 1777-1804.

Barrot, J.-N., & Nanda, R. (2020). Government procurement as a tool for industrial
policy: Evidence from the Small Business Administration. The Review of Financial
Studies, 33(8), 3775-3811.

Council on Foreign Relations. (n.d.). How 9/11 changed U.S. foreign policy: Timeline.
https://www.cfr.org/timeline/how-911-reshaped-foreign-policy

Correia, S. (2016). HDFE: Stata module to estimate linear models with multiple levels of
fixed effects. Statistical Software Components S457985, Boston College Department of
Economics. Retrieved from https://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s457985.html

Crawford, N., & Costs of War Project. (2021). Economic costs of war. Watson Institute
for International and Public Affairs, Brown University.
https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/costs/economic

Goldman, J. (2020). Government as customer of last resort: The stabilizing effects of
government purchases on firms. The Review of Financial Studies, 33(2), 610-643.

Goldman, J., Iyer, R., & Nanda, R. (2022, December 12). Amplifying the fiscal multiplier:
The role of banks [Working paper]. University of Warwick & Imperial College Business
School.

Han, S., & Qiu, J. (2007). Corporate precautionary cash holdings. Journal of Corporate
Finance, 13(1), 43-57.

Hansen, H. (2022, June 3). German lawmakers approve €100 billion military revamp.
Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/world/europe/german-lawmakers-approve-100-bln-
euro-military-revamp-2022-06-03/

Kim, D., & Nguyen, H. (2019). Local government spending and corporate investment.
The Review of Financial Studies, 32(12), 4899-4932.

Watts, B. D. (2008). The U.S. defense industrial base: Past, present, and future. Center
for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments. Retrieved from
https://csbaonline.org/uploads/documents/2008.10.15-Defense-Industrial-Base.pdf

Nakamura, E., & Steinsson, J. (2014). Fiscal stimulus in a monetary union: Evidence from
U.S. regions. American Economic Review, 104(3), 753-792.

                                  13
Nan Tian, N., Lopes da Silva, D., Liang, X., & Scarazzato, L. (2024). Trends in world
military expenditure, 2023 (SIPRI Fact Sheet, April). Stockholm International Peace
Research Institute. https://www.sipri.org/sites/default/files/2024-
04/2404_fs_milex_2023.pdf

Ofek, E., & Richardson, M. (2003). DotCom mania: The rise and fall of internet stock
prices. The Journal of Finance, 58(3), 1113-1137.

Peltier, H. (2020). The growth of the “camo economy”: Consequences of the unchecked
expansion of federal contracting in the post-9/11 era. Costs of War Project, Watson
Institute for International and Public Affairs, Brown University.

Ramey, V. A. (2011). Identifying government spending shocks: It's all in the timing. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(1), 1-50.

Sköns, E., & Perlo-Freeman, S. (2011). SIPRI yearbook 2012: Armaments, disarmament
and international security.
https://www.sipri.org/sites/default/files/SIPRIYB12c04sIII.pdf

U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. (2024). Standard industrial classification
(SIC) codes. https://www.sec.gov/info/edgar/siccodes.htm

Wharton Research Data Services. (n.d.). Compustat North America (Fundamentals
Annual) [Data set]. Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved May 2, 2025,
from https://wrds.wharton.upenn.edu

                                  14
10. AI Transparency statement

To correct grammar, spellchecking, and reduce repetitive word usage, we utilised
Perplexity and ChatGPT. Additionally, it supported our coding process in Stata by
assisting with syntax errors.

                                  15
                              Table 1
Table 1 defines the accounting variables used in this paper. All data is sourced from
Compustat.

                                  16
                              Table 2

This table provides an overview of the full firm sample for the period 1998-2005. The
table reports the mean, median, standard deviation (S.D.), minimum and maximum
values, as well as the number of observations for each variable.

                              Table 3

This table reports the mean, median, and standard deviation (S.D.) for the control and
treatment groups (defense contractors) in the year 2000, along with the differences
between the groups for each statistic and the corresponding t-statistics for the difference
in means.

                                  17
                                                  Table 4

Table 4 reports regression results estimating the impact of post-9/11 defense spending on firm-level financial outcomes. The dependent
variable is indicated in each panel. The key coefficient of interest is from the interaction term Defense Contractor × Post, which captures the
differential effect on firms with over 10% of revenue from defense contracts in 2000. All regressions include firm and year fixed effects,
Columns (2) and (4) also control for industry-by-year fixed effects (2-digit SIC × fiscal year). Columns (1) and (2) use the full sample;
Columns (3) and (4) restrict to small firms (below the 2020 median total assets). Variables are defined in Table 1.

                                                       18
19
                                                  Figure 1

Figure 1 plots year-specific coefficients for defense contractors and non-defense contractors relative to the omitted base year (2001). The
figure illustrates the change of key variables before and after the fiscal spending shock. Coefficients are estimated separately for each year
to capture the dynamic effects over time. Variables are defined in Table 1.

 Figure 1A: LogSales Figure 1B: ROA

                                                       20
Figure 1C: Cashflow Figure 1D: Capex

Figure 1E: CashHoldings Figure 1F: Employees

                                                      21
Appendix

     22
                                              Table A1

Table A1 reports a robustness test using firms with substantial pre-9/11 government contract exposure (excluding defense contractors) as the
treatment group. The dependent variable is indicated in each panel. The key coefficient of interest is from the interaction term Government
Contractor × Post, capturing the differential effect on firms with over 10% of revenue from government contracts in 2000. The control group
consists of firms with no significant defense or government exposure. All regressions include firm and year fixed effects, Columns (2) and
(4) also add industry-by-year fixed effects (2-digit SIC × fiscal year). Columns (1) and (2) use the full sample, Columns (3) and (4) restrict
to small firms (below the 2020 median total assets). Variables are defined in Table 1.

                                                       23
24
                                              Table A2

Table A2 reports a robustness test addressing concerns that the observed effects may reflect the dot-com crash rather than the post-9/11
defense spending shock. The model is re-estimated excluding technology-related firms (SIC codes 3570-3579, 3660-3669, 3670-3679, 4810-
4813, and 7370-7379) from the control group. The key coefficient is from the interaction term Defense Contractor × Post, capturing the
effect on firms with over 10% of revenue from DoD contracts in 2000. Columns (1) and (2) use the full sample (excluding technology firms),
Columns (3) and (4) restrict to small firms (below the 2020 median total assets). All regressions include firm and year fixed effects, Columns
(2) and (4) also control for industry-by-year fixed effects (2-digit SIC × fiscal year). Variables are defined in Table 1.

                                                       25
26
                          Table A3

Table A3 lists the SIC code exclusions applied to the dataset. Firms are excluded if their
primary SIC code falls within Electric, Gas, and Sanitary Services (4900-4999), Financial
Services (6000-6999), or International Affairs and non-operating entities (≥ 9000) (SEC,
2024).

                                  27
                           Table A4

Table A4 lists SIC code exclusions used in the validity test excluding technology firms.
Technology-related firms are excluded based on primary SIC codes: 3570-3579
(Computer Equipment), 3660-3669 (Communications Equipment), 3670-3679
(Electronic Components), 4810-4813 (Telephone Communications), and 7370-7379
(Computer Services), following SEC (2024) classifications.

                                  28