Planting Portfolios

Panel Trees in the Swedish Equity Market

Erik Jin
Michael Brusis

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2025
Abstract:

This study evaluates the performance of the P-Tree algorithm (Cong et al., 2025) in the Swedish
equity market, a setting characterized by lower liquidity, fewer listed stocks, and limited historical
data. The P-Tree algorithm identifies return patterns by splitting stocks based on firm characteris-
tics, capturing both linear and non-linear relationships.
   In the Swedish context, the in-sample Sharpe ratio of the P-Tree portfolio was 0.92, exceeding
the market portfolio’s 0.64. Out-of-sample, the Sharpe ratio was 0.53 when training on the first half
of the sample and testing on the second half, and 0.48 in the reverse scenario. The P-Tree strategy
produced a statistically significant Fama–French three-factor α of 9.61% in-sample, and 3.21% out-
of-sample when predicting from the past to the future. In the reverse future-to-past prediction, the
α was 3.39%, which was not statistically significant at the 10% confidence level.
   The P-Tree model offers flexible structure, with the number of splits adapted to the available
data. In markets with limited historical or cross-sectional information, a shallow-tree configuration
can be implemented that focuses on the most informative characteristics, avoiding overfitting. In
data-rich environments, a deep-tree configuration can capture complex, non-linear relationships while
maintaining robustness. This adaptability ensures that P-Trees balance predictive power with data
availability, delivering interpretable and reliable predictions. Such properties make them a promising
tool for portfolio optimization, risk management, and factor-based investing in the finance industry.

Keywords:

    Machine learning, portfolio optimization, decision tree, efficient frontier, Sharpe ratio

Authors:

   Erik Jin (26057)
   Michael Brusis (25895)

Tutor:

   Ma´ıra Sontag Gonz´alez, Ph.D., Department of Finance

Examiner:

   Ramin P Baghai, Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis in Finance

Bachelor Program in Business and Economics Stockholm School of Economics

© Erik Jin and Michael Brusis, 2025
1 Introduction

It has long been understood that you should not put all your eggs in one basket. This metaphor
extends naturally to investing: rather than allocating all your capital to a single stock, you can re-
duce risk by diversifying across multiple assets. This idea forms the foundation of Modern Portfolio
Theory (MPT), introduced by economist Markowitz (1952). The objective of MPT is to maximize
expected return for a given level of risk, or equivalently, minimize risk for a given expected return.
By plotting expected return against risk (measured by the standard deviation of portfolio returns)
for all possible portfolios, one obtains the efficient frontier, which is the set of portfolios offering the
optimal trade-off between risk and return.

    When a risk-free asset is introduced, the line tangent to the efficient frontier defines the Capital
Market Line (CML). The point of tangency represents the optimal risky portfolio (the tangency
portfolio), which, under the assumptions of the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), corresponds
to the market portfolio. Portfolios along the CML dominate all others, offering the highest expected
return for a given level of risk. The excess return over the risk-free rate per unit of risk is measured
by the Sharpe ratio, a key metric in portfolio construction.

   Although Modern Portfolio Theory provides a theoretical framework for constructing efficient
portfolios, its practical implementation depends on accurate estimates of expected returns, vari-
ances, and covariances. As the number of assets increases, the number of parameters that must be
estimated grows quadratically, making reliable estimation increasingly challenging. To address these
challenges, empirical asset pricing research has developed alternative, data-driven methods for port-
folio formation. One of the most influential approaches is the construction of characteristic-sorted
portfolios, where stocks are grouped based on observable firm characteristics such as size, value, or
momentum. Characteristic-sorted portfolios are designed to capture how expected returns vary with
firm characteristics. Stocks are ranked based on an observable variable such as size, book-to-market
ratio, or momentum, and grouped into quantiles, with deciles or quintiles being most common in the
literature. This allows researchers to examine how average returns differ across these groups. The
difference in returns between high- and low-characteristic portfolios captures the return premium
associated with a given characteristic. In the finance literature, characteristic-sorted portfolios are
commonly used as benchmarks for evaluating portfolio performance. Their appeal lies in their sim-
plicity and transparency, which makes them easy to interpret and replicate. Moreover, they are
empirically grounded, as numerous studies have documented that systematic return patterns are
linked to well-known factors such as size, value, and momentum. As a result, characteristic-sorted
portfolios not only capture meaningful risk factors but also exhibit stability and robustness, since
the underlying stock characteristics tend to remain relatively consistent over time.

    In recent years, machine learning techniques have been increasingly applied to portfolio optimiza-
tion. Unlike traditional methods, which often rely on linear assumptions and parametric estimates,
machine learning algorithms can capture complex, non-linear relationships between asset returns and
risk factors. These models are particularly well-suited for high-dimensional datasets, allowing the
integration of multiple sources of information, including firm fundamentals and macroeconomic fac-
tors. Additionally, once trained, these models can scale to large asset universes. One novel approach
is the P-Tree (Panel Tree) algorithm introduced by Cong et al. (2025), which extends traditional
tree-based methods to panel data structures with the splitting criteria chosen to maximize an objec-
tive function. In this context, portfolio optimization begins with the entire asset universe at a root
node. The algorithm then systematically splits assets into child nodes based on firm characteristics

                                           3
(such as trading volume or book-to-market ratios), forming distinct portfolios at each leaf node. The
algorithm is covered in more detail in section 3.2.

   Unlike standard decision trees that optimize prediction accuracy locally, the P-Tree model uses a
global optimization criterion of maximizing the Sharpe ratio of the mean-variance efficient portfolio
constructed from all leaf portfolios. This approach maintains a time-invariant tree structure, ensur-
ing consistency across periods while capturing asymmetric interactions between characteristics. For
example, liquidity measures may predict returns differently for high-earnings versus low-earnings
stocks. By iteratively splitting the cross-section and re-estimating the tangency portfolio, P-Tree
generates diversified test assets that span a more efficient frontier than conventional sorted portfo-
lios, while remaining interpretable through its graphical tree structure.

   However, machine learning approaches typically excel when there is high-dimensional data with
complex interactions, and they require large amounts of data to train. As such, they have been
predominantly developed and tested in highly liquid markets such as the US stock market, where
extensive information about individual stocks is readily available. This raises an important ques-
tion: do these sophisticated models maintain their strong performance in less liquid markets with
sparser information and fewer observable characteristics? Testing machine learning methods in such
environments provides critical insights into their robustness and external validity beyond the well-
documented, data-rich settings where they were originally designed. Thus, our research question
is: Can the panel-tree algorithm still be used for portfolio construction in the Swedish
stock market?

2 Literature Review

2.1 Existing Literature
Machine learning methods have demonstrated substantial improvements in cross-sectional return
prediction for US equity markets. Gu et al. (2020) show that tree-based models and neural networks
deliver high Sharpe ratios and significant alphas relative to traditional factor models. Crucially, they
emphasize that shallow architectures with strong regularization outperform deep models because
they avoid overfitting when predictive signals are weak relative to noise. Their best-performing
strategies are market-neutral long-short portfolios with low market beta but high risk-adjusted re-
turns. Bryzgalova et al. (2023) extend these findings by applying gradient-boosted decision trees
to portfolio construction. They demonstrate that single-split stumps capture the majority of eco-
nomically meaningful predictability, while additional splits primarily fit noise rather than genuine
return patterns. This emphasis on simple models reflects a broader recognition that weak return
predictability favors interpretable specifications over complex alternatives.

   However, theoretical and empirical evidence suggests that machine learning performance depends
on market size and data quality. Martin and Nagel (2021) formalize the dimensionality problem
in asset pricing: when characteristics outnumber observations, even optimal investors must use
shrinkage or sparsity to avoid overfitting. They show that unconstrained complex models generate
misleading in-sample predictability, while true out-of-sample performance is best when models are
sparse. High in-sample significance often reflects estimation error rather than exploitable patterns.
Ghandar et al. (2016) provide supporting evidence, demonstrating that complex prediction models
underperform simple alternatives in dynamic financial markets. Freyberger et al. (2024) recom-
mend minimum leaf size constraints and early stopping to prevent decision trees from fitting noise,

                                           4
particularly in small panels.

   Most directly relevant to smaller markets, Didisheim et al. (2024) demonstrate that complex
machine learning models systematically overfit in international equity markets outside the United
States. They attribute this underperformance to limited cross-sectional coverage and weaker predic-
tive signals. They recommend conservative specifications, such as shallow trees and ridge regression
for non-US markets. Deeper architectures provide no economic value over conservative specifica-
tions in data-constrained settings and serve only to add noise. This finding is reinforced by evidence
that factor premiums themselves are country-specific. Griffin (2002) establishes that asset pricing
patterns documented in US data do not automatically generalize internationally, with local factor
implementations explaining returns better than global factors. Ammann and Steiner (2023) confirm
this pattern specifically for Nordic markets, finding that factor premiums across Denmark, Finland,
Norway, and Sweden are weaker and less stable than in US data, attributed to smaller market size,
lower liquidity, and higher idiosyncratic risk. Nevertheless, Drobetz and Otto (2021) show that
machine learning can improve return forecasting in European markets when models are adequately
trained and tuned to avoid overfitting, suggesting that careful implementation matters as much as
market size.

   This thesis extends Cong et al. (2025), who develop the Panel Tree (P-Tree) framework for
portfolio construction in the US stock market. P-Trees belong to the broader literature on latent
factor models in asset pricing, which includes deep learning models for nonlinear factor modeling
and various PCA-based approaches. While these methods can capture variable nonlinearity and
asymmetric interactions, P-Trees offer a distinct advantage with graphical interpretability combined
with economic guidance. P-Trees recursively split the cross-section of stocks to maximize the Sharpe
ratio of portfolios formed at each leaf node, maintaining a time-invariant structure that facilitates
interpretation. The algorithm incorporates regularization through minimum leaf size constraints
and employs a global optimization criterion rather than local prediction accuracy. Cong et al.
(2025) demonstrate that P-Trees achieved strong out-of-sample performance in US data, typically
producing up to 9 splits, with their primary single tree, that identify complex interactions between
characteristics. This raises the question of whether P-Trees maintain their advantages in smaller
markets with limited data and fewer available characteristics.

    Despite data limitations, several firm characteristics exhibit predictive power in smaller interna-
tional markets. Soliman (2008) decomposes return on equity and finds that asset turnover contains
information about future returns beyond simple profitability ratios, as it is positively correlated with
subsequent earnings changes and future stock returns even after controlling for other ROE compo-
nents. Hou et al. (2022) confirm that asset turnover remains a robust predictor across multiple
international samples, including European markets, and is economically significant even in smaller
cross-sections. Similarly, cash holdings appear linked to return premiums in constrained markets.
Simutin (2010) documents that firms with excess cash earn higher subsequent returns than firms
with low or negative excess cash, even after controlling for standard risk factors. Bates et al. (2023)
extend this finding internationally, showing that high cash-to-asset ratios command a return pre-
mium in smaller European markets, with the strongest effect in countries with higher idiosyncratic
volatility and weaker corporate governance. Beyond individual characteristics, the market structure
itself may favor certain strategies. Bali et al. (2024) find that the premium for market-neutral
strategies is highest in smaller, less liquid markets due to higher idiosyncratic volatility and lim-
ited arbitrage capital. This suggests that a market-neutral P-Tree approach may be particularly
well-suited to the Swedish context despite data constraints.

                                           5
2.2 Contribution to Literature
Despite extensive research on machine learning in US asset pricing, P-Trees remain untested in
smaller international markets. This thesis provides the first application of the P-Tree methodology
outside the United States, examining whether interpretable machine learning methods maintain their
advantages in data-constrained environments. The Swedish equity market represents a critical test
case as a developed market with fewer listed firms than the United States, allowing us to assess how
sample size affects machine learning performance in a high-quality institutional setting. To enable
this analysis, we developed a custom data processing pipeline integrating monthly market data from
Swedish House of Finance (2025b) with annual accounting data from Swedish House of Finance
(2025c), applying forward-filling logic to ensure data availability while preventing look-ahead bias.
We train single P-Tree models to construct optimized portfolios and evaluate their performance
against standard Swedish asset pricing factors, testing whether P-Trees can extract risk premiums
beyond those captured by traditional factor models.

3 Methodology

3.1 Data Gathering and Preparation
Obtaining a clean, quality dataset is arguably one of the most challenging and time-consuming parts
of training any machine learning algorithm. P-Trees are no exception to this challenge. The problem
becomes even more severe in smaller markets with limited coverage, liquidity, and fewer publicly
traded equities. To address these constraints, a custom data preparation pipeline was built that
combined several available datasets into one cleaned final dataset suitable for training.

    The choice of data sources is critical for the validity of any empirical study. Unlike the US mar-
ket, where widely used databases such as CRSP exist, there is no single database for the Swedish
market that contains all firm-level fundamentals and market variables required for this study. We
evaluated several potential data sources, including “LSEG” (2025), but for our specific sample and
variable requirements its coverage was incomplete for some companies and accounting items. This
led us to focus on databases provided by the Swedish House of Finance. The FinBas dataset from
Swedish House of Finance (2025b) provides the universe of listed companies on the Stockholm Stock
Exchange together with monthly market data and selected firm characteristics. The Serrano dataset
from Swedish House of Finance (2025c) complements this with detailed financial statement data
for Swedish firms. Comparable information may be available in other commercial databases such as
Bloomberg, but these were not accessible within the scope of this research.

   The data preprocessing consisted of multiple steps. Data points outside the time frame were
filtered out. Missing values were handled. Duplicate variables present in multiple datasets were
removed. Unnecessary variables were excluded from the model. As previously mentioned, the
time window chosen was from June 1998 to November 2019. This is due to the availability of the
Fama-French factors provided by the Swedish House of Finance which only had data up to 2020.
The lower bound is determined by both the availability of the Serrano database, with the earliest
observation in 1997, and data quality constraints with limited observations and insufficient coverage
for many firm characteristics for a reliable cross-sectional analysis. Part of the filtering included
removing multiple share types from the same firm. If multiple share classes were included, the
firm-level characteristics used as explanatory variables are identical across share classes, while the
market variables (prices, returns, liquidity) differ. This creates multiple observations with the same

                                           6
explanatory features but different outcomes. In a prediction or regression setting, it can bias the
model. Therefore, the most liquid share class was chosen to represent the firm. The liquidity was
measured primarily with turnover in SEK, but traded volume was used as a secondary tie-breaker.
Another part of the process was to filter out foreign stocks. These stocks are defined as stocks of firms
based in other countries. The FinBas database included stocks belonging to Finnish firms which
were not part of the analysis and thus filtered out. Trading data from four Stockholm based Swedish
equity markets were included. These were ranked according to exchange quality to ensure consistent
price information and avoid duplicating observations for stocks listed on multiple venues. Nasdaq
Stockholm (Main Market), the primary regulated exchange in Sweden, was given the highest priority
(Rank 1). The secondary or alternative markets were ranked as follows: Nasdaq First North (Growth
Market, Rank 2), Nordic Growth Market (NGM, Rank 3), and Spotlight / AktieTorget (Rank 4).
This ranking system ensures that when a stock is listed on multiple exchanges simultaneously, only
the highest-priority venue is used in the dataset.
   Only variables that could be used to replicate the variables used by Cong et al. (2025) were
kept. This was for the variables from both the FinBas and Serrano datasets. Variables that had low
coverage were also excluded, even if they were used by Cong et al. (2025). For example, dividend
yield only had a coverage of 0.44%. With such low coverage the variable would not have any signif-
icant predictive power.

   The next step was to merge the data. Before merging the cleaned FinBas and Serrano datasets, a
mapping table was created. The FinBas dataset used ISIN as identifier while Serrano used organiza-
tion number (org nr) as identifier. The “LSEG” (2025) database was used to create this mapping,
as it included both ISIN and tax-id. In Sweden, the tax-id is constructed from the organization
number by adding the string ”SE” to the start and the integers ”01” to the end. Thus, to retrieve
the organization number, these were stripped off. However, LSEG coverage was incomplete. Ap-
proximately half of the stocks in our sample could not be mapped using LSEG data and had to be
matched manually by cross-referencing company names and identifiers from multiple sources. The
final mapping table was constructed as a dictionary with ISINs as keys and organization numbers
as values.

   One problem that needed to be accounted for when merging the two datasets was that FinBas
had monthly data while Serrano only had annual data. They could therefore not be merged directly.
One option for merging the data was to convert the FinBas data from monthly to annual data by
computing the average for the monthly data points across every calendar year. The main concern
with this approach would be the loss of granularity in the dataset, which is of particular concern
since this would reduce the number of time points from 258 to only 22. This issue is further amplified
because most stocks did not have full coverage across the whole time window studied (see Section 4).

   The method we used was to merge the datasets by forward-filling annual accounting data across
multiple months. The main drawback with this approach is that the model loses some predictive
power since the same accounting variables are used to predict different monthly returns. However,
the motivation for proceeding with this approach is that this information structure reflects real-world
conditions. An investor’s knowledge of the most recent accounting information for a firm is based
on the firm’s most recent annual report. After the tables were merged, new characteristics that
use information from both tables were created. These included return on assets, book-to-market,
earnings-to-price ratio, sales-to-price, and cashflow-to-price. The final filter removed all rows con-
taining more than four missing values. This step was implemented to reduce noise in the dataset
and improve the signal-to-noise ratio for subsequent analysis.

                                           7
    The final step involves lagging the explanatory variables to prevent look-ahead bias. In practice,
only past information is available when making investment decisions. Using contemporaneous infor-
mation to predict stock prices would artificially inflate predictive power and fail to reflect realistic
trading conditions. By lagging the variables, we ensure that the model relies solely on information
observable at the time of prediction. The number of lags applied to each variable depends on its
category, as shown in Table 2. As a consequence of using lag, the total number of usable observations
in the dataset is reduced. Table 1 shows the full data filtering pipeline and the number of remaining
observations after each step.

Table 1: The data filtering pipeline applied to construct the dataset. Steps include: removing
non-Swedish equities, excluding over-the-counter or off-exchange stocks, keeping only one exchange
per stock, including only stocks with annual reports from the Serrano database, and filtering out
observations with more than four missing values. The filtration reduces the number of observations
from approximately 112,000 to 39,524.

         Step Records Description
        1. Raw FinBas monthly data ∼112,000 All FinBas records
        2. Filter SE/SEK stocks only ∼105,000 Swedish stocks in SEK
        3. Remove OTC/off-exchange ∼95,000 Liquid exchange-traded only
        4. De-duplicate by ISIN-date ∼95,000 One record per firm-date
        5. Merge with Serrano (accounting) ∼67,000 Inner join via ISIN-OrgNr
        6. Apply lags and filters ∼61,000 Remove missing targets
         7. Final dataset 39,524 Ready for P-Tree

Table 2: Variable categories and applied lags to prevent look-ahead bias. Accounting and growth
variables have a 6-month publication lag, market variables 1 month, momentum 0–12 months de-
pending on the window, CHPM 6 months, and CHCSHO 12 months.

       Category Variable Lag / Methodology
       Accounting Balance Sheet & Income Statement 6-month publication lag
                                                  data at t corresponds to FYE ≤ t − 6
       Market Market Cap (ratios) Current month t (e.g., B/M)
                     Returns (Target) Lead return t + 1
      Momentum MOM1M Return in t
                   MOM6M Cum. return t − 6 to t − 1
                   MOM12M Cum. return t − 12 to t − 1
                   MOM36M Cum. return t − 36 to t − 12
                   MOM60M Cum. return t − 60 to t − 12
                   SEAS1A Return in t − 12
       Growth AGR Total Assets YoY t − 18 to t − 6
                   SGR Sales YoY t − 18 to t − 6
                   LGR LT Debt YoY t − 18 to t − 6
       Changes CHCSHO Shares outstanding YoY t − 12
                   CHPM Profit Margin change t − 18 to t − 6

                                           8
3.2 P-Tree Algorithm
This thesis employs the P-Tree algorithm developed by Cong et al. (2025) to construct portfolios
from an asset universe consisting of equities available in the Stockholm stock exchange. The final
portfolios are the leaf nodes, which are constructed such that they can fulfill the global objective
which is to construct the efficient frontier. The algorithm, provided by the authors on GitHub Cong
et al. (2025), was implemented in R. Prior to modeling, the data were pre-processed in Python using
the pandas library and then imported into R for use in the P-tree algorithm.

   The P-Tree algorithm works on panel data with n assets and T time periods. Assuming a total
of j splits, there will be j + 1 leaf basis portfolios. The returns of these portfolios form a matrix

                                    (j)       (j)       (j)       (j)         T ×(j+1)
                           Rt = [R1,t , ..., Rn,t, ..., Rj+1,t] ∈ R

           j
where Rn,t represents a length T vector containing the excess returns over the T periods of the n:th
                                   (j)     T
leaf node. The latent factors ft  ∈ R  is a time series vector that represents the weighted return
of the portfolios after splitting the asset universe into sub-portfolio based on characteristics

                                                           (j)       (j)  (j)
                                  ft  = Rt w

         j     (j+1)
where w ∈ R    is a vector of the weights for the leaf basis portfolios. The optimal weights are
calculated with                                  
                                                   ′       −1
                                        (j)      ˆ    (j)   (j)              ˆ    (j)
                         w   ∝  E[Rt Rt ] + γI   E[Rt ] (1)
and where each row sums to 1 to ensure that the total weight of all leaf basis portfolios is 1.
                                                         ′
 ˆ   j      j+1       ˆ   j  j       (j+1)×(j+1)
E[Rt ] ∈ R    and E[Rt Rt ] ∈ R          are the sample mean excess return and the second
moment matrix for the leaf basis portfolios. This is a variation of optimal weight solution derived
from Markowitz’s mean-variance optimization framework

                                                        ′ ˆ
                             min w Σw
                                                                                                   ′
                               subject to 1 w = 1
                                                               ′
                              subject to w μˆ = μ

where w are the optimal weights, Σ is the covariance matrix, ˆˆ                      μ is the expected return and μ is the
target return. This is a constrained optimization problem that can be solved using the method of
Lagrange multipliers. The weight constraint can be accounted for by first lifting the constraint, and
later rescaling the optimal weights such that they sum to 1.
                                               1  ′ ˆ          ′
                        L(w, λ) =  w Σw − λ(w μˆ − μ)
                                       2
                             ∂L   ˆ
                               = Σw − λμˆ = 0                             (2)
                          ∂w
                                  ∂L     ′
                              = w μˆ − μ = 0
                              ∂λ

                                    ∗                                  ∗     ˆ−1
Let the optimal weight be defined as w . The first partial derivative gives w = λΣ    μˆ which sets
                                                           ˆ−1
the weights proportional to values that maximizes the Sharpe ratio Σ  μˆ, and the using the second
partial derivative we obtain
                                    ∗      μ   ˆ−1
                           w =    Σ  μˆ
                                       μˆ′ Σˆ−1 μˆ

                                           9
which gives the weights that optimizes the Sharpe ratio given a level of return μ. The weights can
            ∗    w
be rescaled w = 1′w such that they sum to 1.

   The algorithm provided by Cong et al. (2025) is a variation of this methodology. They use an
unconstrained version that only tries to find weights that optimizes the Sharpe ratio and there is
no target return constraint. Instead of using the covariance matrix ΣˆF they use the second moment
                                     ′
           ˆ    (j)   (j)                                                                                           ′
matrix E[Rt Rt ] This is a good approximation if the mean matrix defined as ˆμF μˆF has small
values in comparison to ΣˆF

                                                                       ′
                              ˆ   (j)   (j)      ˆ           ′     ˆ       ˆ            ′
                    E[Rt Rt ] = ΣF + ˆμF μˆF ≈ ΣF , if ΣF ≫ μˆF μˆF

This can be justified as the returns often have small mean in comparison to volatility. Their algo-
rithm also includes a shift in the matrix inversion of the size γI. γ is a parameter which stabilizes
the matrix inversion which can be a problem if the matrix is ill-conditioned. This can happen if
the returns of the leaf basis portfolios are close to or completely linearly dependent. By including
                                                                   ′
                             ˆ    (j)   (j)
this shift, the matrix E[Rt Rt ] + γI becomes better conditioned. This is a trade-off between
computational stability and reliability and optimal weight selection.

    The algorithm begins with an initialization stage in which all stocks are grouped into a single root
                                          (0)     T
node representing the market portfolio, Rt ∈ R . This is the value weighted return of the asset
universe across the T periods. Before the first split, firm characteristics which are the dependent
variables in the model, are normalized cross-sectionally to the range [−1, 1] within each period. For
the first split, the model evaluates splits from the pre-specified thresholds cm ∈ [−0.6, −0.2, 0.2, 0.6]
for each characteristic. This splits the assets in the parent node into quintiles based on their value for
a specific characteristic. For the first split, the parent node includes all the assets. The algorithm
tests splits ˜ck,m where k denotes the characteristic. The value of characteristic k for an asset is
denoted zk and whether the asset is placed in the left child node depends on whether zk ≤ c˜(k,m)
where ˜c(k,m) denotes the current threshold for characteristic k. If it is not, the asset is placed on the
right child node. The algorithm chooses the one threshold for the characteristic that maximizes the
Sharpe ratio                      q
                                                    ′ ˆ−1
                                L(˜ck,m) =  μˆF  ΣF μˆF (3)

      ˆ−1
where ΣF μˆF are the optimal weights derived from Markowitz’s unconstrained mean-variance frame-
                                                            (1)            (1)
work, see equation 2. For the first split, F = ft  , where ft  is a scalar time series of the return of
                                               (1)       (1)    (1)             (1)
the sum of the weighted portfolios Rt = [R1,t , R2,t ], where R1,t represents the return of the assets
                                 (1)
below the threshold and R2,t represents the assets above the threshold. The return of the first factor
is calculated by choosing optimal weights for the two sub-portfolios based on a characteristic and a
threshold, and taking the weighted sum of their respective returns.

   The economic interpretation can be better understood with the following example. Let the split
be for the characteristic return on asset (ROA) (full list of abbreviations in Appendix 7), and let
the optimal threshold derived from iterating through the pre-specified thresholds in cm, splitting the
assets based on the threshold, and choosing the one that maximizes the Sharpe ratio from equation
3, given the optimal weights given by equation 1. If the threshold was calculated to be 0.2 and
                                                                  ∗          ∗
the optimal weights for the portfolios are calculated to be w1 = 0.3, w2 = 0.7, then the economic
interpretation would be that the assets with return on asset values in the top 40 percentiles have

                                          10
higher returns, and that the optimal risk adjusted return can be achieved by constructing a portfolio
with 30% of total capital allocated to assets in the bottom 60 percentiles of return on asset (ROA),
and 70% capital allocated to asset in the top 40 percentiles of return on asset. The factor for the
first split is calculated as
                                              (1)      ∗  (1)     ∗  (1)
                                ft  = w1 R1,t + w2 R2,t
and the sample mean ˆμF which represents the mean excess return achieved from the specific split

                                                                    (1)
                                        μˆF = E[ft  ]

                             ˆ           (1)
with the covariance matrix ΣF = Var[f t ] ∈ R for the first step.

   For the second step, one of the child nodes generated from the first step becomes an internal
                                                                                           (2)        (2)    (2)    (2)
node and is split. After the second split there will be 3 portfolios, Rt = [R1,t , R2,t , R3,t ]. The
split is chosen to maximize the Sharpe ratio in equation 3 using the weights from equation 1 with
            (2)       (2)   (2)   (2)                                  ∗       ∗   ∗   ∗ ′
the new Rt = [R1,t , R2,t , R3,t ]. The optimal weights are w  = [w1 , w2 , w3 ] and the new factor
  (2)
ft  is calculated as
                         X3
                                             (2)      (2)  ∗          ∗  (i)
                            f t = Rt w =   wi Rt
                                                           i=1
with the new sample mean vector           "     #
                                                                    (1)
                                                   E[ft  ]
                                  μˆF =    (2)
                                                   E[ft  ]
and the new covariance matrix
                           "                       #
                                                           (1)               (1)   (2)
                               ˆ         Var[ft  ] Cov[ft  , ft  ]
                          ΣF =       (1)  (2)          (2)
                                       Cov[f t , ft  ] Var[f t ]

For the third step and onward, the same procedure is applied: For each leaf node, calculate the
Sharpe ratio for splitting that node given a characteristic and a threshold. Choose to split the
node for a given threshold and characteristic that maximizes the Sharpe ratio. The algorithm
is terminated when either the maximum depth is reached, the minimum leaf size defined by the
minimum number of assets in a leaf, is reached, or that any further split does not increase the
Sharpe ratio. The hyperparameters will be covered in section 3.4. Being a greedy algorithm, the
sequential growth of the tree ensures computational feasibility compared to a full enumeration of
possible sortings Cong et al. (2025). The final output of the algorithm after J splits are the leaf
                     (J)       (J)       (J)       (J)                                       (J)
basis portfolio Rt = [R1,t , ..., Rn,t , ..., RJ+1,t] and the final latent factor f t . This encodes a set
of splits of the characteristics that maximizes the Sharpe ratio of the asset universe.

3.3 Extensions - Boosted Panel Trees

1
 The factor from one P-Tree represents the tangency portfolio of the mean-variance efficient frontier.
The mean-variance efficient frontier represents sets of portfolios that have the highest return given
a level of risk. The tangency portfolio is the portfolio with the highest Sharpe-ratio among the
portfolios that span the mean-variance efficient frontier when investors can invest in a risk-free
asset. In this study, the 1-month Swedish T-bill represents the risk-free asset. It is theoretically

   1
    The boosted P-Tree model is not used for the main results.

                                          11
possible to extend the mean-variance efficient portfolio through boosting. The boosting algorithm
fits seamlessly into the P-Tree algorithm since it adds an additional step that is similar to the split
criterion step in the P-Tree algorithm. If we denote the final factor obtained from the regular P-Tree
                   J1
algorithm with ft  , the new optimization function becomes
                     q
                                                    ′ ˆ−1
                                L(˜ck,m) =  μˆF  ΣF μˆF (4)

               J1   2                                                                                 J1   J2
where F = [f t , ft  ]. After the first boosted tree is complete, the factor set will be F = [ft  , ft  ].
                                                                                        J1       Jp
This procedure can be repeated p times until the final factor set becomes F = [f t , . . . , f t ]. Given
this set of factors, the objective is to find weights of the factors such that
                     q
                                                   ′ ˆ−1
                                L(F ) =  μˆF  ΣF μˆF (5)

is maximized. This represents an all-tree mean-variance efficient portfolio. This approach also uses
indirect regularization by optimizing the weights on the factors and not on the leaf portfolios directly.
This avoids high-dimensional issues related to optimizing to many weights simultaneously which can
lead to poor estimates of the optimal weights and overfitting. Thus, the results are more robust and
there is less risk of overfitting.

3.4 Hyperparameter Configuration
The Boosted P-Tree algorithm is governed by several hyperparameters that determine the structure,
regularization, and stability of the estimation process. In this study, some hyperparameters followed
the same configuration as the model employed by Cong et al. (2025), while other were adjusted to
account for the different market structure of the Swedish equity market.
                                        −4
   The covariance shrinkage parameter γ = 10   introduces a regularization term to the diagonal of
the covariance matrix, ensuring numerical stability when inverting it to compute portfolio weights.
A higher value of γ yields smoother, more conservative portfolios by shrinking the covariance matrix
toward the identity, whereas a lower value makes the model more sensitive to the estimated covariance
structure but may increase instability. The step of the algorithm involving this parameter is
                                             ′     −1
                                        (j)      ˆ    (j)   (j)              ˆ    (j)
                         w   ∝  E[Rt Rt ] + γI   E[Rt ] (6)

                                                                  −5
   At the ensemble level, the covariance factor shrinkage parameter λ = 10   regularizes the co-
variance matrix of the P-Tree factors themselves. This prevents any single tree from dominating
the boosted ensemble and ensures that the combination of factors remains well-conditioned. Smaller
values encourage stronger exploitation of factor correlations while larger values promote balance and
robustness. Another parameter that controls the boosting is the learning rate η. This parameter con-
trols how much weight each additional factor has in the final factor set. These two hyperparameters
work together through

                                         ˆ       −1
                                wF ∝ ( ΣF + λI)  μˆF
                                        (P )       (P −1)    (P )
                                 wf inal = [wf inal , ηwF ]

         (P )
where wF denotes the p:th component of wF
   The split thresholds cm ∈ [−0.6, −0.2, 0.2, 0.6] define the candidate partition points for firm char-
acteristics. Each potential split is evaluated based on its contribution to the Sharpe ratio, thereby

                                          12
determining the optimal granularity of cross-sectional partitioning. Narrower thresholds allow finer
differentiation among firms but may also increase sensitivity to noise.

   To prevent overfitting, a minimum leaf size of three firms per terminal node is imposed. This
constraint ensures that each leaf portfolio is estimated from a sufficient cross-section of firms. The
parameter value is scaled from the U.S. market to the Swedish context based on the relative number
of available monthly stocks. Cross-sectional winsorization is also applied at the 1st and 99th per-
centiles of firm characteristics and returns, replacing extreme values with these boundary percentiles
to limit the influence of outliers and transient price effects.

   The number of boosting iterations T is controlled by num iter. It determines how many trees are
sequentially grown. Cong et al. (2025) set T = 9 boosting iterations. However, due to the limited
cross-sectional data of the Swedish market, as can be seen in Figure 1, we empirically determined
the optimal number of iterations through out-of-sample validation. Testing with different boosting
iterations resulted in more splits, but worse performance and less predictive power. For the Swedish
market, the single tree configuration (T = 1, no boosting) provided superior performance. The out-
of-sample Sharpe ratio of 0.53, see table 6, could not be beaten by subsequent changes in boosting
iterations. In fact, T ≥ 2 parameters improved in-sample performance, but simultaneously degraded
out-of-sample performance (see Appendix 7)
   Finally, the maximum tree depth is restricted to 10, limiting the number of consecutive splits
per tree. While deeper trees can capture more complex, nonlinear interactions between firm charac-
teristics and returns, excessive depth increases the risk of overfitting. This cap provides a balance
between model flexibility and generalization.

    Overall, these hyperparameters jointly control the balance between flexibility, stability, and in-
terpretability in the Boosted P-Tree model. The shrinkage parameters (γ, λ and η) govern regular-
ization and numerical stability, while structural parameters such as the split thresholds, leaf size,
and tree depth determine the complexity of cross-sectional partitioning.

4 Results

4.1 Data Description
An important aspect of understanding the performance of data-intensive methods such as machine
learning approaches is studying the data set. This is an integral part of the research question as one
of the key characteristics of the Swedish stock market is the lack of data available to retail investors.
Looking at figure 1 we can see that the average number of firms each year is growing. The maximum
number of firms for a single time period is roughly 250 and the mean is 153. This shows that the
historical coverage is not extensive. To put it into perspective, the total number of firms in the
dataset is 575 as can be seen in table 3.

                                          13
Figure 1: Time series plot of the number of Swedish listed firms included in the dataset over time.
The coverage reflects the availability of financial and accounting variables used in the empirical
analysis. Variations in coverage occur due to listings, delistings, and missing observations, and
therefore determine which firms enter the P-tree model at each point in time.

Table 3: Summary statistics of the dataset used to train the model, including the total number of
observations after filtering, the number of unique firms, the temporal span of the data (in months and
date range), the number of characteristics, the average cross-sectional coverage (firms per month),
and the average temporal coverage (months per firm).

                     Metric Value
                      Observations 39,524
                     Companies 575
                    Months 258
                      Characteristics 33
                     Date Range 1998-06-30 to 2019-11-30
                    Avg Companies/Month 153
                     Avg Months/Company 68.7

   The mean coverage per firm is 68.7 months out of a total of 258 months, meaning that most
firms are observed for only a fraction of the sample, see figure 2. This intermittent presence may
increase noise in the estimated factor returns and exposures, potentially affecting the stability of
factor weights.

                                          14
Figure 2: Histogram showing the distribution of firms’ temporal coverage, measured as the number
of months each firm is present in the dataset. The mean coverage is 68.7 months. The distribution
is right-skewed, with the majority of firms exhibiting shorter-than-average coverage.

                                          15
   In comparison, Cong et al. (2025) had a much more comprehensive dataset. They had monthly
data from 1981-2020 and the average and median coverage per month was 5265 and 4925 for the
first 20 years, and 4110 and 3837 for the latter 20 years. They use 61 characteristics while this study
can only use 33. This reflects limited data availability for constructing these variables. Figure 3
shows the difference in total number of observations and number of characteristics.

Figure 3: Bar-plot comparing the data availability with the original paper. The plots shows com-
parisons of the total number of observations and the number of characteristics used. The original
paper had approximately 2,250,000 observations and 61 characteristics, while this study had 39,524
observations and 33 characteristics.

   The correlation of the explanatory variables is always important to consider for any prediction
                                        2
model, see Appendix 7. The univariate R is shown in table 5. Some variables are highly correlated
with a number of different variables, while show little correlation. This is due to many variables
measuring similar characteristics or are transformation of other variables. For example, operating
accruals (ACC) and percent accruals (PCTACC) are highly correlated (ρ = 0.89) as they are linked
                                 ACC
through one transformation (P CT ACC = Assets ). However they have little correlation with the
other variables. On the other hand, return on equity (ROE) is highly correlated with a number of
other variables that also measures other forms of profitability ratios. Variables with a correlation
factor |ρ| > 0.7 are shown in table 4.

                                          16
Table 4: Highly correlated characteristic pairs with |ρ| > 0.7. Many variables are derived from
common underlying measures, which naturally induces correlation. 16 out of the 33 characteristics
have a correlation coefficient above 0.7.

                          Characteristic 1 Characteristic 2 ρ
                       CHCSHO NI 1.000
                     ROA ROE 0.954
                     ATO GMA 0.906
                     GMA SP 0.900
                      CASH CASHDEBT 0.899
                      EP ROA 0.887
                     OP RNA 0.880
                     ACC PCTACC 0.872
                      EP ROE 0.870
                      ATO SP 0.831
                      CFP EP 0.805
                      CFP ROA 0.745
                      CFP ROE 0.708
                     EP PM 0.707
                     PM ROA 0.701
  Note: CHCSHO and NI both measure changes in shares outstanding but use different transformations: CHCSHO
   = (shares - shares lag12) / shares lag12 (percentage change), while NI = log(shares / shares lag12) (log change).
   Their perfect correlation reflects the fact that they capture the same underlying information about equity
   issuance activity.

    There are a number of profitability related variables that are highly correlated. Highly correlated
variables can generally cause estimates to become unstable. Many of these act as a proxy for the
performance of the firm. As such, when a firm is performing well most of the performance related
variables will have high values and the opposite when the performance is low.

                    2
   The univariate R value is a measure of how much the variance in the return can be explained
                                                                                            2
by a single variable. Looking at table 5 the top three variables with the highest univariate R  are
all momentum related. This suggest that winners tend to stay winners. This is also supported by
the annual spread which is the return difference between portfolios formed on the extremes of the
                                                         2
characteristic. However, while the individual univariate R  values are small with the largest being
smaller than 0.0032, the spreads are still large for some of the variables, the characteristic can still
generate economically meaningful trading profits.

                                          17
                                                                                 2
Table 5: Univariate predictive power of characteristics, measured by R , along with the annual
return spread between the top 20 and bottom 5 stocks. Although individual variables have limited
explanatory power, differences between extreme quintiles can produce substantial annual spreads.
The t-stat is for the annual spread. 13 characteristics have a statistically significant annual spread.

              Characteristic N R² Annual Spread (%) t-stat Sig
               MOM12M 32,609 0.003181 27.37 10.20 ***
              MOM6M 35,377 0.002450 24.17 9.32 ***
               MOM60M 17,671 0.000293 7.53 2.27 **
               ROA 39,243 0.000214 7.29 2.90 ***
              PM 31,640 0.000210 7.17 2.58 ***
               EP 39,280 0.000206 7.19 2.84 ***
               MOM36M 23,395 0.000177 6.20 2.03 **
               RNA 39,087 0.000154 6.22 2.46 **
               CFP 26,634 0.000144 6.36 1.96 **
               NI 32,552 0.000129 -5.51 -2.05 **
               CHCSHO 32,551 0.000129 -5.51 -2.05 **
               ROE 39,139 0.000127 5.63 2.23 **
               OP 39,275 0.000113 5.33 2.11 **
               CHTX 26,201 0.000113 4.88 1.72 *
               PCTACC 22,302 0.000092 4.96 1.43
               SEAS1A 31,686 0.000074 4.17 1.54
               LEV 39,387 0.000043 -3.28 -1.30
               ACC 22,881 0.000035 3.03 0.89
               HIRE 30,700 0.000029 -2.70 -0.95
               GRLTNOA 25,234 0.000025 2.32 0.79
               GMA 39,377 0.000001 -0.45 -0.18
               CASH 39,391 0.000000 -0.33 -0.13
               SP 39,415 0.000000 0.11 0.04
               NOA 28,988 0.000000 -0.00 -0.00
               SGR 28,365 0.000000 0.00 0.00
                Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10. Only non-zero observations used.
                  Annual Spread: Annualized return difference between highest and lowest
                      ranked stocks (long-short portfolio).
                   Median R² across all 33 characteristics: 0.000043

4.2 Main Model Performance
To evaluate the performance of the P-Tree algorithm in the Swedish equity market, we implemented
three distinct testing scenarios, based on the methodology from Cong et al. (2025). This multi-
scenario approach allows us to assess both in-sample fit and out-of-sample predictive power, while
testing for robustness across different time periods. Table 6 summarizes the risk-adjusted perfor-
mance of the Single P-Tree long-short portfolios across all three scenarios. The results demonstrate
that the algorithm is capable of generating significant excess return in the Swedish market, though
performance varies considerably by time period. The weights and splits for the scenarios are shown
in table 7.

                                          18
Table 6: Performance of the P-Tree model, including annualized return, volatility, Sharpe ratio,
                                   2
β, alphas, and out-of-sample R . The sample is split temporally into two halves, with the value-
weighted market portfolio as the benchmark.

                                                                                             2
 Scenario Ann. Ret (%) Vol (%) Sharpe β CAPM α (%, t) FF3 α (%, t) R (%)
 Market (VW) 10.86 19.01 0.64 1.00 – – –
 Scenario A 9.80 10.78 0.92 0.03 9.68*** (4.45) 9.61*** (4.43) 20.20
 Scenario B (Train) 9.69 11.04 0.90 -0.08 10.21*** (3.36) 10.11*** (3.43) –
 Scenario B (Test) 2.76 5.37 0.53 -0.02 3.08** (2.07) 3.21** (2.02) 14.61
 Scenario C (Train) 10.46 7.18 1.43 0.05 9.59*** (5.58) 9.63*** (5.35) –
 Scenario C (Test) 3.48 7.82 0.48 0.01 3.71 (1.33) 3.39 (1.21) 25.05
     Notes: Ann. Ret and Vol are annualized percentages. Alphas are annualized (%) with Newey–West
                                                                                            2
     t-statistics (12 lags) shown in parentheses. Significance: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10. R  is
      out-of-sample.

   Scenario A is a full sample analysis. The model trains and evaluates the P-Tree algorithm on the
complete sample period from June 1998 to December 2019. This scenario serves as a benchmark for
the model’s performance when all available data is utilized. The full-sample analysis demonstrates
the maximum capability of the P-Tree in the Swedish market and identifies which characteristics are
most influential over the entire period. Since the model is both trained and evaluated on the same
dataset, Scenario A does not provide insight into out-of-sample predictive power. In this full-sample
analysis, the Single P-Tree model achieves an annualized Sharpe ratio of 0.92. The portfolio gen-
erates a statistically significant CAPM alpha of 9.68% (t = 4.45) and a Fama–French three-factor
alpha of 9.61% (t = 4.43), as shown in Table 6. The model splits stocks based on asset turnover
(ATO), with the threshold at the 40th percentile, allocating approximately 75% of the weight to
the top 60th percentiles and shorting the bottom 40th percentiles with 25% of the weight (see Table
7). These results indicate that the P-Tree algorithm can successfully fit historical data and extract
a profitable signal from the selected characteristics. The obtained Sharpe ratio is greater than the
market’s of 0.64. However, because the full dataset is used for both training and evaluation, these
metrics should be interpreted as an upper bound on the model’s fitting capability rather than a
measure of true predictive skill.

   Scenario B employs a past-predicting-future approach. The model implements a traditional out-
of-sample test by dividing the sample chronologically at the end of 2009. The model is trained on
data from June 1998 to December 2009 and evaluated on the subsequent period from January 2010
to December 2019. This forward-validation approach tests whether patterns learned from historical
data can predict future returns, which is the most practically relevant question for investors. By
construction, the model has no access to future information during training, making this the pri-
mary test of real-world applicability. In Scenario B, the model splits on asset turnover at the 40th
percentile, shorting the bottom 40th percentiles with a weight of approximately 33% and allocating
roughly 67% to a long position in the top 60th percentiles. While the in-sample performance is
strong (Sharpe ratio = 0.90, CAPM α = 10.21% (3.36), FF3 α = 10.11% (3.43)), the out-of-sample
results are weaker (Sharpe ratio = 0.53, CAPM α = 3.08% (2.07), FF3 α = 3.21% (5.35)), falling
below the market Sharpe ratio. This decline in out-of-sample performance indicates that the model
captures some noise in the training data and exhibits overfitting.

   Scenario C employs a future-predicting-past approach. This provides a robustness check by
reversing the train-test split: the model is trained on data from January 2010 to December 2019 and
tested on the earlier period from June 1998 to December 2009. This approach serves two purposes.

                                          19
First, it tests for look-ahead bias by evaluating whether the performance observed in Scenario B
could be due to fortuitous timing or the selection of a favorable test period. Second, it assesses
whether the relationships between characteristics and returns are persistent across different market
regimes. If both Scenarios B and C produce similar out-of-sample results, this would provide strong
evidence that the P-Tree captures fundamental, time-invariant patterns rather than period-specific
anomalies. In Scenario C, the model splits based on the cash-to-debt ratio, shorting the bottom
20th percentile with a weight of approximately 37% and allocating roughly 63% to the top 80th
percentile. The in-sample performance is the strongest among all scenarios (Sharpe ratio = 1.43,
CAPM α = 9.59% (5.58), FF3 α = 9.63% (5.35)), but the out-of-sample results are weaker (Sharpe
ratio = 0.48, CAPM α = 3.71% (1.33), FF3 α = 3.39% (1.21)), with the alpha no longer statistically
significant. This decline in out-of-sample performance indicates that the model captures some noise
in the training data and exhibits overfitting.

Table 7: Portfolio weights and splitting criteria from the P-Tree model for the in-sample and out-
of-sample tests. The model performs a single split in all scenarios. For the in-sample and first-half
training, the split is based on asset turnover, while for the second-half training, the split is based on
the cash-to-debt ratio.

  Scenario Split Variable Portfolio Threshold Weight (%)
 A: Full Sample ATO Low ATO (< -0.20) -0.20 -25.30%
  A: Full Sample High ATO (≥ -0.20) -0.20 74.70%
  B: Train (1998-2009) ATO Low ATO (< -0.20) -0.20 -33.06%
  B: Train (1998-2009) High ATO (≥ -0.20) -0.20 66.94%
 C: Train (2010-2019) CASHDEBT Low CASHDEBT (< -0.60) -0.60 -36.55%
  C: Train (2010-2019) High CASHDEBT (≥ -0.60) -0.60 63.45%

   Note: Weights represent the tangency portfolio allocation across leaf portfolios, optimized to maximize the
   Sharpe ratio. Within each leaf, stocks are value-weighted by market capitalization.

    The cumulative return profiles in Figure 4 illustrate how each portfolio performed over the sample
period. Although the in-sample P-Tree portfolio achieves a higher Sharpe ratio than the market, the
market portfolio still delivers a higher cumulative return. This occurs because the in-sample portfolio
exhibits substantially lower volatility, boosting its risk-adjusted performance despite generating lower
overall returns. This comparison highlights the fundamental trade-off between risk and return. A
well-diversified portfolio can achieve smoother performance and a higher Sharpe ratio, but higher
long-run returns generally require bearing greater risk.

                                          20
Figure 4: Cumulative returns of the value-weighted market portfolio, the in-sample portfolio, andQ
                                                                 T
the out-of-sample test portfolios. Cumulative return is calculated as   i=1(1 + ri). Even though the
in-sample test achieved a higher Sharpe-ratio than the market portfolio, the cumulative return of
the market portfolio is greater.

4.3 Macroeconomic Regimes
Figure 5 shows the risk-free rate, market return and market risk premium as time series. The rest of
the macroeconomic factors are in the Appendix 7. The market, size, and value factors are obtained
from the Swedish House of Finance’s Fama–French dataset. Inflation data are sourced from Statistics
Sweden Statistics Sweden (SCB) (2025), which reports annual inflation based on the Consumer Price
Index (CPI) with 1980 as the base year. Annualized market volatility is computed from monthly
market index returns. The risk-free rate, measured using the Swedish 1-month T-bill, has been
near zero since March 2015. This follows the Swedish central bank’s decision to cut the policy rate
into negative territory, which caused short-term interest rates to fall and, consequently, reduced the
yields on short-term government securities. The market index is the SIX return index which is a
value weighted index of all stocks listed at the Stockholm Stock Exchange and includes reinvested
dividends. This serves as a natural benchmark as the P-Tree algorithm constructs value-weighted
leaf basis portfolios.

                                          21
Figure 5: Time series of the risk-free rate, market returns, and the market risk premium. Monthly
data points are shown in gray, with a 12-month rolling average in blue. All values are expressed as
percentages on the y-axis.

5 Empirical Analysis and Discussion

5.1 Model Performance and Robustness
To understand the drivers of model performance across different scenarios, the structure of the P-
Trees shown in Table 7 is analyzed. In all scenarios, the model is configured to allow a single split,
resulting in two terminal leaves. For the in-sample and out-of-sample Scenario B results, the model
selects asset turnover at the 40th percentile as the optimal split, while in Scenario C, the split occurs
on the cash-to-debt ratio at the 20th percentile. This setup highlights that, for the given universe
and sample period, the dominant predictive signal is concentrated in one characteristic rather than
in higher-order interactions or complex nonlinear structure. This can be observed with the decrease
in the out-of-sample performance when the model complexity increases, (see Appendix 7). One no-
table finding is that four out of five scenarios produced statistically significant α at 10% confidence
level under both the CAPM and the Fama–French three-factor model, with the exception being
the scenario C’s out-of-sample result. This suggests that, although the model does not consistently
outperform the market portfolio in terms of traditional risk-adjusted metrics such as the Sharpe
ratio in every scenario, it is able to capture return premiums that are not explained by the included
risk factors, namely the market, size (SMB), and value (HML) factors. The near-zero beta values
help explain these results. Across all scenarios, the estimated Beta values are effectively zero (Table
6), which indicates that the strategy’s returns are uncorrelated with the broader market movement
(Market Neutrality). A likely interpretation is that the alpha generated by the model is entirely
derived by its ability to identify idiosyncratic mispricing. The P-Tree could thus play an integral
role in an investor’s market portfolio. By reducing overall portfolio volatility, independent of market
rallies or crashes, the P-Tree strategy can provide diversification benefits.

                                          22
   Figure 4 shows that the in-sample cumulative return and table 6 performance metrics of the
different scenarios. However, although Scenario A exhibits the highest Sharpe ratio, the market
portfolio generates the largest cumulative return. This highlights the fundamental trade-off between
risk and return. The market achieves higher total returns, but only by taking on substantially more
volatility. In contrast, the P-Tree portfolio prioritizes stability and delivers superior risk-adjusted
performance. The model is designed not to maximize absolute returns, but to produce returns in
the safest and most consistent manner.

    The best results obtained when using a single split indicates that, given the limited size and cov-
erage of the dataset, additional partitioning does not yield meaningful improvements in predictive
accuracy. This interpretation is reinforced by the results obtained when the model is allowed to
perform up to two and ten splits (see Appendix 7). Although the in-sample performance improves
reflected in higher Sharpe ratios and larger estimated alphas, the corresponding out-of-sample re-
sults deteriorate substantially, suggesting that deeper trees begin to fit noise rather than genuine
return-predictive structure.

   Importantly, the P-Tree framework enables the user to control the level of model complexity,
reducing the risk of overfitting when the dataset is sparse. Under sparse data conditions, strong
                                                                                         2
regularization and a conservative choice of the number of splits encourage a parsimonious   speci-
fication, while richer datasets may justify allowing deeper trees or using boosting to capture more
complex nonlinear interactions. In the present application, however, additional splits reduce both
the Sharpe ratio and the estimated alphas, indicating that the model does not uncover new, in-
dependent sources of predictive power. This implies that the dataset does not contain weak but
orthogonal predictors that could support greater model complexity; instead, additional characteris-
tics appear either redundant or noisy. Consequently, the underlying return-predictive structure is
relatively simple, and increasing model depth offers no performance advantage. By giving the user
control over complexity, the model is well-suited for both data-sparse and data-rich environments,
highlighting its practical potential for portfolio construction and systematic investing.

5.2 Characteristic Selection and Macroeconomic Context
The selection of splitting characteristics must be interpreted within the macroeconomic context of
each sample period. As illustrated in Figure 7, the risk-free rate in Sweden declined significantly
starting around 2015, eventually reaching zero. This monetary policy was intended to stimulate eco-
nomic activity and incentivize investment. Interestingly, the model’s selection of Cash-to-Debt as
the primary splitting criterion in Scenario C (out-of-sample) suggests that, despite an environment
favorable to leverage, the market priced a premium on financial flexibility and balance sheet strength.

    In contrast, during the earlier period (1998-2009), the model identified Asset Turnover as the sin-
gle determining factor. This period was marked by two major global economic downturns (Dot-com
bubble and Global Financial Crisis) which significantly impacted export-oriented Swedish equities.
The selection of Asset Turnover implies that during these volatile regimes, the market favored firms
capable of efficiently generating revenue from their asset base. Furthermore, the model’s consistent
preference for fundamental accounting ratios (Asset Turnover, Cash-to-Debt) over price-based sig-
nals (such as Momentum) indicates that fundamental metrics were more robust drivers of returns
in the Swedish market during these regimes.

   2
    Parsimonious: simple, economical, not overly complex

                                          23
5.3 Data Availability and Comparison to Original Paper
While data for Swedish equities is available, its coverage and depth differ substantially from the
US data used in the original P-Tree study by Cong et al. (2025). To approximate half of the
characteristics used in the original study, data aggregation from multiple sources was required, and
several key characteristics remained inaccessible. Notably, the original P-Tree paper relies heavily
on analyst revision and the characteristic standardized unexpected earnings (SUE) which frequently
appear as the primary splits in their models. Comprehensive historical analyst forecast data for the
Swedish market is not readily available for the full sample period. Consequently, our model relies on
”second-best” proxies derived from lagged accounting data, which likely diminishes predictive power.

   Furthermore, there is a significant disparity in market size between the US market, comprising
thousands of liquid stocks, and the Swedish market, which averages approximately 153 firms per
month in our filtered sample. While this sample size is sufficient for traditional analysis, it proves
limiting for the P-Tree algorithm. A multi-layer tree (e.g., a 3-layer depth) would result in leaf
nodes containing fewer than 10 stocks, thereby destroying portfolio diversification and increasing
idiosyncratic risk.

   Compared to Cong et al. (2025), whose model achieved out-of-sample Sharpe ratios in the range
of 3.12–4.35 and α values statistically significant at the 1% level for all factor combinations tested
(see Appendix 7), the results in this study are less pronounced in terms of Sharpe ratios and α
significance. Despite this, the results demonstrate that meaningful predictive performance can still
be obtained without overfitting the data. This highlights the robustness of the P-Tree methodology
even in a smaller, less liquid market.

5.4 Parameter Stability
Over the course of the analysis, an extensive sensitivity analysis was conducted involving hyperpa-
rameter tuning, alternative lagging structures, and varying data filtration criteria. A critical finding
from this process is that the P-Trees exhibited high sensitivity to minor changes in the input data
and configuration. Experiments involving automatic hyperparameter tuning led to unstable out-
comes. Parameters would exactly fit the noise in the training data, instead of finding a global stable
optimum, and fail to generalize out-of-sample. A behavior which can be attributed in large parts
to the small market size. Similarly, modifications to the lagging methodology included altering the
publication lag for accounting variables. These resulted in significant shifts in the final tree structure
and performance metrics (still with one split). Notably, the results are heavily influenced by the
data filtration step. For instance, adjusting the threshold for permissible missing values per firm
from 4 to 5, changes the split characteristics. In a large market like the US, such a change would
be negligible. However, in the Swedish market, where the cross-section averages only 153 firms, the
exclusion or inclusion of a small number of firms has a much more significant impact.

5.5 Practical Implementation
Another important factor that should be considered when applying this methodology in a real world
scenario are market frictions. High turnover strategies often see their profits eroded entirely by
the bid-ask spread. Especially in smaller, less liquid markets such as the Swedish equity market,
transaction costs will be higher. To achieve more realistic returns, implementing transaction costs
for frequent rebalancing would likely have diminished, if not completely offset, the alphas. Another
aspect that differs in practice versus our implementation is when a stock delists from the exchange.

                                          24
The model avoids survivorship bias by dynamically dropping stocks from the investable universe
when a firm delists. However, in practice these exits can be costly due to the increase in the bid-ask
spread as there will be a large number of investors selling the stock simultaneously.

6 Conclusion

The integration of machine learning into portfolio optimization has gained substantial attention in
modern finance. Machine learning methods excel at processing large-scale panel data and identifying
complex, non-linear relationships that traditional models, such as linear regressions, are unable to
capture. While other machine learning models, including deep neural networks, can also uncover
intricate interactions among firm characteristics, the novel Panel Tree (P-Tree) algorithm offers sev-
eral important advantages.

   First, unlike many black-box models, the P-Tree algorithm optimizes a user-specified objective
function. In the context of portfolio optimization, this objective can be set to the Sharpe ratio, en-
abling the model to directly search for return–risk–optimal splits. Second, the factors produced by
the P-Tree have clear economic interpretation as the selected splits and associated weights highlight
fundamental drivers of returns. This not only provides economic insight into the cross-section of
expected returns but also allows researchers to diagnose potential model misspecification when the
learned factors deviate from established empirical patterns.

   In contrast, many other machine learning models lack transparency, offer no graphical represen-
tation of decision logic, and are not grounded in economic structure. The P-Tree algorithm therefore
combines the predictive flexibility of machine learning with interpretability and economic meaning,
making it a compelling tool for empirical asset pricing.

   While machine learning methods excel when trained on rich and extensive panel datasets, their
flexibility also makes them susceptible to overfitting in environments with limited data. In smaller
markets with constrained historical depth and cross-sectional coverage, models may capture noise
rather than genuine economic signals, which can reduce out-of-sample predictive performance. This
pattern is visible in the results with the out-of-sample Sharpe ratios falling below that of the market
portfolio, reflecting the challenges of data sparsity.

   Despite this, the P-Tree demonstrates notable strengths in these environments. The portfolio is
nearly market-neutral, with β ≈ 0, yet it is still is able to produce statistically significant positive α
across most specifications under the Fama–French three-factor model. While the strategy may not
surpass a simple buy-and-hold market portfolio over the long term, it delivers investable, low-beta
return streams that provide diversification and reduce exposure to broad market movements. These
features are particularly valuable in the short run, during periods of heightened volatility, offering
investors a reliable tool to extract returns from the most informative characteristics without over-
relying on data-intensive, complex models. The adaptability of the P-Tree is a decisive advantage.
This flexibility allows the model to function effectively in smaller and less liquid markets where data
is constrained, such as the Swedish stock market. In contrast, many other machine learning methods
struggle in these settings because they become overly complex or prone to noise-fitting. As datasets
grow richer and more comprehensive in the future, the P-Tree model is well-positioned to scale its
structure, bridging the gap between sparse-data environments and sophisticated machine learning
methods, and offering a powerful tool for portfolio optimization.

                                          25
References

Ammann, M., & Steiner, P. (2023). Factor premiums in the nordic stock markets. Journal of Inter-
        national Financial Markets, Institutions and Money, 68, 101255.
Bali, T. G., Engle, R. F., & Tang, Y. (2024). Is there a market-neutrality premium? Journal of
        Financial Economics, 152, 103846.
Bates, T. W., Kahle, K. M., & Stulz, R. M. (2023). Why do u.s. firms hold so much more cash than
        they used to? Journal of Finance, 78 (5), 2595–2645.
Bryzgalova, S., Pelger, M., & Zhu, J. (2023). Forest through the trees: Building cross-sections of
        stock returns with gradient boosting. Journal of Finance, 78 (3), 1411–1458.
Cong, L. W., Feng, G., He, J., & He, X. (2025). Growing the efficient frontier on panel trees. Journal
        of Financial Economics, 167, 103873. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2024.103873
Didisheim, A., Koijen, R. S. J., & Yogo, M. (2024). High-throughput asset pricing (Working paper).
        University of Chicago & Princeton University.
Drobetz, W., & Otto, T. (2021). Empirical asset pricing via machine learning: Evidence from the
        european stock market. Journal of Asset Management, 22 (7), 507–538.
Freyberger, J., Neuhierl, A., & Weber, M. (2024). Dissecting anomaly discovery. Journal of Financial
        Economics, 151, 103745.
Ghandar, A., Michalewicz, Z., & Zurbruegg, R. (2016). The relationship between model complexity
        and forecasting performance for computer intelligence optimization in finance. International
        Journal of Forecasting, 32 (3), 598–613.
Griffin, J. M. (2002). Are the fama and french factors global or country specific? Review of Financial
        Studies, 15 (3), 783–803.
Gu, S., Kelly, B., & Xiu, D. (2020). Empirical asset pricing via machine learning. The Review of
        Financial Studies, 33 (5), 2223–2273.
Hou, K., Xue, C., & Zhang, L. (2022). Replicating anomalies. Review of Financial Studies, 35 (2),
        707–746.
Lseg. (2025). Retrieved November 28, 2025, from https://www.lseg.com/en/data-analytics
Markowitz, H. (1952). Portfolio selection. The Journal of Finance, 7 (1), 77–91. https://doi.org/10.
        1111/j.1540-6261.1952.tb01525.x
Martin, I. W. R., & Nagel, S. (2021). Market efficiency in the age of big data. Journal of Financial
        Economics, 141 (1), 3–32.
Simutin, M. (2010). Excess cash and stock returns. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis,
       45 (4), 765–790.
Soliman, M. T. (2008). The use of dupont analysis by market participants. The Accounting Review,
       83 (3), 823–853.
Statistics Sweden (SCB). (2025). Cpi, annual changes (inflation rate) [Accessed: 2025-12-04].
Swedish House of Finance. (2025a). Fama–french factors for the swedish market [Dataset provided
        by the Swedish House of Finance]. Retrieved November 30, 2025, from https://www.hhs.
        se/en/houseoffinance/data-center/fama-french-factors/
Swedish House of Finance. (2025b). Finbas [Dataset provided by the Swedish House of Finance].
        Retrieved November 28, 2025, from https://www.hhs.se/en/houseoffinance/data-center/
        finbas-stocks/
Swedish House of Finance. (2025c). Serrano [Dataset provided by the Swedish House of Finance].
        Retrieved November 28, 2025, from https://www.hhs.se/en/houseoffinance/data-center/
        serrano/

                                          26
7 Appendix

7.1 AI Usage
The following AI tools were used in this project:
GitHub Copilot / Claude: Code assistance, debugging code, refactoring suggestions, and documen-
tation formatting
Usage in the writing: Grammar checking and improvements, code refactoring suggestions, and La-
TeX table generation.
All analytical decisions, methodology choices, and interpretations are the authors’ own work.

                                          27
7.2 Supplementary Tables and Figures

Table 8: The full variable names, abbreviations and total coverage in the dataset. These are all
variables included in the P-Tree algorithm.

                Variable Abbrev Coverage (%)
              1-Month Momentum MOM1M 99.7
              12–2 Month Momentum MOM12M 82.5
               36–13 Month Momentum MOM36M 59.2
               60–13 Month Momentum MOM60M 44.7
              6–2 Month Momentum MOM6M 89.5
               Asset Growth AGR 85.4
               Asset Turnover ATO 85.2
              Book-to-Market BM 99.4
               Cash to Assets CASH 99.7
               Cash to Debt CASHDEBT 98.6
               Cash-Flow-to-Price CFP 67.4
               Change in Profit Margin CHPM 66.2
               Change in Shares Outstanding CHCSHO 82.4
               Change in Tax Expense CHTX 66.3
               Earnings-to-Price EP 99.4
               Employee Growth HIRE 77.7
               Gross Profitability GMA 99.6
               Growth in LT NOA GRLTNOA 63.8
               Leverage LEV 99.7
               Long-term Debt Growth LGR 60.9
               Market Equity ME 99.7
                Net Equity Issuance NI 82.4
               Net Operating Assets NOA 73.3
               Operating Accruals ACC 57.9
               Operating Profitability OP 99.4
               Percent Accruals PCTACC 56.4
               Profit Margin PM 80.1
               Return on Assets ROA 99.3
               Return on Equity ROE 99.0
               Return on NOA RNA 98.9
               Sales Growth SGR 71.8
                Sales-to-Price SP 99.7
                Seasonality (1Y ago) SEAS1A 80.2

                                          28
                                                                                  2
Figure 6: Correlation table for the top characteristics with the highest univariate R  value. Some
variables are highly correlated with a number of other variables.

                                          29
                                                            (a) Market Overview

                                                                (b) Factor Returns

                                          30

                                                                (c) Macro Indicators

Figure 7: Full time series for all the macroeconomic variables used, expressed in percentages. The
gray lines represent the raw data points while the colored lines are rolling averages over 12 months.
Table 9: P-Tree model performance when the maximum number of splits is set to ten. Scenario
A and B produce nine splits and scenario C produces ten splits. The in-sample results are better
compared to when only one split is allowed, but the out-of-sample results are worse indicated by the
lower Sharpe ratio and less significant α. This shows that deep trees tend to overfit as they capture
noise rather than true relationships.

                                                                                        2
      Scenario Ret (%) Vol (%) Sharpe β CAPM α (%, t) FF3 α (%, t) R (%)
       Market (VW) 10.9 19.0 0.64 1.00 – – –
       A 10.4 5.5 1.88 0.02 9.73*** (6.84) 9.73*** (7.02) –
       B (Train) 12.1 6.4 1.90 -0.01 11.09*** (4.82) 10.65*** (4.90) –
       B (Test) 0.9 4.7 0.19 -0.02 0.79 (0.79) 0.86 (0.85) 0.5
       C (Train) 11.1 2.9 3.88 0.04 10.61*** (19.36) 10.63*** (18.40) –
       C (Test) 2.8 6.5 0.43 -0.03 3.80 (1.61) 3.47 (1.37) 1.4
     Notes: Ret and Vol are annualized. Alphas are annualized (%) with Newey–West t-stats (12 lags).
                                                   2
     Significance: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10. R  is out-of-sample.

Table 10: P-Tree model performance when the maximum number of splits is set to two. All scenarios
produce two splits. The in-sample results are better compared to when only one split is allowed,
but the out-of-sample results are worse indicated by the lower Sharpe ratio and less significant α.
This shows that deep trees tend to overfit as they capture noise rather than true relationships.

                                                                                       2
       Scenario Ret (%) Vol (%) Sharpe β CAPM α (%, t) FF3 α (%, t) R (%)
       Market (VW) 10.9 19.0 0.64 1.00 – – –
       A 10.9 9.7 1.12 0.07 8.19*** (4.21) 7.84*** (4.26) –
        B (Train) 13.2 11.4 1.15 -0.05 13.55*** (5.00) 13.55*** (4.95) –
        B (Test) 1.3 5.8 0.22 0.02 0.35 (0.27) 0.45 (0.37) 0.3
        C (Train) 9.4 5.2 1.83 0.04 9.10*** (5.10) 9.17*** (5.38) –
        C (Test) 3.4 6.8 0.50 -0.02 3.11 (1.00) 2.71 (0.85) 0.5
     Notes: Ret and Vol are annualized. Alphas are annualized (%) with Newey–West t-stats (12 lags).
                                                   2
     Significance: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10. R  is out-of-sample.

               Table 11: Scenario B: OOS P-Tree Performance (Cong et al. 2025)

             Model Sharpe Ratio αCAP M αF F 5 αQ5 αRP 5 αIP 5
             P-Tree1 3.23 1.35*** 1.31*** 1.23*** 1.04*** 0.93***
             P-Tree1-5 3.41 1.02*** 1.00*** 0.95*** 0.77*** 0.62***
             P-Tree1-10 3.21 0.95*** 0.94*** 0.89*** 0.74*** 0.56***
             P-Tree1-15 3.12 0.89*** 0.89*** 0.83*** 0.69*** 0.48***
             P-Tree1-20 3.13 0.85*** 0.84*** 0.78*** 0.66*** 0.49***

   Source: Cong et al. (2025), Table 7, Panel B2. Results are for out-of-sample period 2001–2020 using U.S. equity
   data with 61 firm characteristics. Sharpe ratios are annualized. Alphas are monthly returns (%) with respect to
   various factor models: CAPM, Fama-French 5-factor (FF5), Q5, RP-PCA 5-factor (RP5), and IPCA 5-factor
   (IP5). All alphas are statistically significant at the 1% level (*** p < 0.01). P-Tree1 uses a single tree with 10
   leaf portfolios. P-Tree1-5 through P-Tree1-20 use boosted models with 5, 10, 15, and 20 trees respectively (50,
   100, 150, 200 total leaf portfolios).

                                          31
             Table 12: Scenario C: OOS P-Tree Performance (Cong et al. 2025)

          Model Sharpe Ratio αCAP M αF F 5 αQ5 αRP 5 αIP 5
           P-Tree1 4.35 1.50*** 1.42*** 1.35*** 1.60*** 1.58***
           P-Tree1-5 3.87 1.18*** 1.05*** 0.96*** 1.23*** 1.24***
           P-Tree1-10 4.29 1.02*** 0.93*** 0.85*** 1.14*** 1.10***
           P-Tree1-15 4.03 0.96*** 0.86*** 0.80*** 1.07*** 1.02***
           P-Tree1-20 3.88 0.96*** 0.87*** 0.81*** 1.08*** 1.03***

Source: Cong et al. (2025), Table 7, Panel C2. Results are for out-of-sample period 1981–2000 using U.S. equity
data with 61 firm characteristics. Models are trained on 2001–2020 and tested on 1981–2000 (reverse time split).
Sharpe ratios are annualized. Alphas are monthly returns (%) with respect to various factor models: CAPM,
Fama-French 5-factor (FF5), Q5, RP-PCA 5-factor (RP5), and IPCA 5-factor (IP5). All alphas are statistically
significant at the 1% level (*** p < 0.01). P-Tree1 uses a single tree with 10 leaf portfolios. P-Tree1-5 through
P-Tree1-20 use boosted models with 5, 10, 15, and 20 trees respectively (50, 100, 150, 200 total leaf portfolios).

                                        32