PRICE  OVERREACTIONS  IN
CRUDE OIL FUTURES

NONPARAMETRIC IDENTIFICATION OF NEWS-DRIVEN PRICE
DISCONTINUITIES  AND  THEIR ROLE IN SHORT-TERM
OVERREACTIONS

FELIX JOHANSSON

SAGA TRAN

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2025
Price overreactions in crude oil futures:  Nonparametric identification of news-driven
price discontinuities and their role in short-term overreactions

Abstract
This thesis examines whether crude oil futures exhibit short-term overreactions to news events and if
it is possible to develop a profitable trading strategy based on this pattern. Using hourly West Texas
Intermediary crude oil price data, price jumps are identified through a nonparametric method that
isolates discontinuities from local continuous volatility.  Logistic regression is used to relate jump
probability to news characteristics. We find that news volume and sentiment significantly increase
the likelihood of price jumps, while linguistic uncertainty has no explanatory power.   We then
test a rule-based trading strategy exploiting post-jump mean reversion and find that prices often
return towards pre-jump levels, which suggests that many jumps are overreactions.  The strategy
approximately achieves a 43% return over the period January 2024 until September 2025.  This
thesis extends news-driven mispricing research to the commodity futures market and expands the
empirical setting for testing overreactions. It shows how information flows impact short-term price
movements in one of the world’s most liquid markets.

Keywords
Crude oil futures, Mean reversion, News flow, Overreaction, Price jump

Authors
Felix Johansson (25818)
Saga Tran (25770)

Tutor
Marieke Bos, Associate Professor, Swedish House of Finance, SSE

Examiner
Ramin Baghai, Professor, Department of Finance, SSE

Acknowledgments
We would like to sincerely thank Marieke Bos for her support and advice throughout the project.
We also appreciate the constructive discussions during the peer review seminar, which contributed
to meaningful improvements to our thesis.

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
©  Felix Johansson and Saga Tran, 2025
1   Introduction

Crude oil is the most traded commodity worldwide in terms of both volume and notional value.
The benchmark US crude oil futures contract is the West Texas Intermediate (WTI) Light Sweet
Crude Oil Futures, which trades under the ticker symbol CL. CL contracts trade on the New York
Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) which is open nearly 23 hours per day, from Sunday evening to
Friday afternoon [8]. The oil contracts are highly liquid and among the most volatile commodities.
Both demand and supply are variable and sensitive to changes, and intraday fluctuations of several
percentage points are not uncommon. Unlike for large-cap equities or crops like wheat and cocoa,
whose volatility often peak around earnings or a certain season, oil prices are continuously moved
by geopolitical events, OPEC policy, inventory and economic data [31].

A central idea in finance is the e!cient market hypothesis (EMH), which states that the prices of
publicly traded securities (e.g., equities or crude oil futures) reflect all information available, and
prices adjust instantly and correctly to new information.  According to this hypothesis, securities
trade at their fair market value on the exchanges [12]. Another key idea in finance is the random
walk theory, which states that security prices follow a random walk, i.e., the price development
occur in a random manner and cannot be systematically predicted [23]. The EMH together with
random walk theory suggest that the current price is correct, there should be no mispricing, and
there should be no room for predictable reversals following for instance an overreaction in the price
movement after a news announcement [12], [23].

Criticism to the EMH and random walk theory argue that price movements are neither entirely
random nor unpredictable, instead these movements often exhibit patterns such as momentum or
overreactions and mean reversion. Furthermore, behavioral finance research challenges the idea that
market participants are fully rational and instead present factors such as biases and emotions (e.g.,
herd behavior) that can create mispricings, bubbles, and ultimately, price reversals [4].

Recent research show that equity prices tend to systematically overreact to news events in the
short-term. The price of an equity might increase or decrease several percentage points following
an earnings release, only to then make a partial or full reversal back to the level prior to the news
announcement [7], [11], [18], [28]. We find this phenomenon interesting as it challenges fully e!cient
markets, and suggests that market participants overreact to new information in the short-term. It
also raises the question about whether these overreactions can be systematically predicted and then
ultimately exploited for profit.

In this thesis we study whether crude oil prices systematically overreact to news events and subse-
quently mean-revert back to a level close to that before the news event was made public. The news
events in question include, but are not limited to, inventory reports (e.g., API), OPEC announce-
ments, as well as geopolitical and other macroeconomic events. We adopt the methodology of Jeon
et al. [17], who investigate the relationship between news flow and jumps in equity prices. We find
evidence that supports the idea that crude oil futures do tend to overreact to news announcements.
We explore whether it is possible to exploit this phenomenon by shorting or longing the future
during high volatility in connection with the news announcement.

In the rest of this introductory section, we first present some background literature. Secondly, the
objective of the thesis is discussed, followed by the scope and limitations.  Lastly, we present the
thesis outline.

                                           1
1.1   Background
This section reviews evidence from literature showing that financial markets often overreact to news
and subsequently exhibit price reversals. We summarize findings covering the equity market. Fi-
nally, we introduce the key study that forms the foundation of our analysis.

Chen et al. [7] discuss how there seem to be mispricing anomalies in how the stock market reacts
to positive and negative news announcements. More specifically, they examine the performance of
the Chinese stock market and suggest that there is considerable evidence that the market tends
to overreact to positive news and underreact to negative news. The driver of these mispricings is
argued to be institutional investor’s “limited attention” which is biased towards positive news and
away from negative news, creating asymmetric response patterns in the markets.

Studies looking at the US stock market suggest that equities tend to overreact to new information,
and that there is a particularly strong overreaction and price reversal when the initial surge is caused
by media or is followed by a period of stale news, i.e., news whose content substantially overlaps
with earlier reports [11], [28]. For example, Engelberg et al. [11] found that stock recommendations
on the popular finance TV show “Mad Money” acts as attention shocks to investors and leads to
overnight price surges in the upgraded stocks.  However, initial spikes in the stock price often re-
verses during the coming months. The increased price is not sustained and these temporary spikes
following the media coverage suggests mispricing. Tetlock [28] finds a similar systemic pattern that
is especially prevalent in stocks following stale news. The staleness of news is defined as “its textual
similarity to the previous ten stories about the same firm.”  Tetlock shows that the stocks return
on the day of stale news negatively predicts the return during the following week. That is, if the
stock jumps one percentage point following the stale news, the expected return during the next
week is negative and vice versa. This again supports the idea that market participants temporarily
overreact to new information, and that this overreaction is then followed by a price correction.

Kwon [18] documents strong investor overreactions to more extreme news events, such as CEO
changes or M&A activities, while they find that less extreme news events, like earnings or dividend
announcements tends to be followed by an underreaction. Here, they find that the size of the re-
versal as well as the trading volume increases with how extreme the news event is.

The idea of systematic overreactions and price reversals following news announcements in the stock
market raises the question of whether other assets exhibit similar patterns on completely di"erent
markets, such as commodities like crude oil futures (CL contracts), which is the asset that we will
focus on in this study.  The futures market is di"erent from the equity market in several ways.
Mainly, equities represent ownership in a firm, whereas futures are obligations to buy or sell an
asset at a later date. Because futures are traded on margin, meaning only a small portion of the
contract’s notional value is required upfront, they are more leveraged. The leverage has the poten-
tial to magnify the P&L impact of short-term price moves [16].

To explore the idea of systematic overreactions and price reversals in CL futures, we replicate the
methodology of Jeon et al. [17], who investigate whether flow of information in financial news influ-
ences short-term price jumps. Using a firm-level dataset (SME and LC) they identify a price jump
according to the definition given in [19]. Thereafter, they relate the occurrence of a jump to di"erent
news characteristics, such as news frequency, sentiment intensity and linguistic uncertainty. Jeon et
al. find that “these measures of news flow content are significantly related to nonparametric mea-

                                           2
sures of jump intensity and jump-size distributions and explain an important fraction of variations
in the jumps across individual companies”. This suggests that information flow triggers price jumps.
In this thesis, we identify price jumps in CL contracts using the same nonparametric methodology
and examine whether the relationship between news flow and jump intensity observed by Jeon et
al. also holds for commodity prices.

1.2   Objective
The main objective of the thesis is to examine whether crude oil futures exhibit systematic overre-
actions to news events, and if it is possible to develop a profitable trading strategy based on this
pattern.

To address this objective, we investigate (i) if price jumps occur around news announcements, (ii)
if the magnitude of these price jumps depend on the sentiment of the news event and number of
news events in the period prior to the jump, and (iii) given the assumption that price jumps tend
to revert back towards a level close to that before the news announcement, is it possible to exploit
these mean-reversion patterns through a profitable trading strategy.

Our aim is to extend the literature on price overreactions. There is extensive research looking into
price overreactions for equity markets [7], [11], [18], [28]. By replicating the methodology of Jeon
et al. [17], but using crude oil price data we examine whether similar anomalies arise on other
markets. We thus broaden the context in which the overreaction hypothesis is studied.

In addition, we contribute practically by linking and testing theoretical findings in a controlled
market environment. We evaluate whether the assumed mean-reversion after a price jump can be
exploited by a simple, rule-based trading strategy. Thus, we not only extend the literature theoret-
ically, but we also examine the extent to which theoretical anomalies might persist practically in
the market. The implications of this are interesting not only from an academic viewpoint but also
from an industry and market participant perspective.

Lastly, our thesis contributes to the ever-lasting debate of an e!cient market. If crude oil futures
exhibit predictable reversals after price jumps following news events, it could suggest that the
prices adjust ine!ciently and incorrectly to new information, which is inconsistent with the strong
form of the EMH. However, if no predictable pattern is found, the results would support the idea
that markets incorporate new information correctly and nearly immediately, thus reinforcing the
argument of the EMH. Either case o"ers valuable and direct evidence for how well a highly liquid
market, such as that for CL contracts, works in practice.

1.3   Scope and delimitations
The scope of the thesis is hourly WTI crude oil futures price data, and a selected subset of news
sources with coverage between January 2024 and July 2025. Only publicly available, textual news is
considered, and sentiment is measured using the Loughran and McDonald [20] financial dictionary,
which was originally developed for US SEC 10-K filings and may not perfectly capture journalistic
language.

The thesis focuses on the immediate price movements that occur around a detected jump, rather
than attempting to explain the full chain of underlying events or market dynamics leading to a

                                           3
price jump. The analysis relies solely on observable information, which means that private signals,
high-frequency order flow, and other unobservable drivers of price are outside the scope of this thesis.

Lastly, we ignore frictions, such as transaction costs, slippage and, liquidity constraints that arise
in practice.

1.4   Thesis outline
The thesis outline is as follows.  Section 2 presents relevant mathematical background on nonpa-
rameteric price jump identification. It also makes an argument for why this approach is chosen over
the event study. Section 3 explains our practical applications and implementations of the study. It
includes both collection and preprocessing of data, as well as the study design. Section 4 presents
our results. Section 5 discusses the results, compares them to Jeon et al. [17], and makes an argu-
ment for why this can be a useful trading strategy. Lastly, Section 6 provides a conclusion and a
discussion about future work.

2   Theoretical Background

This section outlines the di"erences between the approach of Jeon et al. [17] and an event study,
and makes an argument for using the former. Secondly, it clarifies the di"erence between a price
jump and an overreaction event and states this thesis’ main assumptions. Lastly, it also explains
the mathematical foundation for the logistic regression (logit) model, the log-likelihood ratio test,
the area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC), and the permutation
robustness test.

2.1   Event study
An event study measures the e"ect of an economic event on the value of a firm by comparing realized
returns around the event to the returns that would be expected absent that event. It relies on the
assumption that markets are e!cient, which has the consequence that new public information is
reflected in prices quickly. This means that the economic or financial impact can be derived from
price changes over a short time window, rather than having to wait for financial reports to give a
long-run overview. Event studies have been widely applied to both firm-specific and market-wide
announcements, such as earnings announcements, debt or equity issues, M&A, regulatory changes,
and macro releases [6].

2.1.1   Mathematical foundations
We define the event  e  →  {1, . . . , N }  as a scheduled news announcement. We also define three non-
overlapping windows: an event window around the event, an estimation window prior to the event,
and a post event window after the event, as illustrated in Figure 1.

                                           4
                        e             e                                          e             e
                 T 0         T 1             ω e  = 0            T 2         T 3
                                                                                      ω

                                  e   e                            e   e                                  e   e
      Estimation window  (T 0 , T1   ]     Event window  (T 1 , T2   ]      Post-event window  (T 2 , T3   ]

 Figure 1: Event study timeline with estimation, event, and post-event windows around the event
                                            time  ω e  = 0.

The estimation windows is used to fit the normal return model, that is, the model that measures
the returns that would be expected absent that event. Let  ω e  be the event time for event  e. Assume
ω e  = 0  (without loss of generality) to be the o!cial news release timestamp of event  e.  Choose
            e      e            e      e
integers  T0    < T 1  <  ωe  < T 2  < T 3  and let:

                e   e
   •  ω e  →  (T 0 , T 1 ]  be the estimation window,

                e   e                 e   e
   •  ω e  →  (T 1 , T2   ]  with  ω e  →  (T 1 , T2   ]  be the event window, and

                e   e
   •  ω e  →  (T 2 , T3   ]  be the post event window.

               e    e                                  e   e
Note that  T 0 , T 1  are negative integers and  T 1 , T 2  are positive integers [6]. There are two common
choices when choosing the normal return model: the constant mean return (CMR) model and the
market model [22].  Since this thesis uses intraday crude oil prices, and aims to identify whether
they systematically overreact to news events, it is expected that absent the news event prices would
remain fairly constant under such a short time window. Therefore, the CMR is the better option
for the normal return model in this setting.

In order to define abnormal returns, let  pt  be the price at timestamp  t, and let  R t  = log p t ↑ log p t→1
be the hourly log returns. The abnormal returns for an event  e  is defined as [22]

                                                                                                        e
                                                                               T 1
                               1  ∑
                                                        e   e
               AR ω e  =  R ω e  ↑ μ e   for  ω e  →  (T 1 , T2   ]   where  μ e  =   e    e     R t .            (1)
                                                           T 2  ↑ T 1    e
                                                                            t=T 0

2.1.2   Event study for unscheduled new releases
Scheduled news events, like the OPEC announcements, have a single release time. This makes them
appropriate to use in an event study. However, when the news announcement comes from a news
outlet, there are no assurances that the market was not informed prior to that announcement and
has already acted on the information [6]. Moreover, announcements can di"er by minutes between
di"erent outlets, be leaked prior to the o!cial announcement, or even be a consequence of prior
price moves. This can lead to the event window capturing both event anticipation and post event
actions rather than one discrete shock. MacKinlay [22] stresses that “an important characteristic of
a successful event study is the ability to identify precisely the date of the event”. Therefore, another
approach is to use a non-parametric jump test for identification of overreaction events in crude oil
prices.

2.2   Non-parametric jump test
A non-parametric jump test detects sudden, large changes (or discontinuities) in asset prices directly
from the returns, without specifying a parametric model for the jump process. This means that the

                                           5
test is not assuming any distribution for how the jumps occur. The idea is to standardize the return
over a short interval and compare it to how much the price actually moves during that period. If
the observed move is much larger than what is typical, the move is classified as a discontinuity. This
lets us identify arrival times and size of price discontinuities from prices alone [19]. In contrast, a
classic event study focuses on known events and examines returns around the scheduled time of that
event [22].

2.2.1   Intuition behind the Non-parametric jump test
A single observed return can be large, either because a jump occurred or because the market’s
spot volatility happened to be high at that exact time point.  So, making the assumption that a
large return implies a price jump would confuse high-volatility periods with true jumps. Therefore,
Lee and Mykland [19] standardizes the return by using a measure that explains the local variation
excluding any discontinuities. The authors refer to this measure as “instantaneous volatility”. The
test statistic then becomes a ratio between the log-returns and the instantaneous volatility over a
certain time period. The larger the ratio is, the more likely it is that there has been a price jump.

2.2.2   The  L↑test Statistic
Suppose that there is a fixed time horizon  T  and let  n  be the number of observations in  [0, T ]. Let
      T
!t =  n  define the distance between two consecutive observations, that is, we have divided the time
period into  n  equal intervals of length  !t. Let  K  be the window length and let  p(t i )  be the asset
price at  ti .

Definition 1.  For each time  ti , define

                                           log p(ti ) ↑ log p(t i→1 )
                                  L(t i ) =                                                     (2)
                                                    εˆ(t i )

where
                                    ∑i→1   ∣          ∣∣          ∣
                               2       1            ∣     p(t j ) ∣∣    p(t j→1 ) ∣
                         εˆ(t i )   =                 ∣ log         ∣∣ log         ∣.                     (3)
                               K  ↑ 2             p(t j→1 )     p(t j→2 )
                                   j=i→K+2

The above definition by Lee and Mykland [19] uses the realized bipower variation, that is, the sum
of products of consecutive absolute returns over the window immediately prior to  t i . This estimator
stays consistent even if jumps occur, and therefore captures continuous volatility level (the volatility
level excluding discontinuities) without being distorted by jumps.

If there is no jump in the specific interval being tested√      (t i→1 , ti ],  L(t i )  follows an asymptotic normal
                                     1                   2
distribution with  L(t i )  ↓  N (0, c 2 ), where  c  =   ε .  If the distance between  ti→1  and  t i  is small
enough (the sampling is happening with a small enough time window),  L(ti )  is asymptotically in-
dependent over time [19].

To retain the benefit of using bipower variation, the window length K  must grow with the sampling
so that the jump e"ects in window  K  vanishes.  Lee and Mykland [19] recommends  K  = 78  for
intraday hourly time series data.

                                           6
2.3   Clarification on overreaction events
In this thesis, it is specifically important to distinguish between a price jump and an overreaction
event. A price jump refers to an unusually large and abrupt change in the asset price over a very
short time interval. Lee and Mykland [19] has constructed a non-parametric jump detection test.
Note that this test is backward looking, i.e., it only uses information up to the moment of the sus-
pected jump. An overreaction event, however, is an economic or financial interpretation: it occurs
when the price moves too far relative to its baseline and subsequently reverses toward its mean
level, a pattern documented in the literature on short-term price reactions to news (see, e.g., [28]).

The central assumption of the thesis is that many such reversals are initiated by an initial discon-
tinuity in prices, that is, a price jump.  In other words, if a genuine overreaction occurs, it must
first manifest as a jump.   This assumption allows us to use the statistically identified jumps as
proxies for potential overreaction events.  By pairing these jump occurrences with news flow and
news characteristics, we can examine whether the emergence of overreactions in crude oil prices is
systematically related to the flow, tone, or uncertainty of news.

2.4   Logistic regression
Logistic regression is a type of generalized linear model (GLM) designed for binary dependent
variables.   It models the conditional probability that an outcome  Y i  →  0, 1, where  i  = 1, . . . , N
occurs as a nonlinear function of explanatory variables  X i  =  {x i1 , . . . , x ip }  for  i  = 1, . . . , N . Unlike
the linear regression model, which can predict probabilities outside the  [0, 1]  range, logistic regression
uses the logit link to ensure that the predicted probabilities remain bounded between 0 and 1. Let
p i  =  P(Y i  = 1  |  X i )  denote the conditional probability that the event  Y i  = 1  occurs. The logistic
regression model is defined as
                   (     )
                                  p i
                       log          =  ϑ 0  + ϑ 1 x i1  + ϑ 2 x i2  + · · · + ϑ p x ip ,                   (4)
                           1 ↑ p i

where the left-hand side is the log-odds or logit of the probability of success [27]. The model can
be inverted to express  p i  as

                                            1
                        p i  =       (                          ) .                     (5)
                             1 + exp  ↑ (ϑ 0  + ϑ 1 x i1  + · · · + ϑ p x ip )

Each coe!cient ϑ j  represents the expected change in the log-odds of the event for a one-unit increase
                                                                          ϑ j
in  x j , holding other variables constant. The exponential coe!cient  e    can thus be interpreted as
the odds ratio, i.e., the change in odds associated with a one-unit increase in  x j . The parameters
ω  =  {ϑ 0 , . . . , ϑ p }  are estimated by maximum likelihood. The likelihood function for a sample of  n
independent observations is given by

                          ∏n
                                                             y i        1→y i
                            ϖ(ω) =  ϖ(ϑ 0 , . . . , ϑ p ) =    p i  (1 ↑ p i )     .                        (6)
                                                           i=1
The corresponding log-likelihood is given by

                 ∑n
                         log ϖ(ω) =    [y i log(pi ) + (1 ↑ y i ) log(1 ↑ p i )] .                     (7)
                                          i=1

                                           7
The estimates  ωˆ  =  {ϑ ˆ 0 , . . . , ϑˆ p }  are found by choosing the values that maximizes the log-likelihood.
This is typically done through numerical optimization. Inference is based on that, for large samples,
the coe!cients  ωˆ  are asymptotically normally distributed,  ωˆ  ↓ N (ω, ε̂ (ωˆ)). The covariance matrix
ε̂ (ωˆ)  is estimated using the observed information matrix or robust heteroskedasticity and autocor-
relation consistent (HAC) corrections when serial correlation or heteroskedasticity is present [27].

                                                                  2
The model’s fit is usually assessed using McFadden’s pseudo-R  measure, the log-likelihood ratio
and discrimination metrics such as the area under the ROC curve (AUC)[5], [24], [26].   These
complement significance tests for individual coe!cients and help evaluate both explanatory and
predictive performance. To test robustness, a valuable test is the permutation robustness test [15].
                                                                                     2
See below for a brief explanation of each test, except for the McFadden’s pseudo-R  measure which
is defined as
                                        2        log L 1
                                  R  = 1 ↑       .                              (8)
                                              log L 0

Here,  L 0  is the null model only containing the intercept and  L 1  is the full model including all pre-
dictors [24].

In summary, the logistic regression framework is well suited for this thesis’s binary outcome, i.e., to
distinguish between jump and non-jump outcomes  Y i , since it captures how continuous and discrete
predictors (e.g., news intensity, tone, and uncertainty) jointly a"ect the conditional probability of
a price jump.

2.4.1   The log-likelihood ratio test
The log-likelihood ratio test checks whether adding the news variables makes the logistic regression
model explain the data better than a model without them. It does so by comparing the likelihood
of the null model  L 0  (that contains only an intercept) to the likelihood of the full model  L 1  that
includes the news-based predictors. The test statistic is computed according to

                                  L 0
                            ↑2 log    = ↑2(log L 0 ↑ log L 1 ).                        (9)
                                  L 1

If the full model has a higher likelihood, the test statistic (9) becomes larger. Under the null hypoth-
                                                                      2
esis that the news variables have no e"ect, this statistic follows a  ϱ  ↑distribution. A statistically
significant result indicates that including the news variables improves the model’s ability to fit the
price data [5].

2.4.2   The receiver operating characteristic curve
The ROC curve is a graphical tool for evaluating the discriminatory ability of a binary classifier. It
plots the true positive rate against the false positive rate for all possible classification thresholds,
thereby tracing out how the sensitivity and specificity of a model change as the decision boundary
varies.   A classifier with no discriminative power produces a curve that lies along the diagonal
line, while a curve bending toward the upper-left corner indicates increasing ability to correctly
distinguish positive from negative cases.  The area under the ROC curve (AUC) summarizes this
performance numerically and can be interpreted as the probability that the model assigns a higher
score to a randomly chosen positive instance than to a randomly chosen negative one [26].

                                           8
2.4.3   The permutation robustness test
The permutation test is another non-parametric procedure used to assess whether an observed as-
sociation between predictors and a dependent variable could have arisen purely by chance [15].

To implement this test, the model is first fitted to the original data and a test statistic. Throughout
this thesis, AUC will be used as the test statistic. The dependent variable is then repeatedly and
randomly permuted while the predictors remain fixed, and the model is re-fitted for each permuta-
tion. This produces an empirical null-distribution that reflects how the model would perform if no
true relationship exists. If the observed AUC substantially exceeds this null distribution, it provides
strong evidence that the predictive power of the model is not driven by random variation but by
systematic information in the news-based variables [15].

3   Methodology

First, the research process for the thesis is outlined.  Second, we present the data collection and
preprocessing steps for both the crude oil price data and the news data. Data validity and reliability
is then considered.  Third, we present the jump detection methodology in which we define three
di"erent versions of the jump detector.  Lastly, we present the study design and the evaluation
framework.

3.1   Research process
This study follows an empirical research process consisting of four main stages:  (i) data collec-
tion, (ii) data preprocessing, (iii) model construction, and (iv) evaluation. We collect two primary
datasets: hourly crude oil future prices from NYMEX and a large-scale financial and general news
corpus from HuggingFace [13], [29]. The crude oil data provide the basis for constructing the de-
pendent variable (the price jumps), and the news corpus serves as the source for the independent
variables news volume, tone, and uncertainty. Second, both datasets are preprocessed to align tem-
porarily.  This includes aggregating news to the hourly frequency, handling missing observations,
filtering relevant news, and computing sentiment measures using the Loughran and McDonald [21]
Master Dictionary. The statistical model is then estimated using logistic regression that links the
probability of a jump to news characteristics.  Finally, model performance is assessed using HAC
                                         2
standard errors, McFadden’s pseudo-R  , the area under the ROC curve (AUC), as well as the
permutation robustness test.

3.2   Data collection and preprocessing
First, we briefly describe the data collection process. Thereafter, the steps applied to process the
data are outlined in detail for each of the datasets.   Lastly, we shortly discuss the validity and
reliability of the data.

3.2.1   Crude oil future price data
This study uses historical data on crude oil futures (WTI, CL1).   Note here that CL refers to
the generic crude oil futures contract ticker symbol for WTI on NYMEX, while CL1 specifically
denotes the front-month (nearest-expiry) WTI futures contract [30]. The data has been gathered
from NYMEX via TradingView [29]. The price data sample covers the period 2024-01-01 23.00 to
2025-09-26 16.00 UTC, and includes hourly closing prices in USD, the high and low of each hour

                                           9
and the volume, that is, the number of contracts that exchanged hands per hour.  However, to
match the news time series, we restrict our sample to the period 2024-01-01 23.00 to 2025-07-03
18:00. Table 1 presents the statistics of the raw data. The price variables (close, high, low) show a
spread around a mean of approximately USD  72, with a range between USD  55  and USD  87. With
a standard deviation of around USD  6.7, which corresponds to  9%  of the mean, we can conclude
that the price exhibits quite substantial volatility.

                    Table 1: Summary statistics of crude oil futures price data

                              Statistic   close    high    low    Volume
                               mean      71.89   72.07   71.70      8351
                               std         6.69    6.68    6.69      9515
                               min       55.41   56.08   55.12       106
                               25%       66.89   67.07   66.71      1704
                               50%       71.40   71.60   71.21      4671
                               75%       77.55   77.74   77.34    11 856
                               max       87.46   87.67   87.33   102 784

In order to make sure that the price time series is complete in time (non-trading hours are recorded)
and equally spaced (each observation represents the same time interval  !t), we construct an hourly
index. From the first to the last timestamp, let  T  =  {t0 , . . . , t N }  where  !t  =  ti  ↑ ti→1  = 1  hour
(UTC). Re-indexing the time series to  T  may lead to possible missing values. Thus, if a consecutive
block of missing closing prices is of length smaller than  3  hours, that block is forward-filled with
the closing price prior to the missing block. Otherwise, it remains missing. Figure 2 displays the
(closing) prices over the full period.

                           Figure 2: Crude Oil futures price time series

For each observation, the return and log-return is computed from the price  pt i  at time  t i  according
to
                                  p t i  ↑ p t i→1                    p t i  ↑ p t i→1
                         R(ti ) =            ,   log R(t i ) = log(            ).                    (10)
                                       p t i→1                           p t i→1

                                          10
We look for any pricing or return anomalies:

                        bad price(t i ) =   { p t i  ↔  0  ↗  pt i  =  ↘ } ,                          (11)
                       bad return(t i ) =   { |R(ti )|  >  0.5  ↗  |R(t i )|  =  ↘ } .                  (12)

The “bad return” is flagged when the absolute hourly log return is unusually large (above  0.5  ≃  50%
price change in one hour).  The check identifies no “bad prices” and only one “bad return”.  This
is expected and not problematic since the single flagged value corresponds to the first row in the
re-indexed price series. Because a return requires both  pt i  and  p t i→1 , the first row will be NaN.

3.2.2   News data
The Multi-Source Financial & General News corpus is collected from HuggingFace [13], and is a
collection of approximately 57.1 million news records over the time period 1990-2025.  It joins 24
public news sources into a single-source dataset, where each row represents a news article, containing
the following columns:

   •  UTC ISO-8601 timestamp, yyyy-mm-ddthh:mm:ssz,

   •  text column typically including a title and an article introduction, and

   •  extra fields retaining metadata such as URLs, publisher/source names, authors, tickers, cate-
      gories, origin, and timing details.

To align with the oil price data, the sample is restricted to the time period 2024-01-01 and on-
ward (UTC). Articles outside this interval are discarded before any processing for memory reasons.
However, we discovered that the sample became heavily biased to certain days and hours if all
news articles between 2024-01-01 23.00 to 2025-09-26 16.00 where included, that is, if we tried to
maximize coverage. Therefore, we restricted our sample to the news sources (subsets of the corpus)
with the most recent and even coverage. These include The New York Times (NYT), S&P Daily
Headlines, and Reddit Finance. The last recorded entry for these subsets are 2025-07-03 18:00. The
distribution of news counts over time is displayed in Figure 3.

                          Figure 3:  #  News articles over time

                                          11
The articles are read using streaming (row-by-row) and kept if their date string is after 2024-01-01
00:00:00 (UTC). The “extra_fields” column is formatted as a JSON-like string. An AI-based parser
is used that

  (i) standardizes non-JSON tokens to JSON equivalent ones,

  (ii) removes trailing commas,

 (iii) attempts JSON parsing, and

 (iv) falls back so a (safe) python-literal evaluation when necessary.

The parsed metadata are flattened so that each piece of information has its own column in the
dataframe. We then make sure each column in the table has the correct datatype (either integer,
date, text, or list). Thereafter, duplicate rows are dropped. Moreover, the “text” column is required
to score the article, thus it cannot be empty.

3.2.3   Construction of news flow and sentiment variables
Similar to Jeon et al. [17], we utilize the Loughran and McDonald [21] Master Dictionary, which
is a financial-specific word list.  It classifies words commonly found in corporate filings into cate-
gories among positive, negative, uncertainty. Unlike general sentiment dictionaries, it is tailored to
financial language. This is supposed to avoid misclassifications such as treating the word “liability”
as negative.  In the data, each sentiment column contains a year flag.  Positive years (like  2011)
marks the year that particular word entered the wordlist, and a negative year (like  ↑2011) means
the word was removed in that year. Lastly  0  means a word does not belong to that category. The
latest update was made in 2024 [21].

Because our news sample spans two years, we create two sets of words, one as of 2024 and one as of
2025. A word belongs to category  c  in year  Y  if and only if it was added on or before year  Y  and
not removed on or before year  Y . This ensures that a word that was removed in e.g. 2020 is not
counted as positive/ negative/ uncertain.

Let  PY , N Y , U Y  define the set of positive, negative, and uncertain words in year  Y  respectively. For
each article, we map the timestamp to a year Y , and the text is tokenized into a set W  =  {ς 1 , . . . , ς n }
of words. Thereafter, the tone and  #  uncertain words are computed according to

                               ∑n
                                                         1
            Tone = Pos% ↑ Neg%,                Unc% =       {ς i  → U Y },         (13)
                                                n
                                                                              i=1
                                                                                             (14)

where

           ∑n                   ∑n
                   1                                      1
            Pos% =       {ς i  →  PY },               Neg% =       {ς i  →  N Y }.        (15)
                n                                n
                            i=1                                                i=1

Moreover, we remove stopwords (words with little semantic meaning), from the Loughran and Mc-
Donald [21] General stop-wordlist, from the text column. Jeon et al. [17] retains all tokens to avoid
reducing the apparent tone or uncertainty of longer texts.  However, our sample is substantially
smaller, which makes the impact of stopwords larger. Removing them ensures that the computed

                                          12
measures are not weakened by frequent but semantically uninformative words.

Each article in the raw dataset is timestamped at the minute or second level, so to link the news data
to the price time series, which is sampled at hourly frequency, we aggregate all articles published
within each hour.  Thus, we round down each timestamp to the nearest full hour.  For each hour
t i  →  T  =  {t 1 , . . . , t N }, the score of all articles published during that hour is combined as a weighted
average as
                  ∑
                                      a↑A t n a UncWords a
                                    i
                                  100 ·      ∑             ,   if  N t i  >  0,
                   UncWords t i  =               a↑A t n a                                  (16)
                                         i
                 
                                      0,                            if  N t i  = 0,
                  ∑
                                        a↑A t n a |Tone a |
                                    i
                                  100 ·    ∑           ,   if  N t i  >  0,
                     AbsTonet i  =             a↑A t n a                                    (17)
                                       i
                 
                                      0,                        if  N t i  = 0.

where  A t i  is the set of all articles released in hour  t i  and  n a  is the number of words of article  a.
Lastly,

                                       NewsCountt i  =  N t i .                                (18)

Table 2 reports descriptive statistics for the three aggregated hourly news variables NewsCount,
UncWords, and AbsTone.  They indicate quite sparse and skewed news flow at the hourly level.
Note that all variables are zero at the 25th percentile and UncWords is zero even at the 50th
percentile.

                      Table 2: Summary statistics for independent variables

                       Statistic   NewsCount   UncWords   AbsTone   |R(t i→1 )|
                        mean          1.73         0.17        0.88       0.18
                        std            2.88         0.61        1.75       0.29
                     min          0           0          0         0
                     25%         0           0          0        0
                       50%          1.00         0          0.26       0.08
                        75%           2.00         0.08        1.21       0.25
                       max          53.00        33.33       40.00       7.68

3.2.4   Data validity and reliability
As NYMEX is the o!cial marketplace for WTI crude oil futures (and the most liquid for crude
oil in general) [8], we assume that the recorded prices accurately represent the true transaction
prices at each closing hour. The dataset itself consists of regularly time-stamped market data col-
lected directly from the exchange feeds, which ensures that they have high temporal precision. In
turn, this produces a minimal risk of reporting or sampling errors. Therefore, potential sources of
measurement noise are limited to missing or misaligned observations, and these are identified and
flagged during preprocessing.

The Huggingface corpus provides a broad and diverse set of both financial and general news. How-
ever, because the dataset merges 24 di"erent sources collected through unknown scraping methods,

                                          13
the consistency of timestamps, article completeness, and metadata formatting cannot be fully ver-
ified. Although duplicate removal and type checks improve internal consistency, uneven temporal
coverage reduces the reliability over time. Additionally, the use of UTC timestamps may not align
perfectly with publication or market times.

The Loughran–McDonald Master Dictionary was originally developed for formal corporate and
financial documents, specifically US SEC 10-K filings between 1994 and 2008, to better capture
tone in the language of business.   The authors created their word lists by examining the most
frequent terms in these filings to identify words that typically have financial, rather than general,
connotations of sentiment. While the dictionary was not designed for journalistic text, Loughran
and McDonald [20] note that it may be applied to other financial documents such as press releases
or news articles, as there is no clear reason to expect greater misclassifications in such contexts.
Nonetheless, applying a dictionary derived from corporate filings to news may introduce mismatches,
since linguistic features are di"erent between regulatory and journalistic writing.

3.3   Jump detection methodology
We have formulated three di"erent versions of the  L↑statistic.  First, using Theorem 1 from Lee
and Mykland [19] (see Appendix 7.1.1), then using the same authors Lemma 1 (see Appendix 7.1.2),
which we for the last version have calibrated using the Gilder correction [14].

3.3.1   Pointwise jump detector
Theorem  1  of Lee and Mykland [19] gives us that each trading hour is asymptotically independent√
                                     1                  2            pointwise
of the other. Let  L(ti )  ↓  N (0, c 2 )  where  c  =   ε . Define  φ ϖ       as the pointwise threshold for
flagging a jump. Specifically,
                                        pointwise   z 1→ϖ/2
                                   φ ϖ       =        ,                              (19)
                                                     c
                                                                ϖ
where  z 1→ϖ/2  denotes the critical value such that  P(Z < z 1→ϖ/2 ) = 1 ↑  2  for  Z  ↓  N (0, 1).  Note
                                  1      1                                                    pointwise
that this is valid since  N (0, c 2 ) =  c N (0, 1). A jump is flagged when  |L(t i )|  >  φ ϖ      . If we set
↼  = 5%  and  ↼  = 1%  replicates the  J 0 95  and  J 0 99  indicators of Jeon et al. [17].

3.3.2   Block-wise jump detector
A “block” is defined as one trading day, which, in our dataset corresponds to approximately 24
consecutive observations.  Within each day, there are therefore  m  ≃  24  separate tests for jumps.
Under the pointwise definition of a jump, a  5%  significance level refers to there being a  5%  chance
of getting a false positive.  However, when we test all  24  hours in a day, that error increases to
                       24
roughly  1 ↑ (1 ↑ 0.05)   ≃  70%.

                                                                                                   block
To control this error, Lee and Mykland [19] proposes to calibrate the threshold  φϖ˜    to the maxi-
                                                  m
mum among all no-jump statistics within each block. Let  (1 ↑ ↼˜)   = 1 ↑ ↼. This means that

                                                    1/m
                                  ↼˜  = 1 ↑ (1 ↑ ↼)    .                             (20)
Assume that the condition are as under theorem 1 of Lee and Mykland [19]. Then  cL(ti )  ↓  N (0, 1).
          block
Define  φ ϖ˜    as the blockwise threshold for flagging a jump. Specifically,
                                          block   z 1→ ϖ˜/2
                                     φ ϖ˜    =        ,                                (21)
                                                    c

                                          14
                                                                      ϖ˜
where  z1→ ϖ˜/2  denotes the critical value such that  P(Z < z 1→ ϖ˜/2 ) = 1 ↑  2  for  Z  ↓  N (0, 1). A jump
                                block
is flagged when  |L(t i )|  >  φ ϖ˜    .

3.3.3   Monte Carlo simulated jump detector
Gilder et al. [14] re-examined the  L↑statistic empirically and found that for finite samples, the
theoretical threshold  φ  is too conservative, i.e., it rejects jumps too often. Jeon et al. [17] adopts
this “correction” for their second pair (J95  and  J99) of indicators.  However, the paper does not
present a concrete method for deriving these corrections, but only states that it has applied the
“Gilder correction”.

Gilder et al. [14] describes the correction as a simulation-based calibration of the original threshold
 block                                                                         block          MC
φ ϖ˜    . We have chosen to apply a Monte Carlo simulation in order to calibrate  φ ϖ˜    . Define  φ ϖ˜
as the Monte Carlo (MC) threshold for flagging a jump. We simulate  200, 000  independent draws of
max |Z 1 , . . . , Z m |, where  Z i  ↓  N (0, 1)  and  m  = 24  for our case. We compute the  (1 ↑ ↼)↑quantile
 m=24
q ϖ     (see Appendix 7.2.1). Now, we can estimate

                                       m=24
                                     MC   q ϖ
                                      φ ϖ˜   =       .                                (22)
                                                   c

                             MC
Finally, a jump is flagged when  |L(ti )|  >  φϖ˜   .

3.4   Study design
We will adopt the jump detection statistics defined above at the  ↼  = 5%  and  ↼  = 1%  thresholds.

We test, for each statistic, whether it is reasonable to follow the recommendation by Lee and Myk-
land [19] of using a volatility window  K  = 78.  We test this by plotting the number of detected
jumps while varying the window size K. We choose  K  where the plot is steady.

For each jump hour  t i , we search for news in a look-back window  K  ending at  ti→1 , and construct
the NewsCount, AbsTone, and UncWords. Following the methodology of Jeon et al. [17],
                                                              ∣        ∣                             ∣       ∣
         logit(pt  ) =  ϑ 0  + ϑ 1 NewsCountt  + ϑ 2∣Tone t  ∣ + ϑ 3 UncWords t  + ϑ 4∣R(ti )∣ + ↽ t       (23)
                      i                               i                i                      i                      i

estimates the probability of a jump at time  ti . Hence, we can define the null hypothesis:

H0  :  ϑ 1  =  ϑ 2  =  ϑ 3  = 0.  That is, news intensity and context do not predict jumps.
H1  :  ϑ j   ⇐= 0  for any  j  →  {1, 2, 3}. That is, at least one of the  ϑ’s is non-zero.

3.5   Evaluation framework
The empirical model in equation (23) is estimated using logistic regression fitted by maximum like-
lihood using the  statsmodels.Logit  implementation in Python.   Following Jeon et al. [17], all
explanatory variables are standardized prior to estimation to have zero mean and unit standard
deviation. This normalization allows direct comparison of coe!cient magnitudes across variables,
and ensures that the estimated coe!cients capture the e"ect of a one–standard-deviation change in
each variable on the probability of a jump. Because all variables are standardized, each odds ratio
shows how the odds of a jump change when the corresponding predictor increases by one standard
deviation. For example, an odds ratio of 1.22 means that a one–standard-deviation increase in that

                                          15
variable raises the odds of a jump by 22%.

In Jeon et al. [17], standard errors are clustered at the firm level to account for cross-sectional de-
pendence and serial correlation within each firm’s daily time series. This clustering approach allows
the residuals to be correlated within firms over time while assuming independence across firms. In
our case, we work with a single time series of hourly crude oil prices, where dependence arises over
time rather than across entities. To account for this autocorrelation, we apply HAC standard errors
with six hourly lags.  The HAC estimator gives asymptotically valid inference in the presence of
both heteroskedasticity and short-range serial dependence [2].

Statistical significance is assessed using two-sided  z-tests based on the HAC covariance matrix. We
report both the raw coe!cients and their corresponding odds ratios given by

                                                        ϑ j
                                       ORj  =  e   ,                                 (24)

which under the standardized specification indicate how the odds of a jump change for a one–standard-
deviation increase in variable  j.

Following Jeon et al. [17], we summarize the logistic regression results by presenting coe!cient
                                                                                            2
estimates, HAC-adjusted  z-statistics, standardized odds ratios and McFadden pseudo-R   values.
               2
The pseudo-R  measures how much better the fitted model explains the data compared to one with
only a constant term, providing an indicator of explanatory power. In addition to these standard
metrics, we complement the analysis with the log-likelihood ratio test, the AUC, and a permutation
robustness test.

4   Results

In this section, we present the results from this study.  Note that we will only be presenting the
                                            pointwise                           MC
logistic regression results based on the pointwise  φ ϖ=1%    and Monte Carlo Simulated  φ ϖ˜=1%  jump
indicators at a  1%  threshold, since these are the ones used by Jeon et al. [17]. It is concluded that
          block                                                MC
including  φ ϖ˜    will not add any value since it is closely related to  φ ϖ˜=1% . Note further that the
results at the  5%  confidence level are similar but with lower levels of significance.

First, we present the result from the volatility window  K↑analysis for both indicators. Secondly,
we present results from the jump detection itself. Thirdly, we will present detailed results from the
logit regression including the log-likelihood ratio, AUC, and permutation robustness test.

4.1   Rolling window size
Figures 4 and 5 show the number of detected jumps as the rolling window size  K  varies from 15 to
                               pointwise      MC
200 with a step-size of  5, holding  φ ϖ=1%    and  φ ϖ˜=1%  fixed respectively.

                   pointwise
Starting with  φ ϖ=1%   , the jump count increases steady and peaks around  K  ≃ 50 ↑ 55, and then
                       MC
declines as  K  grows larger. For  φϖ˜=1% , the jump count experiences a peak at around 50, followed
by a sharp decline.

For small K, the local volatility might be noisy and inflated by large returns in the nearby hours.
This, in turn, will cause the  L↑statistic to under-estimate the number of jumps, since short-lived

                                          16
volatility spikes will increase the denominator in the statistic and thus tone down otherwise sig-
nificant price moves. On the other hand, for large values of  K, the estimate instead becomes too
smooth and slow to adapt to changes. This down-weights extreme price moves and in turn reduces
the number of detected jumps.

                       pointwise                                        MC
             Figure 4:  φ ϖ=1%                             Figure 5:  φ ϖ˜=1%

            # jumps detected based on the value of the volatility window K

Between  K  = 70  and  K  = 95  for both jump indicators, the counts are quite stable. This suggests
that the results are not overly sensitive to the exact choice of  K  within this range. On top of this,
the recommended window size by Lee and Mykland [19] for hourly intraday price time series is
K  = 78. Hence, we adopt this value as our baseline.

4.2   Jump detection results
Table 3 summarises the thresholds for the  L↑statistic and the total number of detected jumps
throughout the price time series. The first thing to note is that going from pointwise to block-wise
reduces the number of detected jumps quite substantially. This is expected since we move from per-
test to per-day control of the error. However, the Monte Carlo simulation reproduces the block-wise
thresholds nearly identically. This is a good sign, since they both estimate the same quantile of the
daily maximum under the null hypothesis that  cL(t i )  ↓  N (0, 1). In other words, this validates our
choice of  m  = 24.

                         Table 3: Jump detection thresholds and counts

          Number of observations: 15214
                                 pointwise    pointwise    block     block     MC      MC
                            φ ϖ=5%     φ ϖ=1%     φ ϖ˜=5%   φ ϖ˜=1%   φ ϖ˜=5%   φ ϖ˜=1%
          Threshold            2.4565     3.2283    3.8487   4.4217   3.8501   4.4304
         #  Jumps Detected     1381       733      496     331     496     328

           J
  Notes:  ω ω  where  J  = {pointwise, block, MC}  is the jump threshold for the  L→statistic defined in 1. Whenever
                                                   J
                                    L(t i ) > ω ω  one jump is flagged.

                                                                                                                 pointwise
Figure 6 shows an arbitrary part of the price time series marked with the detected jumps of φ ϖ=1%
    MC
and  φ ϖ˜=1%  respectively.  Overall, we can see that both methods successfully identifies the same
major price discontinuities. This indicates that the real overreaction events are quite robust under
the current choices of hyperparameters  K  = 78  and  m  = 24.  However, the pointwise thresholds
detects additional jumps that are not confirmed when using the Monte Carlo threshold. Here, the
di"erence between controlling the error of each individual observation versus controlling the error at

                                          17
                                      pointwise                                      MC
a daily (m  = 24) level becomes clear. The φ ϖ=1%   threshold is less conservative whereas the φ ϖ˜=1%
threshold eliminates jumps that may arise from local volatility noise rather than true discontinuities.

                                                                  pointwise      MC
     Figure 6: Jumps detected on a subset of the WTI time series using  φ ϖ=1%    and  φ   ˜
                                                                          ϖ=1%

4.3   Logit regression
We are presenting results from running the logit regression using two di"erent jump thresholds,
 pointwise      MC                                                         MC
φ ϖ=1%    and  φ ϖ˜=1% .   First, we present the results using the Monte Carlo indicator,  φ ϖ˜=1% , to
determine the whether a jump has occurred or not. Secondly, we will present the same results, but
                                                    pointwise
now when using the pointwise indicator  φ ϖ=1%   . Finally, we make a comparison of these results
and relate these to the output of Jeon et al. [17].

                      MC
4.3.1   Regression results using  φ ϖ˜=1%
Table 4 presents the results of the main regression (see equation (23)). The model is estimated on
13 170  hourly observations, and there was no issues with convergence, i.e., the model was able to find
a stable maximum when estimating the log-likelihood. The dependent variable represents whether
a price jump has occurred within each hour. Since all explanatory variables were standardized to
have mean zero and unit variance, the intercept of  ↑3.87  can be interpreted as the log-odds of a
jump when all explanatory variables are at their mean level. This corresponds to a jump probability
of approximately
                                            →3.87
                                     e
                              p 0  =      →3.87  ≃  0.0205 = 2.05%.                         (25)
                                   1 + e
                                                                                                             2
The overall fit of the model is quite modest, but statistically significant. The McFadden pseudo↑R
                                                                 →7
is  0.0129. The log-likelihood ratio (LLR) test yields a p-value of  4.5 ⇒ 10  . This confirms that the
inclusion of the news significantly improves the explanatory power compared to the intercept-only
(null) model. Moreover, the model’s ability to discriminate between jump and non-jump hours is
assessed using the area under the ROC curve, which equals  0.67.  This is above random guessing
(AUC=0.5), but still moderate predictive accuracy (see Figure 7).

                                          18
     Table 4: Logistic regression of jump indicator (MC 1% threshold) on news and controls

                                HAC (robust) inference             Odds ratios (per 1 SD)
        Variable       Coef.         SE(HAC)     z       p       OR       95% CI
         const        ↑3.8666           0.0677   ↑57.11   <  0.001     –           –
          NewsCount     0.0806     **     0.0337      2.39    0.0166    1.0839   [1.0147,  1.1579]
          AbsTone       0.1300     ***     0.0461      2.82    0.0048    1.1388   [1.0404,  1.2465]
         UncWords    ↑0.0288           0.0426    ↑0.68    0.4985    0.9716   [0.8937,  1.0562]
          |R(ti→1 )|       0.1771     ***     0.0365      4.86   <  0.001   1.1938   [1.1114,  1.2822]
        Model summary
         No. observations                13 170
                   2
        Pseudo  R  (McFadden)         0.0129
        Log-likelihood               ↑1341.5
        LL (null)                   ↑1359.1
                                              →7
        LLR  p-value                  4.50 ⇒ 10
         AUC (in-sample)               0.670

Notes:  Dependent variable is an hourly jump indicator. Predictors are standardized (μ = 0,  ε  = 1). HAC standard
    errors account for heteroskedasticity and serial correlation. Odds ratios (OR) are reported per one standard
deviation change in each predictor. The predicted jump probability at the mean values of the independent variables
                  →1
             is logit  (→3.8666)  ↑  2.05%.  Significance levels: *  p <  0.10, **  p <  0.05, ***  p <  0.01.

Turning to the individual coe!cients, Table 4 shows that news volume and tone are both positively
correlated with the likelihood of a jump.  The odds ratio for NewsCount is  1.0839, which means
that holding other factors constnat, a one standard deviation increase in the number of articles
published within an hour raises the odds of a jump by approximately  8.4%.  The corresponding
odds ratio for AbsTone is 1.139, implying that a one standard deviation increase in the absolute
tone (=  |P os%  ↑  N eg%|) raises the odds of a jump by roughly  13.9%.  AbsTone are significant
at the 99% level with a p-value of  0.0048. However, NewsCount is just above that threshold (still
significant at  95%) with a p-value of  0.0166. On the contrary, the coe!cient for UncWords is sta-
tistically insignificant since the p-value is almost  0.5.

Lastly, the control variable  |R(t i.→1 )|  that represents the absolute lagged return is positive and highly
significant. Its odds ratio is 1.194 which implies that higher recent market volatility increases the
likelihood of a jump in the next hour by about  19.4%. Since large absolute returns in a short time
span is closely related to high short-term volatility, this means that jumps are more likely to occur
when the market is already volatile.  That is, if recent volatility has been high this increases the
likelihood of additional discontinuous price movements.

The histogram of the permutation test, displayed in Figure 8, is concentrated around  0.525. This is
as expected under the null hypothesis of no predictive/random relationship. Specifically, none of the
permuted models produce an AUC close to the observed value of  0.67. The implied permutation p-
value was calculated to  0.001  (that is, significant at the  99%  level), which means that the probability
of achieving an AUC of  0.67  under random labeling is extremely small.

                                          19
               Figure 7: AUC                     Figure 8: Permutation Robustness test

Overall, the results indicate that both the quantity of news and the intensity of its tone contain
information about jump risk that is not captured by past price movements.  However, linguistic
uncertainty does not appear to play a significant role. The odds ratio of 0.97 implies that the e"ects
are negligible, thus indicating that the frequency of uncertainty-related words does not systemati-
cally explain jump occurrences in this set up. Moreover, although the AUC is modest in absolute
terms, the permutation test demonstrates that the model captures real and systematic relationship
between news count and tone and the likelihood of observing a price jump.

                                        pointwise
4.3.2   Regression results using  φ ϖ=1%
Table 5 presents the results of using the pointwise 99% threshold. Model convergence was achieved.
When all predictors are standardised and at their average level, the intercept corresponds to a jump
level of
                                             →3.03
                                      e
                               p 0  =      →3.03  ≃  0.046 = 4.6%.                          (26)
                                    1 + e
Compared to the MC-indicator used in the previous regression, the pointwise indicator identifies a
                                                                                           pointwise
larger number of jumps. This is expected since the pointwise threshold,  φ ϖ=1%   , is less conserva-
tive and thus classifies more price movements as jumps.

                                                                           2
The overall fit of the model improves slightly. The McFadden pseudo-R   increases from  0.0129  to
0.0194. This suggests that the explanatory variables account for a very minimal, but slightly larger
share of the variation in the (binary) jump outcome. This increase indicates that there might be
a better correspondence between the explanatory variables and the jumps that are only defined
      pointwise
by  φ ϖ=1%   . The LLR is highly significant with a p-value of e"ectively zeros. This confirms that
including the news variables and the lagged return significantly improves the model’s fit compared
to only using an intercept.

The ROC curve in Figure 9 shows a slightly stronger separation between jump and non-jump hours
compared with the MC-indicator model. The AUC is  0.682, which is still moderate but noticeably
above random guessing.

                                          20
   Table 5: Logistic regression of jump indicator (pointwise 1% threshold) on news and controls

                                HAC (robust) inference             Odds ratios (per 1 SD)
        Variable       Coef.         SE(HAC)     z       p       OR       95% CI
         const        ↑3.0327           0.0481   ↑63.10   <  0.001     –           –
         NewsCount     0.0855     ***     0.0244      3.51   <  0.001   1.0839   [1.0384,  1.1426]
          AbsTone       0.0935     **     0.0370      2.53    0.0115    1.0980   [1.0212,  1.1806]
         UncWords    ↑0.0064           0.0319    ↑0.20    0.841    1.0064   [0.9454,  1.0714]
          |R(ti→1 )|       0.2461     ***     0.0316      7.78   <  0.001   1.2791   [1.2022,  1.3608]
        Model summary
         No. observations                13 170
                   2
        Pseudo  R  (McFadden)         0.0194
         Log-likelihood                ↑2 495.4
         LL (null)                    ↑2 544.8
                                             →20
        LLR  p-value                  1.75 ⇒ 10
         AUC (in-sample)               0.682

Notes:  Dependent variable is an hourly jump indicator. Predictors are standardized (μ = 0,  ε  = 1). HAC standard
    errors account for heteroskedasticity and serial correlation. Odds ratios (OR) are reported per one standard
deviation change in each predictor. The predicted jump probability at the mean values of the independent variables
                  →1
              is logit  (→3.0327)  ↑  4.6%.  Significance levels: *  p <  0.10, **  p <  0.05, ***  p <  0.01.

In terms of the individual coe!cients, NewsCount remains positive and significant. It’s odds ratio
is  1.089. This reinforces that higher informational intensity (more news) is associated with higher
probability of a jump. AbsTone is also still (barely) significant at a  99%  threshold with a p-value
of  0.0115. It’s odds ratio is  1.098, which is lower than in the previous test. This is consistent with
there being a larger number of jumps, since more jumps may capture not only highly emotional
market respones but also more “routine” volatility that is independent of shifts in tone. UncWords
remains insignificant, which may mean that the Loughran and McDonald [21] Master Dictionary
may not fully translate from corporate filings language to journalistic contexts. Finally,  |R(t i.→1 )|
also remains significant and very positive, with an odds ratio of  1.279.

               Figure 9: AUC                     Figure 10: Permutation Robustness test

The permutation test show that the model’s predictive performance is far stronger than what would

                                          21
be expected under random chance. The empirical null distribution of AUC values cluster around
approximately  0.515  with a p-value of  0.001, while the observed AUC is  0.682. This implies, like
for the MC indicator, the robustness of our results.

                            pointwise                                                MC
Overall, the results under the  φ ϖ=1%    threshold are consistent with the results under the  φ   ˜
                                                                              ϖ=1%
threshold. NewsCount and AbsTone are both positively related to the likelihood of a jump, UncWord
does not contribute to any additional information, while |R(ti.→1 )| is the absolute strongest predictor.
However, under the Monte Carlo threshold, which is stricter and identifies fewer jump events, the
“baseline” jump probability  p0  = 2.05%, while under the pointwise definition, this probability is
                                                         2                                  2
around 4.6%. However, the model fit metrics (such as R  and the LLR test) improves.  R  increases
slightly from  0.0129  to  0.0194  and LLR becomes even more significant. This means that when the
jump definition captures more frequent events, the predictors explain a larger share of the observed
variation in jump occurrences.

5   Analysis

This section begins by discussing our results and comparing them to those by Jeon et al. [17].
Secondly, it reasons for why it is practically impossible to trade on the news flow in relation to
crude oil. Lastly, it presents a potential trading strategy based solely on the crude oil price.

5.1   Systematic overreactions in CL futures
In Section 2.3, we make the central assumption that genuine overreaction events are typically initi-
ated by an abrupt price discontinuity, that is, a jump. The non-parametric L↑statistic is backward-
looking; it tells us when the realized return over a short interval is unusually large relative to local
continuous volatility, but it does not itself tell us whether that move is “too large” in a financial or
economic sense. The overreaction label only applies ex post, if the price later reverses toward its
pre-jump level. Under this assumption, our jump indicators act as proxies for potential overreaction
events: if overreactions in crude oil prices exist and are systematically related to public information,
they should manifest first as jumps and show up in the relationship between news flow and jump risk.

The regression results in Section 4 confirm that this mechanism is at least partly at work for crude
oil futures. Both for the Monte Carlo and the pointwise  1%  thresholds, the probability of detecting
a jump increases with the news volume and with the absolute value of the tone, while word un-
certainty adds no information. Conditional on the independent variables at their mean, the jump
probability is modest around  2 ↑ 5%  per hour (depending on the threshold), but a one standard
deviation increase in NewsCount or AbsTone raises the odds of a jump by around  8  ↑  14%.  At
the same time, the absolute lagged return  |Rt i→1 |  is the strongest single predictor, which indicates
                                                                           2
that jumps tend to cluster in already volatile states. Both the pseudo↑R  and the in-sample AUC
values are quite low in absolute terms: However, AUC values around  0.67 ↑ 0.68  are significantly
above what would be expected under random labeling according to the permutation tests. These
findings suggest that our statistically identified jump do capture economically meaningful events
where prices adjust to new information.

In the framework by Lee and Mykland [19], a jump is a sudden, discrete price movement that is
too large to arise from normal continuous volatility and typically reflects an information shock that
forces the market to reprice the asset abruptly.  Since our jump indicators are based on Lee and
Mykland’s framework, they respond to news flow in this exact way. This reinforces the idea that

                                          22
potential overreaction events (if they exist) would first appear as price discontinuities before any
subsequent reversal occurs.

                                                                            2
At the same time, the low but significant explanatory power (pseudo-R  ) and the modest AUC
indicate that we are only capturing part of the mechanism: news flow and recent volatility jointly
raise the probability of a jump, but they do not determine it fully. Other factors such as order-flow
imbalances, inventory constraints, and unobserved private information are likely to contribute as
well. This opens up several directions for future research on the mechanism behind overreactions
in crude oil and related markets.

5.2   Result comparison
Jeon et al. [17] find that daily jump probability is significantly related to news frequency and to
the absolute value of tone, while uncertainty of words have a weaker e"ect.  They also find that
news flow helps explain cross-sectional di"erences in jump intensity, and that these relationships are
strongest for equities with high media visibility, measured by the number of distinct news sources
covering the firm. Their results show that news flow triggers discrete price adjustments, and that
the magnitude of these adjustments grows with the informational intensity of the news.

In their benchmark logistic regression (Table 2, Panel B), a one standard deviation increase in news
count increase jump odds by roughly 22% while the absolute value of tone adds about  1  ↑  2%
and word uncertainty barely  1%. Our values are smaller in magnitude but directionally identical.
This might have to do with the fact that Jeon et al. are performing their study on equities at the
daily level, while we are looking at data at the hourly level, and naturally, shorter horizons produce
smaller absolute e"ects.

                                                2
Moreover, Jeon et al. [17] reports a pseudo-R   of around  0.6  ↑  1.4%  while we report a value of
1.3 ↑ 1.9%. Thus, despite di"erent data frequencies and samples, our model has more explanatory
power than what Jeon et al. reports. Our findings confirm the central claim of Jeon et al.: higher
news frequency and stronger tone significantly increases the likelihood of price jumps, but for the
commodity market and in particular the crude oil future market.

5.3   A market perspective
Jeon et al. [17] conduct their analysis at a daily frequency on individual equities. In this environ-
ment, information can accumulate in the interval between recorded price observations, especially
overnight when corporate announcements, rating changes, or macroeconomic releases can occur.
When the market opens, all this accumulated information is incorporated into the opening price,
which can generate discrete opening jumps. They state that “explicitly incorporating news processes
in models of stock return jumps can potentially help identify jumps due to information arrival as
opposed to jumps due to other reasons, such as liquidity or strategic trading based on private in-
formation” and that “this may have broad implications for applications such as option pricing and
risk management where stock return jump models are frequently used” [17].

The futures market in general, and specifically crude oil futures, is fundamentally di"erent.  The
front-month WTI contract trades 23 hours per day on a centralized electronic order book with deep
liquidity and a higher share of participation from algorithmic market makers and high-frequency
traders. Information about inventories, OPEC policy decisions, geopolitical tensions, and macroe-

                                          23
conomic developments is absorbed by the market practically instantaneously [9]. Because trading
is continuous and the market rarely closes, it is reasonable to assume that there is no meaningful
interval during which information can accumulate unpriced. Consequently, while our hourly results
show that news volume and tone increase the probability that the next hour contains a jump, this
does not provide a practical opportunity to take a position ahead of the market.  By the time a
trader observes and processes a headline, the information is already incorporated in the price. Thus,
whereas the equity setting in Jeon et al. [17] operates on a clock where “news today” may translate
into a predictable jump at the next day’s open, the crude oil futures market absorbs information
so quickly that trading directly on the news itself is not feasible for anyone without millisecond
execution capabilities.

Note here that there is a distinction between prices adjusting immediately to new information and
prices adjusting correctly to new information.

These structural di"erences explain why the natural trading focus in our context changes from
anticipation of the jump to the behavior of prices after the jump.   If our central assumption is
correct and many overreactions begin with a jump, then any mispricing that survives beyond the
first milliseconds should be most visible in the post-jump dynamics rather than in the initial spike.
Modern financial markets limit the possibility of trading directly on these events and make it prac-
tically impossible to trade on news.  High-frequency and algorithmic trading systems respond to
news headlines within milliseconds [1]. To gain even marginal speed advantages, many firms invest
in proximity to exchange servers and even in R&D to develop new cables aimed at reducing com-
munication latency [25].  This e"ectively eliminates the opportunity for human or even standard
automated execution to benefit from the initial market reaction. Instead of trying to compete with
algorithms on speed around the news release, it is more plausible to examine whether prices exhibit
systematic mean reversion after discontinuities and whether such patterns can be translated into
rules for entering and exiting positions.

This motivates the trading strategy presented in the next subsection, which does not attempt to
trade on the news directly.   Instead, it assumes that a detected jump reflects a mispricing and
takes the opposite position of the initial price movement, shorting after positive jumps and longing
after negative jumps, with a pre-set take profit and stop-loss level for both directions. This tests
whether the post-jump price development contains exploitable mean-reverting behavior. As stated
earlier, prior research suggests that sudden price jumps often reflect short-term overreactions, after
which prices partially or fully mean-revert toward their previous levels (see e.g., [7]). If the jumps
identified using the nonparametric test indeed do represent such temporary overreactions, then the
subsequent mean reversion may be a source of predictable and systematic return.

5.4   A potential trading strategy
The trading strategy is built around the idea that price jumps may be followed by short-term rever-
sals. The backtest therefore constructs a systematic rule that enters a position immediately after a
detected jump and exits once the price has moved su!ciently in either direction.

Let  pt i  denote the hourly price and  R t i  the hourly return.  A trade is initiated whenever a jump
occurs at time  t i , that is, when the jump indicator  J t i  = 1. The direction of the trade depends on

                                          24
the sign of the jump return
                       {
                                           +1,   if  Rt i  >  0,
                                    d t i  =                                                  (27)
                                          ↑1,   if  R t i  <  0.

If the return is zero or missing, no trade is initiated.   The entry price  p t i  and the trade begins
immediately at time  t i .

After entering the position, the strategy evaluates the subsequent price path  pt i+1 , pt i+2 , pt i+3 , . . ..
At each future hour  t i+j  the price change relative to entry is computed as
                                                   p t i+j  ↑ p t i
                                      movet i+j  =            .                                (28)
                                                            p t i
The position is closed as soon as the move meet either of the prespecified thresholds

                  movet i+j  ⇑  TARGET      or      move t i+j  ↔ ↑  STOP LOSS.              (29)

If the move is in the same direction as the trade, the exit is classified as “take profit”. If the move is
far enough in the opposite direction, the exit is a “stop loss”. If neither threshold is reached before
the end of the sample, the position is closed at the last available price.

For each trade, the raw return between entry and exit is
                                     raw    p exit  ↑ p entry
                                R    =             .                           (30)
                                                 p entry
The strategy return, which also accounts for long or short direction is

                                           strat         raw
                                     R     =  d t i R    .                               (31)

5.4.1   Backtesting
The backtest records all trades initiated by the jump signal and summarizes their outcomes in terms
of the number of trades, total return, mean return per trade, standard deviation of returns, and win
rate. Each trade is treated as an independent unit of notional (that is, all trades are assumed to be
executes with equal capital and allowed to overlap). Using a profit target of  0.7%  and a stop loss
of  0.3%, the backtesting procedure generates a total of 733 trades over the full sample (2024-01-01
                                                               pointwise
until 2025-09-26) using the pointwise jump indicator  φ ϖ=1     . The total cumulative return (P&L),
                                     strat
which is equal to the sum of all  R     , is  42.88%. On a per-trade basis, the average return, which
                  strat
is the mean of  R     , is small at  0.06%, but the distribution of the return is relatively wide with a
standard deviation of  0.89%. These numbers are shown in table 6.

                                  Table 6: Backtesting Results

                                 Statistic                     Value
                               Number of trades              733
                               Total P&L (per 1 notional)   42.88%
                              Average P&L per trade       0.06%
                               Std. of P&L per trade        0.89%
                              Win rate                  54.2%

 Notes:  The trading strategy is applied on the period 2024-01-01 until 2025-09-26. It uses a target of 0.7%, a stop
                                                                                     pointwise
                            loss of 0.3%. Jumps are defined by  |L(t i )|  >  ω ω=1     .

                                          25
The win rate is  54.2%, which is slightly above the  50%  benchmark implied by a symmetric random
walk [23]. This suggests that the jump-based entry rule combined with asymmetric exit thresholds
(target > stop loss) captures a weak but systematic tendency for short-term price continuation or
reversal following detected jumps.

The buy/sell pattern, displayed in Figure 11, shows that the trading strategy consistently enters
positions immediately after detected price jumps, with long trades following downward jumps and
short trades following upward jumps. Many of these trades close profitably as prices partially revert
toward pre-jump levels.  This increases confidence in that the jump-based entry rule can capture
short-term overreactions. However, the pattern also reveals instances where the market continues
to move in the same direction as the jump, which causes the strategy to take the wrong position
and hit the stop loss.

            Figure 11: Backtesting trading strategy on a subset of the WTI time series

The clustering of trades in certain intervals in Figure 11 reflects periods of elevated volatility, where
jumps occur in succession, while quieter periods produce few or no trades.  The asymmetric exit
thresholds are also visible: losing trades typically close quickly, while winning trades exit slightly
further from the entry point when the larger profit target is reached.  Overall, the strategy does
exploit some degree of mean reversion after jumps, but the signal is noisy and highly sensitive to
local market conditions.

5.4.2   Comparison to HFT and market indices
Certain institutional actors, particularly high-frequency trading (HFT) firms and systematic hedge
funds operate with e"ectively negligible marginal trading costs.  These firms execute millions of
trades per day, and for such participants the economic relevance of a strategy is determined not by
the P&L per individual trade, but by the aggregate performance across extremely high turnover
and tight execution spreads [3]. In this segment of the market, even return increments on the order
of a few basis points can be meaningful when scaled across large volumes and low-latency execution
infrastructure [1].

Since our proposed strategy produces a relatively small average P&L per trade it would likely be
eroded by transaction costs (e.g. commissions or bid-ask spreads) for the standard investor or retail

                                          26
trader facing higher frictions. However, the underlying return pattern may still be exploitable for
actors in the market who operate in a near-zero–cost, HFT environment.

Over the full sample period, the backtested trading strategy generates a cumulative return of ap-
proximately 43%, which exceeds the performance of the Dow Jones Industrial Average, whose cu-
mulative return over the same period is roughly 23% [10].  While this comparison highlights that
the strategy outperforms a major equity benchmark in absolute terms, the interpretation should be
made cautiously. The strategy’s returns come from intraday trades with short holding periods and
no overnight exposure, whereas the Dow Jones return reflects a long-only buy-and-hold portfolio
[10]. In addition, as previously stated our cumulative return does not account for transaction costs,
slippage, or funding requirements, all of which would reduce realized performance.

Another potential advantage of the strategy is that its return profile may be largely independent of
broad market movements. Since the trading rules are based on intraday price discontinuities rather
than longer-term market direction, the resulting returns could, in principle, exhibit low correlation
with major equity indices. If this were the case, the strategy might o"er diversification benefits when
combined with more traditional long-only exposures, as uncorrelated return streams can improve
overall portfolio e!ciency.

6   Conclusion and Future Work

The objective of this thesis is to examine whether crude oil futures exhibit systematic overreactions
to news events and whether it is possible to develop a profitable trading strategy based on this
pattern. First, we conclude our results and address our main objective. Then, we present possible
future directions of research. We conclude with a final word.

6.1   Conclusion
The empirical results demonstrate that crude oil prices do react discontinuously to news and that
these discontinuities share several properties with those documented for equities in Jeon et al. [17].
However, there are also important structural di"erences between the two markets that primarily
determine the feasibility of trading on them.

Starting with the relationship between news flow and the probability of a price jump, our findings
indicate that for crude oil futures, a clear connection exist.  Both news volume and the absolute
tone significantly increase the likelihood of a jump, whereas linguistic uncertainty adds no predictive
power. Hence, we have managed to produce the same outcome on the commodity market as Jeon
et al. [17] have done for the equity market. The similarity in the direction/sign of the coe!cients and
          2
pseudo-R  values suggests that the mechanism through which news triggers discrete price moves
appears to operate in a comparable way across markets, despite di"erences in asset class and sam-
pling frequency. However, the e"ect sizes/magnitude of the coe!cients are naturally smaller at the
hourly frequency than at the daily frequency, which is consistent with the idea that shorter periods
allow less time for information to accumulate. The overall pattern supports the interpretation that
news-driven price jumps are not unique to equities and can also arise in highly liquid, continuously
traded futures market.

The trading strategy based on detected jumps yields a positive performance. With a total of 733
trades made, the cumulative return of  42.88%  reflects that mean-reverting price behavior does exist

                                          27
following jumps, at least on average.   The win rate of  54.2%  is only slightly above the random
benchmark of  50%. However, it indicates that the strategy of triggering an entry with a price jump
and having asymmetric exit thresholds (stop-loss vs take profit) captures a weak but systematic
tendency for prices to correct after the initial discontinuity. Although the average return per trade is
small which limits the economic value for investors facing “normal” transaction costs, the underlying
pattern may still be relevant in HFT environments where execution costs are negligible.  Overall,
the results support the broader idea motivating this thesis: that price jumps in crude oil sometimes
reflect temporary overreactions which subsequently mean-revert, and that this post-jump behavior
can be exploited through a simple rule-based strategy.

To conclude, we first show that crude oil futures do exhibit price jump around period of increased
news activity, which confirms that news volume and tone carry information about the likelihood
of a price discontinuity.  Second, we find that the magnitude of the jump is related to the news
characteristics: higher news volume or absolute tone increases the probability of a price jump. This
aligns with the findings of Jeon et al. [17]. Third, by backtesting a trading strategy that takes the
opposite position of the initial jump, we demonstrate that post-jump mean reversion do generate
positive returns. This suggests that, although crude oil prices react instantly to new information,
they do not always adjust fully or correctly. This challenges the idea of the strong EMH. The results
therefore contribute to the literature on price overreactions by demonstrating that these anomalies
extend from equities to commodities. Additionally, we connect the literature on price discontinuities
with short-term overreaction events.

6.2   Future work
While this study provides evidence of systematic relationship between news flow, price jumps, and
price reversals, several limitations remain which open paths for future research.

Most importantly, this thesis does not attempt to explain why overreactions arise in crude oil prices.
Although the statistical link between news characteristics and jumps is clear, the underlying mech-
anism is not taken into account. Behavioral factors such as investor sentiment, limited attention,
or herd behavior may play a role, especially in markets where macroeconomic or geopolitical narra-
tives can change quickly. Structural frictions, inventory constraints, liquidity imbalances, and the
behavior of high-frequency trading algorithms, may also be a potential contributor to price jumps.
Future research could therefore explore the behavioral and structural causes to these overreaction
events, perhaps by combining order-flow data with sentiment measures or by examining how di"er-
ent categories of news events a"ect price discontinuities.

Another interesting extension of this methodology would be to replace the dictionary-based sen-
timent measures with NLP techniques.   The Loughran–McDonald dictionary was developed for
corporate filings rather than journalistic text [20]. By instead applying word-embedding and ma-
chine learning (ML) classifiers to process the news text into categories, it might be possible to
capture contextual nuance, shifts in tone, or other semantics that the dictionary does not. Incor-
porating these approaches has the potential to strengthen the observed relationship between news
flow and price jumps.

Finally, more sophisticated trading strategies, such as dynamic exit thresholds, or ML applications
could be tested to determine whether the economic significance of the mean-reversal pattern can be
strengthened under more advanced decision rules.

                                          28
6.3   Final word
This thesis shows that price discontinuities in crude oil futures are significantly related to news
volume and tone, and that these jumps are often followed by short-term mean reversion that can be
exploited in a systematic trading strategy. At the same time, the mechanisms driving these patterns
remain open to interpretation, and understanding the behavioral and structural forces behind crude
oil overreactions is a potential direction for future research.

                                          29
References

 [1]   Aldridge, I.,  High-Frequency Trading: A Practical Guide to Algorithmic Strategies and Trading
     Systems, 2nd ed. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2013, Copyright  ©  2013 by Irene Aldridge,  isbn:
      9781118343500.  doi:  10.1002/9781119203803.
 [2]   Andrews, D. W. K., “Heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix
      estimation,”  Econometrica, vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 817–858, 1991.  doi:  10.2307/2938229.
 [3]   Bank for International Settlements, Markets Committee, “High-frequency trading in the for-
      eign exchange market,” Bank for International Settlements, Basel, Switzerland, Markets Com-
      mittee Report, Sep. 2011, ISBN 92-9131-885-X (print); 92-9197-885-X (online).
 [4]   Barberis, N. and Thaler, R., “A survey of behavioral finance,” in  Handbook of the Economics
      of Finance, Constantinides, George M., Harris, Milton, and Stulz, René M., Eds., vol. 1B,
      Elsevier, 2003, pp. 1053–1128.  doi:  10.1016/S1574-0102(03)01027-6.
 [5]   Bewick, V., Cheek, L., and Ball, J., “Statistics review 14: Logistic regression,”  Critical Care,
      vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 112–118, 2005.  doi:  10.1186/cc3045.
 [6]   Campbell, J. Y., Lo, A. W., and MacKinlay, A. C., “The econometrics of financial markets,”
      in Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997, ch. 4. Event-Study Analysis, pp. 149–180,
     Chapter PDF hosted by the U.S. NRC,  isbn: 978-0-691-04301-2.
 [7]   Chen, S., Wu, J., Liang, W., and Yang, H., “News shock, limited institutional attention and
      stock market response: Evidence from china,”  Journal of Asian Economics, vol. 100, no. C,
      p. 101 993, 2025.  doi:  10.1016/j.asieco.2025.101993.
 [8]   CME Group,  Wti crude oil futures - fact card,  https://www.cmegroup.com/trading/files/
     WTI-Fact-Card.pdf, Accessed: 2025-01-15, 2024.
 [9]   CME Group,  Light sweet crude oil (wti) — markets: Energy, crude oil, crude oil futures,
       https : / / www . cmegroup . com / markets / energy / crude - oil / light - sweet - crude . html,
      Accessed: 2025-12-07.
[10]   Dow jones industrial average (dji) — tradingview chart,  https://www.tradingview.com/
     symbols/TVC-DJI/?timeframe=12M, Accessed: 2025-12-07.
[11]   Engelberg, J., Sasseville, C., and Williams, J., “Market madness? the case of  mad money,”
      Management Science, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 351–364, 2012.  doi:  10.1287/mnsc.1100.1290.
[12]   Fama, E. F., “E!cient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work,”  The Journal
      of Finance, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 383–417, 1970.  doi:  10.2307/2325486.
[13]   Ferrell, B.,  Financial-news-multisource (revision b509ef6), 2025.  doi:  10 . 57967 / hf / 6432.
      [Online]. Available:  https : / / huggingface . co / datasets / Brianferrell787 / financial -
      news-multisource.
[14]   Gilder, D., Shackleton, M. B., and Taylor, S. J., “Cojumps in stock prices: Empirical evidence,”
      Journal of Banking & Finance, vol. 40, pp. 443–459, 2014,  issn: 0378-4266.  doi:  10.1016/j.
      jbankfin.2013.04.025.
[15]   Good, P. I.,  Permutation Tests: A Practical Guide to Resampling Methods for Testing Hy-
      potheses  (Springer Series in Statistics), 2nd ed. New York: Springer, 2013.  doi:  10.1007/978-
      1-4757-3235-1.
[16]   Hull, J. C.,  Options, Futures, and Other Derivatives, 11th ed. Pearson, 2022.

                                          30
[17]   Jeon, Y., McCurdy, T. H., and Zhao, X., “News as sources of jumps in stock returns: Evidence
      from 21 million news articles for 9000 companies,”  Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 145,
      no. 2, pp. 1–17, 2022,  issn: 0304-405X.  doi:  10.1016/j.jfineco.2021.08.002.
[18]   Kwon, S. Y., “Extreme events and overreaction to news,” Working paper, 2023. [Online].
     Available:  https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/spencerykwon/files/extreme_news_
      overreaction.pdf.
[19]   Lee, S. S. and Mykland, P. A., “Jumps in financial markets: A new nonparametric test and
      jump dynamics,”  The Review of Financial Studies, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 2535–2563, Dec. 2007,
      issn: 0893-9454.  doi:  10.1093/rfs/hhm056.
[20]   Loughran, T. and McDonald, B., “When is a liability not a liability? textual analysis, dictionar-
      ies, and 10-ks,”  The Journal of Finance, vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 35–65, 2011.  doi:  10.1111/j.1540-
      6261.2010.01625.x.
[21]   Loughran, T. and McDonald, B.,  Loughran–mcdonald master dictionary,  https://sraf.nd.
     edu/loughranmcdonald-master-dictionary/, Accessed: 2025-10-26, 2024.
[22]   MacKinlay, A. C., “Event studies in economics and finance,”  Journal of Economic Literature,
      vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 13–39, Mar. 1997, BU-hosted PDF (working-paper date 1996). Published
      version: JEL 35(1), 13–39 (1997).
[23]   Malkiel, B. G.,  A Random Walk Down Wall Street. W. W. Norton & Company, 1973.
[24]   McFadden, D., “Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior,” in  Frontiers in
     Econometrics, Zarembka, Paul, Ed., Academic Press, 1973, pp. 105–142. [Online]. Available:
      file://eml.berkeley.edu/reprints/mcfadden/zarembka.pdf.
[25]   Meyer, G., Bullock, N., and Rennison, J., “How high-frequency traders set up shop — and
      why it matters,”  Financial Times, 2018, Accessed: 2025-12-07 via FT.com.
[26]   Nakas, C. T., Bantis, L. E., and Gatsonis, C.,  ROC Analysis for Classification and Prediction
      in Practice. CRC Press, 2023,  isbn: 978-1-48223-370-0.
[27]   Shalizi, C. R.,  Lecture 12: Logistic regression, Lecture notes, Carnegie Mellon University, 2017.
      [Online]. Available:  https://www.stat.cmu.edu/~cshalizi/uADA/12/lectures/ch12.pdf.
[28]   Tetlock, P. C., “All the news that’s fit to reprint: Do investors react to stale news?”  The
      Review of Financial Studies, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 1481–1512, 2011.  doi:  10.1093/rfs/hhr045.
[29]   TradingView, Nymex: Cl1! – wti crude oil futures continuous contract, https://www.tradingview.
     com/symbols/NYMEX-CL1!/, Accessed: September 26, 2025, 2025.
[30]   TradingView,  What are 1! and 2! continuous futures contracts?  https://www.tradingview.
      com / support / solutions / 43000483493 - what - are - 1 - and - 2 - continuous - futures -
     contracts/, accessed: 2025-12-06, 2025.
[31]   US Energy Information Administration,  What drives crude oil prices? – spot prices,  https:
     //www.eia.gov/finance/markets/crudeoil/spot_prices.php, Accessed: 2025-01-15, 2024.

                                          31
7   Appendix

7.1   Appendix A
7.1.1   A1. Thm 1

                                                                       ϖ
Theorem 1.  Let  L(i)  be as in Definition 1 and the window size  K  =  O p (!t  ), where  ↑1  <  ↼  <
↑0.5.  Suppose the process follows (1) or (2) and Assumption 1 is satisfied.  Let  A¯ n  be the set of
i  →  {1, 2, . . . , n}  so that there is no jump in  (ti→1 , ti ]. Then, as  !t  ⇓  0,
                                             (   3      )
                                        ˆ            2 →ϱ+ϖ→ς
                            sup |L(i) ↑ L(i)|  =  O p !t          ,                       (32)
                              i↑ A¯ n

                             3
where  ⇀  satisfies  0 < ⇀  <  2  + ↼  and
                                         ˆ     U i
                                           L(i) =    .                                     (33)
                                                       c
                                                          ↓
         ↓1                                                             ↓2
Here  U i  =     (W t i  ↑ W t i→1 ), a standard normal variable, and a constant  c  =  E|U i |  =  ε  ≃  0.7979
            !t
[19].

7.1.2   A2. Lemma 1
Lemma 1.  If the conditions for  L(i),  K,  c, and  A¯ n  are as in Theorem 1, then as  !t  ⇓  0,

                                 max i↑ A¯ n |L(i)| ↑ C n
                                                   ↑⇓  ⇁,                           (34)
                                     S n

                                                        →x
where  ⇁  has cumulative distribution function  P (⇁  ↔  x) = exp(↑e   ), and

                                1/2
                   (2 log n)        log π + log(log n)                        1
           C n  =             ↑             1/2       and     S n  =          1/2 ,        (35)
                        c           2c(2 log n)                         c(2 log n)

where  n  is the number of observations [19].

7.2   Appendix B
7.2.1   B1. Monte Carlo Simulation Algorithm
Built with inspiration from Gilder et al. [14]

Algorithm 1  MC simulation of jump indicator threshold
 1:  B  ⇔ 200 000
    
 2:  c ⇔   2/π
                  B↔m
 3:  Simulate  Z  ↓  N (0, 1)
 4:  for  i  = 1  to  B  do       
 5:     Mi  ⇔  max j=1,...,m  |Z ij |
 6:  end for
 7:  q 1→ϖ  ⇔  numpy.quantile({M 1 , . . . , M B }, 1 ↑ ↼)
     MC   q 1→ϖ
 8:  φ ϖ   ⇔
              c
         MC
 9:  Return  φϖ

                                          32