Revisiting the Index Effect

Evidence from ESG Index Additions and Deletions

ALICE NILVALL
EMMA CEDERBOM

Bachelor Thesis
Stockholm School of Economics
2025
Revisiting the Index Effect: Evidence from ESG Index Additions and Deletions

Abstract:

       This thesis investigates whether inclusion in or exclusion from an ESG screened index
       causes abnormal stock returns and abnormal trading volume following the event. It
       examines if firms experience an increase in trading volume after being added to the
       MSCI Choice ESG Screened Indices and a decrease in trading volume after deletion.
       To do this, the study applies an event study methodology, similar to Chen, Noronha
       and Singal (2004), comparing actual returns after the announcement and rebalancing
       with expected returns estimated using the CAPM model and comparing actual trading
     volume with a benchmark volume. While we find no significant impact on returns for
       either stock additions to or deletions from an ESG index, we do find that there is an
       increase in trading activity around the time when the change in constituents is
       implemented. This thesis contributes to the research on the index effect by expanding
       this to include a growing body of indices with sustainability focus, filling a current
        gap in the existing literature.

Key words:

       Index Effect, ESG, Event Study, Abnormal Returns, Abnormal Trading Volume

Authors:
       Alice Nilvall (25963)
      Emma Cederbom (26107)

Tutor:

       Marieke Bos, Associate Professor, Department of Finance

Examiner:

       Ramin Baghai, Associate Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Alice Nilvall and Emma Cederbom, 2025

                                         2
                             I. Introduction

The index effect is a well-studied phenomenon in finance and refers to the impact on a
stock’s price, liquidity or trading activity after the stock has been added to or removed from a
major stock index (Harris and Gurel, 1986). While this effect has been widely investigated in
the finance literature, it has mostly been looked at in relation to major stock indices such as
the S&P 500, MSCI indices and FTSE Russell. There is a certain group of indexes that has
received comparatively little attention in the discussion of the index effect, ESG indices,
which we consider to be overlooked in the existing finance literature. An ESG index can be
defined as a stock market index that selects, weights or excludes companies based on
environmental, social and governance criteria in addition to traditional financial measures
(SIX Group, 2023). These indices give investors exposure that meets certain ethical standards
and allow institutional investors and funds to align their portfolios with ESG principles (SIX
Group, 2023). This thesis will investigate the index effect in relation to ESG indices and fills
a gap in the literature by being among the first to analyze the effects of changes in index
composition in the context of ESG indices. Our research question can be formulated as: Does
inclusion in (or deletion from) an ESG index lead to abnormal stock returns and abnormal
trading volume around the announcement and rebalancing dates?
        This thesis contributes to the research on the index effect by expanding this to include
a growing body of indices with sustainability focus. By analyzing these effects, we provide
insights into whether ESG index revisions have similar impacts on stock returns and trading
volume that have been found in studies on indices lacking this focus (Chen et al. 2004; Harris
and Gurel, 1986; Shleifer, 1986). Previous research has been highly focused on traditional
indices, while ESG indices have not yet been well studied. Since ESG indices is a new
phenomenon and the focus on ESG among investors is increasing (OECD, 2020), it will
become a relevant field of study for future research and this thesis provides a first step in that
process. Understanding these insights can inform asset managers, corporate decision-makers,
and policymakers about the market implications of ESG-focused index changes.
       Based on the documented index effect and previous studies, we believe that we will
see a positive impact on stock prices after a stock has been included on the ESG index, as
well as a negative impact after deletion from an ESG index. We expect that the magnitude of
the cumulative abnormal returns will vary across firms depending on their idiosyncratic
characteristics, which is why we will perform a cross-sectional regression to test for these
effects. Further, we also believe that there is an effect on trading volume. Our hypothesis is
that a stock experiences a positive abnormal trading volume after being included in an ESG
index, while there is a negative impact on abnormal trading volume from ESG index deletion.
       Our hypothesis builds on market efficiency. The efficient market hypothesis is widely
recognized as a concept in financial theory, proposing that financial markets operate
efficiently, making it difficult for investors to consistently achieve abnormal profits without
taking on additional risk (Malkiel, 2003). Most empirical finance studies work under the
semi-strong form of an efficient market hypothesis, which states that all public information is
reflected in prices (Fama, 1970). Therefore, if this hypothesis holds, the stock prices should
immediately reflect the new information when index changes are publicly announced (Fama,

                                         3
1970). This does not only affect prices but also has implications for trading behavior. Under
the efficient market hypothesis volume changes are reactions to new public information
(Fama, 1970). According to John Maynard Keynes's theory, investors prefer to hold liquid
assets rather than illiquid assets, which cannot be quickly converted into cash without losing
significant value (Keynes, J.M., 1936). Liquid stocks have a high level of trading activity,
which makes it simple to buy or sell the shares quickly without significantly impacting the
price (Amihud and Mendelson, 1986). One way to measure the liquidity of a stock is to look
at the bid-ask spread, which is the difference between the highest price a buyer is willing to
pay and the lowest price a seller is willing to accept (Amihud and Mendelson, 1986). Liquid
stocks have a smaller spread, while illiquid stocks have larger spreads, as the spread is an
implicit cost for trading (Stoll, H.R., 2000). When a stock is included in an ESG index, the
increased demand from, for example, index-tracking funds and increased investor attention
could improve the stock’s liquidity (Chen, Noronha and Singal, 2004). This makes the stock
less costly to trade, thus, attracting more trades and resulting in a positive abnormal trading
volume (Chen et al., 2004). Conversely, when a stock is removed from an ESG index,
anticipated declines in trading activity and attention increase the stock’s illiquidity, leading to
lower trading volume (Chen et al., 2004). These insights are considered in our hypothesis.
       The ideal way to test our hypothesis would be to randomly assign index inclusion to a
set of firms that are all eligible to be on the MSCI Choice screened indices. We would then
accurately measure the differences in returns and volumes between the two groups. This ideal
method guarantees no selection bias, no confounding variables, no endogeneity and a clear
causal identification. In reality, different stocks are included in the screened indices for
different reasons and it is thus not randomized. This causes an issue with selection bias as
well as omitted variable bias, since there might be factors that are correlated with index
inclusion that are affecting stock returns or trading volume. We are using an event study to
identify the effect of index inclusion and exclusion on stock returns and trading volume,
following the method presented by Chen et al. (2004). Since this method uses abnormal
returns and trading volume ratios (comparing the observed values to a benchmark), it is
controlling for different omitted variables that are affecting the dependent variables. Since we
are using non-overlapping windows across rebalancing events and short event windows, the
risk of omitted variable bias is minimalized (MacKinlay, 1997). The index constitution is not
randomized, but rather depends on underlying factors, which may give rise to selection bias.
One important consideration is thus if abnormal returns/volume is caused by the index
inclusion/deletion or the underlying factors that led to it. The event study approach that we
are using is handling this issue by using tight event windows, which means that for selection
bias to be an issue, the underlying factors must abruptly change in the event window. Since
this is not the case (these factors change over time, and the ESG scores are presented far
before the index reconstitution), the approach is likely to handle selection bias as well. The
timing of ESG index inclusion/deletion can be argued to be quasi random if there is nothing
that systematically causes the announcement to happen on a day when returns would have
been abnormally high or low anyways. What must be considered to be able to claim quasi
randomness is particularly the risk of the market anticipating the index inclusion/deletion
before the announcement. This anticipation may be an issue since the ESG rankings and
controversy scores are updated beforehand, which means the market may expect that the

                                         4
stock will be included or excluded from the index. If this is the case, the announcement is not
an exogenous surprise at announcement date. This risk is going to be tested for in the analysis
and the implications will be discussed further.
       The results from our study show that stock additions to or deletions from the MSCI
Choice ESG Screened Indices does not produce significant abnormal returns around the
announcement and rebalancing dates. These findings stand in contrast to earlier studies on
traditional indices such as the S&P 500 (Chen et al. 2004; Harris and Gurel, 1986; Shleifer,
1986). Our firm-characteristics regression indicates that idiosyncratic characteristics impact
the magnitude of cumulative abnormal returns following ESG index revisions. In terms of
trading activity, we observe a clear pattern: spikes in abnormal trading volume around the
rebalancing date, followed by a rapid return to normal levels, in line with existing research
(Chen et al., 2004).
        In their study, Chen et al. (2004) examine the index effect and the effects of additions
to and exclusions from the S&P 500 index on stock prices. They find that while stock prices
rise significantly when firms are added to the index, the declines following exclusions from
the index are considerably smaller. The authors argue that the explanation relates to the
trading behavior of index funds, which must immediately purchase shares of newly added
firms but can wait before selling those removed from the index. This asymmetry in trading
leads to greater positive price reactions for inclusions than negative effects for exclusions.
This study is still relevant as it contributes to the understanding of the index effect and offers
explanations not solely based on liquidity or investor awareness.
        Denis et al. (2003) investigate whether the positive stock price effect after inclusion in
the S&P 500 index is caused by price pressure from increased index fund demand or a signal
of changed fundamentals and improved earning expectations. In other words, it examines if
inclusion is an information-free event or if it leads the market to change its expectations
about the stock. This article confirms the significant positive abnormal returns observed by
other researchers after S&P 500 index inclusion. It finds that there is no significant
improvement in analyst earnings forecast following this inclusion and no evidence that
analysts revise their expectations upward. Also, Denis et al. (2003) observe no improvement
in actual operating performance nor outperformance compared to a control group. Therefore,
this study concludes that the effect on stock prices are primarily driven by pressure from
institutional demand rather than fundamental improvement in firm expectations.
       In a more recent study, Greenwood, R.M. and Sammon, M. (2024) find that the
abnormal returns generally associated with a stock being included in the S&P 500 index has
declined from an average of 7.4% in the 1990s to less than 1% over the past decade. The
authors offer multiple explanations for their findings. One of their explanations is that there
has been a change in the composition of the firms that are included, for example related to the
size of the company relative to the index. To reduce tracking error, benchmarked funds tend
to purchase added stocks that constitute a larger percentage of the index upon inclusion and
might be less inclined to purchase additions that are small relative to the index. Other
explanations to why these abnormal returns have largely disappeared is due to increased
arbitrage and improved liquidity provision. The findings are similar to what Preston and Soe
(2021) concludes in their study after observing a declining pattern across multiple major
indices including the Nikkei 225, S&P/TSX 60 and DAX 60. These articles illustrate that the

                                         5
evidence of the effects on index inclusions and deletions includes mixed observations.
However, to the best of our knowledge, there are far fewer studies which have looked at stock
prices after inclusion or removal from the niched perspective of ESG indices.
       Other relevant insights are offered by Bolton, P. and Kacperczyk, M. (2021), who
examine if investors price carbon-related risks in equity markets. The study shows that firms
with higher carbon risk have lower valuations but higher expected returns, indicating a
carbon risk premium. This suggests that carbon emissions, one aspect of ESG considerations,
affect stock prices for publicly traded firms. These findings are relevant for this topic because
they indicate that the market considers environmental risks in stock pricing. However, these
findings are not always consistent in the literature. In their article, Alves, R., P. Kruger, and
M. van Dijk (2023) find little evidence that ESG ratings are related to stock returns.
       This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides a theoretical background and
section 3 describes the indices used in our study. Section 4 and 5 outlines the data collection
and methodology. Section 6 presents our empirical findings. Section 7 includes a discussion
of the results as well as an evaluation of the robustness of our model. Finally, section 8 is our
concluding remarks.

                     II. Theoretical background

                             A. The index effect

Index tracking
Passive investing through a mutual fund or an ETF is a type of investing aimed at mimicking
the performance of a certain stock market index (Wurgler, 2010). By their design and
objective, it is necessary for index funds and ETFs to hold all assets of the index which they
are tracking (Wurgler, 2010). Part of the rationale behind the index effect is based on the fact
that when a firm is added or removed from an index, it triggers major fund flows into or out
of that firm from passive funds (Harris and Gurel, 1986). Passive funds must buy and sell
stocks after the constituents change. This is likely to cause a larger passive flow, which can
drive up demand for stocks when being included in an index, resulting in positive abnormal
returns and increased liquidity (Shleifer, 1986). However, this effect should be temporary
since prices will eventually return to fundamentals once the mechanical trading is completed
(Shleifer, 1986). In the last decades, passive investing has risen in popularity and inflows into
index funds have surpassed inflows into actively managed funds (Sabban, 2024). Wurgler
(2010) explains how a feedback loop is created when growing inflows into passive funds
amplify the index effect, boosting index stock returns and making passive investing even
more attractive, which in turn drives further inflows.

Imperfect substitutes
In contrast to the hypothesis above, another possible explanation to the index effect predicts
that the price changes after stock inclusion should be permanent and sustained as long as the
stock remains included on the index (Shleifer, 1986). In his famous paper, Shleifer (1986)
argues that stocks are not perfect substitutes for one another. This implies a

                                         6
downward-sloping demand curve for stocks, which contradicts the traditional belief of flat
demand curves, as the absence of perfect substitutes will lead to a reduction in arbitrage
activity to flatten the demand curve (Chen et al., 2004). Wurgler and Zhuravskaya (2002)
show that arbitrage activity is weaker and mispricings are more likely to occur for stocks that
do not have any close substitutes. Thus, arbitrage risk seems to be an important factor for
determining the slope of the demand curves. This means that stocks that do not have close
substitutes experience higher price jumps after S&P 500 index inclusion.

Signaling
Another possible mechanism behind the observed index effect relates to the conveyance of
information (Berkman, O’Brien, See and Yeh, 2023). Due to information asymmetry,
investors do not have full insight into a company’s ESG related practices or risks. Therefore,
ESG index inclusion could be seen as a signal of quality since it confirms that the firm has
strong governance, takes social responsibility and follows sustainable practices, which
reduces uncertainty and increases investor confidence (Berkman et al., 2023). The study by
Dyck, Lins, Roth and Wagner (2019) supports the presence of such signaling effects. They
argue that institutional investors, influenced by ESG signals, actively allocate capital toward
more sustainable firms. Their study find that higher institutional ownership is associated with
high corporate social responsibility since these investors do not only value financial metrics
but also sustainability practices. In addition, the study demonstrates that engaged institutional
investors motivate firms to improve their ESG practices, which creates a feedback loop in
which investor engagement and corporate behavior reinforce one another.

Investor interest, media attention and analyst coverage
Being included in certain indices increases investor interest, media attention and analyst
coverage, which contributes to increased volumes and higher prices (Goyal and Wahal,
2025). On the other hand, if a stock is deleted from the index, it could have the opposite
effect, leading to lower prices and volumes being traded (Goyal and Wahal, 2025). This effect
is related to the behavioral finance literature. Merton (1987) argues that there is a “shadow
cost” of incomplete information. Therefore, investors tend to seek value-related information
to facilitate their trading decisions, such as financial news coverage around index rebalancing
(Merton, 1987). In addition, media coverage increases investor attention and awareness,
which has been shown to play an important role in investors’ buying behavior (Barber and
Odean, 2008). Investor attention or awareness is enhanced by events such as financial news,
which can generate buying behavior by investors around index rebalancing, potentially
resulting in better price informativeness (Barber and Odean, 2008).

                             B. ESG in finance

The term “ESG” refers to the consideration of environmental, social and governance criteria
to measure an organization’s environmental and societal impact, as well as their governance
structure (OECD, 2020). The term has become widespread and established in finance as more
investors have started using ESG-ratings and ESG data in investing (Pástor, Stambaugh and
Taylor, 2021). Motives for investors could for example be related to regulatory constraints,

                                         7
   personal or ethical considerations or a potentially higher risk-return tradeoff (OECD, 2020).
   In recent years, there has been an increase in the number of ETFs and mutual funds with an
   ESG focus and ESG investing is one of the fastest growing areas within asset management
   (Pástor et al., 2021). 72 new sustainable funds were launched globally just in the second
   quarter of 2025, which is up from 57 in the previous quarter (Morningstar, 2025).
          ESG indices differ from traditional indices in that their constituents are chosen not
   only based on financial metrics but also based on ESG criteria (MSCI, 2024). This
   dual-selection mechanism generates a distinct feature that could influence how these indices
   are perceived by the market. Furthermore, the motivations and behavior of ESG fund
   investors may differ from that of passive index investors (Bolton and Kacperczyk, 2021).
   ESG index investors may respond not only to mechanical trading demands but also to the real
   social or environmental effects that inclusion signals (Dyck et al., 2019). These additional
   motives might impact the level and duration of price and volume effects in a certain way
   (Dyck et al., 2019). With the growing flow of ESG fund exposure and sustainable investing,
   we address a critical gap by investigating if and how the traditional index effect occurs in
   ESG indices.

              III. MSCI Choice ESG Screened Indexes

   The MSCI Choice ESG Screened Indexes are free float-adjusted market capitalization
   weighted indices that reflect the performance of firms with an above average ESG ratings
   relative to peers in the same sector. These indices exclude companies that are involved in
   controversies or in controversial business activities, including controversial weapons,
   tobacco, and fossil fuels (MSCI, 2024).
          The eligible universe for the MSCI Choice ESG Screened Indices includes all the
   constituents of their respective MSCI underlying parent index. The underlying index for each
   index is outlined in figure 1 below.

                                         Figure 1
                 MSCI Choice Screened Indices and the underlying indices
Figure 1 presents the parent, or underlying, index for each of the three versions of the MSCI Choice ESG Screened
Index. The constituents of the underlying index represent all stocks that could be eligible for inclusion in the
sustainability-focused version, if they meet the sustainability-related criteria.

 MSCI Choice ESG Screened Index Underlying Index

 MSCI EAFE Choice ESG Screened Index MSCI EAFE Index

 MSCI EM (Emerging Markets) Choice ESG Screened MSCI Emerging Markets Index

 MSCI USA Choice ESG Screened Index MSCI USA Index

                                           8
Based on MSCI ESG Ratings, the MSCI Choice ESG Screened Indices identify companies
that have demonstrated a commitment and an ability to successfully manage their ESG risks
and opportunities. To be eligible for inclusion, firms are required to have an MSCI ESG
Rating of ‘BBB’ or above. The MSCI ESG Ratings system aims to measure firms'
management of environmental, social and governance risks and opportunities and indicates
how the firm manages relevant key issues relative to industry peers. MSCI ESG Ratings use a
weighted average key issue calculation that is normalized by industry to provide an
industry-adjusted ESG score, ranging from 0 to 10, which is then translated to a seven-point
scale from ‘AAA’ to ‘CCC’ (MSCI, 2024).
       In addition, the MSCI Choice ESG Screened Indices use MSCI ESG Controversies
Scores to identify companies that are involved in serious controversies with an
environmental, social, or governance impact of their operations and/or products and services.
For a stock to be eligible for inclusion in any of these indices, the firms are required to have
an MSCI ESG Controversies Score of 3 or above (MSCI, 2024).
       The MSCI Choice ESG Screened Indices are reviewed and rebalanced on a quarterly
basis. Additions and exclusions are implemented as of the close of the last business day of
February, May, August and November. However, the index constituents are reviewed on a
monthly basis for the involvement in ESG controversies. If a constituent is considered to be
involved in ESG controversies, they will be deleted. For a deletion to occur, these
controversies should be classified as Red Flags, i.e. have an MSCI ESG Controversies Score
of 0. A Red Flag indicates an ongoing, severe ESG controversy affecting the company
directly through its actions, products, or operations. Index revisions are usually announced
nine business days before becoming effective. The MSCI Choice ESG Screened Indices do
not maintain a fixed number of constituents. The number of constituents may fluctuate at
each rebalancing as firms are added or removed (MSCI, 2024).
       To conduct this study, we chose the MSCI Choice ESG Screened Indices for a number
of reasons. These indices are specifically designed to reflect the performance of companies
that fulfill certain ESG criteria and offer a transparent methodology for how stocks are
selected, added, or deleted from the indices. Second, these indices cover three different global
markets; EAFE (Europe, Australasia and Far East), USA and Emerging Markets, which
makes it possible to compare and draw conclusions from different geographic regions. Third,
the MSCI Choice ESG Screened Indices are among the more widely used ESG benchmarks,
making them likely to trigger observable market reactions after index revisions (MSCI,
2024). The prominence of these indices are relevant for investment flows, index-tracking
products such as ETFs, and institutional investor behavior (MSCI, 2024).

                         IV. Data collection

Index membership revisions have been collected separately for the three indices from
Bloomberg. We find 275 additions and deletions to the EAFE index during the quarterly
rebalancing events in 2023, 2024 and 2025, excluding the last rebalancing event in 2025
since this had not occurred at the time when the data was collected. Out of the sample of 275
actions, we exclude 18 actions that occurred on other dates than the official rebalancings.

                                         9
This method is following the one used by Chen et al. (2004), which excludes stocks that were
added to or deleted from the index due to a merger or takeover, spinoff or change in share
type or for which there is insufficient data. In the case of the MSCI Choice ESG Screened
indices, another reason for irregular additions and deletions could be that new information
has emerged, for example non-compliance with MSCI ESG criteria, leading to immediate
exclusion (MSCI, 2024). This filtering leads to the dataset being more representative of the
full population of ESG indices, since the stocks that are included/excluded at irregular dates
are affected by significant simultaneous events. This introduces a risk of the observed effect
on stock returns or trading volume being caused by this event rather than the index
inclusion/exclusion, meaning increased worries of omitted variable bias. By excluding these,
we are minimizing this risk and thus improving internal validity of the study. However, it also
decreases the sample size slightly, which lowers statistical power (Stock and Watson, 2019).
It could also create sample selection bias if the excluded firms are systematically different
from the included firms. This is not necessarily an issue in this case, but it is important to
acknowledge the potential risk. It also has an important implication for the external validity
of the study, since it means that the effect that we find cannot be interpreted as the general
effect of index inclusion/deletion, but rather only the effect of planned rebalancing.
Additionally, the stocks that are irregularly deleted are often removed because of involvement
in controversies, meaning our final sample excludes these stocks. This has an effect on the
interpretation of external validity of the findings.
       We find 133 additions and deletions to the USA index during the quarterly
rebalancing events in 2025 and 2024. For this index, we do not include constituent changes as
a result of rebalancing in 2023 due to lack of data. Out of the sample of 133 actions, we
exclude 19 actions that occurred on other dates than when the official rebalancing occurred
for the reasons outlined above.
       For the EM index, we find 170 additions and deletions during the quarterly
rebalancing events in 2025, including the last rebalancing date in 2024. We include only 2025
and one rebalancing event in 2024 due to lack of data on rebalancing events dating back
further than this. Out of the sample of 170 actions, we exclude 13 actions that occurred on
other dates than when the official rebalancing occurred.
        Our dataset differs from Chen et al. (2004) in the sense that it contains a shorter time
period due to lack of available data for rebalancing of the indices further back in time. This
shorter time frame increases the risk of time-specific bias in comparison to if the dataset had
been longer. If a specific market condition prevailed during 2023 to 2025 (for example
regarding macroeconomic conditions, monetary policy or investor sentiment towards ESG), it
may distort the index effect observed in our analysis. This means the results may reflect
unique market conditions rather than a general index effect, reducing external validity.
       Daily stock price and trading volumes for the stocks in our sample are obtained for a
time interval extending from the last rebalancing date to the next rebalancing date. This
interval stretches from approximately 90 trading days before the actual rebalancing event to
90 trading days after the actual rebalancing event, following the method presented by Chen et
al. (2004). It includes the announcement date, which usually takes place around 11 to 15
trading days before the actual rebalancing date.

                                        10
   In our data analysis, another three stocks (two from the EAFE index and one from the USA
   index) are excluded from the sample due to insufficient data to perform the necessary
   calculations outlined in the methodology section. After these adjustments, the final sample
   consists of 525 events.

                                         Figure 2
                                Number of observations
This figure illustrates the number of stocks on which we have based the analysis. We outline the number of joiners and
leavers to or from the index for all three versions of the index as well as the full sample consisting of all three indices.
Column 2 is the initial number of stocks. Column 3 and 4 show the number of stocks that have been excluded from the
final sample due to either them being irregular events or other factors. The final sample is presented in column 5.

                       Initial         Irregular        Other Final sample
                     sample        events

 MSCI EAFE 275 18 2 255

 Joiners | Leavers 101|174 8|10 1|1 92 | 163

 MSCI USA 133 19 1 113

 Joiners | Leavers 42|91 7|12 0|1 35 | 78

 MSCI EM 170 13 0 157

 Joiners | Leavers 102|68 5|8 0 97 | 60

 FULL SAMPLE 578 50 3 525

 Joiners | Leavers 245|333 20|30 1|2 224|301

   To complement this analysis, we will also investigate if there is a certain type of companies
   that are affected more than others by index inclusion or deletion by performing a
   cross-sectional regression. We obtain data on firm characteristics for the stocks that have
   been either included in or removed from the MSCI Choice ESG Screened indices through
   Bloomberg. The firm characteristics chosen are summarized in the table below.

                                         Figure 3
                     Firm characteristics in the cross-sectional regression
In the first column of figure 3, we show the 5 factors that are considered for each stock in the cross-sectional regression.
A brief explanation of the factors are provided in column 2. The label is the short form which we have used in the data
collection and analysis. This label appears in column 3. All firm characteristics are taken one day before the
announcement date (AD-1) as shown in column 4.

                                            11
Factor Explanation Label Timing

Momentum Performance over the last 6 months momentum AD-1

Price to book (P/B) ratio Proxy for growth vs value px_to_book AD-1

Market capitalization Firm size mkt_cap AD-1

Average bid-ask spread Proxy for liquidity bid_as_spread AD-1

Industry and sector according to the BICS     What industry the firm belongs to Dummy Tech      AD-1
definition                                                                    Dummy Cons
                                                                       Dummy Indust
                                                                     Dummy Bas mat
                                                                     Dummy Finans
                                                                       Dummy Util
                                                         Dummy Comm
                                                                   Dummy Energy

  The values for each stock and each factor are collected at exactly one trading day prior to the
  announcement date (AD-1). We chose this timing because it provides the most recent and
  accurate information at the time of the event without risking that the factors have been
  influenced by the event itself. This approach follows standard event study methodology
  (MacKinlay, 1997), which emphasizes that explanatory variables and control factors should
  be measured prior to the event to avoid issues of endogeneity and event-related influence.
         We chose these specific factors since they can all contribute to explaining the
  variation in cumulative abnormal return, following the characteristics used by Bolton and
  Kacperczyk (2021). The momentum factor helps control for pre-existing price trends that
  could bias our results, since stocks that have performed well in the past tend to continue
  performing well in the near future, and vice versa (Jegadeesh and Titman, 1993). Therefore, a
  stock might show high CAR after inclusion simply because it has been trending upward
  already before inclusion. The price to book ratio can be used to identify growth and value
  stocks (Fama and French, 1993). Firms with a high P/B ratio are typically classified as
  growth stocks with higher market expectations and strong anticipated future performance
  (Fama and French, 1993). In contrast, firms with a low P/B ratio are considered to be value
  stocks, often undervalued relative to their fundamentals (Fama and French, 1993). Thus, the
  P/B ratio helps test whether growth and value stocks react differently when being included or
  excluded from an ESG index. Market capitalization is a measure of firm size and a standard
  variable in regression models and event studies (Fama and French, 1993). Larger firms tend
  to have greater analyst coverage, higher liquidity and more stable investor bases, which may
  affect the price reaction (Banz, 1981). In contrast, smaller firms might experience stronger
  abnormal returns due to lower liquidity and higher information asymmetry (Barber and
  Odean, 2008). A narrow bid-ask spread indicates higher liquidity because investors trade the
  stock more easily without causing large price movements (Amihud and Mendelson, 1986).
  Conversely, a wide spread reflects lower liquidity and higher trading frictions (Amihud and
  Mendelson, 1986). Including the bid-ask spread variable can indicate how liquidity affects

                                          12
   stocks’ reactions to ESG index inclusion and deletions. Finally, industry and sector according
   to Bloomberg’s Industry Classification System (BICS) are included to identify possible
   patterns for stocks in the same industries.

                                         Figure 4
                Summary statistics of dependent and independent variables
This table reports summary statistics for the dependent and independent variables used in the analysis. The first two
panels (addition panel and deletion panel) show the cumulative abnormal return (CAR) over the different event
windows as well as the trading volume ratio, denoted as Abnormal Volume (AV), at day 0 and day 13. Day 0 is the
announcement date (AD) and day 13 is 13 days after announcement. ED denotes “Effective date”, which is the same as
the rebalancing date. The last panel shows the different firm characteristics.

   Figure 4 shows summary statistics over the independent and dependent variables used in the
   analysis. We have chosen day 0 and day 13 because they represent the announcement and
   most common effective date (ED) used in the analysis. The last panel shows the different
   firm characteristics. Overall, the table shows small deviations from zero for CAR over the
   different event windows, but generally positive for additions and negative for deletions.
   Trading volume is closer to 1 at announcement date than at day 13 for both the mean and
   median for additions and deletions, but the difference between the mean and the median is
   larger for day 13. That can be explained by large outliers that are heavily affecting the mean,
   shown by the large maximum values. The most deviant data regarding the firm characteristics

                                           13
   is market capitalization, since it has a very large maximum value and a significantly larger
   mean and median, pointing to the data being right-skewed.

                           V. Methodology

   We use the event study methodology proposed by MacKinlay (1997) and Chen et al. (2004)
   to investigate the effect associated with changes of the composition of MSCI Choice ESG
   Screened Indices on stock prices and trading volume. Day 0 is the inclusion or deletion
   announcement, which occurs a few days before the actual rebalancing takes place. Depending
   on the different rebalancing dates and the different indices, the announcement is usually made
   11 to 15 days before the changes are implemented. Announcement dates as well as the actual
   rebalancing dates are included in the event window. A timeline is provided below.

                                         Figure 5
                                       Timeline
This timeline illustrates the estimation window in relation to the announcement date and effective date. The estimation
window is 365 days long, starting one year before the previous effective date. The length between two effective dates is
approximately 90 days. The effective date takes place around 11 to 15 days after the announcement date, which is
denoted as day 0.

   Throughout the whole paper, the unit of analysis is firm-event, since we analyze effects at
   event level (every index inclusion or deletion for a given firm constitutes one unit of
   analysis). The raw data contains daily stock-level observations, but the analysis is performed
   at firm-event level.

                               A. Stock return effect

   Abnormal returns are calculated as the difference between the observed stock return and the
   expected return estimated from a market model following the event study method suggested
   by MacKinlay (1997). The cumulative abnormal return (CAR) is then obtained by summing
   the daily abnormal returns over the different CAR windows (figure 6). Statistical significance
   of the CARs is tested using a two-tailed t-test to evaluate whether they differ significantly
   from zero. A detailed description of the methodology is provided in this section.
           To assess the stock return effect on index inclusion and deletions, we look at different
   event windows and calculate the cumulative abnormal return (CAR). The CAR periods are
   based on the periods used by Chen et al. (2004). This methodology provides a
   well-established ground for evaluating the persistence of price and volume reactions after
   index revisions. Chen et al. (2004) suggests that stock prices may revert after the event, so

                                           14
   extending the event windows until 20 days and 60 days after the effective date allows us to
   determine whether the effects are temporary or permanent. Also, Beneish and Whaley (1996)
   find decreasing significance of the effects of stock index inclusion up to 60 days after the ED,
   which again motivates the longer event windows. By including all different event windows,
   we are able to capture both short-term and long-term effects.

                                         Figure 6
                       Cumulative abnormal return (CAR) period
Figure 6 shows the four different event windows during which we calculate the cumulative abnormal returns. The first
“period” consists of one single date, meaning that we calculate the abnormal return only on this day. These periods are
chosen based on the methodology used in the event study by Chen et al. (2004). For the rebalancing dates in August
2025, we calculate cumulative abnormal returns only over the first two event windows, as sufficient data for the
subsequent windows were not yet available at the time of collection. Below we also provide the labels used throughout
our analysis when referring to these periods. “AD” stands for “Announcement Date” and “ED” stands for “Effective
Date”, referring to the date on which the change in index constituents is implemented.
 Cumulative abnormal return (CAR) period Label

 Abnormal return on announcement date AD

 Cumulative abnormal return from the announcement date  AD → ED
 to the effective date

 Cumulative abnormal return from the announcement date  AD → ED+20
 to 20 days after the effective date

 Cumulative abnormal return from the announcement date  AD → ED+60
 to 60 days after the effective date

   One of the most crucial assumptions of the event study is that nothing else happened at the
   same time which affects stock returns, since it in that case would be hard to isolate the effect
   of inclusion in or exclusion from the index (MacKinlay, 1997). To ensure that this assumption
   holds, we have used short event windows (both AD and AD to ED are short time periods),
   which decreases the risk of confounding events. Furthermore, revisions occur at different
   dates since the index is rebalanced four times per year and we have used data between 2023
   and 2025. This frequency means it is unlikely that industry or macro events would happen
   systematically at the same time as index rebalancing. We are also using abnormal returns,
   which removes the effect of general market movements (MacKinlay, 1997). Additionally,
   inclusion or exclusion of the MSCI indices are publicly known processes that are not initiated
   by the firms themselves (Stock and Watson, 2019). This means they are to the largest extent
   exogenous shocks, which reduces the concern of endogeneity (Stock and Watson, 2019).
   However, for index inclusion/exclusion to be an exogenous shock, there cannot be an
   anticipation effect since that means the treatment is not a shock to the market and there is a
   risk of bias. Therefore, we assume exogeneity but will more carefully discuss how reasonable
   this assumption is and the implications of it in the discussion section.

                                           15
        To begin our analysis, we calculate the actual daily returns for each stock in our final
sample from the stock prices, which we explain in the data collection section. The actual
return (Ri,t) for each day is calculated by using equation 1:

                                                           (1)

The abnormal return (ARi,t) is defined as the difference between a stock’s actual return and
the expected return (MacKinlay, 1997). It is given by equation 2:

                                                              (2)

In equation 2, we use the actual change in stock price from one day to another together with
the expected return, which we obtain from estimations using the CAPM, the Capital Asset
Pricing Model (equation 3). We chose a market model approach instead of a constant mean
return model because the market model represents a refinement by removing the part of a
stock’s return that is related to variation in the market’s return, thereby reducing the variance
of abnormal returns (MacKinlay, 1997). MacKinlay (1997) further argues that the
incremental benefits of using a multifactor model in event studies are limited as the additional
factors only offer a small marginal explanatory power beyond the market factor and that there
is thus little reduction in the variance of the abnormal return. We therefore apply a market
model based on CAPM. The equation used for the CAPM is as follows (Fama, 1970):

                                                                     (3)

To ensure the validity of the CAPM as a benchmark for expected returns, we have to make
certain assumptions. First, we assume that the market is efficient, or more specifically, that all
publicly available information is quickly reflected in stock prices (Fama, 1970). Another key
assumption in the CAPM is that return on assets can be directly explained by their sensitivity
to the market portfolio (beta coefficients) (Fama, 1970). In other words, there is a linear
relationship between the expected return and beta. We assume that the beta coefficient of a
stock relative to the market does not change significantly from the estimation window to the
event window. In reality, however, CAPM is a simplification and may not capture all risks,
such as risks related to size, value and momentum factors. Therefore, some researchers prefer
multi-factor models such as the Fama-French 3 factor or 5 factor model since these models
could potentially be more accurate in predicting the expected return (Fama and French,
2015). In this study we chose to work with CAPM for reasons explained above.
       The CAPM model requires estimating a beta coefficient for each stock in our sample
(Fama, 1970). We estimate the beta coefficients by running an OLS regression over the
estimation window (figure 5), following the framework of Fama (1970). The estimation is
done by using the daily price in an interval from one year before the last effective date until
the last effective date. Beta coefficients are used together with the daily risk free rate (Rf,t)
and the corresponding market return (Rm,t) to calculate an estimated return for each stock,

                                        16
according to the CAPM (Fama, 1970). The regression is performed in Bloomberg, using the
following regression model:

                                                                        (4)

The estimation window is one calendar year, ending around 90 days before the announcement
date. To prevent the event from influencing the normal performance model parameter
estimates, the event window should not be included in the estimation window (Campbell, Lo
and MacKinlay, 1997). Campbell et al. (1997) also recommend having a buffer period
between the end of the estimation window and the beginning of the event window, to avoid
contamination by pre-event movements. We have chosen to estimate our beta coefficients for
the expected return calculations by using daily observation of price during one year. For
event studies, it is recommended to use 200–250 daily observations before the event for beta
estimation, which is roughly one calendar year considering that the stock market is closed on
weekends and holidays (Campbell et al., 1997). The estimation period should be long enough
to estimate model parameters with statistical precision, yet short enough to ensure that the
parameters remain stable over time (Campbell et al., 1997). We compute beta as the slope
coefficient from a regression of the stock’s returns on the benchmark’s daily returns over the
specified period. As the benchmark, we use different indices for our three subsamples. The
MSCI ESG Screened Choice Indexes are constructed by applying ESG exclusion screens to
an underlying index (MSCI, 2024). These underlying indices are used as a benchmark for the
beta regression, as well as for the market proxy (figure 1).
        In order to be able to draw the overall interference for the event, the abnormal returns
are aggregated over the different event windows (figure 6). We calculate the cumulative
abnormal return (CAR) by summing up the abnormal returns over the event windows for
each stock (equation 5). The mean abnormal return is calculated for all firms over the event
windows, which we do separately for additions and deletions (equation 6). The variance is
also calculated for all stocks over the event windows (equation 7). T1 and T2 in equations 5 -
8 denote the first and last day of the event windows, respectively. This analysis is done for
our three subsamples alone as well as for the whole sample of 525 stocks.

                                                                  (5)

                                                                  (6)

                                                                  (7)

                                        17
We calculate sample variances and perform a two-tailed t-test to test statistical significance of
the CARs. The two-tailed t-test allows both positive and negative CARs, meaning that it tests
whether the CARs are significantly higher or lower than expected without assuming a
specific direction of the effect. Thus, the null hypothesis is that CAR=0 while the alternative
hypothesis is that CAR≠0. We perform a t-test using equation 8:

                                                               (8)

To be able to calculate the variance of abnormal returns, we make the assumption that in the
cross section the abnormal returns are uncorrelated. This assumption is argued to be valid if
the event windows do not overlap, which is the case in our study since we have relatively
short event windows and the index is rebalanced quarterly (MacKinlay, 1997). Additionally,
stocks come from different industries and countries, which further reduces the
inter-correlation (Brown and Warner, 1985). Thus, following prior literature, we make the
assumption of zero cross-sectional correlation of abnormal returns. Further, to do the
hypothesis testing using the student’s t-distribution, we assume the cumulative abnormal
return follows the normal distribution (Stock and Watson, 2019). This is reasonable due to the
samples being large (almost all samples have N>30) and we assume the cumulative stock
returns are identically and independently distributed, which means it follows from the central
limit theorem that the cumulative abnormal returns are approximately normal (Stock and
Watson, 2019). However, the sample of inclusions for the USA index and exclusions for the
EM index have fewer than 30 observations for the longer event windows, meaning these
results should be interpreted more carefully. No clustering is used since we compute one
CAR per firm per event window, creating a cross-sectional dataset without within-firm serial
correlation and thus clustering is not required (Stock and Watson, 2019).

                           B. Trading volume effect

To examine the effect on trading volume after index revisions, we analyze the abnormal
trading volume using MacKinlay’s (1997) constant mean model. With this method, we
calculate a volume ratio by using the average trading volume for a stock in the estimation
window as a benchmark trading volume. This is the same estimation window as used for beta
estimation when looking at stock returns (figure 5). We then assess whether trading volume
exhibits abnormal behavior after the announcement by applying the same two-tailed t-test
used for the CARs. This test evaluates whether the average abnormal trading volume differs
significantly from zero. To find the average trading volume we use the following equation:

                                                         (9)

                                        18
The volume ratio is calculated by comparing the trading volume on a certain day with the
benchmark trading volume found in equation 8. The equation for the volume ratio (AVi,t) is as
follows (MacKinlay, 1997):

                                                  (10)

The volume ratio is calculated separately for our three subsamples as well as for the whole
sample over each day in the event windows. To evaluate statistical significance of abnormal
trading volume over the different event windows, we calculate sample variances and perform
t-tests to determine if the observed results are statistically different from one. The t-tests test
the hypothesis that the ratio is statistically different from one, against the null hypothesis that
the ratio is equal to one (equation 11). Since we are comparing one observation per firm and
day there is no time dimension or serial clustering, thus clustering is not applicable.

                                                          (11)

                     C. Regression on firm characteristics

In this part of our analysis, we investigate if there are a certain type of companies that are
affected more than others by index inclusion or deletion by performing a cross-sectional
regression. The firm characteristics chosen are momentum, price to book (P/B) ratio, market
capitalization, average bid-ask spread and industry and sector. These factors are all
summarized and explained in figure 3. We also provide a motivation for why we have chosen
these specific factors in our regression in the data collection section above. Based on these
factors, we use the following regression model:

CARi is the cumulative abnormal return for each firm given the four different dependent
variables; CAR_AD, CAR_AD_ED, CAR_AD_20 and CAR_AD_60. Each coefficient (each
beta) describes the effect of that firm characteristic on cumulative abnormal return, holding
the other factors constant. We have used the natural logarithm of market capitalization since
market capitalization is right skewed (there are some firms that are many times larger than
the rest), so by using the natural logarithm we are reducing the influence of outliers and thus
better satisfy the assumption regarding no outliers (Stock and Watson, 2019). In this analysis,
all stocks have a positive market capitalization. Thus, there is no issue with taking the natural
logarithm out of zero. We have then used a dummy variable for every industry, where
Technology is omitted to avoid the issue with multicollinearity caused by the dummy variable
trap (Stock and Watson, 2019). This means the other industry variables measure performance

                                        19
relative to Technology firms. We have also used robust standard errors, to adjust for the fact
that the errors are likely heteroskedastic (Stock and Watson, 2019).

To be able to make the OLS regressions to find which firm characteristics are explaining
abnormal returns, we make the standard assumptions of the multiple linear regression. We
assume that the error term is not correlated to any of the independent variables, that the
observations are identically and independently distributed, that outliers are rare and no
perfect multicollinearity (Stock and Watson, 2019). The last assumption is relaxed by
excluding one dummy variable of an industry from the regression, since including it would
impose perfect collinearity with the intercept term. We further relax the assumption of
homoskedasticity by using robust standard errors. We are not using clustering since it is not
possible to cluster by firm since each firm only appears once and if we would cluster by
rebalancing date we would get the issue with too few clusters (Stock and Watson, 2019).
Thus, ordinary heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are appropriate. The exogeneity
assumption is plausible since firm characteristics are pre-determined (before cumulative
abnormal returns), which reduces the risk of reverse causality. As previously stated,
rebalancing of indices is not initiated by firms and can therefore be argued to be an
exogenous shock that is not correlated with other factors that are systematically related to
firm characteristics (Stock and Watson, 2019).

                           VI. Results

                               A. Stock return
Index inclusion

Panel 1a reports our findings from the stock return analysis for index inclusion across the
EAFE, USA and EM subsamples as well as the full sample. We find no significant abnormal
returns over the event windows after a stock has been included in the ESG index. For all
markets and event windows, the t-statistics are small and most are in fact quite far from
significant. This suggests that the observed CARs are indistinguishable from zero. In
addition, we also notice that several of the mean CARs are negative, possibly contradicting
our hypothesis that being included on the ESG index leads to positive abnormal returns. Even
in the windows where mean CARs are positive (e.g. AD → ED+60 for EAFE and EM), the
large variances and high standard deviations imply substantial cross-sectional dispersion,
making it difficult to draw any conclusions about systematic inclusion effects. Taken
together, the evidence suggests that index inclusion does not lead to a significant price effect,
and any small movements observed appear to be noise. These results contradict our
hypothesis, as we were expecting to find significant effects on stock returns after index
inclusion. They also stand in contrast to traditional studies on the index effect (Chen et al.,
2004; Harris and Gurel, 1986), which find positive and statistically significant abnormal
returns following inclusion in major stock indices.

                                        20
                                        Panel 1a
                  Cumulative abnormal return (CAR) for index inclusion
This panel shows the number of observations, mean, variance, standard deviation and result from the t-test for index
inclusion. The panel includes all three subsamples as well as the full sample. We present the findings over four different
event windows. The first event window is at the announcement date (AD), only including that one date. The other event
windows all span from the announcement date and stretch to the effective date (ED), 20 days after the effective date
(ED+20) and 60 days after the effective date (ED+60).
                                              Panel A: Inclusion
                       No. observations Mean Variance St. deviation T-test

                                  EAFE
        AD 92 0,000155 0,000342 0,018493 0,008401

     AD → ED 92 0,002146 0,004750 0,068918 0,031145

   AD → ED+20 85 0,004349 0,008696 0,093252 0,046635

   AD → ED+60 85 0,036932 0,022577 0,150255 0,245796

                                   USA
        AD 34 −0,003014 0,000524 0,022888 −0,131692

      AD -> ED 34 0,001122 0,006552 0,080946 0,013863

   AD → ED+20 26 −0,032549 0,009074 0,095257 −0,341693

   AD → ED+60 26 0,016920 0,009314 0,096510 0,175316

                             EM
        AD 97 0,001592 0,000398 0,019948 0,079810

     AD → ED 97 0,001011 0,013306 0,115351 0,008768

   AD → ED+20 69 −0,023267 0,028293 0,168206 −0,138327

   AD → ED+60 69 0,042053 0,096642 0,310872 0,135273

                                                Full sample
        AD 223 0,000297 0,000393 0,019813 0,014993

     AD → ED 223 0,001497 0,008675 0,093140 0,016068

   AD → ED+20 180 −0,011567 0,016333 0,127802 −0,090506

   AD → ED+60 180 0,036004 0,048676 0,220626 0,163191

                                           21
   Index exclusion

   Panel 1b reports our findings from the stock return analysis for index exclusion. We find no
   significant mean cumulative abnormal return over the event windows. Also here, the t-tests
   are quite far from significance. These t-statistics indicate that it is not possible to reject the
   null hypothesis of zero abnormal returns. For all indices, the mean CARs are negative values
   over the longer windows (AD → ED+20 and AD → ED+60), which suggests that excluded
   stocks may experience small downward price shifts. However, the wide variances and large
   standard deviations imply substantial dispersion in firm-level reactions, making these average
   effects statistically indistinguishable from zero. For example, in the full sample, CARs range
   from -0.0014 on the announcement date to -0.0345 in the AD → ED+20 window, yet none of
   these are close to statistical significance. These results contradict our hypothesis, as we were
   expecting to find significant negative effects on stock returns after index exclusion. Chen et
   al. (2004) found that the negative effect of deletions is much smaller or non-existent, hence,
   in the case of index deletion, our result is less contrasting to the existing literature. Our
   findings are consistent with those of Greenwood and Sammon (2024). Greenwood and
   Sammon (2024) argue that index exclusions typically do not generate large or persistent price
   effects because the market impact of deletions has diminished over time. Thus, while our
   hypothesis of a strong negative effect is not confirmed, the null results are supported by
   empirical findings that deletion effects have become smaller or insignificant.

                                       Panel 1b
                  Cumulative abnormal return (CAR) for index exclusion
This panel shows the number of observations, mean, variance, standard deviation and result from the t-test for index
exclusion. The panel includes all three subsamples (EAFE, USA and EM) as well as the full sample. We present the
findings over four different event windows. The first event window is at the announcement date (AD), only including
that one date. The other event windows all span from the announcement date and stretch to the effective date (ED), 20
days after the effective date (ED+20) and 60 days after the effective date (ED+60).
                                            Panel B: Exclusion
                    No. observations Mean Variance St. deviation T-test

                                   EAFE
        AD 163 0,005808 0,001065 0,032636 0,177962

    AD → ED 163 −0,010441 0,004685 0,068447 −0,152533

   AD → ED+20 144 −0,028461 0,012237 0,110623 −0,257279

   AD → ED+60 144 −0,035250 0,026785 0,163660 −0,215384

                                   USA
        AD 79 −0,013565 0,000508 0,022542 −0,601753

    AD → ED 79 −0,034753 0,006997 0,083650 −0,415463

                                           22
   AD → ED+20 57 −0,053252 0,010067 0,100336 −0,530730

   AD → ED+60 57 −0,045204 0,022067 0,148550 −0,304303

                             EM
        AD 60 −0,002998 0,000373 0,019310 −0,155271

    AD → ED 60 −0,000454 0,012813 0,113193 −0,004008

   AD → ED+20 29 −0,027520 0,033190 0,182181 −0,151059

   AD → ED+60 29 0,043802 0,048989 0,221334 0,197898

                                                Full sample
        AD 302 −0,001367 0,000845 0,029077 −0,047009

    AD → ED 302 −0,020065 0,007030 0,083843 −0,239319

   AD → ED+20 230 −0,034486 0,014278 0,119492 −0,288605

   AD → ED+60 230 −0,027749 0,028871 0,169916 −0,163312

                          B. Time series plot for stock return

   Graphs 1.1 to 2.2 shows the average abnormal return for the full sample over the event
   window as well as a period before the announcement date. Below are the separate plots for
   index inclusion and for index exclusion. We have also included a more zoomed in version
   (Graphs 1.2 and 2.2), clearly showing how abnormal return changes close to the
   announcement date. We can observe from the plots that there is no clear movement at the
   announcement date or another date before or after, but rather similar movements along the
   x-axis. This observation points to the data being noise rather than a clear relationship between
   abnormal returns and index inclusion or deletion. Thus, we can conclude that there are no
   obvious effects, neither for index inclusion nor index deletion. Not all stocks in our sample
   have data stretching more than 75 days after the announcement date, which is why we are
   careful to draw conclusions about the right most part of the graphs.

   Index inclusion

                                    Graph 1.1 and 1.2
                   Time series of Average Abnormal Return (Additions)
The left graph plots the daily average abnormal return for a period starting 60 days before the announcement date until
80 days after. This is the ARR for the full sample, comprising all three indices. The y-axis is average abnormal return
and the x-axis is the day relative to the announcement date. Day 0 is the vertical line and denotes the announcement
date. The graph to the right is more focused, starting 10 days before the announcement date and stretching until 20 days
after.

                                           23
   Index deletion

                                    Graph 2.1 and 2.2
                    Time series of Average Abnormal Return (Deletions)
The left graph plots the daily average abnormal return for a period starting 60 days before the announcement date until
80 days after. This is the ARR for the full sample, comprising all three indices. The y-axis is average abnormal return
and the x-axis is the day relative to the announcement date. Day 0 is the vertical line and denotes the announcement
date. The graph to the right is more focused, starting 10 days before the announcement date and stretching until 20 days
after.

                               C. Trading volume
   Index inclusion

   Table 1.1 presents the results from a t-test on the abnormal trading volume for all index
   inclusions. We have tested each subsamples separately as well as the sample as a whole, from
   15 days before the announcement date until 20 days after. There are significant effects, and
   mostly so for the emerging markets index. However, the USA index contains a fewer number
   of observations in the deletions sample, which makes it more difficult to get significant
   results when performing a t-test. We can also note that there are significant results before the
   announcement date as well as after, even though it seems to be that most significance

                                           24
   happens after day 0. This result supports our hypothesis that a stock experiences a significant
   increase in abnormal trading volume following inclusion in an ESG index.

                                            Table 1.1
                 T-test results by Day for Additions (H0: mean = 1, Days -15 to +20)
Table 1.1 presents the volume ratio for each day from 15 days before the announcement date (-15.0) until 20 days after
the announcement date (20.0) for index inclusions. The symbols *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10 %, 5 %,
and 1 % level respectively. The results are presented separately for the three subsamples (EM, USA and EAFE) as well
as for the full sample (Combined).

   In graph 3.1 we have plotted the abnormal trading volume starting before the announcement
   date until after the effective date. We see a clear spike in the graph at about 13 days after the
   announcement date. This can be explained by the fact that the actual inclusion is
   implemented at the effective date, which takes place at about 11-15 days after the
   announcement is made. The graph indicates that there is a steep increase in trading activity at
   the time of the actual index rebalancing. These findings are in line with Chen et al. (2004), as
   they report a significantly higher turnover ratio at this date. Similar to us, Chen et al. (2004)
   also find that the abnormal increase in volume turnover tapers off after the effective date.

                                           25
                                     Graph 3.1
               Volume ratio by Day for Additions (H0: mean = 1, Days -15 to +20)
Graph 3.1 illustrates the daily volume ratio from 15 days before the announcement date (-15) until 20 days after the
announcement date (20) for index inclusion. The y-axis is the volume ratio and the x-axis is the number of days relative
to the announcement date. This is the volume ratio for the full sample, comprising all three indices. Day 0 is the vertical
line and denotes the announcement date.

   Index Exclusion

   Table 1.2 below shows the t-test for stock deletions from the ESG index during a period -15
   to +20 from the announcement date. We observe multiple highly significant results,
   especially around the effective date (approximately day 13). We also observe that these
   results occur both before and after the announcement date. However, in line with the findings
   of Chen et al. (2004), we see no permanent effect on trading volume since it quickly reverts
   to normal levels after the announcement date. A comparison between trading volume effects
   after index inclusion (table 1.1) with index exclusion (table 1.2) indicate that we have more
   significant results for index exclusion.

                                          Table 1.2
                T-test results by Day for Deletions (H0: mean = 1, Days -15 to +20)
This table presents the volume ratio for each day from 15 days before the announcement date (-15.0) until 20 days after
the announcement date (20.0) for index deletion. The symbols *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10 %, 5 %, and
1 % level respectively. The results are presented separately for the three subsamples (EM, USA and EAFE) as well as
for the full sample (Combined).

                                           26
   Graph 3.2 plots the abnormal trading volume for stocks that have been deleted from the ESG
   index. Again, we see a clear spike in the graph at around 13 days after the announcement
   date. The actual stock deletion takes place at around this time from the announcement,
   leading to a higher abnormal trading volume at around the effective date. As illustrated in
   graph 3.2, the magnitude of the spike is larger than in graph 3.1 for index inclusion,
   indicating that abnormal trading volume is higher for index deletion than index inclusion.
   These findings are consistent with Chen et al. (2004), who also report a higher turnover ratio
   for the deletions sample on the effective date compared to the additions sample, although
   both are statistically significant.

                                     Graph 3.2
               Volume ratio by Day for Deletions (H0: mean = 1, Days -15 to +20)
Graph 3.2 illustrates the daily volume ratio from 15 days before the announcement date (-15) until 20 days after the
announcement date (20) for index exclusion. The y-axis is the volume ratio and the x-axis is the number of days relative
to the announcement date. This is the volume ratio for the full sample, comprising all three indices. Day 0 is the vertical
line and denotes the announcement date.

                                           27
                   D. Cross-sectional regression for stock returns

   Index inclusion

   In table 2.1 we see the results from the regression of firm characteristics on cumulative
   abnormal returns. The logarithm of market capitalization has a positive and highly significant
   coefficient at announcement date, and marginally significant between announcement and
   effective date. This observation points to larger firms experiencing higher abnormal returns
   upon index inclusion and particularly immediately. The coefficient for the bid ask spread is
   negative and highly significant in the first two model specifications, indicating that less liquid
   stocks tend to experience lower abnormal return close to (or at) announcement date of index
   inclusion. The value and momentum factors are insignificant through all model
   specifications, pointing to those characteristics not being driving forces behind abnormal
   returns related to index inclusion. Regarding the industry dummies, multiple of them are
   significant in the first model specification (consumer, basic materials, finance, utilities,
   communications and energy) and all of these have negative coefficients, showing that these
   industries tend to experience lower abnormal returns compared to the omitted category
   (Technology). This shows that at the announcement date, technology firms seem to
   experience a higher abnormal return than other firms. However, these effects seem to weaken
   over time since they are not significant in the other model specifications.

                                          Table 2.1
                    Cross-sectional regression for stock return (Additions)
This table presents the cumulative abnormal returns at announcement date (CAR_AD), announcement date to effective
date (CAR_AD_ED), announcement date to 20 days after the effective date (CAR_AD_20) and announcement date to
60 days after the effective date (CAR_AD_60) regressed on firm characteristics for all additions in the sample. The
coefficients are presented together with standard errors in parentheses and symbols (stars) that represent the p-values.
The symbols *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % level respectively.

                                           28
Index deletions

In table 2.2 we see a positively significant effect of momentum at announcement date,
pointing to firms with recent strong performance being less punished by index removal. This
observation could be due to investors perceiving these as strong despite the deletion.
Furthermore, the coefficient for value is negatively significant at announcement date,
indicating that growth firms face slightly more negative abnormal returns. We also observe a
positively significant effect of the logarithm of market capitalization, which shows that larger
firms experience more positive (or less negative) abnormal returns after deletion. Liquidity
does not explain variation in our data in any of the three model specifications (measured by
bid-ask spread), pointing to it not systematically explaining CAR after index deletion in our
sample. We further observe the industry dummies having less significant effects in
comparison to our sample for additions, but financial firms seem to experience more positive
(or less negative) abnormal returns than technology firms after deletions through the first
three model specifications. The other dummies are mostly insignificant, showing no clear
difference in effects in comparison to technology firms. Similarly as for additions, the effects

                                        29
   are observed close to the announcement date, but seem to fade away when increasing the
   distance from the announcement.

                                          Table 2.2
                    Cross-sectional regression for stock return (Deletions)
This table presents the cumulative abnormal returns at announcement date (CAR_AD), announcement date to effective
date (CAR_AD_ED), announcement date to 20 days after the effective date (CAR_AD_20) and announcement date to
60 days after the effective date (CAR_AD_60) regressed on firm characteristics for all deletions in the sample. The
coefficients are presented together with standard errors in parentheses and symbols (stars) that represent the p-values.
The symbols *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10 %, 5 %, and 1 % level respectively.

                           VII. Discussion

                               A. Analysis of results
   The results from our study shows that stock additions to or deletions from the MSCI Choice
   ESG Screened Indices does not produce significant abnormal returns around the
   announcement and effective dates. The t-tests reveal that the cumulative abnormal returns do

                                           30
not differ statistically from zero for all event windows and subsamples. These findings stand
in contrast to earlier studies on traditional indices such as the S&P 500, in which stocks
experienced strong positive abnormal returns following addition and negative abnormal
returns following deletion (Harris and Gurel, 1986; Shleifer, 1986). This result implies that
the index effect might work differently for indices with a focus on ESG compared to
traditional market indices.
       One possible explanation to the contrasting results may be that ESG indices capture a
smaller portion of passive fund flows compared to traditional market indices (Morningstar,
2025; OECD, 2020). ESG indices make up only a small part of the investment universe and
appeal mainly to investors with explicit sustainability preferences, meaning that the total
assets under management tracking ESG indices is smaller (Morningstar, 2025; OECD, 2020).
There is thus less buying and selling pressure when index revisions occur. Secondly, investors
may already be predicting or pricing in ESG-related information, so there is a lower
information surprise at the time of index revision (Bolton and Kacperczyk, 2021). Thirdly,
the quarterly rebalancing frequency of the MSCI Choice indices might make these events
more predictable and thereby reduce the price pressure effects (MSCI, 2024). Investors in
ESG indices include institutional and long-term investors with sustained commitments rather
than short-term arbitrageurs. Such an investor profile may dampen the mechanical demand
shocks that drive index effect returns in traditional indices (Dyck et al., 2019).
       Another consideration is related to the composition of the index and the fact that the
number of index constituents is not fixed (MSCI, 2024). Because the index size is variable,
an inclusion does not automatically require a deletion, and vice versa. Other studies on the
index effect have mainly studied indices with a fixed number of constituents (Chen et al.,
2004; Harris and Gurel, 1986; Greenwood and Sammon, 2022). In these cases, every addition
must be matched with a deletion which means index-tracking funds must both buy the added
stock and sell the deleted stock. When the number of constituents is not fixed, there is no
forced substitution and trading flows are more dispersed and weaker, which could help
explain the insignificant effect on abnormal return (Shleifer, 1986). This relates to the theory
of imperfect substitutes (Shleifer, 1986), which states that stocks are not perfect substitutes
for one another, leading to downward-sloping demand curves. For indices with a fixed
number of constituents, forced substitutions create a stronger demand shock. When the
number is variable and a stock does not need to be sold to make room for another, the
demand shock is smaller, reducing the price impact according to the imperfect substitutes
theory (Shleifer, 1986).
       The lack of significant abnormal returns show a similar pattern to the results of
Greenwood and Sammon (2024). In their article, Greenwood and Sammon (2024)
demonstrate that the traditional index effect has largely disappeared in recent years, which
they attribute to smaller net demand shocks from index funds due to “index migration”. This
means that when a stock is moving from one index to another, some trackers will buy it while
others have to sell it, which creates offsetting demand shocks. They further explain this by
increased market efficiency and greater predictability of index changes. These explanations
likely extend to ESG indices, which have smaller passive inflows, priced-in information and
transparent rebalancing events, as explained above. Consequently, even if the trading
volumes increase after index revisions, the impact on stock returns is minimal. Particularly,

                                        31
Greenwood and Sammon (2024) emphasize that the market has become more efficient in the
way that liquidity traders are coordinating their trades to the same time (at the rebalancing
date) and the liquidity providers know when this date is, which minimizes transaction costs.
They find evidence that the proportion of trades at rebalancing dates has increased
dramatically between the 1990s and 2010s, pointing to this mechanism existing. This may be
highly relevant in the case of ESG indices as well, since our study finds evidence that the
trading volume is concentrated at the rebalancing date. This evidence indicates a high level of
market efficiency, which can help explain the insignificant effect on abnormal returns.
       Another possible explanation to the absence of significant effects on abnormal returns
is that the stocks have already been added to a broader, underlying index before (MSCI
EAFE/USA/Emerging Markets Index) which means the effect has already occurred. Previous
research has investigated the effect of being added to broader indices (such as the S&P 500)
and found significant effects for this (Chen et al., 2004), while being added to screened (more
flexible) indices has not gained as much attention in the existing research. It may be that
while additions to broader indices generate abnormal returns, additions to screened indices
show no significant results because the effect has already been absorbed when the stock was
included in the underlying index.
       From the results for trading volume, however, we observe a clear pattern. The
observed spikes in abnormal trading volume around the effective date, followed by a rapid
return to normal levels, indicate that market activity temporarily increases when the index
changes are implemented. These findings are consistent with the liquidity hypothesis, which
claims that index revisions trigger portfolio rebalancing among investors and funds tracking
these indices (Harris and Gurel, 1986). We further see that the trading volume differs
significantly from the one year average on more days than just at and directly after the
announcement date and effective date. Particularly interesting, there are significant trading
volumes before the announcement date for both additions and deletions. To be able to
distinguish what this comes from, one must consider the different elements that a t-test
contains. A larger t-statistic can depend on both a larger mean and a smaller standard error.
The standard error consists of both the square root of the variance and the number of
observations, which is fixed (since it is the number of stocks, which stays the same over the
full period). Thus, a larger t-statistic is either because of a larger mean or a smaller variance.
By decomposing these two parts separately, we observe that the mean of the daily trading
volume across all stocks is rather close to 1 before the announcement date, but the variance is
small for the days where we find significant results. This is further shown in the plots (graph
3.1 and 3.2), since these show average trading volume ratio daily for additions and deletions.
This points to the fact that the significant results before that is due to a small variance. The
small variance for these particular days mean that all stocks are generally traded relatively
equally in comparison to their own previous average during these days. It can be observed
that the stocks cluster around the trading volume ratio of 1 for these days, pointing to nothing
special happening which is affecting the trading volume, meaning it is similar to the one year
average. This leads to large t-statistics, even though the average trading volume ratio is not
abnormally high (Stock and Watson, 2019).
        The cross-sectional regressions offer additional insights. We find that larger firms and
those with a narrower bid-ask spread exhibit slightly higher abnormal returns after inclusion,

                                        32
   implying that index inclusion has a stronger impact on these types of firms. This finding is
   consistent with what has been observed in the literature. Kappou, Brooks and Ward (2008)
   find that larger firms have a more positive abnormal return after index inclusion than smaller
   firms, in line with our findings. Greenwood and Sammon (2024) also finds that liquidity is a
   key moderating factor in modern index effects, which further points to more liquid stocks
   being more heavily affected by inclusion. We also find that tech stocks are more affected than
   other types of stocks, due to the significantly negative coefficients for the other dummy
   variables. This finding aligns with recent literature, such as Tavor (2014), which shows a
   stronger effect of index inclusion for tech firms. This might be due to tech stocks typically
   relying more on growth expectations than on current cash flows, which could mean that the
   signaling effect of index inclusion is more valuable for these stocks (Tavor, 2014). For stock
   deletions, high recent performance (high momentum) is correlated with lower CAR,
   indicating that high-momentum stocks are more negatively affected by index deletions. This
   may be due to investors viewing index deletions as a signal that the strong performance is
   about to end, creating a larger negative impact for these stocks due to a stronger signalling
   effect (Shleifer, 1986). To some extent, we also see that market capitalization has an impact.
   Larger firms are less negatively impacted by index deletion than small firms, in line with our
   findings for additions. Financial firms also seem to be less negatively impacted by index
   deletion than other sectors, possibly due to them often being large, stable and closely
   followed by analysts and institutional investors, which increases efficiency and reduces the
   impact of index deletion (Merton, 1987). However, the explanatory power of these
   regressions is relatively limited, which again indicates that the impact of inclusion or
   exclusion in ESG indices on stock performance is, at most, slight and short-lived.
          Taken together, the results demonstrate that there are important differences between
   ESG and traditional index effects. While index revisions in major indices like the S&P 500
   typically result in price adjustments, ESG index revisions seem to affect trading activity
   without impacting stock returns. These findings contribute to the understanding of ESG
   investing by showing that indices with a sustainability focus behave and influence the market
   differently compared to traditional market indices.

                               B. Robustness check

   To test for the robustness of our results, we have performed permutation tests for cumulative
   abnormal returns and abnormal trading volume. The test for abnormal returns is performed to
   help verify that the observed cumulative abnormal returns do not significantly differ from
   noise. The graphs below show the results.

                                     Graph 4.1
                        Permutation test results for abnormal returns
These graphs show the permutation tests for additions and deletions separately, and for all the different event windows
separately. The four event windows are ED, AD to ED, AD to ED+20 and AD to ED+60. “AD” stands for
“Announcement Date” and “ED” stands for “Effective Date”, referring to the date on which the change in index
constituents is implemented. The y-axis is the frequency, indicating how often each value of the test statistic occurs

                                           33
across all permutations, while the x-axis is the test statistic. The red line shows the observed cumulative average
abnormal return from our analysis and the grey line shows CAAR=0 (null hypothesis).

   The permutation test finds if there is an effect on abnormal return by random chance, without
   assuming anything about the return distribution. This is done by randomly reshuffling the
   data 10,000 times, which gives a distribution of CAARs (cumulative average abnormal
   returns) in a scenario where index inclusion or deletion has no effect. It is then calculated
   how extreme the observed CAAR from our data is compared to this distribution, which is
   presented by how far out in the tails of the distribution the red line is. All tests show
   insignificant results, which suggests that it is not possible to reject the hypothesis that our
   results differ from noise. Since the red dashed line is well within the null distribution, the
   observed CAARs are not extreme compared to what could arise randomly if the effective
   dates had no real impact. In addition, the p-values all exceed conventional significance
   thresholds, indicating that the magnitude of observed CAAR is consistent with chance. The
   permutation test is fully aligned with the results of our t-tests, which also fail to detect
   statistically significant CAARs after ESG index revisions.
          Furthermore, we have performed a permutation test for trading volume at the effective
   date (ED) to test the robustness of this analysis. The results are shown in the graphs below.

                                    Graph 4.2 and 4.3
                         Permutation test results for trading volume
These graphs show the permutation test for trading volume. The graph to the left shows the test for additions and the
right graph shows the test for deletions. The y-axis is the frequency, indicating how often each value of the test statistic
occurs across all permutations, while the x-axis is the test statistic. The red line illustrates the observed mean trading
volume ratio for day 13.

                                           34
   This permutation test finds if the trading volume ratio at the effective date is unusually large
   compared to if the event would have occurred any other day. The test randomly assigns a fake
   effective date and computes mean trading volume for this date. This is repeated 10,000 times
   to create a distribution of what effective date means if the event has no effect at all. The true
   mean at day 13 is then compared to this distribution, and we see that the true mean abnormal
   trading volume lies far to the right of the permutation null distribution. This indicates that the
   trading activity following ESG index addition and deletion is extremely unlikely to be due to
   random variation. Thus, there seems to be an effect of the event for trading volume, even
   when relaxing the assumptions regarding distributions. We have chosen to compare day 13 to
   the randomized distribution because it can be observed from our previous analysis (t-tests and
   plots) that there seems to be a big effect around day 13, and it is a valid proxy for the
   effective date. Therefore, it is of particular interest to see if this effect differs from noise.
         We have further tested the assumption of no anticipation, following the method
   presented by Greenwood and Sammon (2024). We have tested the assumption by visualizing
   cumulative average abnormal returns from -70 days to +20 days for additions and deletions
   separately. If there is no anticipation of index inclusion/exclusion from the market, CAAR
   should remain relatively stable before the announcement, and then suddenly increase at
   announcement. Graph 4.4 shows that this is not the case in our sample. For additions, CAAR
   is increasing almost constantly before announcement, showing positive abnormal returns
   generally for the stocks before announcement. The opposite relationship is observed in graph
   4.5 for deletions. This result could be driven by an anticipation effect as information about
   index changes leak before the official announcement (Beneish and Whaley, 1996; Greenwood
   and Sammon, 2024). If market participants infer this information in advance, stock prices will
   begin to adjust prior to the announcement date. The gradual price shift before the official
   announcement challenges the semi-strong form of the efficient market hypothesis, that all
   publicly available information should be priced in the stock price (Fama, 1970). Under the
   EMH, we would expect all relevant information to be quickly reflected in the stock price
   instead of gradually (Fama, 1970). However, the method does not control for other events
   affecting stock returns simultaneously, which means it is not possible to rule out that the
   perceived anticipation effect is observed due to other events than anticipation of index
   inclusion/exlusion.
                                    Graph 4.4 and 4.5
                        CAAR before announcement (-70 to +20)
The graphs below show cumulative average abnormal returns (CAARs) around the announcement date (-70 days to +20
days). The graph to the left shows the CAAR for stocks additions while the right graph shows the stock deletions. The
y-axis is the CAAR and the x-axis is the number of days from the announcement. The vertical line illustrates the
announcement date (Day 0).

                                           35
One dimension of robustness that would have been interesting to further explore is if the
results are robust to different time periods. Due to data limitations, our sample contains data
from 2023, which means the results may depend on the market conditions that have been seen
during this period. Furthermore, it has been argued in recent literature that the index effect
has been decreasing during the most recent time (Greenwood and Sammon, 2024). Thus, this
may be an explanation to the insignificant effect on abnormal returns that we find. If we
would have a larger dataset that spans over a longer time period, we would be able to split
this dataset into one part that is more recent and one part that is older. In that way we would
be able to see if the effect is robust to different market conditions, and also if the decreasing
index effect can be an explanation to the results. However, this is not possible to do since
ESG indices are a new phenomenon (OECD, 2020). The absence of such a dataset affects the
interpretation of the external validity of our results, since it means we cannot rule out that the
index effect exists only in this specific period.

                          C. Limitations of our study

A limitation concerns our choice of method for the expected return calculation. In fact, this is
an issue in most event studies. Fama (1970) refers to this issue as the “bad model problem”.
According to Fama, this implies that even if markets are efficient, a poorly constructed model
can lead researchers to conclude that anomalies exist when they actually reflect model
misspecification rather than market inefficiency. By using the CAPM to estimate expected
returns, we ignore other systematic factors and only consider market risk to be the
determinant of expected performance. Other potential factors such as size, value, momentum
are assumed to be irrelevant (Fama and French, 2015). This simplification might bias our
estimation of abnormal returns.
       In addition, the CAPM assumes a linear relationship between risk and return, which
might overlook some of the dynamics in investor behavior and not fully capture investor
preferences for ESG investing (Fama, 1970). We also assume beta for the stocks to be stable
over time, indicating that a firm’s systematic risks remain unchanged. In reality, betas can
fluctuate as a result of changed market conditions, firm-specific events or investor sentiment.
This assumption might also distort expected return estimates and, consequently, the abnormal
returns.
       Taken together, the CAPM limitations mentioned above highlight that part of the
observed abnormal returns could stem from model misspecification rather than genuine
market inefficiencies, as Fama (1970) suggests in the bad model problem. We therefore
suggest that further studies use a multifactor model to calculate expected returns (such as the
Fama French 3 factor model or 5 factor model), which might lead to more accurate expected
returns and thus, abnormal returns (Fama and French, 1993; Fama and French 2015). By
including additional risk factors such as size, value, profitability and investment, a
multifactor model could provide more accurate estimations and reduce the likelihood of
biased estimations (Fama and French, 2015). Additionally, further research could test the
robustness of our result by using a different specification of CAPM, which includes alpha
instead of the risk free rate.

                                        36
       Another limitation relates to the scope of the study and the limited amount of data.
Further research could contribute to and expand the findings in this study by exploring the
index effect in other ESG indices, such as indices in the FTSE4Good Index Series or the S&P
Global 1200 ESG Exclusions Index. The scope of this thesis limits the analysis to a single
family of indices and does not extend to other sustainability indices. The delimitation restricts
the external validity of the findings and their applicability, as the results may not be
representative of other indices that are a part of the ESG universe. To be able to draw more
general conclusions regarding the term “ESG indices”, this study should be repeated on other
ESG indices. In addition, the data in our sample is collected between 2023 and 2025, which is
a rather short period to be able to reliably capture long-term trends or draw robust
conclusions about patterns over time. The study would be more robust if we had a larger
dataset over a longer time frame, since it would both include more observations which
increases the statistical power and reduce the risk of confounding events happening in our
sample period.
       One assumption we make is that there is no anticipation from the market about the
inclusion or deletion of a certain stock. However, as seen in graph 4.4 and 4.5 this assumption
likely does not hold. The observed anticipation effect could cause an understated observed
effect for our event window and insignificant abnormal returns, even if an effect actually
exists. For the MSCI Choice ESG Screened Indices, which follow a predictable rebalancing
schedule (MSCI, 2024), some investors may monitor changes in firm ESG ratings or
controversies to predict likely additions or deletions. These investors try to anticipate which
additions or deletions will occur using publicly available ESG information. As a result, the
market reaction may occur gradually, making it difficult to isolate the real announcement
effect as part of the effect may occur before the official announcement date. We therefore
identify a need to test for anticipation effects, potentially by expanding the event windows
prior to the announcement date. By including more trading days before the announcement
date, it captures early trading activity by investors anticipating changes in the index
composition prior to the official announcement.
       A further limitation with regards to the constant mean model methodology for
abnormal trading volume is that it does not account for market-wide fluctuations in trading
activity. The model assumes that the average trading volume is constant and equal to the
historical average computed over the estimation window (Campbell et al., 1997). However,
during the estimation period, there could have been macroeconomic events, monetary policy
changes, shifts in market structure (e.g. the rise of high-frequency trading or ETFs) or
broader market regimes (e.g. bull markets with higher overall liquidity). If the estimation
period is characterized by relatively low (high) market-wide trading activity while index
revisions occur during a period of high (low) volumes, the model systematically
overestimates (underestimates) the abnormal volume (Campbell et al., 1997). To address this
issue, further studies should consider using a market-adjusted volume ratio, in which the
denominator is the benchmark trading volume standardized by market volume during the
estimation period and the numerator is the event period turnover standardized by market
volume during the event period (Chen et al. 2004).

                                        37
                       VIII. Conclusion

This thesis examines the index effect in the context of ESG screened indices. We use the
MSCI Choice ESG Screened Indices to evaluate whether abnormal stock returns are
associated with inclusion to or exclusion from an ESG index. The study applies an event
study methodology, comparing actual returns after the announcement and implementation
dates with expected returns estimated using the CAPM model and comparing actual trading
volume with a benchmark volume. The analysis tests for short-term and medium-term
cumulative abnormal returns and trading volumes across multiple event windows to
determine whether index inclusions and exclusions generate significant market reactions over
different time horizons. The study further investigates the effect on trading volume, by
examining how trading volume changes upon index inclusion or exclusion. We also consider
how firm-specific characteristics such as market capitalization, liquidity and valuation ratios
help explain the cross-sectional variation in abnormal returns.
        We find no significant impact on returns for either stock additions nor deletions to an
ESG index, which contrasts previous research on the traditional index effect for major indices
such as the S&P500. The absence of significant abnormal returns suggests that ESG index
revisions function differently from those of other indices. Several factors likely contribute to
this result, such as smaller passive fund flows into ESG indices, greater predictability of
rebalancing events and the structure of the MSCI Choice ESG screened indices, which avoids
forced substitutions. Moreover, the anticipation effect causes the market to react gradually,
making it difficult to isolate the real announcement effect.
       The results also show a sharp increase in trading volume on the rebalancing dates,
indicating that ESG index changes influence market behavior primarily through temporary
liquidity effects rather than lasting price impacts. The cross-sectional regression shows that
firm characteristics such as size, liquidity, and sector can influence these reactions.
Robustness checks confirm that the increase in trading volume is extremely unlikely to be
due to random variation, while the tests for abnormal returns show that it is not possible to
reject the hypothesis that our results differ from noise, aligning with our t-test results.
       Several limitations have been acknowledged and points to a need for further studies
on the index effect in the context of ESG indices. With that being said, this study highlights
important differences between ESG and traditional index effects which are highly relevant for
the academic debate. The existing literature on index effects has historically focused on large,
traditional benchmarks and studies on ESG indices remains limited. By examining a growing
family of sustainability-focused indices, this study broadens the empirical scope of index
effect research and highlights structural distinctions between ESG and conventional index
mechanics. In addition, the findings support recent evidence that index effects have weakened
in modern markets (Greenwood and Sammon, 2024), extending this argument to the ESG
context. With this study, we also contribute to a growing understanding of how
sustainability-focused indices interact with market dynamics and underlines the need for
further research on a broader range of ESG benchmarks and with longer time horizons.

                                        38
                          IX. References

 Alves, R., Krüger, P. and van Dijk, M.A. (2023) ‘Drawing up the bill: Are ESG ratings related to
       stock returns around the world?’, Swiss Finance Institute Research Paper, No. 25-41.
 Amihud, Y. and Mendelson, H. (1986) ‘Asset pricing and the bid-ask spread’, Journal of Financial
       Economics, 17(2), pp. 223–249.
 Banz, R. W. (1981). The relationship between return and market value of common stocks. Journal of
       Financial Economics, 9(1), 3–18.
 Barber, B.M. and Odean, T. (2008) ‘All That Glitters: The Effect of Attention and News on the
        Buying Behavior of Individual and Institutional Investors’, The Review of Financial Studies,
       21(2), pp. 785–818.
 Beneish, M. D., and Whaley, R. E. (1996) ‘An Anatomy of the “S&P Game”: The Effects of
       Changing the Rules’, The Journal of Finance, 51(5), 1909–1930.
 Berkman, H., O’Brien, J.A., See, A.C. and Yeh, J.J., 2023. ESG and the cost of capital: Evidence from
       the world. The Review of Financial Studies, 36(10), pp.4150–4190.
 Bolton, P. and Kacperczyk, M. (2021) ‘Do investors care about carbon risk?’, Journal of Financial
       Economics, 142(2), pp. 517–549.
Brown, S. and Warner, J. (1985). ‘Using Daily Stock Returns: The Case of Event Studies‘,
        Journal of Financial Economics, 14(1), pp. 3-31.
 Campbell, J.Y., Lo, A.W. and MacKinlay, A.C. (1997) The econometrics of financial markets.
       Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
 Chen, H., Noronha, G. and Singal, V. (2004) ‘The price response to S&P 500 index additions and
       deletions: evidence of asymmetry and a new explanation’, The Journal of Finance, 59(4), pp.
      1901–1930.
 Denis, D.K., McConnell, J.J., Ovtchinnikov, A.V. and Yu, Y. (2003) ‘S&P 500 index additions and
       earnings expectations’, The Journal of Finance, 58(5), pp. 1821–1840.
 Dyck, A., Lins, K.V., Roth, L. and Wagner, H.F. (2019) ‘Do institutional investors drive corporate
       social responsibility? International evidence’, Journal of Financial Economics, 131(3), pp.
      693–714.
 Fama, E.F. and French, K.R. (2015) ‘A five-factor asset pricing model’, Journal of Financial
       Economics, 116(1), pp.1–22.
 Fama, E.F. and French, K.R. (1993) ‘Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds’,
       Journal of Financial Economics, 33(1), pp.3–56.
 Fama, E.F. (1970) ‘Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work’, The Journal of
       Finance, 25(2), pp. 383–417.
 Goyal, A. and Wahal, S. (2025) ‘Index Creation, Information Changes, and Financing’, Journal of
       Accounting Research, 63(4), pp. 1235–1278.
 Greenwood, R.M. and Sammon, M. (2024) ‘The disappearing index effect’, The Journal of Finance,
      Forthcoming.
 Harris, L. and Gurel, E. (1986) ‘Price and volume effects associated with changes in the S&P 500 list:
       New evidence for the existence of price pressures’, The Journal of Finance, 41(4), pp.
      815–829.
 Jegadeesh, N. and Titman, S. (1993) ‘Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers: Implications for
       Stock Market Efficiency’, The Journal of Finance, 48(1), pp.65–91.
 Kappou, K. and Brooks, C. (2008) ‘A re-examination of the index effect: Gambling on additions to
       and deletions from the S&P 500’s “gold seal”’, Journal of Banking and Finance, 32(3), pp.
      418–429.

                                         39
Keynes, J.M. (1936) The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. London: Macmillan.
Mackinlay, A.C. (1997) ‘Event studies in economics and finance’, Journal of Economic Literature,
      35(1), pp. 13–39.
Malkiel, B. G. (2003) ‘The Efficient Market Hypothesis and Its Critics’, The Journal of Economic
      Perspectives, 17(1), 59–82.
Merton, R. C. (1987) ‘A Simple Model of Capital Market Equilibrium with Incomplete Information’,
      The Journal of Finance, 42(3), pp.483–510.
Morningstar, 2025. Global Sustainable Fund Flows: Quarterly Data – Q2 2025. Morningstar Direct.
MSCI (2024) MSCI Choice ESG Screened Indexes Methodology.
OECD (2020). Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) Investing: Practices, Progress and
      Challenges. OECD Publishing, Paris.
Pástor, Ľ., Stambaugh, R.F. and Taylor, L.A. (2021) ‘Sustainable Investing in Equilibrium’, Journal of
      Financial Economics, 142(2), pp. 550–571.
Preston, H. and Soe, A.M. (2021) ‘What happened to the index effect? A look at three decades of S&P
       500 adds and drops’, S&P Dow Jones Indices Research Paper.
Sabban, A. (2024). It’s Official: Passive Funds Overtake Active Funds. Morningstar.
SIX Group, 2023. What Actually Is an ESG Index? [online]
Shleifer, A. (1986) ‘Do demand curves for stocks slope down?’, The Journal of Finance, 41(3), pp.
      579–590.
Stock, J.H. and Watson, M.W. (2019) Introduction to Econometrics. 4th edn. Harlow: Pearson. ISBN
     9781292264455.
Stoll, H.R. (2000) ‘Friction’, The Journal of Finance, 55(4), pp. 1479–1514.
Tavor, T. (2014) ‘Abnormal investor response to the index effect for daily and intraday data’,
      Financial Markets and Portfolio Management, 28(3), pp. 281–303.
Wurgler, J. (2010) ‘On the economic consequences of index-linked investing’, The Review of Finance,
      14(3), pp. 567–607.
Wurgler, J. and Zhuravskaya, E. (2002) ‘Does arbitrage flatten demand curves for stocks?’, The
      Journal of Business, 75(4), pp. 583–608.

AI Appendix

We have used AI tools (ChatGPT, Grok, Deepseek and Elicit AI) for help with coding and grammar.
Equations 1 to 11 have been generated using AI tools.

                                        40