When Central Banks Speak

A STUDY ON THE IMPACT OF CENTRAL BANK ANNOUNCEMENTS
ON THE SWEDISH STOCK MARKET

Mariia Sechyna

Wenjing Chen

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2025
When Central Banks Speak: A Study on the Impact of Central Bank Announcements on
the Swedish Stock Market

Abstract:

This thesis investigates how unexpected Swedish monetary policy announcements influence the
stock market in Sweden. Using the Riksbank’s high-frequency monetary policy event-study
database (2004–2024) and daily industry indices from Nasdaq Nordic, we estimate the effects of
these monetary shocks on the broad OMX Stockholm Price Index and on industry-level
responses. Our results show that a 1-percentage-point unexpected increase in the 1-month SEK
OIS rate leads to a decline of approximately 1.66% in the aggregate equity market index, robust
across announcement types and outlier-adjusted specifications. Pure timing surprises deliver
weaker, statistically insignificant effects, indicating a forward-looking channel in Sweden similar
to the United States. We find little and insignificant cross-industry heterogeneity. Overall, the
findings highlight the importance of the surprise component of Riksbank policy communication
for Swedish asset prices and provide new evidence on monetary transmission in a small and open
economy.

Keywords:

Monetary Policy Surprises, High-Frequency Event Studies, Overnight Index Swaps, Stock
Market Reactions, Central Bank Communication, Swedish Equity Market

Authors:

Mariia Sechyna (26066)

Wenjing Chen (25273)

Tutor:

Dr. Maíra Gonzalez, Teaching Assistant, Department of Finance

Examiner:

Ramin Baghai, Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Mariia Sechyna and Wenjing Chen, 2025

                                                                            1
When Central Banks Speak:

A Study on the Impact of Central Bank Announcements on the Swedish Stock Market

Central bank monetary policies have both profound and immediate effects on financial markets,
and such changes have influenced important outcomes in the economy in the areas of investment,
consumption, and total output. By focusing on the short-term interest rate, central banks
influence asset values and investment returns in relation to capital costs, portfolio values, and
overall market expectations. Therefore, there has been a long and plethora of literature discussing
the effect of monetary policies in the US context. For example, Bernanke and Kuttner (2005)
analysed the impact of unexpected monetary policy changes on the U.S. stock market.

However, empirical evidence on the Swedish market has remained limited, largely due to the
historical lack of high-frequency monetary policy data. With the newly released dataset from the
Riksbank (Almerud, Krygier, Lundvall, and Njie, 2024), we are now able to examine how
Swedish equity prices respond to monetary policy announcements in real time. In summary, this
study provides novel evidence from a different market environment and over a considerably
longer horizon than previously possible.

One key difference is the different communication habits of central banks, which affects the
“surprise” of the unexpected policy rate change. The Riksbank adopts a more transparent
communication strategy than the Federal Reserve (Fed). The Swedish central bank is one of the
first central banks that began to forecast its interest rate paths (repo-rate paths) on a regular basis
(Svensson, 2010), while the Fed provides a so-called ‘dot plot’ (Federal Reserve, 2024).
Consequently, the financial markets in Sweden operate within a clearer communications
framework than their counterparts in the United States. With different communication patterns,
the level and frequency of surprises are different in time. So, the effect of unexpected policy rate
change may carry different weights in the two markets.

Measuring how equity prices respond to monetary policy is inherently challenging because
markets typically incorporate expected policy decisions into prices before they are officially
announced. Consequently, observed movements primarily reflect the unexpected component of
policy changes. Distinguishing between anticipated and unanticipated actions is therefore
essential to identify the true impact of monetary policy on equity valuations. In particular,
interest rate adjustments that are already anticipated by market participants tend to generate little,
if any, stock price reaction (Bernanke and Kuttner, 2005). Both Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) and
Kuttner (2001) show that only the surprise component of interest rate announcements has the
potential to influence the stock market.

We follow the same methodology as Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) and focus on the aggregate
Swedish stock market response and different types of Swedish central bank meetings. We employ
the high-frequency data from the Swedish central bank with the 30-minute event window,
including 30-minute changes in SEK OIS rate (e.g., 1-month, 3-month, or 6-month SEK OIS

                                                                            2
rate) and 30-minute changes in OMX Stockholm All-Share Index on announcement dates. Two
event windows are used around each communication event. One of them is a pre-communication
window that starts 10 minutes before the actual announcement and ends at the actual
announcement. The other one is the post-event window, starting at announcement time and
closing 20 minutes thereafter. Within each of the windows, the median price is computed. The
difference between the two windows' medians, measured as post-announcement minus
pre-announcement prices, is an indication of the short-run or instantaneous market response. In
our thesis, current policy surprise is proxied by changes in the 1-month OIS rate on
announcement dates. Apart from that, we also look at industry-level stock responses to monetary
policy announcements.

We find that a one-percentage-point unexpected increase in the one-month SEK OIS rate leads to
an approximately 1.66% decline in the Swedish stock market relative to its benchmark. Our
results are robust when restricting the analysis to different types of announcements, but we find
that Riksbank minutes have no effect on the Swedish stock market. The effect is more
pronounced when eliminating observations that are identified as influential outliers. The negative
and significant coefficient here suggests that an unanticipated policy rate rise caused a fall in the
Swedish stock market index.

We also find that Swedish stock market returns respond insignificantly to pure timing surprises,
but react significantly and robustly to level surprises that shift the expected future path of interest
rates. This suggests that the market cares more about the policy path than its timing. Our finding
is consistent with Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), although the magnitude is smaller for Sweden.

When examining the industry-level responses, we find that the monetary policy surprise does not
produce any statistically significant reaction for the majority of the industries, except for the
health care industry. The result for the health care industry is statistically significant only at the
10% level. However, due to data limitations, we are uncertain if the estimated industry-level
responses are in accordance with CAPM-predicted industry responses.

Literature Review and Contribution

One key paper that aims to answer questions similar to those investigated in our study is “What
Explains the Stock Market’s Reaction to Federal Reserve Policy?” by Bernanke and Kuttner
(2005), which itself builds upon the work of Kuttner (2001), Campbell (1991), and others. Their
research established a clear empirical link between monetary policy surprises and stock market
movements in the United States. By decomposing Federal Reserve policy actions into anticipated
and unanticipated components using Federal Funds Futures, they found that only the surprise
changes drive stock market reactions. In particular a 0.25% unexpected rate cut causes a 1%
increase in broad U.S. equity indices. The expected part of the Federal Funds Futures rate change
did not prove to show any significant influence on the abnormal fluctuations of the equity
market.

U.S. Research suggests two broad ways to address endogeneity and the problem of simultaneous
reactions. The first approach relies on using high-frequency, intraday data within a short time

                                                                            3
window around an FOMC announcement. By focusing on this narrow window, researchers can
better isolate the effect of the policy decision itself from other news that may occur earlier or
later in the day. Building on a similar idea, Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005) later showed
that an equity price response measured with intraday observations is robust and almost the same
as those derived from daily data. However, when using intraday data, the explanatory power of
the model increased substantially, as reflected in a higher R². In another follow-up study,
D’Amico and Farka (2003) reached comparable results by introducing intraday data into a VAR
framework to capture market reactions in greater detail. Another broad solution takes a more
econometric perspective. For instance, Rigobon and Sack (2002) applied a method that takes
advantage of the changes in volatility generated by unexpected monetary policy actions. By
using this heteroskedasticity, their estimator is able to produce more reliable estimates of how
financial markets respond to policy shocks (Bernanke and Kuttner, 2005).

In terms of Swedish research, Andersson, Dillén, and Sellin (2006) provide early evidence on
how different forms of monetary policy communication, such as repo rate changes and inflation
reports, affect the term structure of interest rates in Sweden. Iversen and Tysklind (2017) wrote a
staff memo and examined how changes in both the actual repo rate and the published repo rate
path from 2006-2017 affect a range of Swedish financial variables, including market interest
rates, household and firm lending rates, and exchange rates. Using an event‐study framework,
they separate expected and unexpected components of both the policy rate and the rate path.
They employ STINA contracts as a measure of market‐based surprises and drawing on both
factor analysis and regression‐based techniques to isolate orthogonal “target” and “path” shocks,
following Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005). Using daily data, their results show that
unexpected changes in both the current repo rate and the repo rate path significantly affect
financial variables such as market interest rates, household and corporate lending rates, and
exchange rates. They find that the impact of the repo rate path extends beyond what can be
explained by contemporaneous changes in the policy rate, highlighting the independent role of
forward guidance as a monetary policy tool.

Natvik, Rime, and Syrstad (2020) studied whether the publication of interest rate paths improves
the market’s ability to forecast future interest rates. Using high-frequency FRA (Forward Rate
Agreements) data for Norway and Sweden, they find that communication about future policy
paths does not significantly improve market responses to new information. Instead, only actual
policy actions (“target” effects) lead to more accurate market expectations.

Brubakk, ter Ellen, and Xu (2021) also investigated how central bank communication through
published interest rate projections affects market expectations, focusing on Norges Bank and
Sveriges Riksbank. Using a high-frequency event-study framework, they show that unexpected
revisions to the policy rate path significantly move market interest rates—especially at shorter
maturities—indicating that such communication is effective and credible.They find little to no
significant impact on equity prices, suggesting a weaker transmission of forward guidance to
stock markets.

In the working paper of Swedish central bank, Almerud, Krygier, Lundvall and Njie (2024)
constructed and utilized a high-frequency Monetary Policy Event-Study Database for Sweden in
order to assess and reveal the macroeconomic effects (such as employment, inflation and CPI) of
Riksbank’s monetary policy shocks. They found that an unexpected increase in rates translates to

                                                                            4
an immediate and persistent appreciation of the krona, besides which output and consumer prices
are gradually lowered, whereas shocks from forward guidance yield similar yet less precise
findings. This paper presents a robust empirical framework and long-span high-frequency data
that substantially increases the capacity for analysis on the transmission of Swedish Monetary
Policy.

Our study applies the same event-study approach of Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) to the
Riksbank’s monetary rate announcements and the OMX Stockholm All-Share Index. Compared
with Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), our research leverages the new high-frequency data and
shorter event-study windows, so the causation and estimation are more accurate and reliable.
Besides, we contribute to the literature that studies the effect of policy rate changes, especially in
the Swedish context. In that sense, our research is closely related to the literature such as
Almerud, Krygier, Lundvall and Njie (2024). While their paper focuses on the effects on
macroeconomic variables, we study both aggregate and industry-level stock-market responses,
and distinguish between timing and level surprises.

Methodology

Here is how we approach the analysis. To measure the impact of the Riksbank’s monetary policy
on the Swedish stock market, we look at how the market reacts on announcement days.
Importantly, markets can respond not only when the policy rate changes, but also when investors
expect a change that did not happen.

We use an event-study method to isolate these reactions. Following the approach of Bernanke
and Kuttner (2005), our sample includes all Riksbank policy announcements—both rate
decisions and the release of minutes—from August 2004 to August 2024. This gives us 269
events, of which 121 are regular monetary policy announcements, 124 are the release of minutes,
and 22 are extraordinary announcements as well as 2 extraordinary announcements and minutes.

                        Table Ι Type of Announcements
       The table reports descriptive statistics for the Swedish central bank’s different types of announcements.
        Type of announcements n Percentage (%)

        Minutes 124 46.10
        Regular Announcement 121 44.94
        Extraordinary Announcement 22 8.18
        Extraordinary Announcement and Minutes 2 0.74
        Total 269 100.00

A key variable in this study is the policy surprise, which is the unexpected component of a policy
decision to market participants. It is measured as the difference between what markets had priced
in beforehand and the actual policy rate announced.

                                                                            5
For each event, we define two short time windows, a pre-event window, covering the 10 minutes
before the announcement and a post-event window, covering the 20 minutes after the
announcement.

The median price (average of the bid and ask prices) is calculated within each window. Then the
pre-event median is subtracted from the post-event median. This difference shows the short-run,
or immediate, market reaction.

As in the benchmark study, we analyze both the full sample and a sample with outliers removed,
and we check whether similar outlier effects appear in the Swedish case.

                                    I. Data

  I.A Main Data

The baseline study shall rely on the dataset created by the Swedish Riksbank (Almerud, Krygier,
Lundvall and Njie, 2024) and intended for high-precision event studies related to monetary
policy announcement surprises and corresponding reaction of the Swedish stock market and
provides high-frequency financial market reactions to Riksbank communications between 2004
and 2024. The monetary policy surprise component is captured by the Overnight Index Swap
(OIS) rate change in the 30-minute event window in percentage points. Data are available for
1-month, 3-month, and 6-month STINA (short-term SEK OIS) contracts, following the
                                                                                            1
specification of Almerud, Krygier, Lundvall, and Njie (2024) . Thereafter, the surprise
component is matched with the corresponding intraday high-frequency percent change of the
                                                                              2
OMX Stockholm price index in the same event window , which leaves us with the exhaustive
data required for the baseline study.

  I.B Types of Announcements

In our analysis, we include all three types of policy-rate announcements presented in the full data
sample. Two types of announcements - regular and extraordinary, are those that result in a new
policy decision. Regular announcements are held on pre-scheduled dates, normally eight times
per year, with the decision released the next day at 09:30 the morning after the Executive Board
meeting, while extraordinary announcements take place in response to exceptional economic or
financial developments such as the coordinated monetary policy actions during the global
financial crisis of 2008–2009 or the emergency decisions taken during the coronavirus pandemic
in 2020–2021. In one to two weeks after the meeting the minutes are released, and in contrast, do

1
  See Jakob Almerud, Dominika Krygier, Henrik Lundvall, and Mambuna Njie (2024) for the original data source
and the construction of the policy surprise component based on STINA and STIBOR contracts.
2
  See Jakob Almerud, Dominika Krygier, Henrik Lundvall, and Mambuna Njie (2024) for detailed explanation of
event window definition and measurement.

                                                                            6
not include any new policy decisions, although they are still evidently associated with the
unexpected policy change. This occurs because the minutes reveal additional details about the
Riksbank’s internal reasoning, such as the motivations behind the Executive Board’s decision,
differing views among board members, and any formal reservations entered against the policy
decision if such exist (Almerud et al., 2024).

  I.C Outliers

The information for each outlier, such as, the policy rate decision, announcement type, and policy
motivation is taken directly from the corresponding Riksbank press releases for: October 8, 2008;
October 23, 2008; December 4, 2008; February 11, 2009; April 21, 2009; and March 13, 2020.
Further details on financial market stress during the 2008–2009 crisis and the COVID-19 shock
in 2020 are taken from Almerud et al. (2024).

  I.D Data on Industry portfolios

To examine how the Swedish stock market responds to monetary policy surprises at an industry
level, we use the daily industry indices provided by Nasdaq from approximately 2015 to 2024.
Since Fama–French industry portfolios for the Swedish market are not available, we rely instead
on the Swedish industry indices provided by Nasdaq as a practical alternative. Every index
represents one of the ten industry groups that Nasdaq offers for the OMX Stockholm Price Index
(PI), namely Energy, Industrials, Consumer Discretionary, Consumer Staples, Health Care,
Financials, Technology, Telecommunications, Utilities, and Real Estate. These industry indexes
are produced and licensed by Nasdaq. They track those companies that fall into every respective
industry group based on Industry Classification Benchmark (ICB).

       II. Reaction of Stock Market to changes in Riksbank Policy Rate

This section will focus on describing the reaction of the Swedish equity market and its magnitude
on the Monetary policy announcement by Riksbank. We start by looking at the response of the
aggregate stock market, and discuss the implications of outliers and different central bank
activities related to policy rate changes. Next, similar to Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), we
discuss the level and timing surprises of policy rate changes. Finally, we study the effect of
unexpected policy rate changes on different industry sectors in the Swedish stock market.

We rely on the findings of Bernanke and Knuttner (2005), who discussed the difficulties of
capturing the causal effect of policy announcements on the equity market. The equity market has
a forward-looking nature and tendency to price in all the available, expected information to the
market. Therefore, we focus specifically on the surprise component of every policy
announcement that introduces an unanticipated information to the market. Furthermore, we
emphasize the use of a narrow event window, which isolates the immediate market reaction to

                                                                            7
policy news, protects against contaminating influences from other market movements, and
mitigates endogeneity concerns.

  II.A Measuring The Surprise Element of Policy Announcements

In order to define the surprise element we employ the high-frequency method developed by
Almerud et al. (2024). The 1-month OIS contract rate estimates are taken during 10-minutes
before and 20-minutes after windows around each policy announcement including the release of
minutes. Later, the policy rate surprise component is captured as the difference between the OIS
rate in the pre-announcement window and after-announcement window, as presented in Equation
1. The collection of the intraday movements of the OIS is possible because OIS contracts in
Sweden trade continuously throughout the day and incorporate changes in policy expectations in
real time, making updated price quotes effectively available every second. Therefore, we choose
it as the cleanest proxy to best reflect the near term interest-rate expectations. Since the reaction
is measured within a narrow intraday window, the estimate is not affected by other data release or
concurrent market news which would be the case if daily returns were used instead.

                                                                                                  (1)

In Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), the policy surprise is obtained from daily changes in Federal
Funds Futures that settle on the monthly average federal funds rate. Therefore, it may include the
influence of other same-day macro releases or market developments unrelated to the
announcement itself, making the estimates essentially more contaminated and less precise in
describing the effects of the surprise policy rate changes on the equity market. With more
granular data, we measure the market reaction from the intraday changes in the 1-month OIS rate
within a narrow window around the formal announcement, ensuring that only the information
revealed at the new policy decision influences the estimate. Therefore, the database estimates
based on the OIS changes are more precise and accurate measurement of the policy rate surprise
by design. Further discussion of the construction of U.S. surprise measures and underlying
reasoning for the surprise component selection for Riksbank’s dataset can be found in Bernanke
and Kuttner (2005) as well as Almerud et al. (2024).

  II.B Baseline Event-Study Findings

Following the approach employed by Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) we intend to observe the
reaction of the stock market on the day the new policy announcement is made. If the change is
fully anticipated, the stock market should not react or show insignificant movements. In the case
of Sweden, any changes in policy rates are made exclusively in either regular or extraordinary
monetary announcements by Riksbank while the minutes released contain no new decisions.
Therefore the most relevant sample for our event study will be based on the regular and
extraordinary announcements only. However, the findings based on the full sample, which

                                                                            8
includes the release of minutes, are also presented for completeness. Our sample ranges from
August 20, 2004 to August 26, 2024 with 269 announcements.

The main baseline results of our event study are summarised in Table ΙΙ. Column (a) includes the
results of regression of percent change of the OMX Stockholm price index on the full sample of
1-month OIS rate change on the days of all types of announcements including the release of
minutes. represents the intraday return on the OMX Stockholm price index, denotes the
1-month OIS rate, which captures the monetary policy surprise component and captures the
sensitivity of equity returns to monetary policy surprises across all announcement types.
Equation 2 shows the standard form of the equation that we employ for the regressions across
different samples of announcement types.

                                                                                                  (2)

Column (b) only includes the days of regular and extraordinary announcements that are
essentially new policy rate releases, where measures the equity market’s responsiveness to
monetary policy surprises specifically associated with new rate decisions. We only change the
estimated coefficient as seen in Equation 3.

                                                                                                  (3)

In both regression specifications, the error term captures all non-policy forces that move Swedish
equity prices on announcement days and is assumed to be uncorrelated with the monetary policy
surprise on the right-hand side.

Similar to findings of Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), we found a negative and highly significant
response of the equity market to the positive surprise change for both of the samples. The results
in column (a) show that each 1-percentage-point increase in the monetary policy rate surprise is
associated with a 1.66% decrease of 1-day equity return in response. The shows that 6.1% of
variation of equity market returns are caused by the 1 month OIS rate change on the days of the
new policy announcements and the release of minutes. The results in column (b) excluding the
minutes announcements show the similar relation between the variables although now we
observe a higher magnitude of the stock market reaction to the OIS rate change. For each
1-percentage-point increase in the monetary policy rate surprise follows a 1.67% decrease in
return of the equity market. Furthermore, this regression shows higher explanatory value and
increases to 8.7% indicating that minutes announcements inject additional noise into the
return dynamics and that equity prices respond more clearly to unexpected policy decisions than
to communication without a new rate release.

                                                                            9
                                       Table ΙΙ
       The Response of Equity Prices to Riksbank Monetary Policy Surprises
The table presents the results from regression of intraday percent return of the OMX Stockholm Price Index on
change of 1-month Overnight Index Swap rate. Column (a) contains the results of the regression on days of all types
of announcements and column (b) on all days of announcements excluding the release minutes. Change in the OMX
Stockholm Price Index, expressed in percent, and the 1-month OIS rate change, expressed in percentage points.The
full sample consists of 269 observations of regular and extraordinary policy rate announcements and the release of
minutes, 124 of which are the announcements and 145 are the release of minutes. The period of observations lasts
from August 20, 2004 through August 26th, 2024. Parentheses include heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors,
used to compute the corresponding t-statistics. Note: * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01

                             Regressor (a) (b)
                            Intercept -0.011 0.007
                                                 (0.020) (0.029)
                           Surprise change -1.662** -1.673**
                                                 (0.735) (0.776)
                          R² 0.061 0.087

  II.C Types of Announcements

As we previously saw, the difference in types of announcement has an effect on how and with
what magnitude the stock market will react. From our data sample, we can see that both regular
and extraordinary announcements are accompanied by changes in the policy rate, whereas the
releases of the minutes provide only additional information about the Riksbank’s internal
reasoning and individual board members’ views without introducing any updates to the policy
rate. While minutes themselves do not carry direct messages for policy rate change, they still
carry nuanced information about the opinions and decision procedures for policy rate changes.
Therefore we aim to investigate if this nuanced information has a similar effect on the equity
market return as the new rate announcement itself and change in OIS.

In order to answer the question, we restrict the 269-observation sample to all the releases of
minutes only, which comprise 124 observations. As before, we run the regression in equation (4),
with the percent change in the OMX Stockholm price index regressed on the one-month OIS rate
changes on the days of the minutes’ release. We proceed with the same variables that were
introduced before and the new coefficient captures the sensitivity of equity returns to
monetary policy surprises on the days of minutes’ release. The findings are reported in Table ΙΙΙ.

                                                                                                  (4)

The coefficient estimated for the release of minutes is - 1.379, and while consistent with the
baseline specification, it is statistically insignificant. The explanatory power of this regression is

                                                                           10
also negligible, with an of only 0.7%, indicating that minutes announcements contribute
virtually no information for explaining equity returns and instead primarily introduce noise into
the full-sample results. This outcome reinforces the distinction between communication events
and policy-decision days. Although the release of minutes may coincide with modest movements
in the 1-month OIS rate, the information revealed about the Riksbank’s internal reasoning does
not generate an equity-market reaction comparable to that triggered by actual policy rate
decisions and therefore only contaminates the estimations.

                                       Table ΙΙΙ
           The Response of Equity Prices to Riksbank’s Minutes Release
The table presents the results from regression of intraday percent return of the OMX Stockholm Price Index on
change of Overnight Index Swap in the 30-minute event window. Column (a) contains the results of the regression
on days of minutes’ release. Change in the OMX Stockholm Price Index, expressed in percent, and the 1-month OIS
rate change, expressed in percentage points. The sample consists of 124 observations. The period of observations
lasts from August 20, 2004 through August 26th, 2024. Parentheses include heteroskedasticity-robust standard
errors, used to compute the corresponding t-statistics. Note: * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01

                                 Regressor (a)
                                Intercept -0.016
                                                      (0.027)
                               Surprise Change -1.379
                                                      (1.364)
                              R² 0.007

  II.D Outliers

Figure 1 depicts the negative correlation between policy rate surprises and equity market returns
mentioned above. From the figure it becomes evident that on some days the equity market has a
stronger reaction to the policy surprise than on others. To fully grasp the influence of policy
announcements on the stock market, we therefore proceed to examine if there is any pattern
shared by all outliers that can explain the unusually strong reaction and how outliers affect the
estimated coefficients in our baseline results.

First, to identify the candidates for outliers, we compute Cook’s Distance for each observation in
the sample. Cook’s Distance quantifies how much the estimated regression coefficients would
shift if a given observation were removed, thus providing a standard measure of influence in
linear regression. This diagnostic serves a purpose similar to the influence statistic used by
Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), although our analysis relies on the conventional Cook’s Distance
formulation rather than their quadratic measure. Following common applied-econometric
practice, we classify observations with D>0.04 as influential and therefore identified as an outlier
candidate.

                                                                                11
Figure 1. Policy rate surprises and stock market returns, intraday data. The figure displays a scatterplot relating
the 1-day OMXSPI value-weighted return in the event window to the 1-month OIS surprise for the 269 Riksbank
announcement days in the full sample. Data points are categorized according to whether the event corresponds to a
regular policy meeting, an extraordinary announcement, or a release of minutes. Dates shown on selected points of
mark six observations identified as potential outliers based on their regression influence statistics. Change in the
OMX Stockholm Price Index, expressed in percent, and the 1-month OIS rate change, expressed in percentage
points.

Based on the size of our sample and with the aim of isolating only the most influential
observations, we employ a Cook’s Distance cutoff of D=0.04, a conventional threshold for
detecting observations that exert a non-trivial impact on the estimated coefficients. Cook’s
Distance for observation is computed using Equation 5 where denotes the residual of
observation , its leverage, the number of estimated parameters, and the residual
variance.

                                                                                                  (5)

                                                                           12
Figure 2. Distribution of regression influence statistics. The statistics are based on Cook's distance measures from
the regression of 1-day OMXSPI equity returns on the monetary policy surprise, dropping each observation in turn
from the sample. The majority of announcements exhibit influence values below 0.01, while only a small number
fall into higher ranges. The six observations exceeding 0.04 have a material effect on the estimated coefficient.

The distribution of the number of observations in each Cook’s distance range is plotted in Figure
2. We observe that there are 6 observations exceeding the value of 0.04 that have an unusually
high influence on the estimates of relationship between surprise rate change component and
return of equity market coefficient. The remaining observations follow an antimodal distribution,
skewed heavily toward the lower end of the Cook’s distance values, with the majority exerting
significantly smaller influence on estimated coefficient than the six outlier events.

When looking for a common factor that could explain the distinctively high effect of the
observation on our base result we found that three outliers had taken place in 2008: October 8
and 23 and December 4, and two in 2009: February 11 and April 21. The most recent outlier with
an unusual influence power was observed on the day of Extraordinary announcement on March
12, 2020. Taken together, these two clusters correspond to periods in which the Riksbank
implemented exceptionally forceful policy interventions during the global financial crisis of
2008–2009 and the COVID-19 shock in March 2020. The actions were undertaken to stabilize
funding markets and prevent a systemic liquidity breakdown, rather than routine adjustments of
the policy rate.

The first candidate outlier, October 8, 2008, coincides with the coordinated global policy
                                                                                                                      3
response to the collapse of interbank liquidity following the failure of Lehman Brothers . On this
date, the Riksbank lowered the policy rate by 0.5 percentage points as part of a joint action by

3
 Lehman Brothers was a major U.S. investment bank whose bankruptcy on September 15, 2008, marked the largest
failure of a financial institution in U.S. history. Its collapse caused a severe disruption of activity in global interbank
funding markets, increased counterparty risk, and is widely viewed as the tipping point accelerating the global
financial crisis. For more details of the event and its impact, see Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (2011)

                                                                           13
major central banks, including the Federal Reserve, the ECB, and the Bank of England. Financial
conditions had weakened sharply, and funding markets were experiencing a severe shortage of
liquidity. The decline of OMXSPI return by 0.93% that day is an outstanding reaction compared
to other policy announcements in our sample, consistent with the heightened risk aversion and
market distress at the time (Alsterlind et al.,2024). As documented by Alsterlind et al. (2024), the
Swedish interbank market was experiencing exceptional stress during this period, with unusually
wide STINA/OIS spreads and significant uncertainty regarding bank solvency.

A similar dynamic can be observed on October 23, 2008, where a second large policy action was
taken during a period of sharply declining equity valuations and collapsing European demand.
Although the OMXSPI moved only slightly that day, namely 0.025% increase, the monetary
policy surprise was large, and reports at the time noted serious problems in credit markets and a
sharp decline in Swedish export orders. This episode again reflects market responses driven more
by macro-financial instability than by the policy surprise itself, amplifying its influence measure.

The most extreme outlier in our sample occurs on December 4, 2008, when the Riksbank
released an unprecedented 1.75% rate cut, making it one of the largest single reductions in
modern Swedish monetary history. This decision was motivated by a rapid decline in Sweden’s
economic circumstances, with output expected to decrease sharply in 2009 and credit conditions
                         4
continuing to tighten.  The stock market reaction of 1.55% increase, was exceptionally strong,
mirroring the euphoric response seen in the U.S. following large unscheduled cuts documented
by Bernanke and Kuttner (2005).

Two further outliers had taken place in February and April 2009, when the recession in Sweden
                                                                                 5
had fully materialized and unemployment levels were climbing rapidly. On February 11, 2009,
the Riksbank continued its aggressive easing strategy with another substantial 1-percentage-point
policy rate cut, reflecting the ongoing collapsing global demand, deteriorating household
confidence, and the risk of a prolonged recession. Although the OMXSPI increased by 0.74%,
this response appears to have been influenced by broader market stabilization rather than the
specific magnitude of the policy surprise. Similarly, on April 21, 2009, the Riksbank lowered the
policy rate to 0.50% and introduced additional liquidity support measures. The OMXSPI rose by
0.67%, and long-term rates fell noticeably, reflecting market relief and expectations of a
sustained low-rate environment.

The final candidate outlier is March 13, 2020, recorded on the day of the extraordinary monetary
                                                                                         6
policy announcement released at the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic.  This event took
place in time of extreme market volatility, with the OMXSPI declining by more than 1.35% on

4
  During late 2008, Swedish GDP, exports and credit conditions worsened in line with the global financial crisis. For
a detailed discussion of Sweden’s macroeconomic developments during this period, see Sveriges Riksbank (2009).
5
  For detailed labour market and GDP developments during this period, see Sveriges Riksbank (2009).
6
 On March 13, 2020, the Riksbank published an extraordinary monetary policy announcement outlining measures in
response to the initial financial distress caused by the COVID-19 outbreak. see Sveriges Riksbank (2020).

                                                                           14
the day. Although the policy rate itself was unchanged at 0%, the Riksbank announced several
emergency liquidity measures, including expanded asset purchases and new lending programs
designed to support corporate credit markets and prevent a broader financial disruption.

In order to quantify the effect of inclusion of the above-mentioned outliers and confirm that the
same relationship between the surprise policy rate component and stock market return remains
valid, we shall perform the same analysis while distinguishing between two samples, the results
are based on: including and excluding the outliers. The results of the regressions can be found in
Table ΙV, where column (a) shows the results of the regression of the sample including the
outliers and column (b) excluding them. Both columns shall not include the days of minutes’
release for the purpose of obtaining more precise results for the reasons we discussed earlier.

                                   Table ΙV
               The Effect of Outliers on Estimated Policy Responses
The table reports the results from regressions of the intraday percent return of the OMX Stockholm Price Index on
the 1-month OIS policy surprise. Column (a) presents the coefficient estimates obtained using the full sample of
announcement days, while column (b) reports the corresponding estimates after removing the six observations
identified as outlier candidates according to Cook’s distance D > 0.04. Both samples exclude the observations on the
days of minutes’ release. Change in the OMX Stockholm Price Index, expressed in percent, and the 1-month OIS
rate change, expressed in percentage points. Parentheses contain heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors used to
compute the associated t-statistics. Note: * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01

                       Regressor (a) (b)
                      Intercept 0.007 -0.001
                                            (0.029) (0.027)
                     Surprise Change -1.673** -1.884***
                                            (0.776) (0.616)
                     R² 0.087 0.059

Based on the new results presented in column (b), as the highly influential outliers have been
removed from the regression sample we observe the change in both coefficients and although
the relationship between the stock market return and surprise policy negative and significant
relationship remains unchanged. The slope increases in magnitude from –1.673 to –1.884,
indicating that the core relationship is stronger in the absence of the outlier announcements that
disproportionately affect the full-sample estimate. This suggests that the movement of the stock
market in 2008–2009 and 2020 were altering its typical response of the stock market to
monetary-policy surprises. The reduction in the from 0.087 to 0.059 also implies that highly
influential outliers tend to produce large simultaneous movements in both policy surprises and
stock returns, which inflates the apparent fit of the regression. After removing these observations,
monetary policy shocks still remain influential for the stock price movements, but they explain a
smaller share of the overall variation. Overall, the baseline negative and statistically significant
relationship between monetary-policy surprises and equity returns remains intact. Although the
outlier observations have some influence on the magnitude of the estimated effects, they do not
affect the core underlying dynamics, and the central result remains the same as outliers are
removed.

                                                                           15
  II.E Timing versus Level Surprises

Our findings suggest that the Swedish stock market generally reacts noticeably to the policy
surprise—the unexpected component of the policy decision that deviates from market
expectations. However, the magnitude of this reaction is not always consistent. Sometimes the
market barely moves, while in other cases, it reacts more sharply than the size of the policy
surprise. According to Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), one key reason for this variation is that not
all policy surprises affect expectations of future interest rates in the same way.

Some announcements might simply shift the timing of a policy action that investors already
anticipated—timing surprises. In other cases, announcements shift the entire expected trajectory
of interest rates over the coming months. Surprises that more persistently reshape expectations
naturally tend to have a greater influence on stock prices than those that merely alter the timing
of expected policy actions.

Following the method of Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), one way of determining the impact of
policy surprises on expected future interest rates is to analyze the relationship between the
surprise component and the change in SEK OIS rates in subsequent months. This is represented
in Figure 3, which plots the high-frequency (30-minute) change in three-month-ahead OIS rate
against the current policy surprise measured as the high-frequency (30-minute) change in
one-month OIS rate. In this case, the 45-degree line in the figure indicates a one-for-one response
of the three-month-ahead expected rate to the current policy surprise.

Observations lying along a shallower line are those below the 45-degree line in the northeast
quadrant and above in the southwest quadrant. These represent observations that have less than a
one-for-one effect on three-month-ahead expectations. By contrast, observations lying along a
steeper line represent a greater-than-one-for-one effect and can be interpreted as indicating that
those specific surprises contain particularly enduring implications for the future path of monetary
policy.

While Figure 3 shows a clear positive relationship between the current monetary policy surprise
and the change in 3-month OIS rate, the response is far from uniform. Although most
observations are clustered around the 45-degree line, their dispersion indicates variation in the
extent to which policy surprises affect expectations of future short-term rates.

It is worth noting that several observations reveal the presence of perverse effects, whereby the
change in three-month ahead expectations changes in the opposite direction of the surprise. For
example, on March 30, 2020, the increase in the current policy surprise observed in the figure
corresponded to a decrease in the three-month OIS rate expectation. It can be interpreted that
during periods of stress in the economy, the actions taken by the Swedish central bank may be
seen as signals of worsening economic conditions and rising likelihood of easing in the coming
periods.

                                                                           16
Figure 3. One-month SEK OIS surprises and three-month SEK OIS expectations. The figure is a scatterplot of
high-frequency (30-minute) changes in the three-month-ahead OIS rate against the current policy surprise—
high-frequency (30-minute) changes in one-month OIS rate, for the 269 event days in the sample. Both rates are in
percentage-point terms. Observations are distinguished according to whether the reaction of 3-month-ahead
expectations are greater than, less than, equal to, or opposite in sign from the current policy surprise. The three
observations with date labels are those associated with unusual announcements by Riksbank.

When regressing the change in the three-month-ahead OIS rate on the current surprise in Table V
below, the slope coefficient that we derive is less than one. That implies that when it comes to
responding to surprises in monetary policy, the reaction in the expected short-term interest rate is
less than one-for-one. Another way of thinking about this is that it appears that many of the
changes that are observed in the surprise component are more about changes in the timing of
when a policy action will be taken, and less about changes in whether such an action will ever be
taken at all.

For all three specifications in Table V, the value of the policy surprise variable’s coefficient is
remarkably stable around 0.75 and statistically significant at the 1% level with very small
standard errors (0.029). It can therefore be concluded that when there is an unexpected increase
of 1 percentage point in monetary policy, it translates into an increase of 0.75 percentage points
for the three-month-ahead interest rate. The precise magnitude of this effect indicates that
three-month-ahead interest rate expectations are highly sensitive to current policy surprises.
Moreover, the similar and significant coefficients across columns (a) to (c) suggest that this result
is robust even after including additional dummy variables.

                                                                           17
                                  Table V
           The Response of Interest Rate Expectations to Policy Surprises
The table reports the results from regressions of the high-frequency (30-minute) change in the 3-month-ahead SEK
OIS rate on the current policy surprise—high-frequency (30-minute) changes in 1-month SEK OIS rate. Both
variables are expressed in percentage-point terms. The reversal dummy equals 1 for rate changes that reverse the
direction of the previous change. The regular announcement dummy is set to 1 for those observations coinciding
with regular announcements. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Note: * p < 0.1;
** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01
              Dependent variable: Δ 3m OIS
               Regressor (a) (b) (c)
              Policy surprise (Δ1m) 0.747*** 0.746*** 0.745***
                                                 (0.029) (0.029) (0.029)
              Reversal dummy -0.001 -0.001
                                                              (0.004) (0.004)
              Regular announcement dummy -0.001
                                                                          (0.003)
              Constant 0.0003 0.001 0.001
                                                 (0.001) (0.002) (0.002)
             Observations 269 269 269
              R² 0.717 0.717 0.717
              Adjusted R² 0.716 0.715 0.714

This coefficient of approximately 0.75 also suggests that the impact of policy surprises on
three-month expectations is less than one-for-one. A reasonable explanation, consistent with
Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), is that many policy surprises—unexpected changes in the
one-month SEK OIS rate in our sample—reflect surprises only in the timing of policy actions.

None of the dummy variables included in columns (b) to (c) reaches the level of statistical
significance. The reversal dummy variable—indicating whether the policy announcement
reverses the direction of the previous rate change—has a small and statistically insignificant
negative coefficient. This suggests that three-month-ahead expectations do not react differently
when policy decisions occur at turning points.

Moreover, the regular announcement dummy variable included in column (c) has a small
magnitude value and is statistically insignificant as well. This shows that there is no differential
reaction of the three-month-ahead expectations on regular announcement days either. In other
words, these empirical findings suggest that the transmission of policy surprises to
three-month-ahead expectations is broadly consistent across announcements, regardless of any
specific distinguishing characteristics.

                                                                           18
The results in Table V show a relatively high level of explanatory power, which was evident with
an value of 0.717 for all columns combined, with the adjusted values that are only
slightly lower in columns (b) and (c). It becomes apparent that surprises in monetary policy
explain a large part of the variations revealed by expectations about Sweden’s 3-month-ahead
interest rates.

In order to assess the extent to which differences in policy surprises’ impact on expectations can
help explain the Swedish stock market’s responses, we used the same method as Bernanke and
Kuttner (2005) and constructed a variable that captures the difference between the effects of the
surprises on current and three-month-ahead interest rate expectations.

Specifically, our “timing surprise” variable is defined as the difference between the change in the
three-month-ahead OIS rate and the current policy surprise. In other words, it is the vertical
distance between each observation and the 45-degree line in Figure 3.

When a policy announcement affects the current and expected future interest rates equally, the
changes in the current (one-month) and the three-month-ahead interest rates are the same. In that
case, the timing surprise would be equal to zero. By contrast, a policy announcement that has a
smaller impact on expected future interest rates than on the current rate would be associated with
a negative timing surprise.

In Table VI, we include the timing surprise variable in regressions of the Swedish stock market
response. With the regression, we examine whether forward-looking components of monetary
policy shocks contribute to variation in the stock market’s reaction across announcements and
over time.

Columns (b) and (d) in Table VI report the regression results when the timing surprise term is
included in the model. The inclusion of this term increases the magnitude of the coefficient on
the current policy surprise, which goes from -1.66 to -1.84. According to Bernanke and Kuttner
(2005), once the timing surprise is included, the coefficient on the policy surprise can be
interpreted as capturing the impact of a policy surprise that shifts three-month-ahead interest rate
expectations by the same amount (that is, when the timing surprise equals zero). This suggests
that the Swedish stock market reacts more strongly when monetary policy affects the expected
level of interest rates in the three coming months.

Across all four regression specifications presented in Table VI, the Swedish stock market
consistently significantly responds to the policy (or level) surprise, as evidenced in specifications
(a) through (d). In the full sample regressions in columns (a) and (b), it is observed that a
one-percentage-point unexpected increase in the policy surprise leads to a substantial decline of
approximately 1.66% to 1.84% in the OMXSPI. Both coefficients are statistically different from
zero at the 5% significance level.

When the outliers with the strongest influence are removed, the relationship becomes more
apparent. Indeed, columns (c) and (d) show a stronger effect than in columns (a) and (b), which
range between -2.02% and -2.38%, and are significant at the 1% level. This shows that the
Swedish stock market's response to unexpected shifts in monetary policy is consistent and
predictable. This is evident from columns (c) and (d) of Table VI, where the standard errors of

                                                                           19
the relevant coefficients decrease and the confidence intervals become more tightly clustered.
Such narrowing of the intervals indicates that the estimates are more stable and less influenced
by extreme observations that could otherwise distort the results.

                                   Table VI
             The Stock Market Response to Level vs Timing Surprises
The table reports the results from regressions of the high-frequency (30-minute) change in the OMXSPI on the
policy surprise (measured as the high-frequency 30-minute change in the one-month SEK OIS rate) and the timing
surprise. The timing surprise is defined as the difference between the change in the 3-month-ahead SEK OIS rate and
the current policy surprise — high-frequency (30-minute) changes in 1-month SEK OIS rate. Explanatory variables
are expressed in percentage-point terms while the dependent variable is expressed in percentage terms.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Note: * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01
Dependent variable: Δ OMXSPI
Regressor Full          Full          No             No
                           Sample        Sample        outlier            outlier
                                 (a)              (b)              (c)                 (d)
Policy surprise (Δ1m) -1.662**      -1.842**       -2.018***        -2.384***
                            (0.735)         (0.753)         (0.551)           (0.564)
Timing surprise         — -0.712       — -1.652**
(Δ3m – Δ1m)                           (0.995)                        (0.748)
Effect of "pure"                            -1.130                            -0.732
timing surprise                               (-0.95)                             (-0.89)
Intercept -0.011         -0.011          -0.012            -0.010
                            (0.020)         (0.020)         (0.019)           (0.019)
R² 0.061 0.063 0.039 0.050
Adjusted R² 0.057 0.056 0.035 0.043

For the timing surprise, the coefficient in the full-sample regression in column (b) is negative and
statistically insignificant, indicating that it does not have a measurable effect on the Swedish
stock market—at least when considering all monetary policy events together, including regular
and extraordinary announcements as well as minutes. Timing effects appear to be highly
sensitive to outliers and become identifiable only once extreme observations associated with
unusually large market responses are removed.

In column (d), we show the results excluding outliers. The coefficient of the timing surprise is
significantly negative at an estimated -1.65 percent, which is significant at the 5 percent level.
This statistically significant and negative coefficient on the timing surprise indicates that policy
surprises with a less-than-one-for-one impact on expectations—meaning that the change in the
three-month-ahead SEK OIS rate is smaller than the current-month policy surprise—have a
correspondingly weaker effect on the Swedish stock market.

                                                                           20
In the extreme case of a “pure” timing surprise with no effect on the expected level of interest
rates, the stock market response is given by the difference between the coefficient on the policy
surprise and the one on the timing surprise: -1.13 for the full sample and -0.732 for the sample
without outliers. Neither estimate is statistically significant even at the 10 percent level. This
implies that when policy actions merely shift the timing of rate changes without altering the
expected future level of interest rates, the overall Swedish stock market reaction tends to be very
weak and unstable.

Overall, the results in Table VI indicate that the Swedish stock market responds primarily to level
surprises. In other words, monetary policy influences aggregate stock returns mainly by changing
the expected level of interest rates in the coming months.

The timing surprise becomes statistically significant only after excluding observations identified
as outliers. While timing factors may also be present in the stock market, this becomes apparent
only after removing observations when stock price responses were very large, suggesting that the
stock market responds more to level surprises than to timing surprises.

Our findings are consistent with those of Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), which show that the
stock market primarily responds to level surprises that shift the expected future path of interest
rates rather than the timing surprise. However, compared with the corresponding U.S. estimates
reported in their study, the Swedish coefficients tend to be smaller in absolute magnitude.

In Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), the values for the full sample are approximately 0.171 and
0.192 in columns (a) and (b), whereas for the no-outlier sample they are around 0.049 and 0.085,
respectively. In comparison, the Swedish results show values of 0.057 and 0.056 for the full
sample, and 0.035 and 0.043 for the no-outlier sample. Overall, the differences in explanatory
power between the U.S. and Swedish cases do not appear to be large.

  II.F Industry Response

Thus far, the analysis has focused on the response of the overall Swedish stock market index.
However, it is also important to investigate how different industries react to monetary policy
surprises. Table VII reports the regression estimates for the ten OMX Stockholm PI industry
indexes, that is, differential responses of Swedish industries to monetary policy surprises. Due to
data limitations, the market betas for two industries—Consumer Staples and Consumer
Discretionary—cannot be estimated.

Most industries exhibit negative coefficients, indicating that unexpected monetary tightening by
the central bank generally leads to a decline in industry-level stock prices. However, for the
majority of industries, these effects are not statistically significant. Only the healthcare industry
shows a significant response to policy surprises, with a negative and statistically significant
coefficient. Specifically, the estimated coefficient of −0.13 suggests that, on average, a
one-percentage-point unexpected increase in the current policy rate is associated with an
approximate 0.13% decline in the healthcare index on the announcement.

                                                                           21
                                   Table VII
                The Response of Industry Indices to Policy Surprises
The table reports the results from regressions of 1-day equity returns of OMX Stockholm industry indices on the
high-frequency (30-minute) monetary policy surprise, measured as the change in the 1-month SEK OIS rate within
the 30-minute event window. OMXSPI daily in this table is daily return. The explanatory variable is expressed in
percentage-point terms. The dependent variables are all expressed in percentage terms. The regression includes an
intercept, whose coefficient is not reported. Most industries have 114 announcement-day observations, except the
last two, which have fewer due to shorter data availability. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. Note: * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01

Industry              Policy     Std.       Constant Obs. Adj. R² Durbin– Market
Index                Surprise   Error                                Watson  Beta

OMXSPI daily -0.03 (0.07) 0.001 114 -0.006 2.077 1.00***
Energy -0.02 (0.08) 0.0004 114 -0.008 2.159 1.10***

Financials -0.07 (0.08) 0.0005 114 0.001 2.275 0.97***

Health Care -0.13* (0.07) 0.003* 114 0.043 2.095 0.74***
Industrials -0.03 (0.07) 0.001 114 -0.007 1.860 1.15***
Real Estate -0.05 (0.09) -0.0001 114 -0.006 2.146 0.67***
Technology -0.05 (0.08) -0.001 114 -0.006 2.049 1.11***

Telecommunications -0.02 (0.06) -0.001 114 -0.008 2.434 0.85***
Utilities -0.06 (0.15) -0.002 114 -0.007 2.144 0.40***

Consumer Staples -0.03 (0.03) 0.0004 46 -0.015 1.577 —

Consumer           0.08 (0.09) 0.0004 46 -0.006 1.793 —
Discretionary

For the remaining industries—namely Energy, Financials, Industrials, Real estate, Technology,
Telecommunications, Utilities, Consumer staples, and Consumer discretionary—it is difficult to
conclude whether monetary policy surprises have a meaningful impact. In other words, there is
limited evidence that stock price reactions to monetary policy surprises differ systematically and
significantly across industries.

This contrasts with the findings of Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), where most industries exhibited
statistically significant responses to monetary policy surprises, with only one out of ten industries
(Energy) showing an insignificant reaction. In their study, the high-tech and telecommunications
industries responded more strongly to policy surprises than the aggregate market, while the
utilities industry reacted at roughly half the market’s magnitude.

Most adjusted values in Table VII are noticeably low, suggesting that unexpected changes in
Swedish monetary policy account for only a small share of the variation in individual industry
returns. Furthermore, the low precision of the estimated coefficients indicates that there is

                                                                           22
insufficient evidence to support the hypothesis that industries exhibit heterogeneous responses to
monetary policy surprises.

Similar to Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), we also ask whether the pattern of industry responses in
Sweden is proportional to that implied by the CAPM—that is, whether the magnitude of the
responses is proportional to each industry’s market beta. One way to address this question is to
regress the excess return of industry on the excess return of the market in order to
obtain each industry’s market beta,

                                                                                                (6)

which is then used to estimate the response to monetary policy. The industry response implied by
the CAPM can then be expressed as

                                                                                                (7)

where is the estimated response of daily return of OMXSPI to policy surprises.

In industries such as Energy, Financials and Technology, the market betas are close to 1,
implying that these industries generally move in line with broader market risk. However, their
sensitivity to the monetary surprise appears limited. Overall, these results imply that although the
Swedish market as a whole is sensitive to surprise changes in monetary policies, as evidenced
from the baseline results in the previous section, this sensitivity is not observed to be focused on
any specific industry except the Health Care industry. In other words, the effects become much
less discernible when examined at the industry level.

Figure 4 plots the fitted responses to monetary policy against the estimated responses reported in
Table VII. The horizontal axis shows the CAPM-implied response of each industry’s daily stock
returns, while the vertical axis reflects the estimated responses from the regressions of each
industry’s daily returns on monetary policy surprises as reported in Table VII.

The dashed line shown in Figure 4 serves as a benchmark, representing where the estimated
responses would lie if they matched the CAPM-implied responses exactly. It is important to note
that, because the horizontal and vertical axes are plotted on different scales, this one-to-one
benchmark does not appear as a dashed line in the figure. The industry points would lie on the
dashed line if the CAPM perfectly accounted for variation across these industries.

Although most of the CAPM-implied response represented by the dashed line lies within the
confidence intervals associated with the estimated responses, the precision of those industry
estimates is low. Therefore, it means that this is obviously not a powerful test. Figure 4 suggests
that systematic market risk has limited explanatory power for the cross-industry variation in
Swedish industries’ reactions to the monetary surprise.

                                                                           23
Figure 4. Estimated industry responses and CAPM implications. The figure depicts the 1-day responses of the
Swedish industry indices to a one-percentage-point policy surprise (measured as the high-frequency 30-minute
change in the 1-month SEK OIS rate.) The values on the horizontal axis are the industry stock return responses
implied by the CAPM. The vertical axis values are the estimated industry return responses reported in Table VII. The
vertical lines represent the 80% confidence intervals associated with the estimated industry responses. The dashed
line represents the one-to-one benchmark where the estimated responses would equal the CAPM-implied responses.

Most industries cluster near the zero axis, and their confidence intervals are relatively wide,
indicating substantial estimation uncertainty. Among these industries, Health Care stands out as
the most pronounced negative outlier, whereas Industrials, Technology, Energy and
Telecommunications exhibit responses that align more closely with the CAPM-implied
predictions.

Since the estimated industry responses are statistically insignificant (as reported in Table VII),
and the estimated daily OMXSPI response used to compute each CAPM-implied response is also
insignificant, it is difficult to determine if the one-factor CAPM adequately explains the observed
cross-industry variation in monetary policy sensitivity. When comparing these findings to the
evidence from the United States, provided by Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), the Swedish industry
responses are statistically insignificant, and their compliance rate to CAPM cannot be concluded.

The largely insignificant industry estimates in Table VII can be explained using the identification
methodology explained in Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005). They stated that ‘the
estimation of the effect of monetary policy actions on asset prices is a difficult problem, since

                                                                           24
standard regression analyses are subject to simultaneity, causality, and omitted variables. The
high-frequency method of identification, such as a high-frequency window, adopted for this
research, helps mitigate such difficulties.

In particular, Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005) demonstrate that without a narrowly defined
(high-frequency) event window, changes in policies and asset price movements can be correlated
to macroeconomic announcements. When studying the aggregate level of Swedish stock market
returns, we use high-frequency data with a 30-minute window to address this issue. However,
due to the lack of resources, our best industry-level data is daily data. Therefore, the event
window is significantly longer in our industry-level analysis, which could be the explanation why
we have conflicting results.

Specifically, several components could affect our industry-level event studies. These components
may be industry-specific earning announcements, firm-specific announcements, asset illiquidity,
and market microstructure or efficient price anomalies. Due to a lack of high-frequency industry
return data, we have to use daily returns of industries. Moreover, Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson
(2005) mentioned that this effect of monetary policy on asset prices is primarily driven by
unexpected changes in the path of short-term interest rates. Consistent with this finding, Table VI
indicates that the overall Swedish stock market responds significantly to unanticipated changes in
the expected level of interest rates in the coming months.

  II.G Interpretation and Comparison of Results

We next compare the Swedish estimates with those reported by Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) to
see whether the equity market response to monetary policy surprises is consistent across the two
countries. We shall then attempt to examine if there are other factors specific to Sweden that
exert influence on its equity market return and if there is a need to further explore the factors to
shed more light on our research question. We start by making a visual comparison between the
coefficients of the U.S case paper and our own estimates for Sweden.

First we compare the baseline results. Specifically we will take the coefficients for the sample
excluding minutes and the outlier candidates sample. This way we are able to observe a
meaningful comparison by closely matching the requisites of the U.S paper sample where only
the announcements leading to the new policy rate or new information to the market releases are
used. The samples also exclude the six outliers with highest influential statistics in both cases. In
addition, we selected the regression done using the unexpected policy rate change component
only, since coefficients of regressions on the expected change are available as well as reported in
Table 2, column (d) of Bernanke and Kuttner (2005). The sizes of the two samples are also
highly similar: 139 for our Swedish case and 131 for the U.S. case sample. The comparison can
be found in Table VIII. The benchmark literature uses 1-day CRSP value-weighted equity returns
                                                7
from 1979-2002 as the dependent variable. This is well comparable in purpose to our 2004-2024

7
  The CRSP value-weighted index includes all U.S. common shares with CRSP share codes 10 and 11 listed on the
NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ. Constituents follow CRSP’s standard index-construction methodology. Historical
constituent lists are not publicly distributed; index composition is algorithmically determined at each month-end. See
CRSP (2023, pp. 14–15) for methodological details.

                                                                           25
sample where the dependent variable is the high-frequency return of the OMX Stockholm
All-Share Index OMXSPI, which includes all shares officially listed on Nasdaq Stockholm and is
                                                                                                              8
designed to capture nearly the entire Swedish equity market (Nasdaq Nordic, n.d.).

As the result of the comparison we conclude that both cases exhibit the same baseline findings:
negative and highly significant response of the stock markets to the positive policy rate surprise
component. Furthermore, we observe a stronger reaction in the U.S. equity market to policy
surprise, namely for each 1-percentage-point increase in the monetary policy rate surprise the
stock market declines by 2.55% while Swedish stock market only declines by 1.88%. However in
the latter case, the unexpected policy rate change explains 5.9% of the variation in the Swedish
stock market. Whereas, the Federal Fund Rate surprise has smaller explanatory power to the
CRSP movement of 4.9%.

There are some factors that could explain the differences. Firstly, our analysis is based on the
estimates measured between 2004-2024 while the estimates for the U.S. ase are taken from
1989–2002. As a result, differences in sample periods alone may contribute to the divergence in
                              9
estimated coefficients.

Secondly, we must recall the difference in the frequency of estimations of the regression
variables for both cases. The Riksbanks database uses the high-frequency intraday data measured
in a 30-minutes event window around each announcement whereas the U.S. estimates use daily
CRSP returns that capture the entire trading day following the policy decision. As emphasized by
Gürkaynak, Sack and Swanson (2005), wider event windows increase the risk that unrelated
news or macro events contaminate the measurement of policy announcements on stock market
returns. Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) acknowledge the same limitation for daily returns, noticing
that these factors may influence equity prices. We consider this to be one of the factors that
influences the difference between both the coefficients and the lower observed in the U.S.
results.

A substantial part of the benchmarking research is dedicated to addressing the endogeneity and
joint-response issues arising from the nature of daily estimation frequency of the variables used
in the regressions. The authors also proceed to mention the two possible solutions to this
problem: first is to use intraday data within a narrow event window around the announcement
and second is a heteroskedasticity-based identification approach. By adopting the first suggested
approach to address endogeneity, we obtain improved estimates with reduced influence from
unrelated non-policy developments occurring on announcement days. This approach also delivers
higher explanatory power, as anticipated by the authors.

The same intraday event-window approach also mitigates the problem of employment report
releases coinciding with announcement days described by the authors. Using daily returns would
otherwise mix the “good news” of a decreased policy rate with the “bad news” of an

8
  The OMXSPI includes all firms listed on Nasdaq Stockholm’s main market. Historical index composition and
return data for 2004–2024 are available from Nasdaq Nordic’s index database.
9
  The U.S. economy experienced substantial structural changes between 1989–2002 and the post 2004 period,
including the rise of technology and growth sectors, increased equity market capitalization, and a sustained decline
in real interest rates. These developments altered the transmission of monetary policy to asset prices. For further
information see Lettau and Ludvigson (2004) and Jordà, Schularick and Taylor (2017).

                                                                           26
underperforming employment report. Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) show that on such days the
employment shock almost fully offsets the policy surprise, leading to a near-zero measured
response in the end.

                                 Table VIII
           Comparison of baseline results between Sweden and the U.S.
The table presents the regression results for the response of broad equity market returns to monetary policy surprises
in Sweden and the United States. Column (a) contains the results of regressing the daily percent return of the OMX
Stockholm All-Share Index on the change in the 1-month OIS rate on all days of announcements, excluding releases
of minutes and outliers. Column (b) reports the U.S. benchmark estimates from Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), based
on regressions of the 1-day CRSP value-weighted equity return on the monetary policy surprise component of the
federal funds rate. Change in the OMX Stockholm Price Index, expressed in percent, and the 1-month OIS rate
change, expressed in percentage points. The Swedish sample contains 139 observations between August 20, 2004,
and August 26, 2024. The U.S. sample contains 131 observations (77 FOMC meetings and 55 target rate changes),
excluding the September 17, 2001 observation. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
Note: * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01

                     Regressor (a) (b)
                     Intercept -0.001 0.11
                                           (0.027)
                    Surprise Change -1.884*** -2.55***
                                           (0.616)
                    R² 0.059 0.049

Lastly, structural macroeconomic differences between Sweden and the U.S. may also help
explain the difference in coefficients and explanatory value of the models. The U.S. equity
market is larger and more dominated by rate-sensitive growth industries tending to exhibit
stronger discount rate reactions (Lettau and Ludvigson, 2004; Lustig, Stathopoulos and Zechner,
2019). Sweden, however, relies more on export-oriented industrial sectors such as machinery,
manufacturing, engineering, and financials, which can decrease the effect of domestic monetary
policy shocks through global demand and exchange-rate channels (Adolfson, Laséen, Lindé and
                      10
Svensson, 2007)  .

Overall, the comparison suggests that monetary transmission in Sweden operates through broadly
similar channels as in the U.S., although with systematically weaker equity market responses.
This difference is consistent with the earlier identified macroeconomic and industrial factors,
such as open-economy features and sectoral composition, each influencing the estimated
sensitivity of returns to policy surprises. Importantly, the use of intraday measurements mitigates
many domestic factors that could otherwise contaminate the results. This enables our Swedish
estimates to isolate the pure policy-surprise effect more clearly and to better capture its
relationship with equity market returns. Future research could quantify the relative contribution

10
  These structural differences between Sweden and the United States are well documented in comparative
macroeconomic studies. OECD (2024) provides macroeconomic indicators for both countries beginning in 1960,
while the IMF (2024) offers historical series for GDP, unemployment, inflation, and trade openness dating back to
the early 1980s.

                                                                           27
of these structural factors and explore how they shape cross-country differences in the
transmission of monetary policy to equity markets.

                                     ΙΙΙ. Conclusion

As a result of our study, we find a negative and significant relationship between the unexpected
component of the monetary policy announcements and the aggregate Swedish stock market. On
average, a one-percentage-point increase in the policy surprise is associated with a 1.66%
decrease in the overall stock market return. The result is robust and consistent across samples of
different announcement types. However, we find that the release of minutes have an insignificant
impact on the stock market, even though the release of minutes carries additional information
about the change in policy rates. The results remain valid with exclusion of highly influential
outliers. Although we find a significant relationship between policy surprises and the stock
market’s movements, only a small part of variation in the equity market is explained by the
policy surprise.

In our analysis about the timing and level surprise, we find that the Swedish stock market
responds insignificantly to the pure timing surprise. This means that when policy actions only
shift the timing of policy rate changes without changing the expected future level of interest
rates, the aggregate stock market reaction tends to be weak and insignificant. The results of the
level surprise that shift the future expected level of interest rates by the same amount,
demonstrate a significant and robust relationship with the overall stock market. In other words,
the market cares more about the path of monetary policy rather than its timing. This finding is
consistent with Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), but the magnitude of Sweden’s case is relatively
smaller.

Finally, we look at the industry responses on the unexpected monetary policy announcements.
We find that there are no significant results in terms of the impact of monetary policy surprises
on industry returns except the health care industry. However, the health care industry is only
significant at a significance level of 10 percent. Most industries cluster near the zero axis, and
their confidence intervals are relatively wide, showing substantial estimation uncertainty. Among
these industries, Health Care is the pronounced negative outlier, whereas responses of Industrials,
Technology, Energy and Telecommunications align more closely with the CAPM-implied
predictions. However, since the estimated industry responses are statistically insignificant, and
the estimated daily OMXSPI response used to compute each CAPM-implied response is also
insignificant, we cannot conclude that CAPM can well explain the observed cross-industry
variation in monetary policy sensitivity. When comparing these industry-level findings to
Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) with strongly significant industry responses, the Swedish industry
responses are statistically insignificant, and their compliance rate to CAPM cannot be concluded.
Similar to Gürkaynak et. al (2005), we argue that the insignificant industry responses can be
attributed to a much longer event window of industry returns due to our lack of corresponding
intraday data. Taken together, our findings show that monetary policy surprises have a clear and
measurable impact on the Swedish equity market, consistent with the evidence in Bernanke and
Kuttner (2005). However, the magnitude of the effect differs from the U.S. case, suggesting that

                                                                           28
additional factors may shape Sweden’s transmission mechanism and offer meaningful avenues
for future research.

                                                                           29
                               References

Adolfson, Malin, Stefan Laséen, Jesper Lindé, and Lars E. O. Svensson, 2007, Monetary policy
and the exchange rate: The role of the export sector, Riksbank Economic Review 2, 7–27.

Almerud, Jakob, Dominika Krygier, Henrik Lundvall, and Mambuna Njie, 2024, Measuring
Riksbank monetary policy: Shocks and macroeconomic transmission, Sveriges Riksbank
Working Paper Series No. 445, Stockholm.

Andersson, Magnus, Hans Dillén, and Per Sellin, 2006, Monetary policy signaling and
movements in the Swedish term structure of interest rates, Journal of Monetary Economics 53(8),
1815–1855.

Bernanke, Ben S., and Kenneth N. Kuttner, 2005, What explains the stock market’s reaction to
Federal Reserve policy?, Journal of Finance 60, 1221–1257.

Brubakk, Leif, Saskia ter Ellen, and Hong Xu, 2021, Central bank communication through
interest rate projections, Journal of Banking & Finance 124, 106044.

Campbell, John Y., 1991, A variance decomposition for stock returns, The Economic Journal
101(405), 157–179.

Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP), 2023, CRSP U.S. Stock Databases Guide,
University of Chicago Booth School of Business, pp. 12–18, 44–46.

D’Amico, Stefania, and Mira Farka, 2003, The Fed and the stock market: A proxy and
instrumental variable identification, Working Paper, Columbia University.

Federal Reserve, 2024, Monetary policy projections FAQs. Available at:
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomc_projectionsfaqs.htm.

Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, 2011, The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report, U.S.
Government Publishing Office.

Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Eric T. Swanson, 2005, Do actions speak louder than
words? The response of asset prices to monetary policy actions and statements, International
Journal of Central Banking 1, 55–93.

International Monetary Fund (IMF), 2024, World Economic Outlook, Washington, D.C.

Iversen, Olof, and Andreas Tysklind, 2017, Repo path and implications for Swedish money
market rates, Sveriges Riksbank Staff Memo.

                                                                           30
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor, 2017, Macrofinancial history and the new
business cycle facts, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 31, 213–263.

Kuttner, Kenneth N., 2001, Monetary policy surprises and interest rates: Evidence from the Fed
futures market, Journal of Monetary Economics 47, 523–544.

Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson, 2004, Understanding trend and cycle in asset values:
Reevaluating the wealth effect on consumption, Journal of Financial Economics 74(3), 581–622.

Lustig, Hanno, Andreas Stathopoulos, and Josef Zechner, 2019, Who captures the value
premium?, Journal of Finance 74(3), 1361–1397.

Natvik, Gunnar J., Dagfinn Rime, and Olav Syrstad, 2020, Does publication of interest rate paths
provide guidance?, Journal of International Money and Finance 103(C).

OECD, 2024, OECD Economic Outlook, Paris.

Rigobon, Roberto, and Brian Sack, 2002, The impact of monetary policy on asset prices, Finance
and Economics Discussion Series 2002–4, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
Washington, DC.

Sveriges Riksbank, 2009, Monetary Policy Report, February 12, Stockholm.

Sveriges Riksbank, 2020, Measures to mitigate the effects of the coronavirus pandemic, Press
Release, March 13.

Svensson, Lars E. O., 2010, The role of transparency and communication: The experience of the
Riksbank, Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 2, 5–52.

                                                                           31
                                     AI Appendix

AI was used as a tool to correct grammatical errors, make enhancements, and assist with coding.

                                                                           32