THE CLIMATE OF CHOICE

HOW WEATHER CONDITIONS SHAPE CONSUMER DECISION-
MAKING

BAPTISTE RUNDSTRÖM

WILHELM VON ROSEN

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2025
The Climate of Choice: How Weather Conditions Shape Consumer Decision-
Making

Abstract:
   How does the weather affect consumer decision-making? This thesis examines
   whether consumers of public transport behave in line with the rational benchmark
   when choosing from a menu of contracts, and whether certain weather conditions
   systematically affect these decisions. Using a panel dataset of consumer purchases
   from Västtrafik’s To Go app combined with daily weather data from the Swedish
   Hydrological and Meteorological Institute, we investigate overspending behavior and
   estimate fixed-effects regressions to observe weather-induced projection bias. We find
   that 1.8–2.7% of Adults and around 0.5% of Youths systematically overspend on
   single tickets over a 30-day period, compared to the price of a flat-rate ticket, resulting
   in an annual welfare loss exceeding SEK 7 million. Abnormally warm days reduce the
   purchases of 30-day tickets by 1.2%, while two-day lagged precipitation increases
   them by 14.7% per millimeter. Precipitation also positively affects the probability of
   overspending by 4.0% per millimeter. Other than these findings, most weather
   variables show no meaningful effects. These results suggest that, while most
   consumers’ decision-making aligns with the rational benchmark, a subset exhibits only
   bounded rationality. These findings extend the behavioral finance literature by
   documenting these biases and challenging the neoclassical assumption of rational
   consumer behavior in a new context.

Keywords:

   Menu of contracts, rational model, projection bias, welfare, weather.conditions.

Authors:

   Baptiste Rundström (26006)

   Wilhelm von Rosen (25991)

Tutor:

   Marieke Bos, Economist (Docent) and Deputy Director, Swedish House of Finance

Examiner:

   Ramin Baghai, Professor, Swedish House of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Baptiste Rundström and Wilhelm von Rosen, 2025

                                   1
How does the weather affect consumer decision-making? Some firms providing services
offer a menu of contracts, a list of choices the consumer is to choose from. Cell-phone
carriers offer a trade-off between data plans and price, and gyms offer different types of
memberships including subscription services, single tickets, or multiple day passes. The
neoclassical literature in financial economics assumes that individuals have rational
expectations about their future consumption and that their present contract choices
maximize their future utility, given those expectations. This is an essential part of the
fundamental Capital Asset Pricing Model established by William F. Sharpe (1964), which
                                                                               1
formalizes how rational investors construct optimal portfolios under risk.  Similarly, in
Robert E. Lucas, Jr. (1978), the author presents a consumption-based asset pricing
framework in which expectations of rational consumers about future consumption shape
                        2
their decision-making.  Both papers rely on the assumption that consumers are rational
and forward-looking. More recent literature has provided evidence challenging the
validity of this assumption, and in this thesis, we add to this evidence by investigating
how weather conditions affect consumer decision-making behavior when choosing from
a menu of contracts for public transport services. We do so by answering the following
two questions:
    1. Do consumers of public transport overspend on single tickets, i.e., spend more on
        them than the price of a period ticket, due to an inaccurate expectation of future
      consumption?
    2. Do weather conditions affect the demand for specific public transport ticket types,
       and do they affect any potential overspending on single tickets?
We expect there to be a small systematic overspending on single tickets, which we define
as any money spent on single tickets in a given period above the price of a flat-fee ticket
for the same period. Such a finding would align with the evidence provided by DellaVigna
& Malmendier (2006), presenting how gym members tend to overestimate their future
                                                        3
attendance, leading to paying higher prices per visit.  We investigate almost the opposite
effect, whether consumers of public transport underestimate their future consumption,
potentially leading to overspending, due to a similar inaccuracy in consumer expectations
of future consumption and behavior. Hence, we also expect there to be a systematic level
of overspending on single tickets in the public transport industry. Furthermore, we expect
consumers’ contractual choices to be influenced by weather conditions, as observed in
Busse, Pope, Pope & Silva-Risso (2015), where warmer days prompted car buyers to
                                                                    4
purchase convertibles rather than four-wheel drive vehicles.  We expect a similar
projection bias in the public transport industry, and that a similar weather effect could
affect potential overspending.
Any failure by consumers to minimize their cost (overspending) or any significant
weather effect on their decision-making indicates a deviation from the rational model
benchmark and a violation of at least one of its three assumptions: 1) Perfect foresight, 2)
                                                                    5
Utility maximization (cost minimization), and 3) No bias.  Although we assume
consumers are inherently looking to minimize their costs, hence, deviations are due to

1
 Sharpe, “Capital Asset Prices.”
2
 Lucas, “Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy.”
3
 DellaVigna and Malmendier, “Paying Not to Go to the Gym.”
4
 Busse et al., “The Psychological Effect of Weather on Car Purchases.”
5
 Tirole, “The Theory of Industrial Organization.”
                                   2
violations of assumptions 1 and/or 3, which may in turn lead to failure in aligning with
assumption 2.
Our findings are of importance to consumers of public transport as they highlight how
consumers systematically misjudge their future travel needs and lead them to bear
unnecessary financial costs, resulting in a welfare loss. This loss is synonymous with
profit for the public transport provider, indicating that they systematically benefit from
consumers’ lack of rationality. This raises questions about fairness and transparency that
would point to the opportunity to explore the implementation of a more consumer-
friendly menu of contracts or a ‘capping’ mechanism. Our thesis could also serve as help
in consumers’ decision-making by making them more mindful of how they make their
choices, so that they could become more aware of any potential lack of rationality in their
process.
In our thesis, we follow a similar structure to the one presented in DellaVigna &
Malmendier (2006), where we make predictions in relation to the rational model and test
whether the behavior exhibited by consumers aligns with its assumptions, but our
                                             6
methodology also differs in some ways.  DellaVigna & Malmendier rely mostly on
straightforward benchmark comparisons, similar to our cost-comparison and
overspending tests, but we also extend the analysis by running regressions to examine if
weather conditions specifically have a systematic effect on ticket choices and
overspending. This allows us to go beyond the question of whether rational behavior is
violated and investigate why or what mechanisms are behind the behavioral deviations.
We use consumer data provided by Västtrafik, the public transport provider for the Västra
Götaland region in Sweden, in the form of an anonymous panel dataset, which alone
allows us to observe the quantity of purchases of tickets and any potential overspending
on single tickets. We also hand-picked weather data from the public website for the
Swedish Hydrological and Meteorological Institution for insights on daily temperature,
precipitation, sunshine hours, and cloud cover. With the use of these datasets, we run
logarithmic and logistic regressions with individual fixed effects to see if weather
conditions bear any systematic effect on the decision to purchase specific ticket types and
if it affects overspending. We also perform robustness checks in the form of permutation
tests for our findings to test whether the results are significant due to an existing effect or
simply due to randomness.
While the data we use provides for a solid analysis on consumer decision-making and
how weather affects it, we lack more detailed individual-specific data to control for
individual differences that are potential underlying reasons for specific behavior, such as
home addresses, specific transport alternatives, or household income. As we cannot
control for these variables, our experiment on the effect of weather is limited, as it lacks
the isolation that would be found in an ideal experiment.
Nevertheless, our results provide a clear picture of how consumers of Västtrafik’s services
behave relative to the rational benchmark. We find that between 1.8% and 2.7% of Adults
and around 0.5% of Youths systematically overspend on single tickets over a 30-day
period, compared to the price of a flat-rate ticket. Indicating a failure to cost-minimize
due to inaccurate expectations of future travel needs. These deviations suggest a lack of

6
 DellaVigna and Malmendier, “Paying Not to Go to the Gym.”
                                   3
perfect foresight and potential bias in consumers’ expectations and purchasing decisions.
The overspending results in an annual welfare loss exceeding SEK 7 million for
overspenders.
We also find that certain weather conditions influence ticket choices in ways consistent
with projection bias, essentially a form of weather-induced projection bias. Specifically,
abnormally high temperatures seem to decrease the purchases of 30-day tickets, while
precipitation two days prior to the day of purchase seems to increase them. This suggests
consumers systematically respond to weather when forming their expectations of future
consumption, experiencing a form of bias from external factors outside of their own
expectations. However, most weather variables show no effect, indicating that only
specific, sufficiently salient weather conditions affect consumer decision-making. We
also observe certain seasonal patterns, indicating changes in weather effect throughout
the year. In the spring/early summer, higher sunshine hours increase single ticket
purchases, while this effect of sunshine hours is negative when considering the overall
sample period. Moreover, precipitation seems to increase the probability of overspending
on single tickets, suggesting that weather not only affects contract choices, but also has
financial consequences for consumers.
Since the deviations and effects we observe are modest in size and rather selective, our
findings point to bounded rationality rather than full-on irrationality. Most consumers
behave in line with the rational benchmark, while a smaller subset shows deviations from
it.
As previously mentioned, neoclassical literature assumes rationality of consumers, which
is something we investigate in our thesis by following the ideas presented in the current
behavioral finance body of work and build on the existing literature with new insights
from the public transport industry and a deeper investigation of weather effects.
Chetty, Looney & Kroft (2009) provide an analysis on how consumers systematically
deviate from rational price and cost-minimization when the tax component of prices is
            7
not salient.  They provide evidence that consumers respond almost entirely to the posted
shelf price rather than the full post-tax price, despite it being their total cost. Consumers
essentially behave as though the tax price does not exist if it is not included in the shelf
price, resulting in higher demand than a perfectly rational consumer would exhibit.
Limited attention and cognitive costs related to mental effort are at the root of this
consumer behavior, leading consumers to rely on the information that is given to them
rather than all available information. These findings directly tie to our thesis, in which we
test these mechanisms in a public transport setting.
Busse, Silva-Risso & Zettelmeyer (2006) bring forth another analysis providing evidence
                                                              8
that consumers fail to behave as rational price optimizers.  By studying car transactions
in the U.S., they show how temporary manufacture promotions, for example, cash-back
discounts, are not entirely passed through to the transaction prices for consumers. Instead,
dealers absorb part of the promotional value by negotiating other components in the total
price paid by the consumer. However, the buyers act as if they are receiving the full
discount, leading them to pay more than a rational consumer would.

7
 Chetty et al., “Salience and Taxation.”
8
 Busse et al., “$1,000 Cash Back.”
                                   4
Grubb & Osborne (2015) provides further insight into how consumers’ beliefs are
systematically biased and limited in learning, even in an environment that is repeated or
                             9
with abundant information.  By studying mobile phone plan contract selection, they show
that consumers consistently underestimate their future consumption and end up selecting
tariff plans that lead to avoidable higher fees. This inaccurate estimation persists despite
the monthly feedback consumers receive with their invoice, suggesting a persistence of
biased beliefs.
We build on the ideas presented in these three papers by investigating consumer decision-
making and whether there is any similar inaccurate estimation exhibited by consumers in
the public transport industry. DellaVigna & Malmendier (2006) serves as an anchor for
our thesis, both in the sense that we follow a similar structure and that we aim to test
                     10
similar predictions.   In their paper, the authors find that gym members in the U.S. tend
to choose a membership contract that is not cost-minimizing as they base their decision
on an overestimation of their future attendance. Holders of monthly memberships attend
too infrequently for the membership to be worth the price-point compared to lower-priced
options, such as a 10-visit pass, leading to unnecessarily high spending. Similarly, we test
for systematic overspending to investigate whether consumers exhibit similar failure to
cost-minimize in their contractual choices in the public transport industry.
We then take this analysis further to test for potential weather effects on consumer choices
                                                                                         11
and overspending by performing regressions similar to those of Busse et al. (2015).  In
their paper, the authors show that car buyers’ choices are systematically influenced by
same-day weather conditions, with warmer temperatures prompting them to purchase
convertibles instead of four-wheel drive vehicles. Illustrating the influence of projection
bias as buyers fail to look past the temporary present conditions in a decision affecting
their future. Similarly, we investigate whether the weather affects which type of ticket a
consumer chooses to purchase, and if it also has an effect on the probability of
overspending.
The remainder of the thesis is organized as follows: In Section I, we introduce the public
transport industry, the main features of the consumer and weather datasets, and our
sample construction. In Section II, we discuss our theoretical underpinnings along with
our predictions. Section III concludes.
    I. Consumer & Weather Datasets
    A. The Public Transport Industry
This thesis focuses on the public transport system in the region of Västra Götaland in
Sweden. It is located on the west coast and is home to the city of Gothenburg, the second
                                    12
most populous city in the country.  Västra Götalandsregionen is the overarching regional
public transport authority, responsible for how public transport should be expanded and
                                          13
where investments should be made.

9
 Grubb and Osborne, “Cellular Service Demand.”
10
  DellaVigna and Malmendier, “Paying Not to Go to the Gym.”
11
  Busse et al., “The Psychological Effect of Weather on Car Purchases.”
12
  Statistikmyndigheten SCB, “Folkmängd och befolkningsförändringar - Kvartal 2, 2025.”
13
  Västra Götalandsregionen, “Så styrs kollektivtrafiken.”
                                   5
Västtrafik AB (Västtrafik) is a subsidiary of this authority and is responsible for planning
and procuring public transport on behalf of Västra Götalandsregionen. Västtrafik decides
how routes should be planned, where stops should be located, the scheduling, and whether
a route should be discontinued. Politicians in the regional council decide how public
transport should be run at a general level.
This thesis specifically focuses on Västtrafik for the following reasons:
Large commuter base – Västtrafik has over 444 000 consumers using their services every
    14
day.   This provides for a large and diverse population (service workers, students,
younger consumers, older consumers, etc.), making findings more generalizable.
Clear single ticket vs. period ticket choice – Västtrafik has clear period ticket options for
consumers, as well as flexible single tickets, allowing for a comparison between the two
types.
Availability of consumer data – through Västtrafik’s To Go app, anonymous data about
individuals’ purchases of both single and period tickets is easily extractable.
Natural variation in weather – Västra Götaland’s strong variation in weather between
and within seasons allows for a stronger analysis of potential weather impact on decision-
making.
Practical accessibility – as we are based at the Stockholm School of Economics in
Sweden, Västtrafik as an option allowed for an easier understanding of the local context
                                                15
and easier communication with the firm.
Transferability to similar systems – the findings from this thesis are transferable to other
metropolitan public transport systems that propose a similar single ticket vs. period ticket
choice, making Västtrafik a relevant setting for insights that could be extended elsewhere.
   B. Public Transport Consumer Data – Västtrafik
Data on consumers of Västtrafik’s services was provided by Västtrafik themselves. This
panel data spans from January 1st, 2024, to August 31st, 2025, and covers daily individual
purchase activity. All the data originates from the Västtrafik To Go app, which connects
purchases to an individual person by assigning them a consumer ID, hence, consumer
purchases can be traced back to specific individuals. This allows us to analyze the
decision-making process at an individual consumer level, rather than dealing with
aggregate figures.
   C. Weather Data – SMHI
We obtained data for the weather in Gothenburg from the public website for the Swedish
                                                      16
Meteorological and Hydrological Institute (SMHI).  The data is from the three following
weather stations: 1. Göteborg Sol 2. Göteborg A 3. Göteborg-Landvetter Flygplats. The
data is updated on a daily basis and goes back multiple decades, allowing for calculations
of historical averages while also providing recent values. All variables from SMHI’s data

14
  “Västtrafik AB.”
15
  We were also in contact with Stockholms Lokaltrafik (SL), responsible for the public transport in the
Stockholm region, but determined that they were a much less fitting option for our thesis due to their lack
of detailed consumer data.
16
  SMHI, “Ladda ner väderobservationer.”
                                   6
were presented in the raw data with values on an hourly basis per date, except for
Temperature, which had three data points at times 06:00, 12:00, and 18:00.
    D. Sample Construction and Variables of Interest

We base the majority of the analysis on the two datasets previously mentioned: 1. Public
Transport Consumer Data (Västtrafik) and 2. Weather Data (SMHI).

When it comes to Västtrafik’s consumer data, our sample only includes data for
consumers and tickets that fit the following two conditions:

    1) Registered in the App – Only data from purchases made through the Västtrafik To
       Go app are included in the sample.
    2) Zone A – The data has been cut down to include tickets only valid within zone A.

                                                                                                17
      Figure 1: Map of the Three Zones A, B, and C in which Västtrafik Operates

Both filters were decided together with Västtrafik during the acquiring of the data,
meaning our raw data already has these two conditions applied. According to the
information provided by Västtrafik during our personal communication, the share of
consumers who are registered in the app and purchase their tickets there is about 90
percent of the total consumer base. Hence, the requirement of a consumer ID to track
consumer behavior does make for such a strong constraint on our experiments, as most
observations are still included. We decided to only include zone A in our experiments as
individuals traveling within this smaller zone have a wider choice of alternative transport
they could use on top of Västtrafik’s services (e.g., walking, driving, cycling, etc.),
whereas consumers traveling within zones B and C, and between the zones, travel further,
and thus, have fewer options. Hence, consumers in zone A are more likely to switch
between different modes, facilitating analysis on differences in decision-making and
behavior. Moreover, without data on where a ticket is purchased, the large sizes of zones
B and C make the connections to the weather data very general, meaning potential effects
in our findings would be inaccurate. Weather conditions measured by weather stations in

17
  “Zoner - Västra Götaland.”
                                   7
Gothenburg are likely similar to the conditions in Partille, but less so for far-away
locations like Bengtsfors (see figure 1).

The variables we analyze specifically from the consumer data are the following: a)
Purchase Date – The date the ticket was purchased by the consumer (which is also the
date the ticket is activated/used) b) Price – The price of the ticket purchased by the
consumer c) Discount Date – The date a discount was provided for the consumer (if it
was provided at all) d) Consumer ID – Each person registered in the app has a consumer
ID that their purchases are assigned to.

The discount date variable refers to Västtrafik’s discount feature for single tickets, where
a person purchasing four or more single tickets during a 7-day period get a 20% discount
on all the tickets purchased within that period. The discount period resets once the seven
days are over.

We constructed the sample of data from SMHI manually, combining data on our variables
of interest from the three weather stations mentioned previously. The variables analyzed
are the following: a) Temperature – the air temperature (in °C) b) Precipitation – the
amount of rain or snowfall (in mm) c) Cloud cover – share of the area of the sky covered
                       18
by clouds (0-8 oktas)  d) Sunshine hours – amount of time in an hour the sun shines (in
hours, from 0 to 1).

We processed the data for all weather variables as to have one average value for each
variable per date. The average is calculated including only values recorded between 06:00
and 18:00 for all variables, including the values for those two specific times. Hence, the
values for the weather variables used for the remainder of the thesis are these average
                                                                                       st                                      st
values. The sample covers data from January 1 , 2024, to August 31 , 2025, for both
          19
datasets.

18
  Cloud cover can also take on a value of 9 oktas, which indicates that the cloud cover could not be
accurately determined due to fog, heavy snow, or other obstructions. This is only the case for around 1%
of observations.
19
  In addition to the two datasets, we manually collected data on public holidays & school holidays.
Public holidays are defined as bank holidays in Sweden and were taken from a calendar. School holidays
were measured as holiday for school children in Gothenburg – using a conservative approach to account
for different durations of holidays.
                                   8
            Table 1 – Definitions of all dependent and independent variables

     Variable Definition

 Independent
 Purchase date The date a ticket was purchased (to assign purchases to specific time periods).
                           The price of the ticket purchased (to calculate amount spent on ticket types
 Price
                             during a period and identify consumer categories).
 Discount date The date a discount was awarded for the tickets purchased in the previous 7 days
                          A specific customer ID attributed to everyone registered in Västtrafik’s app (to
 Consumer ID
                                    associate each purchase to a specific and anonymous individual).
 Public Holiday Dummy variable equaling 1 if there is a bank holiday.
 School Holiday Dummy variable equaling 1 if it is a school holiday in Gothenburg.
 Weather variables
                         The difference between the average temperature of day t (between 6am and 6pm)
 Temperature anomaly
                                and the 30-year average temperature (between 6am and 6pm) in degrees Celsius.
 Precipitation Average precipitation in mm for a day t.
 Cloud cover The fraction of cloudiness on day t in oktas.
 Sunshine hours The number of sunshine hours for a day t.
                              Weather is a combined vector of the above weather variables and t-k signals the lag
  Weathert-k
                                     of the weather variable. We test for k=1 and k=2.
 Season Which season it is, we use spring and early summer measuring from March to July.
 Season*Weather The interaction effect of season on weather.

 Dependent
                             The net difference of cumulative single ticket cost for a fixed period less the flat fee
 Overspending           ticket for that same period, given cumulative single ticket cost is greater than the
                                 flat fee.
 Period ticket purchase If a consumer bought a period ticket or not.
 Single ticket purchase If a consumer bought a single ticket or not.

   E. Ideal Data & Methodology
In an ideal experiment, we would have access to more detailed datasets. On the consumer
side, information such as home and work locations, typical commute routes, specific
location and time of ticket purchase, access to alternative modes of transport, and other
socio-demographic characteristics (e.g., age, income, household size, etc.) would allow
us to control for potential individual-specific determinants of consumption more
accurately. These variables would offer clearer insight into whether the consumer
behavior we observe is due to expectation errors or simply individual differences we are
unable to capture. In the absence of these controls, weather effects ought to be evaluated
as correlations and not definitive causal effects. Moreover, increased precision in the
weather data would further enhance connections between the conditions and consumer
behavior. With a higher number of weather stations providing detailed conditions for
precise areas, and measurements on a minute instead of hourly basis, each ticket purchase
could be matched with the precise weather conditions that the specific consumer

                                   9
experienced at that time and place, rather than relying on the aggregate weather conditions
in the area for the whole day.
Methodologically, the ideal design would involve a more experimental framework,
instead of an observational approach, capable of isolating specific effects. For example,
random variation in weather forecasts, controlled information shocks, and eliciting certain
beliefs among consumers (e.g., control the announced weather forecasts), could be used
directly to measure consumer expectations in a more controlled environment and then
compare them to the observed realized behavior. Such an experiment is run in Bertrand,
                                     20
Karlan, Shafir & Zinman (2010),   in which the authors analyze a direct mail field
experiment implemented by a South African consumer lender who randomized
advertising content, loan prices, and offer deadlines, allowing them to find how specific
factors affect demand. A similar experiment would allow us to find similar specific
relationships between certain weather conditions and demand for different ticket types,
and for effects on overspending.
Additionally, a longer sample period spanning multiple years would strengthen the
analysis of seasonal effects and consumer learning. It would allow us to follow individual
consumers and study how they may adapt to weather over time, such as some cyclists
perhaps becoming more resistant to rain or cold. It would also provide for a more accurate
analysis of seasonal differences with data on multiple sample periods for every season of
the year, compared to our sample period, which does not even include two periods for
every season. Together, these data and experimental improvements would allow for the
identification of a more causal impact of weather on ticket choices and overspending.
   F. Contractual Menu

Västtrafik offer many different types of tickets, especially different combinations of zones
                          21
their services operate in.   Since we are focusing on travel solely within zone A, we only
consider tickets providing valid transport within this specific zone. There is a total of
three consumer categories that each person fits into: 1) Adult, 2) Student, for ages 20 and
above, and 3) Youth, for ages 1 to 19.

Table 2 illustrates the contractual menu that all Västtrafik’s consumers are faced with
when looking to use their services. Any choice made to start using public transport or
switching between ticket types is made in relation to this contractual menu. Note that
students are excluded as a consumer category from this thesis, as they are
indistinguishable from the Adult and Youth categories, since we use the purchase price
of each transaction as an indication of which category the consumer belongs to, and the
prices are the same as these categories for Single, Day, and 3-Day tickets, and 30-Day
and 90-Day tickets, respectively. Moreover, our analysis focuses on the comparisons
between single tickets and 30-Day tickets (and 90-Day tickets in prediction and finding
2).

20
  Bertrand et al., “What’s Advertising Content Worth?”
21
  Such as combination tickets for zones A and B or zones A, B, and C, etc.
                                  10
               Table 2 – Västtrafik’s Menu of Contracts for Zone A22

       Ticket Type Consumer Category
                       Adult Youth Student*
 Single Ticket (90      37 SEK 28 SEK 37 SEK
 min)
 Day Ticket 120 SEK 90 SEK 120 SEK
 3-Day Ticket 240 SEK 180 SEK 240 SEK
 30-Day Ticket 860 SEK 645 SEK 645 SEK
 90-Day Ticket 2320 SEK 1740 SEK 1740 SEK
Notes: The 90-Day Youth Ticket has a “Leisure” option available for purchase for consumers ages 7-19
for only 925 SEK. This ticket is only valid 14:00-04:00 on weekdays and around the clock on weekends,
public holidays, and other holidays. This leisure ticket is excluded from our data. The prices in the table
are as of the 2025-09-26 price calendar.
    G. Descriptive Statistics

Table 3 shows the allocation of ticket transactions between the different ticket types and
customer categories, as well as the quarterly means of all four weather variables. The
differences in average price per ticket are due to price increases that Västtrafik put in
place within our sample period.

Single tickets constitute the lion’s share of transactions, with roughly 1 million and 80
thousand transactions per month, for Adults and Youths, respectively. Conversely,
monthly passes transactions vary between 30 to 40 thousand (10-14 thousand for Youths)
transactions per month. The quarterly revenue from the two types is similar. SEK 97–114
million for single tickets and SEK 87–111 for 30-day tickets.

22
  Authors’ data collection from Västtrafik’s To Go app (September 2025).
                                  11
          Table 3: Descriptive Statistics by Ticket Type, Age Group and Quarter

Notes: Ticket prices are sometimes not integers due to the price changes introduced in Q1 2024 & 2025. Other tickets
include 24-hour & 72-hour tickets, both for Youth and Adults, thus accounting for the varying average ticket prices.
2025 Q3 only includes July and August data, hence explains the significantly lower number of transactions. Single
ticket revenue is not adjusted for discounts.

Table 4 presents the summary statistics for the ticket quantities of three different ticket
types purchased, the spending on single tickets, and the four weather variables. The
maximum values for the ticket quantities are many standard deviations from the mean
values, suggesting they are rare outliers. Purchasing multiple period tickets within a
month, 30-day or 90-day, seems like an irrational waste of money, considering the tickets
are activated immediately after purchase, meaning their periods of validity overlap.
Although it could be that the consumer refunded one ticket only to buy a new one shortly
after.
A similar case is observed for single tickets with a high maximum of 125 tickets, which
leads to the maximum spending and overspending in the table. The low mean monthly
overspending of SEK 3.20 on single tickets per adult consumer suggests that
overspending behavior is rare and has a small impact overall on the group of consumers.

                                  12
        Table 4: Summary Statistics for Ticket Quantities, Spending, and Weather

As for the weather variables, the high standard deviation and range of temperature
anomaly indicate how the temperatures in our sample period vary largely from their 30-
year average, in both colder and warmer directions, although the mean value of 1.36°C
suggests higher daily temperatures on average. Notably, precipitation has four missing
values, which are accounted for in all our regressions.

    II. Contract Choice

    A. Theoretical Underpinnings

As we aim to determine how rational consumers are in their decision-making, the actions
a perfectly rational individual undertakes serve as a benchmark for comparison. The
rational model showcases how a fully rational individual should behave, based on three
fundamental assumptions: (1) Perfect foresight & expectations – the individual is aware
                                                                                  23
of exactly how often they will use public transport in a given period.

(2) Utility maximization – the individual chooses from the menu of contracts to maximize
their utility subject to any budget constraints. Maximizing utility is synonymous with
minimizing costs in this thesis. Camerer, Issacharoff, Loewenstein, O’Donoghue & Rabin
       24
(2003)  express utility maximization in mathematical terms as the following equation:

                             max 𝑈𝑡 = 𝑢(𝑐𝑡) + 𝛽𝐸𝑡[𝑢(𝑐𝑡+1)] (1)
                                                                      𝑐𝑡,𝐶𝑡

where ct denotes the present consumption, Ct is the contract picked, β ∈ (0, 1) measures
the intertemporal discount factor (β≈1 implies time preference is of low importance), and
Et is the current information-based expectations at time t.

(3) No bias – the individual does not over- or underestimate their motivation for public
transport usage. If the rational model were to hold, consumers would not overspend on
single tickets in a month; they would instead carefully evaluate their future consumption
of that month and choose the contract that would minimize their cost, no matter what that

23
  Tirole, “The Theory of Industrial Organization.”
24
  Camerer et al., “Regulation for Conservatives.”
                                  13
contract is. Resulting in a general decision rule that perfectly rational consumers follow
without mistake:

    • If the individual expects to use public transport often enough that a period pass
        costs less per use than single tickets: they purchase a period ticket.

                       𝑃 × 𝐸𝑡[𝑄𝑡] > 𝐹 → 𝐶ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑒 𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑑 𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 (2)

    • If the individual expects to use public transport rarely enough that single tickets
       cost less per use than a period ticket: they purchase single tickets.

                      𝑃 × 𝐸𝑡[𝑄𝑡] ≤ 𝐹 → 𝐶ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑠𝑒 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑙𝑒 𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡𝑠 (3)

From equations (2) and (3), we can then define the break-even point where a consumer
ought to buy a period ticket: QB = F / P. If a consumer expects to travel more than QB
times, they should buy a period ticket. Conversely, if the consumer expects to travel less
than QB, they would be better off buying single tickets.

If a consumer deviates from these conditions, it implies the failure of a consumer’s
foresight and/or that their expectations about future travel are biased. An explanation for
                                                                         25
such a deviation from the rational model is found in projection bias.  It is the tendency
for an individual to assume that their future needs, wants, or tastes will be more similar
to their present situation than they actually will be. Essentially, it leads to an
underestimation of expected changes in the future and decision-making in the present, as
                                                                                                       26
if their temporary current self would persist longer than it does. Camerer et al. (2003)
mathematically derived projection bias as follows:

                                                        ∗
                           𝐸𝑡[𝑄𝑡+1] = (1 − 𝜆)𝐸𝑡 [𝑄𝑡+1] + 𝜆𝑠𝑡 (4)

where λ ∈ (0, 1) is the degree of projection bias (higher λ means greater projection bias),
                                                    ∗
st is the present state of the consumer, and 𝐸𝑡 [𝑄𝑡+1] is the unbiased expectation of future
public transport needs.

Similarly to projection bias, salience can distort the future expectations of a consumer.
Salience refers to how present experiences can receive different amounts of attention, and
under projection bias, how the weighting of these experiences potentially skews future
              27
expectations.  Relating this to weather, different weather conditions will produce varying
salience levels and consequently induce projection bias to different degrees. Weather
conditions with a noticeable physical effect are of high salience (precipitation and
temperature deviations), conversely, weather conditions with minimal physical effect will
are of low salience (cloud cover and sunshine hours). High-salience conditions translate
into a stronger influence of St under equation 4, thus more projection bias, which
ultimately can skew consumer contract choices.

To illustrate in practical terms how a consumer chooses from a menu of contracts, we
consider an individual who perfectly follows the rational benchmark. Due to their rational

25
  Camerer et al., “Regulation for Conservatives.”
26
   Ibid.
27
  Bordalo et al., “Salience and Asset Prices.”
                                  14
nature, they successfully select the cost-minimizing contract thanks to their perfectly
accurate expectation of future travel frequency. Conversely, a consumer subject to
projection bias may have their expectations distorted by temporary salient conditions, and
the wants and needs they experience because of them, leading to a potential over- or
underestimation of future travel frequency. This can, in turn, lead to a failure in selecting
the cost-minimizing contract, as this decision is made on an inaccurate estimation, leading
to unnecessarily high costs, i.e., overspending. This is even though they too are looking
to minimize their cost.

    B. Predictions of Consumer Decision-Making

Under this benchmark, it follows that we should be able to observe overspending
occurring on the individual level, i.e., P×Qt > F. In other words, some travelers will fail
to meet the criteria of cost minimizing under the rational model, such that P×Qt ≤ F –
indicating that the consumer either suffers from a behavioral bias or lacks perfect
foresight of future public transport usage. If the individual is subject to projection bias,
short-term conditions can distort their expectations Et[Qt+1], leading to a potential under-
or overestimation of subsequent public transport consumption.

In the following sections, we investigate this framework through a set of empirical
predictions that we compare to the rational benchmark. Section B.1. investigates the
existence of systematic overspending, while sections B.2. through B.4. investigate the
effect of weather on ticket purchases and overspending. This approach allows us to
benchmark behavior against theoretical predictions and helps us uncover the mechanisms
behind potential deviations.

    B.1. Predictions 1 & 2: Observed Overspending

In predictions 1 & 2, we first consider the choice consumers have between purchasing a
single ticket at each use of public transport, with price P and quantity Q (number of
tickets), or opting to purchase a period ticket, for a flat fee F. We look at whether there is
any overspending and what the magnitude of this overspending is. Formally,
overspending is defined as:

                        𝑂𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑚𝑎𝑥{0, 𝑃 × 𝑄𝑖,𝑡 − 𝐹𝑡} (5)

                                                                        28
Where Qi,t is the trips by individual i realized over a period t

Prediction 1 (rationality in decision-making): The majority of consumers who buy
single tickets should accumulate a total cost for those single tickets less than or equal to
the 30-day flat fee. Overspending will exist but be minuscule in prevalence.

Prediction 2 (sustained rationality in decision-making): The vast majority of
consumers who buy single tickets should accumulate a total cost for those single tickets
less than or equal to the 90-day flat fee. Overspending should be even less common than
for a 30-day period.

28
  We use the max-operator to make sure overspending is only recorded when the cumulative single ticket
cost exceeds the flat fee.
                                  15
Prediction 1 & 2 Reasoning – According to the rational benchmark, individuals make
decisions that minimize their expected costs. Formally, an individual would select the
contract where their expected travel frequency satisfies either:

                                P × 𝐸30[𝑄𝑖,30] ≶ 𝐹30 (6)

Or:

                                P × 𝐸90[𝑄𝑖,90] ≶ 𝐹90 (7)

P is the price of a single ticket and Q30 (Q90) is the corresponding number of single tickets
purchased for one 30-day (90-day/roughly a quarter) period. P includes the discount
effect of a consumer purchasing 4 or more tickets during distinct occasions in a week. F30
(F90) is the flat fee for a 30-day (90-day) ticket.

It follows that rational consumers of single tickets, during a 30-day period, would travel
less than or equal to the break-even point QB = F / P. On the other hand, those expecting
Et[Qt] > QB will opt for the flat-rate ticket. Overspending occurs when an individual
deviates from this framework and fails in cost minimizing, which entails that the perfect
foresight (1) and/or no bias assumption (3) is violated. Furthermore, extending the period
to 90 days reveals critical insight about overspenders: if individuals learn from prior false
                                                                                             29
expectations, we should not observe overspending over longer periods of time.

Finding 1 (rationality in decision-making): For the majority of the sample, individuals
follow the rational formula in Prediction 1, spending a total amount on single tickets less
than the price of a 30-day during a 30-day period. However, there is an overall
overspending rate of 1.8 % for Adults (2.7% for strategic switchers) and 0.5% for
         30
Youths.

Table 5 shows the mean spending, standard deviation, and number of observations for
consumers in the two groups: P×Q > F (overspenders) and P×Q ≤ F. This is then translated
into an overspending rate illustrating the share of the total number of observations that
are overspenders.

29
  Worth noting is that there might be other constraints than lack of learning, leading to overspending,
such as liquidity or risk-aversion with regards to not sufficiently utilizing a period ticket. We can’t
distinguish between these different factors and thus acknowledge that they might exist. At the same time,
these problems should partially be solved by strategic switchers who at least have demonstrated prior
liquidity (and risk-aversion).
30
  The inability to classify a ticket as belonging to the Student category results in a conservative approach
in the results since purchases of single tickets by students are compared to the higher flat fee for Adults,
and not the student flat fee. This underestimates the amount of overspending and the overspending rate
for Adults.
                                  16
         Table 5: Monthly Spending Patterns WITH WEEKLY DISCOUNTS (SEK)

Notes: P*Q > F represents individuals (adults) overspending, i.e. the cumulative cost of single tickets in a month is
greater than the flat fee. P*Q < F represents the individuals (adults) that are not overspending. Mean shows the
average cumulative cost of a customer for the respective classifications – standard deviation is in parentheses. N
represents the total number of individuals for that category. Overspending rate is calculated as
N(overspending)/N(Total) and shows the proportion of individuals overspending in a month.

We see that there is an overall overspending rate of 1.8% for Adults, with those
individuals spending an average of 1012.3 SEK, and 0.5% for Youths, with an average
spending of 783.1 SEK. Moreover, the overspending fluctuates significantly in relative
terms, ranging from 1%-3.5% during the sample period. Due to the low amount of
overspending from the Youth category, we choose to exclude this category from closer
analysis in the next table.

    Table 6: Strategic Switchers (Adults): Monthly Spending Patterns WITH WEEKLY
                              DISCOUNTS (SEK)

                                  17
Notes: P*Q > F represents individuals overspending, i.e. the cumulative cost of single tickets (after adjusting for
discounts) in a month is greater than the flat fee. P*Q < represents the individuals that are not overspending. Mean
shows the average cumulative cost of a customer for the respective classifications – standard deviation is in
parentheses. N represents the total number of individuals for that category. Overspending rate is calculated as
N(overspending)/N(Total) and shows the proportion of individuals overspending in a month. Youths are omitted from
                                                                                                                                       31
the sample because of their negligible size – most evidently Youth tickets are subsidized by the local authorities.

In table 6 we consider “strategic switchers”, that is, individuals who at some point during
the sample period have bought a 30-day ticket. The point of this is to exclude consumers
who are infrequent travelers and only buy tickets sporadically. The assumption behind
this is that someone who purchases a 30-day ticket at some point travels a decent amount,
or at least enough not to be considered a sporadic user of public transport. In this case,
the overspending rate is 2.7% for adults, meaning 2.7% of strategic switchers
suboptimally select single tickets - nearly a 1% increase in percentage points.

Finding 2 (sustained rationality in decision-making): For the majority of the sample,
individuals follow the rational formula in Prediction 2, spending a total amount on single
tickets less than the price of a 90-day ticket during a 90-day period. However, there is
still an overall overspending rate of 1.0% for Adults (1.2% for strategic switchers) and
0.2% for Youths.

         Table 7: Quarterly Spending Patterns WITH WEEKLY DISCOUNTS (SEK)

Notes: P*Q > F represents individuals overspending, i.e. the cumulative cost of single tickets in over three month is
greater than the flat fee. P*Q < represents the individuals that are not overspending. Mean shows the average
cumulative cost of a customer for the respective classifications – standard deviation is in parentheses. N represents
total amount of individuals for that category. Overspending rate is calculated as N(overspending)/N(Total) and shows
the proportion of individuals overspending in a month.

Table 7 reports the same information as table 5, but over a quarterly (90-day) period.
Individuals who spent more in total on single tickets during those 90 days than the price
of a 90-day ticket are considered to be overspenders. The overspending rate shows
systematic overspending, although it remains very low overall, with 1.0% for Adults and
                                                                         32
0.18% for Youths (excluding Q3 2025 for fair measurement).

31
  “Skolkort i grundskolan.”
32
  Calculated as total N of overspenders divided by total N for respective category (weighted)
                                  18
    Table 8: Strategic Switchers (Adults): Quarterly Spending Patterns WITH WEEKLY
                              DISCOUNTS (SEK)

Notes: P*Q > F represents individuals overspending, i.e. the cumulative cost of single tickets (after adjusting for
discounts) over three months is greater than the flat fee. P*Q < represents the individuals that are not overspending.
Mean shows the average cumulative cost of a customer for the respective classifications – standard deviation is in
parentheses. N represents the total number of individuals for that category. Overspending rate is calculated as
N(overspending)/N(Total) and shows the proportion of individuals overspending in a month. Youths are omitted from
                                                                                                                                       33
the sample because of their negligible size – most evidently Youth tickets are subsidized by the local authorities.

As in finding 1, by adjusting for strategic switchers, we observe a higher overspending
rate of 1.2% in table 8, compared to 1.0% in table 7.

Findings 1 & 2 Interpretation – Under the decision rules in equations (2) and (3), a cost-
minimizing consumer should purchase a period ticket (30- or 90-day) if their expected
usage satisfies P×Et[Qt] > F; if not, they purchase single tickets per trip. Thus, systematic
overspending should not occur, since the expectations are perfectly accurate and
unbiased.

However, from both predictions 1 & 2, we see a low but systematic and non-trivial
overspending on public transport, suggesting breach of perfect foresight and/or no bias.
A consumer lacking perfect foresight risks building inaccurate expectations of their future
travel frequency, while a bias-suffering consumer is influenced by exogenous variables
that could impede their expectation’s accuracy. These external variables could be related
to changes in household income, age, or weather, as seen in Busse et al. (2015) and later
                            34
discussed in this thesis.   Ultimately, these factors risk translating into tangible
overspending on single tickets. Furthermore, a downwards shift in Et[Qi,t+1] built by
projecting the present temporary conditions into the future, indicates suffering from
projection bias.

Notably, even under longer time spans, some travelers still fail to cost-minimize under
equations (2) and (3). This indicates that, on one hand, there is some learning behavior,
as the overspending rate is considerably lower for the 90-day ticket than for the 30-day
ticket. On the other hand, it suggests that learning may not be instant, as a considerable
number of consumers keep overspending. Considering this, biases can be rendered not to
be pure noise, but rather systematic. Our findings mirror the findings of DellaVigna &
                                                                            35
Malmendier (2006) and suggest systematic bounded rationality.

33
  “Skolkort i grundskolan.”
34
  Busse et al., “The Psychological Effect of Weather on Car Purchases.”
35
  DellaVigna and Malmendier, “Paying Not to Go to the Gym.”
                                  19
Evaluating the strategic switchers, their higher overspending behavior is hard to explain
                                       36
by the mere absence of information.  It conversely points towards that they violate the
assumption of perfect foresight, as they fail to accurately predict their future usage
Et[Qt+1] – or that their expectations are distorted by contemporaneous events like
seasonally good weather, implying breach of the no bias assumption. Clearly, lack of
information alone cannot explain the systematic overspending of consumers.

Our results in findings 1 & 2 provide evidence that the assumption of consumer rationality
made in neoclassical literature is not necessarily accurate. While many consumers seem
to align with the rational benchmark, the observed overspending suggests this is not the
                    37
case for everyone.  This indicates that the neoclassical assumption of rational behavior
of consumers is an approximation, as some consumers may behave optimally, while a
subset systematically deviates from the rational cost-minimizing benchmark.

Finding and interpretation 1 & 2 – Welfare loss

The evident conclusion from findings 1 & 2 is that despite the discount system in
Västtrafik, some consumers still overspend, which results in a welfare loss. It is defined
as the cumulative amount overspent on single tickets for an arbitrary period, i.e., the
difference between the sum of single ticket expenses (less discounts) and the flat fee F
for that same period, given the sum of single ticket expenses > F. On the individual level,
this amount might seem negligible.
       Table 9: Welfare Loss from Non-Optimal Ticket Choice (Single-Ticket Users)

Notes: Avg. Loss for overspenders displays the average total overspending for a quarter – mean to the left and
standard deviation in parentheses. % overspending (users) shows the share of customers overspending for the whole
quarter. N represents the total number of unique individuals for that quarter. Total welfare loss is the total amount
overspent for the whole quarter. 2025 Q3 only includes values from July and August.
As shown in table 9, the average loss for an overspending individual (over a quarter) is
varying between a mere SEK 170 – 200. However, the aggregate quarterly welfare loss
of around SEK 1.75 million and an annual loss exceeding SEK 7 million (omitting the
incomplete quarter of Q3) demonstrate more substantial figures. From a holistic
perspective, this means forgone utility induced by inaccurate expectations. For Västtrafik,
this results in additional revenue, which poses the question of whether the public transport
system is set up in a way that unintentionally induces overspending behavior. They could
implement a more user-friendly ‘capping’ system where single tickets are free for a
consumer once their total monthly spending reaches the price of a flat-rate ticket. While
their discount feature may reduce overspending, such a mechanism could protect their
consumers from it completely.

36
  It should be noted that they most likely possess sufficient knowledge on prices to make a monetary
evaluation of which option cost minimizes under the rational benchmark.
37
  Tirole, “The Theory of Industrial Organization.”
                                  20
However, the discount could still protect consumers from potential overspending and also
be behind the relatively low welfare loss. Some customers who are eligible for the
discount would have, if the discount had not been implemented, reached a cumulative
single ticket cost greater than the flat fee ticket, thus they would have overspent. In table
10, we see what the annual amount consumers would have spent extra on single tickets if
there were no rebate function in place, i.e., consumers’ annual savings thanks to the
        38
rebate.

        Table 10: Consumer Spending and Welfare Loss if There Were No Rebate

Notes: Table 10 displays the total annual effective cost of the discount system on single tickets for Västtrafik.
Share_infra is a number between 0 and 1 that shows the potential share of discounts trip taken. This means that under
a 0.50 share_infra, only 50% of the trips (that reached discount eligibility) would have been pursued.

Assuming the quantity of single ticket purchases is completely unaffected by the
inexistence of a rebate, we can formulate the savings as follows:

                                  𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑢𝑎𝑙                  𝑛𝑜 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡            𝑟𝑒𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑒
             𝑆𝑎𝑣𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑠      = ∑(𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑡         − 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑡    ) (8)
                                                                                                𝑖,𝑡

                𝑛𝑜 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡                      𝑟𝑒𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑒                              39
 where 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑡           = PQit and 𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑡      = PQit - discount×PQit

We see that, holding that share_infra = 1, consumers would spend over SEK 20 million
more annually on single tickets (had there not been a rebate). Even if only 25% of the
trips were unaffected, it would still result in SEK 5 million more in annual spending, from
which we can draw an assumption that at least some consumers would be overspending
                             40
if it were not for the rebate.  On the flip side, the discount is a source of missed revenue
for Västtrafik and rather protects consumers from overspending on their services.

While the results in table 10 suggest that the rebate has a positive impact on consumer
welfare, this may not necessarily be the case. It could be that consumers aware of the
rebate are more tolerant of the risk of overspending when buying more single tickets, as
they feel a sense of protection. In other words, some consumers could be inclined to
purchase higher quantities of single tickets because they know they can earn a discount

38
  The existence of the discount could have prompted consumers to purchase more single tickets due to a
feeling of safety, which is why we include different percentages of unaffected trips.
39
  Annual savings are synonymous with the annual discount but reflect a different perspective of equation
(8).
40
  We recognize that consumers who are rational would, without a rebate system in place, adjust their
decisions in accordance with the changed decision rule for optimal ticket choice, following according to
the rational equation. Without the rebate, the quantity threshold becomes lower for choosing a single
ticket, and consequently, more consumers, if they are rational, would buy the flat fee ticket. Intuitively,
some people under a rebate system would fall short of the quantity threshold for a flat fee ticket to be
worth it, but conversely, without rebate be above the threshold and buy a flat fee ticket. Since the rebate
system increases that quantity threshold, it offers more flexibility for consumers, but without it, we at
least expect some consumers to miscalculate their future usage and then overspend.
                                  21
on them and be shielded from overspending. Some consumers of period tickets could also
be inclined to switch to purchasing single tickets, as the rebate may drop the price of their
expected consumption of single tickets below the flat-fee ticket price.

This comfort in purchasing higher quantities of single tickets may actually lead to a higher
total spending, despite the 20% discount, compared to if there were no rebate. However,
this assumes that these tickets were not planned before (for example, under a flat fee
ticket), hence it is difficult to conclude if this truly would be the case or not.

This would be the case if consumers end up purchasing tickets they otherwise would not
have purchased, had it not been for the rebate, at a total price higher than the savings from
             41
the discount.  In which case, the rebate, counterintuitively, reduces consumer welfare. A
similar idea is illustrated in Heimer, Iliewa, Imas & Weber (2021), where it is found that
overconfidence increases for consumers when they feel shielded from the full
consequences of their decisions, making individuals more prone to future repeated,
                      42
suboptimal choices.   Hence, the rebate could have the opposite effect of saving
consumers’ money, and actually encourage riskier behavior, leading to less cost-efficient
behavior.

    B.2. Predictions 3 & 4: Weather Impact on Ticket Purchases

In predictions 1 & 2, we observed contractual choices and overspending behavior by
consumers of Västtrafik’s services; in predictions 3 & 4, we analyze how weather impacts
these purchasing decisions. More specifically, prediction 3 looks at how same-day
weather conditions affect period ticket purchases, while prediction 4 analyzes a lagged
effect of weather on the purchases of both ticket types.

Prediction 3 (immediate weather impact): According to assumption 3 (no bias) of the
rational model, temporary weather conditions on the date of purchase have no impact on
the purchase quantity of 30-day flat fee tickets. Hence, we predict that contemporary
weather conditions should not systematically influence period ticket sales.

             log_tickets𝑖𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽1 × 𝑤𝑒𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2 × 𝑝𝑢𝑏𝑙𝑖𝑐_ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑡
                         +𝛽3 × 𝑠𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑙_ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑡 + 𝛾𝑚 + 𝜀𝑡 (9)

             log_tickets𝑖𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖 + 𝛽1 × 𝑤𝑒𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2 × 𝑝𝑢𝑏𝑙𝑖𝑐_ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑡
                      +𝛽3 × 𝑠𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑙_ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑡 + 𝛾𝑚 + 𝛿𝑤 + 𝜀𝑡 (10)

Log_ticketsit is the logarithmic version of period ticket sales for a transaction i on a given
day t which harmonizes the interpretation and variance of the variable. The variable
weatherit is a vector combined of precipitation in mm, sunshine in hours, cloudiness in
oktas (fraction covering the sky), and temperature anomaly in degrees Celsius capturing
contemporaneous weather conditions. Public_holidayt and school_holidayt are dummies
controlling for bank holidays and school holidays respectively. γm is monthly time fixed
                                              43
effects and δw weekly time fixed effects.

41   𝑟𝑒𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑒      𝑛𝑜 𝑟𝑒𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑒                          𝑟𝑒𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑒                              𝑛𝑜 𝑟𝑒𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑒
  𝑄𝑡      > 𝑄𝑡        in such a way that 𝑃𝑄𝑡      × (1 − 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡) > 𝑃𝑄𝑡
42
  Heimer et al., “Dynamic Inconsistency in Risky Choice.”
43
  Wooldridge, Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data.
                                  22
Prediction 4 (lagged weather impact on ticket purchases): The weather conditions
leading up to the date of purchase of rational consumers should have no impact on the
purchase quantity of 30-day flat fee tickets or single tickets.

 log (periodtickets)𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑤𝑒𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2𝑤𝑒𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡−1 +
                                                                                       (11)
 𝛽3𝑤𝑒𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡−2 + 𝛽4𝑝𝑢𝑏𝑙𝑖𝑐_ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑡 + 𝛽5𝑠𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑙_ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑡 + 𝛾𝑠 + 𝛿𝑤 + 𝜀𝑡

 log (𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑙𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡𝑠)𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑤𝑒𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2𝑤𝑒𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡−1 +
                                                                                       (12)
 𝛽3𝑤𝑒𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡−2 + 𝛽4𝑝𝑢𝑏𝑙𝑖𝑐_ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑡 + 𝛽5𝑠𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑙_ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑡 + 𝛾𝑠 + 𝛿𝑤+𝜀𝑡

Log(periodtickets)it and log(singletickets)it is the logarithmic version of period- and
single ticket sales for a transaction i on a given day t - which harmonizes the variance
and interpretation of the variable. The variable weatherit is a vector combined of
precipitation (mm), sunshine hours, cloud cover (oktas, fraction of the sky) capturing
contemporaneous conditions, and temperature anomaly in degrees Celsius. Weatherit-1
                                                                      44
and weatherit-2 are the same vectors but lagged t-1 and t-2 days.   Public_holidayt and
school_holidayt are dummies controlling for bank holidays and school holidays
                                                                                           45
respectively. γm is monthly time fixed effects and δw weekly time fixed effects.

Prediction 3 & 4 Reasoning – Under the rational benchmark, decision-making remains
unaffected by temporary weather conditions outside of their own expectations of future
               46
consumption.   However, for individuals suffering from projection bias, exogenous, and
especially salient conditions like days with high precipitation or abnormally warm
temperature may prompt inaccurate estimations of future travel frequency. In prediction
3, we examine whether this phenomenon is occurring contemporaneously. We then
extend the test for one- and two-day lagged effects to see whether consumers form
expectations and make decisions based on recent past weather on top of same-day
conditions.
Finding 3 (immediate weather impact on period ticket purchases): There is a 1.4%
decrease in period ticket purchases for each degree Celsius in temperature anomaly. The
insignificance of precipitation, sunshine hours, and cloud cover indicates that not all
aspects of weather necessarily systematically trigger a specific purchasing decision.

Table 11 reports the results of equations (9) and (10) OLS regression of temperature
anomaly, precipitation, sunshine hours, cloud cover, public holiday, and school holidays
                                                                                      47
on the daily period tickets bought, with weekly and monthly time-fixed effects.  From
the month- + weekday fixed-effects model we find that temperature anomaly is significant
with a coefficient of -0.014.

44
  Stock, Introduction to Econometrics.
45
  Wooldridge, Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data.
46
  Tirole, “The Theory of Industrial Organization.”
47
  Temperature Anomaly – This variable is an indicator of how the daily temperature deviates. For a specific date, it
is calculated by subtracting the 30-year average temperature, between 06:00 and 18:00, for that specific date, from
the date’s Temperature value.
                                  23
           Table 11: Prediction 3 – Weather effects on daily period ticket sales

Notes: The table shows values of coefficients and regular OLS standard errors (in parentheses) for the time-fixed effects
OLS (logarithmic) model showing the effect of weather on the sale of daily period tickets. Temperature anomaly is
measured in degrees Celsius, precipitation in mm of rain, sunshine in hour, and cloud cover as a fraction of coverage
on the sky (oktas). All variables are logarithmic to stabilize variance and for harmonized interpretation. Public- and
school holidays are dummies that equals 1 if there is a bank- respective school holiday and equals 0 if not. Time-fixed
                                                                                               48
effects are run with monthly & weekly dummies to control for temporal effects.

This shows that on a given date, there is a decrease of 1.4% in 30-day flat fee ticket sales,
ceteris paribus, for each degree Celsius the temperature is above that date’s 30-year
average. Precipitation, sunshine hours, and cloud cover are all insignificant and thus seem
not to influence period ticket sales.

Finding 3 Interpretation – The significant effect from temperature anomaly shows a
modest influence of weather on period ticket sales. Taken together with the insignificance
of the other variables, it suggests that the weather influence on period ticket sales is minor,
with only some indication of consumer reaction to salient weather conditions.

A likely reason for the temperature anomaly as the standalone effect may be its more
salient nature. This means that temperature deviations are more noticeable for individuals,
while the other three variables are perhaps more transient and short-lived. In this case, it
follows that they would not have a similar impact as a temperature anomaly. In practice,
positive temperature deviation affects feasibility of public transport substitutes, making
it appear as more pleasant to for example, walk or bike.
Alternatively, insignificance may suggest that while there may be a reaction to these
weather variables, it is not systematic across all individuals but rather heterogenous,
which could cancel out their effect on 30-day ticket purchases on an aggregate level.
Thus, while the temperature anomaly finding seems to provide support for prediction 3
and demonstrate a modest form of projection bias, the other insignificant variables
indicate that not all aspects of weather systematically trigger a specific decision with
regard to same-day 30-day ticket purchases.

48
  Wooldridge, Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data.
                                  24
Finding 3 – Robustness check

Table 12: Prediction 3 – Permutation Test Summary for Weather Effects on Period Tickets

Notes: The table displays the results of a permutations test on prediction 3’s OLS model for period tickets – iterated
500 times. Significant values indicate that the coefficients earlier in the prediction OLS are unlikely to be random.
“Estimate” shows the coefficients that were priorly yielded from the prediction OLS, “Model p-value” shows the p-
values from the OLS prediction ran on equation (9) and (10), and “Permutation p-value” shows the p-values from the
                49
permutations test.  Temperature (t) is measured in degrees Celsius, precipitation (t) in mm of rain, cloud cover as a
fraction of coverage on the sky (oktas), and sunshine in hours.

In table 12, the results of the permutations test confirm the earlier findings in table 11,
with all prior insignificant coefficients falling under the null in the permutations test, and
temperature anomaly maintains its predictive power in the weekday time-fixed effects
                                                                                 50
model, meaning that it is improbable that it arose by random chance.

Notes: Figure 2 displays the random distribution from the permutations test iterated 500 times for temperature
anomaly’s effect on period ticket sales under the weekly time-fixed effects model. The red line indicates where the
                                                                                                           51
coefficient from the original regression lies relative the randomly generated coefficients.

As seen in figure 2, it becomes clear that temperature anomaly belongs to the extreme
values of the permutations test as highlighted by the red line. If this was not the case, the
red line would be inside the bulk of the bell curve (and not in the tail). This graph can be

49
  Fisher, “The Design Of Experiments.”
50
  The permutations shed confidence on our results because it reflects the result of the coefficients had
there not been any effect of weather at all. Thus the distribution shows the empirical null.
51
  Young, “Channeling Fisher.”
                                  25
generated for each coefficient in a permutations test, but by virtue of vastness constraints,
we choose to only include this example. The other graphs would be analogous to this one.
Finding 4 (lagged weather impact on ticket purchases): There seems to be a positive
lagged effect of two days of 14.7% for precipitation on the purchases of period tickets –
temperature anomaly remains its significance from prediction 3. The rest of the
coefficients are insignificant, suggesting, as seen in finding 3, that not all aspects of
weather necessarily systematically trigger a specific purchasing decision.

Table 13 reports the results from the daily fixed-effects models from equations (11) and
(12) examines how short-term weather fluctuations influence ticket purchasing behavior.
The specification controls for unobserved, time-invariant differences between ticket
categories (30-day vs. single tickets) and includes seasonality adjustments, as well as
public holiday indicators. Standard errors are Newey-West with a 7-day lag to correct for
serial correlation. The lagged effects are daily, where t–1 indicates a difference of one
day.

          Table 13: Prediction 4 – Daily Lagged Weather Effects on Ticket Sales

Notes: The table shows values of coefficients and Newey-West HAC standard errors with a 7-day lag (in parentheses)
for the time-fixed effects OLS (logarithmic) model showing the lagged effect of weather on the sale of daily period- and
                52,53
single tickets.     Temperature anomaly is measured in degrees Celsius, precipitation in mm of rain, cloud cover as a
fraction of coverage on the sky (oktas), and sunshine in hours. Period- and single ticket variables are logarithmic to
stabilize variance and for harmonized interpretation. Public- and school holidays are dummies that equals 1 if there is
a bank- respective school holiday and equals 0 if not. Time-fixed effects are run with weekly dummies in order to
                         54                                                            55
control for temporal effects.   The sine and cosine variables control for seasonality in the data.   Cloud cover lagged
is omitted from the regression due to low added independent variation and the inflation of multicollinearity when

52
  Newey and West, “A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation
Consistent Covariance Matrix.”
53
  Stock, Introduction to Econometrics.
54
  Wooldridge, Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data.
55
  Harvey, Forecasting, Structural Time Series Models and the Kalman Filter.
                                  26
including them. This also makes sense because lagged cloud cover should be, at least partially, captured by sunshine
hours and precipitation.

We see that through both models, lagged precipitation is significant in predicting period
tickets. The positive coefficient with magnitude 0.147 suggests an increase in period
ticket purchases, all else equal, of 14.7% on a given day for each millimeter of
precipitation two days prior to the day of purchase.
All other predictors are insignificant across both models, implying that all short-term
weather conditions except precipitation and temperature deviation are unable to explain
variations in ticket sales. In other words, consumer expectations remain unaffected by
these contemporaneous conditions.
Findings 4 Interpretation – In finding 3, the significant same-day negative effect of
temperature anomaly on period ticket purchases (also found in prediction 4) suggests
consumers respond to an immediate weather shock. Similarly, the positive 2 day lagged
effect of precipitation on period ticket purchases suggests a reaction to weather shocks
leading up to the moment of purchase. This deviation from the rational benchmark implies
that consumer expectations are distorted by exogenous factors, though only limited to
certain specific weather conditions. It follows that these consumers (who shift
expectations based on short-term weather shocks) violate assumption 3 (no bias) of the
rational model, in the form of a weather-induced projection bias. Notably, both
precipitation and temperature represent high-salience weather conditions with
considerable physical impact. Thus, more salient weather conditions seem to more clearly
influence ticket sales.
Similar results were found in Busse et al. (2015), where temperature was shown to be of
                                                                       56
the highest behavioral salience among the other weather conditions.  Different from their
paper, however, which solely focuses on same-day effects, our insights from finding 4
suggest there may be lagged weather-induced projection bias originating from
precipitation. The positive coefficient of the lagged precipitation variable suggests
projection bias can originate in a more dynamic form, operating over multiple days.
For the weather conditions that do not systematically influence ticket sales, the results
align with our predictions and further resonate with the rational benchmark, since these
conditions do not seem to induce projection bias and consequently do not violate any of
the rational assumptions.
As single tickets only have insignificant predictors, it can be concluded that consumers
of these tickets do not systematically factor in weather fluctuations in their consumption.
This largely makes sense as they should not need to forecast future travel frequency when
confronted with a contractual decision. Therefore, temporary weather shocks don’t
disturb future expectations. It could also be because certain consumers purchase single
tickets so sporadically that they do not even consider any other options. For them,
purchasing a single ticket may not be synonymous with declining the option to purchase
a 30-day ticket, as they may not even consider it as another option because of their low
use of public transport. Hence, future conditions or expectations are completely irrelevant
to them, and the weather conditions cannot influence them. Conversely, period tickets
require clearer forecasting, in which weather conditions might distort the perceived need

56
  Busse et al., “The Psychological Effect of Weather on Car Purchases.”
                                  27
of future travel, and thus why we observe significant results for high-salience weather
variables.
It is important to note that these results relate to decisions whether to purchase specific
ticket types or not, not actual overspending. Hence, while the effect observed from the
significant weather variables suggests some bounded rationality, as consumers seem to
be influenced by external factors, this bounded rationality does not necessarily lead to a
lack of rationality in terms of overspending. An individual opting out of purchasing a
period ticket because of abnormally warm temperatures does not necessarily mean they
will purchase a number of single tickets high enough in the future that would lead to
overspending.
Finding 4 – Robustness check

     Table 14: Prediction 4 – Permutations Test Summary for Daily Lagged Weather

Notes: The table displays the results of a permutations test on prediction 4’s OLS model for period- & single tickets –
                 57
iterated 500 times.   Significant values indicate that the coefficients earlier in the prediction OLS are unlikely to be
        58
random.  “Estimate” shows the coefficients that were priorly yielded from the prediction OLS, “model p” shows the
p-values from the OLS prediction ran on equation (11) and (12), and “perm p” shows the p-values from the
permutations test. Temperature (t) is measured in degrees Celsius, precipitation (t) in mm of rain, cloud cover as a
fraction of coverage on the sky (oktas), and sunshine in hours. Cloud cover lagged is omitted from the regression due
to low added independent variation and the inflation of multicollinearity when including them. This also makes sense
because lagged cloud cover should be, at least partially captured by sunshine hours and precipitation.

From the permutation test in table 14, we can see that, firstly, the significance of our
variables lagged precipitation and temperature anomaly, regressed on period tickets, is
likely not to be a result of random chance (p-value = 0.048 and 0.000, respectively, from
the permutations test), thus upholding our earlier interpretations and demonstrating robust
results. Secondly, temperature (anomaly) (t-2) and sunshine (t) changed from
insignificant to relatively significant, meaning they are extreme values of the random null
distribution, and thus not just pure statistical noise. However, their sizes continue to be
minor and hence do not change our prior interpretations. Thirdly, the p-values from the
single tickets demonstrate that these coefficients all fall inside the null distribution,
implying that there is no systematic correlation between lagged weather and single ticket
sales.

    B.3. Prediction 5: Seasonality of Weather Impact

57
  Fisher, “The Design Of Experiments.”
58
  Young, “Channeling Fisher.”
                                  28
From findings 1 & 2, we found that a considerable number of individuals still overspend
on single tickets despite Västtrafik’s single ticket discount system. Later, in findings 3 &
4, we showed that some elements of weather correlate with period ticket purchases. The
question then becomes whether this effect is more pronounced during specific seasons.
For example, do sunshine hours have a larger effect on single ticket sales during
spring/early summer than their general yearly effect? With the rationale being that people
are more optimistic about future weather conditions during this time of year, that could
then prompt consumers to opt for alternative modes of transportation, such as biking.

Prediction 5 (season of weather effect): If prevalent, the effect of weather-induced
projection bias is more pronounced in the spring and early summer, when expectations
of future weather conditions are more optimistic, compared to the whole sample period.

 log(periodtickets)𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑤𝑒𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡+𝛽2𝑤𝑒𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡 × 𝑠𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑜𝑛𝑡 +
                                                                                      (13)
 𝛽3𝑝𝑢𝑏𝑙𝑖𝑐_ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑡 + 𝛽4𝑠𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑙_ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑡 + 𝛾𝑠 + 𝛿𝑤 + 𝜀𝑡

 log (singletickets)𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑤𝑒𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡+𝛽2𝑤𝑒𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡 × 𝑠𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑜𝑛𝑡 +
                                                                                      (14)
 𝛽3𝑝𝑢𝑏𝑙𝑖𝑐_ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑡 + 𝛽4𝑠𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑙_ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑡 + 𝛾𝑠 + 𝛿𝑤 + 𝜀𝑡

Log(periodtickets)it and log(singletickets)it is the logarithmic version of period- and
single ticket sales for a transaction i on a given day t - which harmonizes the
interpretation and variance of the variable. The variable weatherit is a vector combined
of precipitation in mm, sunshine in hours, cloudiness in oktas (fraction covering the sky),
and temperature anomaly in degrees Celsius. Weatherit×seasont is the moderating effect
of seasons on the same weather vector – the goal is to gauge if there is an amplified effect
                                                             59,60
of weather depending on the concurrent season.      Public_holidayt and school_holidayt
are dummies controlling for bank holidays and school holidays respectively. γm is monthly
                                                           61
time fixed effects and δw weekly time fixed effects.

Prediction 5 Reasoning – Prediction 5 suggests that the impact weather has on consumer
decision-making, observed in findings 3 & 4, may vary or be amplified depending on the
season when the purchase takes place. The rational model posits that there should not be
                                                                                   62
any seasonal effect on contract choices after factoring in future travel usage.   In other
words, a rational consumer would be unaffected by weather optimism/pessimism and
strictly base their contract choice on expected consumption Et[Qt+1]. If the traveler is
subject to projection bias, improved weather in the spring and early summer may build
on already optimistic thoughts an individual has about future improved weather, which
would prompt them to be more reluctant to purchase a period ticket and, in turn,
potentially lead to overspending on single tickets. We can therefore gauge with prediction
5 if consumers violate assumption 3 (no bias) by observing if the effect of weather on

59
  Aiken and West, Multiple Regression.
60
  Stock, Introduction to Econometrics.
61
  Wooldridge, Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data.
62
  Tirole, “The Theory of Industrial Organization.”
                                  29
consumer purchasing behavior is amplified during specific seasons – potentially also
indicating that the consumer is in breach of assumption 1 (perfect foresight).

Finding 5 (season of weather effect): In the spring/early summer, each hour of sunshine
increases purchases of single tickets by 12.4%, while overall one hour of sunshine
indicates a decrease of 6.8% in single ticket sales. Precipitation reduces single ticket
sales by 3.9% per mm of rain (though the effect is invalidated in the permutations test).
All weather variables are insignificant in predicting period ticket sales.

Table 15 illustrates how the impact of the weather on the sales of tickets differs overall
compared to in the spring/early summer.

    Table 15: Prediction 5 – Weather and Seasonal Moderation Effects on Ticket Sales

Notes: The table shows values of coefficients and Newey-West HAC standard errors with 7-day lags (in parentheses)
for a time-fixed effects OLS (logarithmic) model showing the moderated effect of seasons on weather on the sale of
                                                   63
daily period- and single tickets (including lagged effect).   These are employed to account for serial correlation in the
data. Temperature anomaly is measured in degrees Celsius, precipitation in mm of rain, cloud cover as a fraction of
coverage on the sky (oktas) and sunshine in hours. Spring (and summer) dummies capture the period of March to July.
Spring*weather measures the interaction term of the season on the weather variables. The dependent variable is
logarithmic to stabilize variance and for harmonized interpretation. Public- and school holidays are dummies that
equal 1 if there is a bank- respective school holiday and 0 if not. Time-fixed effects are run with weekly dummies in
order to control for temporal effects. The sine and cosine variables control for seasonality.

We find that sunshine hours and seasonally moderated sunshine hours correlates with
singe ticket sales – having coefficients of -0.068 and 0.124, respectively. This means that
a one-hour increase in sunshine hours (sunshine hours during early spring/summer),
ceteris paribus, decreases (increases) single ticket sales with 6.8% (12.4%). Moreover,

63
  Newey and West, “A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation
Consistent Covariance Matrix.”
                                  30
precipitation is significant for single tickets with a coefficient of -0.039 – meaning a 1
mm increase in rain, all else equal, decreases single ticket sales by 3.9%. The other
predictors are insignificant (or only weakly significant), implying no strong correlation
between these weather conditions and ticket sales during early spring/summer. For period
tickets, the variables are insignificant and suggest no behavioral significance in weather
influence on period ticket sales.

Finding 5 Interpretation – In the single ticket regression, we see that sunshine- and
seasonally moderated sunshine hours predicted single ticket sales, though with opposite
signs pointing towards a season-dependent behavioral mechanism. Through the full year,
sunshine hours decrease single ticket sales. This reflects increased feasibility for public
transport substitutes such as biking or walking, thus reduced ticket demand, which then
aligns with the rational model. However, in spring and early summer, sunshine hours
correlate with more single tickets being purchased. This does not necessarily mean that
people violate the rational model induced by projection bias, instead it can reflect
increased travel overall for leisurely activities. Hence, the effect of sunshine shows
consistency with the rational model and is not proof of projection bias. By virtue of data
limitation, we cannot isolate the data to only commuting trips, meaning that even if the
effect were to reflect weather-driven projection bias, other travelers appreciating the
sunny weather would offset and distort this effect by buying single tickets. Lastly, period
ticket sales remain unaffected by sunshine hours in the model. Intuitively, this makes
sense as a short-term increase in sunshine hours should not have a huge impact on future
travel needs. In other words, this is in line with the rational model.

For precipitation, the same-day effect is negatively correlated with the sale of single
tickets. This most likely reflects decreased demand for discretionary trips, i.e. leisure
travel or miscellaneous consumption done with a degree of spontaneity. Under the
rational model, this makes sense since a rational consumer would likely opt-out from
spontaneous and optional trips when the weather makes them less feasible. Importantly,
precipitation has high salience and thus is expected to at least decently alter general
mobility – ultimately not reflecting distortion of expectations but shift in demand. While
it seems counterintuitive from the perspective of commotional trips, after all precipitation
should increase single tickets because of increased substitution of biking/walking. These
trips appear to be outweighed by the decreased discretionary trips, creating a net negative
effect, and explaining the negative sign of precipitation. Furthermore seasonally
moderated precipitation is insignificant in predicting single ticket sales. Conclusively,
precipitation is not more pronounced during spring and early summer.

Notably, the insignificant same-day coefficient for temperature anomaly in finding 5
appears to contradict the significant coefficient for period tickets in finding 3-4.
Econometrically, this can be explained by the interaction model including more and
multicollinear variables where temperature, sunshine and season-dependent dummies
impede model precision – thus low independent variation for the same-day effect remains
to be attributed. Simply put, there is a reallocation of explanatory power across the same-
day and the moderated variables instead of it being concentrated in just one.

Regarding the other predictors (for both models), none has any meaningful significant
correlation with ticket sales when seasonally moderated. Therefore, cloud cover and

                                  31
temperature deviation do not seem to be distorting future expectations after seasonal
amplification – aligning with the rational model.

Overall, while there seems to be a differing effect the weather has on the sale of both
single- and period tickets depending on the season at hand, there is no coherent evidence
pointing to a reliance on single tickets being stronger due to improved weather changes
in the spring and early summer. It instead points toward that people either rationally
substitute public transport for other transportation modes, or that they increase
consumption because of increased leisure activity. Ultimately, there is no consistent
evidence of projection bias.

Finding 5 – Robustness check

      Table 16: Prediction 5 – Permutation Test Summary for Weather and Seasonal
                                       Interactions

Notes: The table displays the results of a permutations test on prediction 5’s OLS model for period- & single tickets –
                 64
iterated 500 times.  Significant values indicate that the coefficients earlier in the prediction OLS are unlikely to be
        65
random.  “Estimate” shows the coefficients that were priorly yielded from the prediction OLS, “model p” shows the
p-values from the OLS prediction ran on equation (13) and (14), and “perm p” shows the p-values from the
permutations test.

Evaluating the validity of the regression results in prediction 5 using permutations test,
we find that all our significant regressors, but precipitation, are extreme values under the
distribution of the permutation test. It can therefore be concluded that those results are
not occurring because of mere chance. Precipitation, however, is insignificant under the
permutations test, implying that the OLS effect was driven by mere chance (since
permutations test p-values trumps the original model p-values) and not behavioral
correlation. Therefore, the effect of precipitation should be invalidated. Moreover, we see
that temperature (t) and sun during spring/early summer turn significant under the
permutations test, implying that these coefficients might not be a result of noise and
actually could be useful predictors.

    B.4. Prediction 6: Weather Impact on Overspending

In findings 1 & 2, we established the existence of systematic overspending among
consumers. In findings 3 & 4, we observed how weather impacts contractual choices,
which we then analyzed in the spring/early summer compared to the complete sample
period in finding 5. It follows that weather conditions affecting contractual choices also
could have an effect on overspending, which is what we investigate in prediction 6.

64
  Fisher, “The Design Of Experiments.”
65
  Young, “Channeling Fisher.”
                                  32
Prediction 6 (weather impact on overspending): If specific weather conditions through
projection bias affect consumers’ contractual choices, and if this causes them to misjudge
future consumption, weather may also increase the probability of overspending among
consumers who fail to switch optimally between single and 30-day tickets.
is_overspending𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑤𝑒𝑎𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2𝑝𝑢𝑏𝑙𝑖𝑐_ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑡 +
𝛽3𝑠𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑙_ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑦 + 𝛿𝑤 + 𝜀𝑡                                                        (15)

Is_overspendingit is a dichotomous variable deeming if a customer i overspent on single
tickets in a specific month t. The variable weatherit is a vector combined of precipitation
in mm, sunshine in hours, cloudiness in oktas (fraction covering the sky), and temperature
anomaly in degrees Celsius. Weatherit-1 and weatherit-2 are the same vectors but lagged
t-1 and t-2 days. Public_holidayt and school_holidayt are dummies controlling for bank
holidays and school holidays respectively. δw is the individual fixed effects to isolate the
                                     66
within variation of a customer.

Prediction 6 Reasoning – Under the rational benchmark, consumers disregard temporary
external factors when they form expectations about future travel needs, implying that,
should there be overspending, it should not be affected by the weather. However, as we
observe in findings 3 & 4, some weather conditions systematically affect consumers’
contractual choices. Since these selections determine spending on single tickets, certain
weather conditions could affect overspending – especially high-salience variables like
precipitation potentially could increase the probability of overspending.
Finding 6 (weather impact on overspending): Precipitation positively affects the
probability of overspending by 4.0% per millimeter. Temperature anomaly, cloud cover,
and sunshine hours have negligible effects.
Table 17 reports the results of the regression of temperature anomaly, precipitation,
sunshine hours, cloud cover, public holidays, school holidays, and seasonality on
overspending according to equation (15). In this case, overspending is recorded as a
dummy variable with a value of 1 if the individual is overspending, and 0 if they are not.
Hence, the impact of the independent variables is to be interpreted as affecting the
likelihood of overspending for an individual i.

66
  Wooldridge, Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data.
                                  33
   Table 17: Prediction 6 – Individual-level Fixed-Effects Regression of Overspending on
                                 Weather

Notes: The table shows values of coefficients and robust HC1 standard errors (in parentheses) clustered at the
individual level using customer_id for individual-level fixed effects OLS (logarithmic) model showing the effect of
weather on the probability of overspending (dependent dichotomous variable: is_overspending = 1 if the person
                         67, 68
overspends that month).     Temperature anomaly is measured in degrees Celsius, precipitation in mm of rain, cloud
cover as a fraction of coverage on the sky (oktas), and sunshine in hours. Public- and school holidays are dummies
that equals 1 if there is a bank- respective school holiday and equals 0 if not. Individual-fixed effects are run to control
                                                                                             69
isolate within variation for individuals. The sine and cosine variables control for seasonality in the data.  The negative
adjusted R^2 doesn’t necessarily invalidate the results of the within variation of a dependent binary variable like
“is_overspending”. By definition, the formula of adjusted R^2 penalizes our inclusion of multiple regressors – which
at the same time also have a minor impact on the explanation of within variation for individuals. The important
takeaway is the interpretation and significance of the coefficients in this case.

We see that the coefficients for all weather variables are statistically significant (but
economically irrelevant), suggesting that an individual’s overspending behavior on single
tickets is related to all four weather conditions we investigate. Precipitation has a
coefficient of 0.040, suggesting a 4.0% increase in the probability of overspending, all
else equal, per millimeter of rain. Across temperature anomaly, sunshine hours, and cloud
cover, we find significance but a mix of generally small effects. While they are all
associated with a lower probability of overspending, their small coefficients of -0.001, -
0.000, and -0.002, respectively, suggest their effects are negligible, indicating no
systematic effect of these three weather conditions on the probability of overspending.
Finding 6 Interpretation – The strongest impact of weather on the probability of
overspending being from precipitation adds insight to finding 4, where we observed
lagged precipitation increasing perceived future consumption by virtue of projection bias,
but the adaptation other tickets differed between consumers. Some travelers quickly
adapted to increased travel frequency (indicated by rain), while others delayed this and
kept consuming single tickets (despite higher expected travel needs), resulting in

67
  Arellano, “PRACTITIONERS’ CORNER.”
68
  Wooldridge, Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data.
69
  Harvey, Forecasting, Structural Time Series Models and the Kalman Filter.
                                  34
overspending. Therefore, it can be concluded that projection bias induced by precipitation
may lead to overspending for individuals who fail to adjust their expectations about future
travel frequency in time or do so inconsistently. Thus, this suggests bounded rationality
under the rational benchmark. Moreover this resonates with prior findings where high-
salience variables like precipitation exhibited the most prominent effect on expectations.
Although the other three weather variables are statistically significant, they yield
coefficients of small magnitudes, indicating these weather factors have virtually no
systematic effect on the probability of overspending. Compared to the rational
benchmark, these results suggest that most weather conditions have little or no effect on
the financial outcomes of consumer choices. Suggesting an alignment with the rational
benchmark for all cases but precipitation. Its observed effect indicates a deviation from
the model, implying that certain weather conditions may influence consumers’
contractual choices as far as leading to overspending on single tickets and contributing to
the welfare loss. Overall, however, the findings suggest that weather is not a substantial
predictor of overspending.
Contrasting this to the findings in Busse et al. (2015) reveals a critical difference in how
                                                70
their models are set up differently to ours.   Purchasing tickets or a car is an active
decision made by an individual at a specific moment, while overspending is an
accumulation of decisions aggregated over a month. In the case that contractual choices
are affected by weather, they would be diluted when aggregated, meaning these
deviations are negligible from an economic perspective. Our model then detects
significant but negligible correlations because of the temporal aggregation. Thus, while
the model in Busse et al. (2015) also has a low explanatory power, their findings reflect
legitimate behavioral differences, since they are not aggregated in any way.

Finding 6 – Robustness check

The extremely small standard errors and very low explanatory power of the model, with
     2
an R of 0.003, indicate that the large sample size makes the model detect tiny behavioral
differences and finds significant results for all variables. This adds to the conclusion
established above that weather is not a substantial predictor of overspending (despite
significant coefficients). However, due to how the model is set up – using a plm function
in R – running a permutation test, in line with prediction 3-5, to investigate the robustness
                                                                              71
of the model and the significance of the variables is not plausible.
    III. Conclusion
How does the weather affect consumer decision-making? In this thesis, we investigate
how consumers of public transport make contractual choices when faced with a menu of
ticket choices and whether these choices are systematically affected by weather
conditions. Our investigation is based on the following two questions:

70
  Busse et al., “The Psychological Effect of Weather on Car Purchases.”
71
  The individual fixed effects model underlying structure could not be feasible kept when running the
permutations test causing either the model to omit the fixed effects or make the model unidentifiable.
                                  35
    1. Do consumers of public transport overspend on single tickets, i.e., spend more on
        them than the price of a period ticket, due to an inaccurate expectation of future
      consumption?
    2. Do weather conditions affect the demand for specific public transport ticket types,
       and do they affect any potential overspending on single tickets?
By answering these questions, we review the assumption of consumer rationality, made
in neoclassical behavioral finance literature, by testing consumer rationality and weather
effects in a new setting where we discover how their behavior deviates from and aligns
                                          72
with the rational model benchmark.
We use a panel dataset provided by Västtrafik, covering anonymous consumer purchases
made in their “To Go” app – allowing us to observe purchasing behavior on an individual
level over a period of around one year and nine months. This dataset alone allows us to
observe the quantity of purchases for specific ticket types and identify overspending,
which we define as any money spent on single tickets in a given period above the price
of a flat-fee ticket for the same period.
Combining this with another panel dataset from the Swedish Hydrological and
Meteorological Institute (SMHI), covering the weather conditions surrounding
Gothenburg. We run logarithmic OLS- and logistic regressions with individual fixed
effects to investigate whether certain weather conditions have an effect on consumers’
future expectations and contractual choices, as well as any potential overspending.
Essentially, investigating a form of weather-induced projection bias. We also perform
robustness tests for each of our findings in the form of permutation tests. While the data
we use provides essential insights, access to more individual-specific variables, such as
access to alternative modes of transport or household income, would have allowed us to
observe weather effects in an isolated experiment to produce more accurate findings.
Nevertheless, we find that a subset of consumers of Västtrafik’s services, around 1.8%–
2.7% of Adults and around 0.5% of Youths, systematically overspend on single tickets
over a 30-day period, compared to the price of a flat-rate ticket. Such behavior indicates
a failure to cost-minimize, consistent with deviations related to violations of the rational
model’s assumptions of perfect foresight and no bias. It follows as a plausible explanation
for overspending that these consumers anchor too heavily in their current travel behavior
and assume it will continue further into the future than it will in reality, leading to an
underestimation of travel frequency in the future. Essentially, a form of bounded
rationality caused by distorted expectations from projection bias. A contractual choice
based on this underestimation risks leading to overspending if the underestimation
prompts a consumer to opt for single tickets instead of a 30-day ticket, even though the
flat-fee ticket would have made them better off, because of their high travel frequency.
We also find that certain weather conditions affect contractual choices in ways consistent
with projection bias, specifically, abnormally high temperatures seem to have a negative
effect on purchases of 30-day tickets, while precipitation two days prior to the purchase
seems to raise them. This suggests consumers’ expectations of future consumption and
the decision-making that goes with it are systematically affected by weather, indicating a
form of weather-induced projection bias. However, these are the only same-day and

72
  Tirole, “The Theory of Industrial Organization.”
                                  36
lagged effects we observe, and other than these specific cases, we find that most weather
variables have no systematic effect on consumer decision-making. The duality of these
results indicates two key findings: Firstly, consumers do not react uniformly to all weather
variables; rather it seems that weather has no effect in most cases. Secondly, in the cases
where there is an observed effect, the effect originates from either of the two most salient
variables: temperature anomaly and precipitation. Suggesting, the weather conditions
have to be sufficiently noticeable for consumers’ expectations and decision-making to be
systematically affected. This applies at least for the overall sample period, as weather
conditions during specific seasons do not seem to require the same salience to have an
effect on consumers. In the spring/early summer, sunshine hours seem to positively affect
purchases of single and 30-day tickets, while this effect is not observed over the whole
investigated period.
As for overspending, the positive effect of precipitation – raising the likelihood of
overspending by 4.0% – suggests that weather not only has effects on purchases of tickets,
but also on consumers’ potential overspending. Indicating that weather-induced
projection bias not only affects which contracts consumers choose to purchase, it can also
lead to an unnecessary financial cost.
Our findings on inaccurate expectations and failure to minimize costs by consumers
reinforce the insights found in DellaVigna & Malmendier (2006), as we extend their
                                                                                     73
results from the health club industry to the public transport industry.  As we observe
similar expectation errors in a different setting, our results indicate that such biases persist
across different environments and for different contracts. We take this analysis further as
we add to the findings in Busse et al. (2015) by observing similar weather-induced
                                                                                                       74
projection bias affecting consumer purchasing decisions in our context as well.
Furthermore, we take their findings an extra step by not only investigating general
overspending and weather effects on purchasing decisions but also presenting how
weather-induced projection bias also has an effect on the overspending we observe. Our
findings suggest the existence of bounded rationality, lack of perfect foresight, bias, and
deviation from the rational benchmark, indicating that the general assumption of
consumer rationality made in neoclassical literature is unlikely to hold universally.
The consumer overspending leads to an annual welfare loss exceeding SEK 7 million,
which is synonymous with more revenue for Västtrafik, raising a question of fairness in
their pricing design. The lack of a ‘capping’ mechanism on the purchase of single tickets,
where single tickets are free for a consumer once their total monthly spending reaches the
price of a flat-rate ticket, suggests Västtrafik allows for consumer overspending. While
their discount feature may reduce it, such a mechanism could protect their consumers
from it completely. Such an intervention can also be made on a societal level by
policymakers or transportation ministers – elaborating on interventions like this act as a
natural extension for future research. Our findings also have implications for consumers
and their purchasing behavior. If consumers become more aware of potential biases they
experience during their decision-making, it may improve their rationality and shorten
learning lags in their overspending.

73
  DellaVigna and Malmendier, “Paying Not to Go to the Gym.”
74
  Busse et al., “The Psychological Effect of Weather on Car Purchases.”
                                  37
Notably, however, our experiments have some limitations that an ideal experiment would
cover. Firstly, while our data covers the basic variables of individual purchases, other
individual-specific such as home address, access to alternative modes of transport, or
location and exact time of purchase, would have allowed us to control individual-specific
variations more accurately, isolate our tests for the effects we are looking for, and with
more detailed weather data, connect purchases to the weather a specific consumer
experienced at a specific time and place. Secondly, our sample period is rather short,
which limits our analysis of seasonal effects and changes in behavior over longer periods
of time, such as some consumers getting used to biking in the rain. Access to more
detailed data covering a period of multiple years would be ideal to use for future research
on the topic.
Taken together, we find that while many consumers behave in line with the rational
benchmark, a meaningful subset systematically overspends and suffers from weather-
induced projection-bias in their contract choices. This thesis demonstrates that bounded
rationality also plays a role in a routine and high frequency setting, and extends the current
behavioral finance literature by challenging the neoclassical assumption of rational
consumer behavior and highlighting the implications of bounded rationality in economic
decisions in a new setting.

                                  38
                                   References
Aiken, Leona S., and Stephen G. West. Multiple Regression: Testing and Interpreting
       Interactions. Multiple Regression: Testing and Interpreting Interactions. Sage
        Publications, Inc, 1991.

Arellano, M. “PRACTITIONERS’ CORNER: Computing Robust Standard Errors for
       Within-Groups Estimators.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 49, no.
       4 (1987): 431–34. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0084.1987.mp49004006.x.

Bertrand, Marianne, Dean Karlan, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, and Jonathan
       Zinman. “What’s Advertising Content Worth? Evidence from a Consumer
       Credit Marketing Field Experiment*.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125,
       no. 1 (2010): 263–306. https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.2010.125.1.263.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. “Salience and Asset Prices.”
       American Economic Review 103, no. 3 (2013): 623–28.
        https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.103.3.623.

Busse, Meghan R., Devin G. Pope, Jaren C. Pope, and Jorge Silva-Risso. “The
       Psychological Effect of Weather on Car Purchases.” The Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 130, no. 1 (2015): 371–414. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qju033.

Busse, Meghan, Jorge Silva-Risso, and Florian Zettelmeyer. “$1,000 Cash Back: The
       Pass-Through of Auto Manufacturer Promotions.” American Economic Review
       96, no. 4 (2006): 1253–70. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.96.4.1253.

Camerer, Colin, Samuel Issacharoff, George Loewenstein, Ted O’Donoghue, and
       Matthew Rabin. “Regulation for Conservatives: Behavioral Economics and the
       Case for ‘Asymmetric Paternalism.’” University of Pennsylvania Law Review
       151, no. 3 (2003): 1211–54. https://doi.org/10.2307/3312889.

Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. “Salience and Taxation: Theory and
       Evidence.” American Economic Review 99, no. 4 (2009): 1145–77.
        https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.99.4.1145.

DellaVigna, Stefano, and Ulrike Malmendier. “Paying Not to Go to the Gym.”
       American Economic Review 96, no. 3 (2006): 694–719.
        https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.96.3.694.

Fisher, Ronald A. “The Design Of Experiments.” 1935.
       https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.502684/page/n3/mode/2up.

Grubb, Michael D., and Matthew Osborne. “Cellular Service Demand: Biased Beliefs,
       Learning, and Bill Shock.” American Economic Review 105, no. 1 (2015): 234–
       71. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20120283.

Harvey, Andrew C. Forecasting, Structural Time Series Models and the Kalman Filter.
       Cambridge University Press, 1990.
       https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107049994.

Heimer, Rawley, Zwetelina Iliewa, Alex Imas, and Martin Weber. “Dynamic
       Inconsistency in Risky Choice: Evidence from the Lab and Field.” SSRN
       Scholarly Paper No. 3600583. Social Science Research Network, February 22,
       2021. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3600583.

                                  39
Lucas, Robert E. “Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy.” Econometrica 46, no. 6
       (1978): 1429–45. https://doi.org/10.2307/1913837.

Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West. “A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite,
       Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix.”
       Econometrica 55, no. 3 (1987): 703–8. https://doi.org/10.2307/1913610.

Sharpe, William F. “Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under
       Conditions of Risk.” The Journal of Finance 19, no. 3 (1964): 425–42.
       https://doi.org/10.2307/2977928.

“Skolkort i grundskolan.” Accessed October 26, 2025.
        https://goteborg.se/wps/portal?uri=gbglnk%3agbg.page.3df4c9fa-c1a9-4b68-
       8966-6c954bece3ca.

SMHI. “Ladda ner väderobservationer.” Text. Accessed October 25, 2025.
        https://www.smhi.se/data/hitta-data-for-en-plats/ladda-ner-vaderobservationer.

Statistikmyndigheten SCB. “Folkmängd och befolkningsförändringar - Kvartal 2,
        2025.” Accessed September 28, 2025. https://www.scb.se/hitta-statistik/statistik-
        efter-amne/befolkning-och-levnadsforhallanden/befolkningens-sammansattning-
        och-utveckling/befolkningsstatistik/pong/tabell-och-diagram/folkmangd-och-
       befolkningsforandringar---manad-kvartal-och-halvar/folkmangd-och-
        befolkningsforandringar---kvartal-2-2025/.

Stock, James H. Introduction to Econometrics. Fourth edition, Global edition. With
       Mark W. Watson. The Pearson Series in Economics. Pearson, 2020.

Tirole, Jean. The theory of industrial organization. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1988.
Västra Götalandsregionen. “Så styrs kollektivtrafiken.” November 23, 2015.
        https://www.vgregion.se/kollektivtrafik/sa-styrs-kollektivtrafiken/.

“Västtrafik AB.” Accessed October 12, 2025. https://www.vasttrafik.se/om-
        vasttrafik/vasttrafik-ab/.

Västtrafik. (2025). To Go app dataset (authors’ own extraction, September 2025).
       Unpublished dataset.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. 2010.

Young, Alwyn. “Channeling Fisher: Randomization Tests and the Statistical
       Insignificance of Seemingly Significant Experimental Results*.” The Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 134, no. 2 (2019): 557–98.
        https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjy029.

“Zoner - Västra Götaland.” Accessed November 18, 2025.
        https://www.vasttrafik.se/reseplanering/abc/.

                                  40