The Last Chapter of the Local
Bank Office?

Exploring Swedish Bank Branch Closings and their Effects on
the Economy

MOA OLDEBERG

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2025
The Last Chapter of the Local Bank Office?: Exploring Swedish Bank Branch
Closings and their Effects on the Economy

Abstract:

   Bank branches have closed across Sweden and other countries. Existing literature
   describes this phenomenon from different angles. Niklas Amberg & Bo Becker (2025)
   focus on Swedish bank branch closings, and how local businesses are affected,
   “Banking Without Branches”, with data on a municipality level. My thesis explores if
   the local economic effects they find influence regional economic growth in Sweden.
   The main question in this thesis is therefore: “Do bank branch closings affect
   regional economic growth?”. I apply a local projections model where the main
   explanatory variable is branch change (change in number of local bank offices) year t
   in region r, and the dependent variable is percentage change in GRP growth (gross
   regional product growth), the same year and region. I then construct a 2SLS as
   identification strategy. The first equation estimates bank branch change in region r
   year t, with a shift-share instrument. The second equation is similar to the local
   projections model, but the main explanatory variable branch change is endogenous
   (generated in the first stage equation). Since sectors might be adversely affected by
   branch change, I repeat the 2SLS on four broad sectors, to answer my second question:
   “Are sectors affected differently by the branch closings?”. To make the analysis
   more fine grained I also apply the model for 58 more specific industries, with
   percentage change in industry revenue growth as the dependent variable in the second
   stage, to answer “Are industries differently affected by branch closings?”. For
   robustness I apply the local projections model on 4 selected industries, again with
   percentage change in revenue growth as the dependent variable. According to the local
   projections model, GRP growth increases if a bank branch closed two years ago, but
   effects of a closing current year or last year are unsignificant. The 2SLS doesn’t show
   effects of branch change on total GRP growth. The service industry and goods industry
   are both negatively affected by bank branch closings, according to the sector 2SLS.
   Out of the 58 regressions on the specific industries, 4 regressions each have at least
   one significant effect of branch change this year, last year or two years ago, indicating
   possible heterogenous effects on an industry level. If a bank closed two years ago, the
   food, drink and tobacco industry’s revenue growth is estimated to increase. If a bank
   closed a year ago, revenue growth is estimated to decrease in the water, water
   treatment, disposals, recycling and sanitation industry and for post offices. Revenue
   growth from other companies in law, business, science and tech is estimated to
   increase if a bank closed last year. The local projections model estimation on each of
   the specific industries shows similar results, except there’s no significant estimated
   effect on the food, drink and tobacco industry or other companies in law, business,
   science and tech. I also show examples of welfare effects beyond my data.

                                   1
Keywords:

   Bank branches, soft information, narrow-scope trust

Authors:

   Moa Oldeberg (25609)

Tutor:

   Pehr Wissén, Professor Emeritus of Practice, Swedish House of Finance

Examiner:

   Ramin P Baghai, Researcher, Swedish House of Finance, Professor, Stockholm School
   of Economics

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business & Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Moa Oldeberg, 2025

1.1. Acknowledgements

I greatly thank my supervisor Pehr, for interesting, fun and inspiring discussions and
advice! Thanks to my previous finance, economics and business teachers, who have given
me inspiration for this thesis writing! Especially thanks to my family and friends, for all
your support throughout this journey!

1.2. Introduction

Through the 2000’s, several countries have seen trends of bank branch (local bank office)
closings. The euro area saw a peak in bank branch numbers year 2008, with
approximately 186 000 offices, reports Daniel Legran, Olli Tuomikoski and Johanna
Spitz (2024), “The changing landscape of bank offices in the euro area”. This number
declined to around 106 000, in the year 2023. Sweden has also seen a decreasing trend in
number of bank branches: There were almost 1900 banks year 2001, and approximately
750, year 2023 (Niklas Amberg & Bo Becker, 2025, “Banking Without Branches”). Four
major bank corporations “storbanker” dominate the Swedish bank market –
Handelsbanken, Nordea, SEB and Swedbank. All of them have closed bank offices
broadly. Also, other players on the Swedish bank market – such as savings banks

                                   2
“sparbanker”, have significantly closed local bank offices. All Swedish regions have seen
large decreases in number of bank branches, between 2011 and 2022 (Figure 1). This
thesis investigates if the decreased access of a region’s bank offices influences the
region’s economic growth (GRP growth).

Figure 1

                                   3
Literature mentions several reasons for why countries have seen a pattern of bank
branches disappearing, such as reduced demand to visit a physical bank office, the
growing use of online banking, and banks wanting to cut costs. New technology is
described as one reason for branch closures. Because retail banking customers start using
online banking, and the demand for physical meetings therefore decreases. In Europe, 24
percent of households used online banking services in 2007, compared to 64 percent 2023,
tells Amberg and Becker (2025).

However, technology introductions might help branches, as technologies can enhance the
branch activities. For example, in an Italian setting, Angelo D’Andrea, Marco Pelosi and
Enrico Sette shows fast internet can improve loan monitoring and consequently increase
loan supply and lower interest rates (2025), “When broadband comes to banks: credit
supply, market structure and information acquisition”. In other words, a local bank office
could use online banking as a complement. So, technology introductions don’t have to
mean an office should close. Though in the Swedish setting online banking appears as a
substitute, replacing some services that before were conducted by the local branch.
Therefore, online banking increase is one way of understanding the closures. Further, if
a bank company wants to go more digital, they need to invest in establishing and
maintaining the technology required. So, there’s less resources left for operating a local
bank office. In a previous school project, my working group interviewed someone
working with artificial intelligence at a bank office, showing some employees focus on
technology, and have less time/ no time for customer contact.

So, bank branch closings are connected to different areas, for example technology,
costumer research and organization. As I describe in more detail in Related Literature and
Discussion, Amberg and Becker (2025) shows bank branch closings can reduce lending
to local firms, and consequently negatively affect the local economy. I’m thinking the
effects might transfer to a regional level. Therefore, the main question this thesis aims to
answer is: “Do bank branch closings affect regional economic growth?”. The branch
closing timings differ between regions (or counties) in Sweden. Because GRP growth
also varies, I’m able to analyze if the variation in GRP growth can be explained by the
change in number of a region’s bank branches (branch change), with the help of theory
by Amberg and Becker (2025). I firstly estimate a local projections model, specified in
Model specification. The estimation of branch change (t-2) indicates a branch closing two
years ago had a slightly positive effect, in percentage, on GRP growth. However, because
of the identification problem described in Identification problem, I also apply an
identification strategy, a 2SLS model. The 2SLS model estimation doesn’t prove an effect
of branch closings on the whole regional GRP growth.

I think sectors are differently affected, because different types of companies or
organizations have different relationships or ties with banks, and therefore different needs
for a local bank office (bank branch). So, a second question of the thesis is: “Are sectors

                                   4
affected differently by the branch closings?”. I apply the 2SLS on four broad sectors.
The estimation says a branch closing reduces GRP growth for goods producers and
service companies.

Continuing the above argument that the tie to a bank can be explained by the type of
organization, a third question I aim to answer is: “Are industries differently affected by
branch closings?”. Estimations of the 2SLS model show a branch closing positively
affects the food, drink and tobacco industry and other companies in law, business, science
and tech. The water treatment, disposals, recycling and sanitation industry and post
offices are instead negatively affected. For robustness I apply the local projections model
on these four industries. The result says the food, drink and tobacco industry and other
companies in law, business, science and tech are not affected by any branch closing, while
the water treatment, disposals, recycling and sanitation industry and post offices are
negatively affected.

I also create a reverse causality check model, where Δlog(GRP) explains branch change.
The estimation result is that Δlog(GRP) doesn’t explain GRP growth – So according to
these results there’s not more or less closings in a region where GRP growth increases –
No reverse causality.

1.3. Related Literature

1.3.1. Starting point

The main inspiration for this thesis is the working paper “Banking Without Branches” by
Niklas Amberg & Bo Becker (2025). They describe the trend of Swedish bank branch
closings with Swedish bank branch data 2001-2023. The paper also investigates economic
effects. They find a decline in lending to local firms, as an effect of the branch closures,
negatively impacting the real economic activity of the firms. They explain the decline in
lending with theory of soft information: When there’s no local bank office available, and
a business must apply for a loan from the bank online, the bank cannot get soft
information about the loan applicant. An example of soft information creation is that a
bank officer meets a loan applicant, and the bank officer forms an opinion of the
trustworthiness of the applicant, or more specifically finance related: judges if they think
the applicant can pay back the loan. Following this theory, when the distance between the
loan applicants and loan decision makers increases, soft information decreases, possibly
reducing the chance to receive a loan. Reading Amber and Becker (2025), I wonder if the
local effects (on a municipality level), affect regional economic growth. Further, they do
show effects differ between firm sizes and ages (new and small firms with little hard

                                   5
information access less loans). I’m thinking that different sectors and industries don’t
have the same access either, which I also test below.

1.3.2. Banks’ perspective

Philip S. Morrison and Rachel O’Brien (2001) use a GIS (Geographic information
system) and show how a special interaction model can help Banks decide what branches
to close, in “Bank branch closures in New Zealand: The application of a spatial interaction
model”.

Alfredo Martín-Oliver, József Sákovics and Vicente Salas-Fumás (2025) also focuses on
the banks’ perspective, when it’s beneficial to close a branch, in: “Who closes first? The
interaction of market structure and fall in demand in bank branch closures”.

1.3.3. My contribution

To sum up my literature search, several papers describe this branch closing phenomenon
with the lens of the bank: when and how is it beneficial for the bank? Amberg and Becker
(2025), describe branch closings from business customers’ point of view in the Swedish
context, which I also look at. I attempt to extend their research by zoning out to a regional
level in my data analysis: Are there implications for the whole regional economy? I also
divide up the analysis into different sectors and industries.

1.4. Data & Methodology

1.4.1. Data

I visualize bank branch closings with a dataset on bank branch addresses, from Pipos,
Tillväxtverket, (2025). This dataset has all addresses for bank branches in Sweden, 2011-
2023. Year, county/ region and bank (example Nordea), is specified for each address.
Amberg and Becker (2025) also uses this data, together with earlier data (as described).
They report several Nordea bank addresses disappearing somewhere between 2012 and
2016 and then reappearing. They therefore fill in an address that disappears and reappears
in the years between. I also do this interpolation. Further, if an address appears, disappears
and reappears within two years, I fill in that address in the years between. Note that the
data I acquired only reaches until 2023, so it is possible bank branches have closed after
and not been recorded, and therefore those closings are not included in my analysis. This
dataset is the base for calculating the change in number of bank branches per region and

                                   6
year, the main explanatory variable in the following model. The calculation of branch
change is: branch change(t)=branches(t)-branches(t-1). So, if the branch change is
negative, there are fewer branches year t compared to year t-1.

Reading the above-mentioned literature, I’m thinking that a region’s economic activity
might depend on access to bank branches, for example because Amberg and Becker
(2025) describes negative effects for SME’s (Small and medium sized enterprises) when
a bank branch closes, and SME’s are a large part of the Swedish economy. I find a
measure of GDP per region (GRP – Gross Regional Product), from SCB, 2025,
“Bruttoregionproduct (BRP), sysselsatta och löner (ENS 2010) efter region (län,
riksområde) och näringsgren SNI 2007. År 2000-2023”, SCB. Calculating the change of
log(GRP)(r, t) between year t-1 and t gives me Δlog(GRP)(r, t), the dependent variable
of interest in the model below. The dataset also has GRP divided into broad industries. I
recreate the model on log GRP growth per industry.

I add a data set including revenues per industry (more specific than above industries),
region, and year, from SCB (2025) “Lokal verksamhetsenhet – Regionala basfakta för
verksamhetsnivå enligt Företagens ekonomi efter region (län) och näringsgren SNI 2007.
År 2007-2021”. Some industries are grouped together as one post in this dataset, and I
count them as one industry for simplicity. From these revenues I calculate
Δlog(Revenues)(i, r, t), percentage change in revenue growth for industry i, region r, year
t, an independent variable I also aim to explain.

Amberg and Becker (2025) construct a local projections model, where branch change in
a municipality explains how an economic outcome Y changes in the municipality. I create
a similar local projections model, with the variables below.

1.4.2. Model specification

The variable branch change(t) is the change in number of local bank offices in a region.
In my model this variable explains the region’s Δlog(GRP)(r, t) (1). Δlog(GRP)(r, t) is
calculated like this: Δlog(GRP)(r, t) = log(GRP)(r, t) - log(GRP)(r, t-1). The Δlog(GRP)(r,
t) variable is therefore approximately the percentage change in GRP growth from year t-
1 to year t. When a coefficient is estimated, it’s therefore interpreted as how GRP growth
changes in percentage if the variable increases with one unit. So, the coefficient of branch
change(r, t) is how GRP growth changes in percentage if one local bank office opens the
same year.

Like Amberg and Becker I add two branch change lags (branch change(r, t-1) & branch
change(r, t-2)). Since the GRP data is not inflation corrected, I also control for year fixed

                                   7
effects (factor(year)) (like Amberg and Becker, 2025). Instead of firm fixed effects I have
region fixed effects: factor(region). Because the regional economic output might
influence next year’s output, the model also has a GRP growth lag, Δlog(GRP)(r, t-1).

Local projections model
Δlog(GRP)(r, t) = β₀ + β_1*branch change(r, t) + β_2*branch change(r, t-1) +
β_3*branch change(r, t-2) + β_4* Δlog(GRP)(r, t-1) + β_region*factor(region) +
β_year*factor(year) + ε_i (1)

Variables
    - Δlog(GRP)(r, t) – Percentage change in GRP growth, from year t-1 to year t, in
        region r
    - branch change(r, t) – difference in number of local bank offices of region r, from
        year t-1 to year t
    - branch change(r, t-1) – difference in number of local bank offices of region r, from
        year t-2 to year t-1
    - branch change(r, t-2) – difference in number of local bank offices of region r, from
        year t-3 to year t-2
    - Δlog(GRP)(r, t-1) – percentage change in GRP growth, from year t-2 to year t-1,
        in region r
    - r – denotes a region
    - t – denotes a year
    - factor(region) – region control, dummy variables
    - factor(year) – year control, dummy variables
    - ε_i – What the model cannot capture, the error term

Hypotheses for model estimation
Hypothesis 1: H0: The coefficient of branch change(r, t), β_1 = 0. H1 (Alternative
hypothesis): The coefficient of branch change (r, t), β_1 ≠ 0 (2)

Hypothesis 2: H0: The coefficient of branch change(r, t-1), β_2 = 0. H1 (Alternative
hypothesis): The coefficient of branch change(r, t-1), β_2 ≠ 0 (3)

Hypothesis 3: H0: The coefficient of branch change(r, t-2), β_3 = 0. H1 (Alternative
hypothesis): The coefficient of branch change(r, t-2), β_3 ≠ 0 (4)

                                   8
1.4.3. Identification problem

Amberg and Becker (2025) describes the identification problem: that it’s not random
where banks choose to close bank branches. Therefore, they create a two-stage least
squares model (2SLS), and instrument branch number change in the first stage. They
construct a shift-share instrument, Zj,t, for explaining the bank branch change, in line with
Bartik (1991), and in the first stage regression they estimate the instrument’s explanatory
power over branch change. The second stage regression estimates the effect of branch
change on an economic outcome (their structural equation mentioned before).

To construct their instrument, they firstly divide each number of branches of a “non-
savings bank” (b) in municipality (j), year t-1, with total number of all bank branches in
the same municipality and year. In other words, they use the number of local bank offices
of a large bank – “storbank” in the region, and divide it with all local bank offices,
including those who aren’t belonging to a large bank. Savings banks – “sparbanker” aren’t
included in the numerator as they often operate with fewer branches, and decisions to
close a branch might be because of local conditions. The result (share) is then multiplied
by the change in total number of the bank’s branches in Sweden year t (the shift). The
sum of all shift*shares for municipality j and year t is the instrument: Zj,t. Because not all
banks are included in the numerator of the share, Amberg and Becker (2025) also include
a “sum of shares control”, aligned with Borusyak, Hull & Jaravel (2022),
“Quasi_Experimental Shift_Share Research Designs”. This control is the sum of market
shares of non-savings banks in the municipality.

1.4.4. Identification strategy

Since I’m testing regional effects, I also construct a shift-share instrument. I count local
bank offices for each large bank in region r year t-1, and divide the number with total
bank offices in region r, year t-1. The share is multiplied by national growth in number
of bank offices for the large bank (the shift), year t (like Amberg and Becker (2025)).
Following their instrument construction, I repeat this for all large banks in region r (share
from year t-1 and shift from year t), add the shift-shares together, and the result is the
instrument for region r year t (Figure 2). I define the large banks as Nordea, Swedbank,
SEB and Handelsbanken.

                                   9
Figure 2
Instrument construction

I then make a 2SLS model where the first stage equation shows how the instrument affects
branch change ΔBranches(r, t) – change in number of local bank offices (6), and the
second stage equation shows how branch change (here endogenous) affects GRP growth:
Δlog(GRP)(r, t) (5). The second stage equation also includes two instrumented lags of
branch change (ΔBranches(r, t−1), ΔBranches(r, t−2)), from 2 additional first stage
equations. All equations have a GRP growth lag, Δlog(GRP)(r, t-1) and region controls
(factor(region)). The equations also have sum of shares controls interacting with year
fixed effects (factor(sum of shares))(r, t). Each sum of share control is calculated like this:
number of total bank offices of bank b, region r, year t-1 is divided by total number of
bank offices region r year t-1. That calculation is repeated for all large banks. Those shares
are then added together, resulting in the sum of shares control for region r year t (Figure
3).

Figure 3
Sum of shares construction

1.4.5. 2SLS model equations

Δlog(GRP)(r, t) = β₀ + β_1* ΔBranches(r, t) + β_2* ΔBranches(r, t−1) + β_3*
ΔBranches(r, t−2) + β_4* Δlog(GRP)(r, t-1) + β_region*factor(region) +
β_year*factor(sum of shares)(r, t)*factor(year) + ε_i (5)

                                  10
ΔBranches(r, t) = β₀ + β_1*instrument(r, t)+ β_2*instrument(r, t-1) + β_3*instrument(r,
t-2) + β_4* Δlog(GRP)(r, t-1) + β_region*factor(region) + β_year*factor(sum of
shares)(r, t)*factor(year) + ε_i (6)

New variables
    - ΔBranches(r, t) – difference in number of local bank offices in region r from year
         t-1 to year t, in this model instrumented in the first stage.
    - instrument(r, t) – shift-share region r year t
    - instrument(r, t-1) – shift-share region r year t-1
    - instrument(r, t-2) – shift-share region r year t-2
    - factor(sum of shares)(r, t)*factor(year) – control added because not all banks are
        included in the numerators of the shares (see the shift-share logic above),
         interacting with a year dummy variable.

1.4.6. Hypotheses for model estimations

Hypothesis 4: H0: The coefficient of ΔBranches(r, t), β_1 = 0. H1 (Alternative
hypothesis): The coefficient of ΔBranches(r, t), β_1 ≠ 0. (7)

Hypothesis 5: H0: The coefficient of ΔBranches(r, t-1), β_2 = 0. H1 (Alternative
hypothesis): The coefficient of ΔBranches(r, t-1), β_2 ≠ 0. (8)

Hypothesis 6: H0: The coefficient of ΔBranches(r, t-2), β_3 = 0. H1 (Alternative
hypothesis): The coefficient of ΔBranches(r, t-2), β_3 ≠ 0. (9)

The model uses all years for GRP that has corresponding years for the explanatory
variables, including the lags (recall that each grp growth is explained by several branch
change variables, the earliest from t-2, that in turn is explained by three instruments (one
the same year and two instrument lags, see first stage equation above), and each
instrument needs prior year’s branch data for the shift component. So, the model explains
GRP growth change from 2016. This reduces the sample size used in the model, which
can make the results less accurate. I still choose to include the two lags of the instrument,
because I think that the national shifts last year and two years ago might influence
decisions to close branches this year.

The model above is then applied on one broad sector at a time, to see if there are
heterogenous effects on different type of production or operations.

                                  11
To further test for heterogeneity in effects, I make a third version of the 2SLS, with
Δlog(Revenues)(i, r, t) as the dependent variable in the second equation (from the third
dataset)(10). These industries are more specific than the broad sectors in the model above.

Δlog(Revenues)(i, r, t) = β₀ + β_1* ΔBranches(r, t) + β_2* ΔBranches(r, t−1) + β_3*
ΔBranches(r, t−2) + β_4* Δlog(Revenues)(i, r, t-1) + β_region*factor(region) +
β_year*factor(sum of shares)(r, t)*factor(year) + ε_i (10)

New variables
    - Δlog(Revenues)(i, r, t) – Percentage change in revenue growth for industry i,
        region r, year t
    - Δlog(Revenues)(i, r, t-1) – Percentage change in revenue growth for industry I,
       region r, year t-1

To make my analysis more robust, I also remake the local projections model, with
Δlog(Revenues)(i, r, t) as the dependent variable, and apply it on 4 industries.

To make it clear, my models and data time window differ from Amberg and Becker
(2025), so I assume my results can differ. Still their paper helped a lot in my data
collection and model building, and I’m very grateful for that!

1.5. Main Empirical Analysis

1.5.1. Trends of Bank Closings and GRP

The timings of bank closings are different between regions (Figure 4). Also, the major
banks have different closing timelines (Figure 5). GRP trends also vary for the regions,
as shown in Figure 6.

                                  12
Figure 4

Figure 5

                                  13
Figure 6

1.5.2. Local projections model

Branch change(r, t) has the coefficient -0.000, and I cannot reject the null hypothesis (2)
that it doesn’t explain Δlog(GRP)(r, t) (Table 1), at a significance level p<0.10. Branch
change (r, t-1) has the coefficient -0.001., small, and I cannot reject the null hypothesis,
that branch change has zero effect on Δlog(GRP)(r, t) (3) at the significance level p<0.10.
I can reject the null hypothesis that branch change (r, t-2) doesn’t explain Δlog(GRP)(r,
t) (4), at the significance level p<0.05 (-0.001**). The local projections model therefore
points to a positive lagged effect of a branch closing (since each coefficient explains
Δlog(GRP)(r, t) change if one branch opens). The R-Squared result indicates 47.8 percent
of the variation in GRP growth(r, t) is explained by the local projections model. In the
next section I explore if my identification strategy (2SLS) shows the same results.

                                  14
Table 1

1.5.3. 2SLS

Also here are the coefficients small, close to zero, 0.002, -0.003 and 0.001, and cannot
prove any effect (at a significance level p<0.10) of ΔBranches(r, t), ΔBranches(r, t-1) and
ΔBranches(r, t-2).

However, estimating the instruments’ effects on ΔBranches(r, t), instrument (r, t) has a
large positive coefficient at a significance level p<0.01 (52.694***). Not all coefficients
of the instruments show explanatory power at a p<0.05 significant level (table 2), but
several pass that threshold.

                                  15
Table 2

1.5.4. 2SLS four sectors

Running a regression of Δlog(GRP)(r, t) per sector (denoted as industry in the results)
shows possible heterogeneity of the effects between industries (Table 3). Like previous
second stage regressions, several variables have small coefficients that cannot prove an
effect at p<0.10. However, when applying the model on Δlog(GRP)(r, t) from the goods
industry (varuproducenter), ΔBranches(r, t-2) has a positive coefficient at a p<0.10
significance level (0.005*), indicating a bank closing two years ago negatively affect
goods producers. Further, when looking at explanation of Δlog(GRP)(r, t) from the
service industry (tjänsteproducenter), the coefficient of ΔBranches(r, t) is positive and
significant (0.005*) suggesting a bank closure decreases GRP growth from service
businesses the same year. In the regressions for non industry posts (ej branschfördelade
poster) and public institutions and households’ nonprofit organisations (offentliga
myndigheter samt hushållens icke vinstdrivande organisationer), branch change has low
explanatory power.

                                  16
Table 3

The AIC (Akaike information criterion) results for the goods industry, service industry
and non industry posts are -437.816, -478.983 and -563.073 respectively (Table 4). These
are higher than the local projections model AIC (-860.1), indicating the latter has better
quality with using the data. However, the industry model for public institutions and
households’ nonprofit organisations has an even lower AIC (-947.440). The small RMSE
(Root mean square error) results for the industry regressions (0.071, 0.065, 0.053, 0.021)
indicates the data points are close to the model’s predicted values.

Table 4

1.5.5. 2SLS industry revenue model

Running the regressions on the industry revenues, I find 4 regressions with at least one
significant coefficient of branch change or a branch change lag (in the second equation,
Table 5), (See appendix 1 for all 58 industries initially included, and how I interpret them
in English). The estimation says if a bank closed two years ago, and everything else is
constant, the revenue growth of the food, drink and tobacco industry increases with 2.3
percent. A bank branch closing last year makes revenue growth decrease by 1.4 percent

                                  17
in the water, water treatment, disposals, recycling and sanitation industry, and revenue
growth of post offices decrease with 1.3 percent while there’s a revenue growth increase
in other companies in law, business, science and tech (3.2 percent).

Table 5

These models on industry revenue have lower quality than previous models, according to
higher AIC results (Table 6). The RMSE values are also higher, but still close to 0,
indicating the actual data points are close to values predicted by the model.

Table 6

1.5.6. Local projections industry revenue model

Estimating the local projections model on the selected industries, I cannot prove
explanatory power of branch change on the food, drink and tobacco industry (Table 7).
However, if a branch closed last year, the revenue growth of water, water treatment,
disposals, recycling and sanitation industry decreases, like the previous model also
predicts, here the decrease is estimated as 0.3 percent*. The revenue growth of post
offices also decreases if a bank closed last year, according to the estimation (0.003***).
Branch change cannot explain revenue growth change in other companies in law,
business, science and tech, according to this model estimation. The AIC values are higher
than the AIC for my initial local projections model (-860.1), indicating that model has
better quality with the same data. However, this model doesn’t use the exact same data

                                  18
(recall the initial local projections model have GRP and here I use Revenues). Also, this
model has some significant coefficients of branch change, unlike the initial model. The
AIC of the food, drink and tobacco industry is 38.4 here, lower than the second stage
regression for the same industry, where the AIC value is 132.188. The local projections
regression for water, water treatment, disposals, recycling and sanitation industry has AIC
-196.4, lower than for the second stage regression on this industry, -115.726. The AIC
value is -315.2 for this model on post offices and -235.146 for the second stage regression
on the same industry. The regression on other companies in law, business, science and
tech has the AIC -106.7, also lower than the second stage regression for the industry
(41.893). The AIC therefore indicate the local projections model has better quality than
the second stage model in regards to the data used (which is the same for both models).
The RMSE values are close to 0, so the model’s fitted values are close to the actual data
points.

Table 7

                                  19
1.5.7. Reverse causality check

As seen above, the estimation of branch change is sometimes significant. However, it’s
not certain that branch change affects Δlog(GRP)(r, t). Perhaps it’s the other way
around. To test for reverse causality, I return to the initial local projections model, but
switch Δlog(GRP)(r, t) and branch change(r, t), to see if the branch change depend on
regional economic activity. According to the model estimations, I cannot reject the null
hypothesis that Δlog(GRP)(r, t) doesn’t explain branch change(r, t) (Table 8). I cannot
prove any effect of Δlog(GRP)(r, t-1) or Δlog(GRP)(r, t-2) either. However, the branch
change lag has the coefficient 0.404*. So a branch closing this year might be partially
explained by another closing last year.

Table 8

1.6. Discussion

Revisiting “Do bank branch closings affect regional economic output?”, I cannot
answer yes based on my results. The local projections model estimates a significant,
positive but small effect on GRP growth of a bank branch closing two years ago, but
because of the identification problem described, I also conduct a 2SLS. The 2SLS for
total GRP growth cannot prove an effect of a branch closing.

Also, I recognize GRP growth is a broad measure, and a product of many factors. So a
significant coefficient of branch change in my analysis might not prove causality. This
broadness is one reason why I also applied the models on industries. Still, a coefficient
might be significant because of variables my models doesn’t include, which is why I
cannot confirm a causal relationship between branch closings and GRP growth.

                                  20
To answer “Are sectors affected differently by the branch closings?” I divide the
model into four broad sectors (industries), showing companies are affected differently
depending on which sector they are in. According to the estimations, a branch closing
negatively affects the total GRP growth of service companies the same year, and a branch
closing two years ago negatively affects goods companies’ GRP growth in the region.
Branch growth has low explanatory power in the regressions on GRP growth from non
industry posts and public institutions and households’ non profit organizations. This could
be because these types of businesses/ organizations are less dependent on bank financing
(for example a leisure association that survives on membership fee financing). I also
assume public institutions have different financing agreements than other organizations.
Riksbanken (n.d.) reports that public institutions are financed by taxes, and with different
interest-bearing securities, “Offentlig sektor”. Banks are some of the buyers of these
securities, but are not a majority of the owners, indicating public institutions are less
dependent on banks than private businesses.

I also test the question “Are industries differently affected by branch closings?”. So I
apply the identification strategy on more specific industries (changing the dependent
variable in focus to percentage change in revenue growth) and find a few industries
affected by bank branch closings in different ways, positively or negatively. Since only 4
out of 58 regressions showed any significant effect of branch change, heterogenous
effects seem low in the total economy. On the other hand, two industries with vital society
functions are negatively affected according to the model (water, water treatment,
disposals, recycling and sanitation & post offices), while another influential industry
(food, drink and tobacco) is positively affected according to the model, showing it’s
useful to look at the effects on an industry level.

I find it surprising that the food, drink and tobacco industry has a GRP growth increase if
a bank closes, according to the 2SLS model. At first I’m thinking these businesses might
have more hard information they can use to secure a bank loan, and therefore don’t need
to visit a bank branch. However, I assume water, water treatment, disposals, recycling
and sanitation are tangible asset heavy, and therefore have a lot of hard information for
securing a loan. Still a branch closing is associated with revenue growth decrease for their
industries. So, it doesn’t seem existence or lack of hard information can explain why
branch change affect industry revenue growth differently.

Another possible explanation is that people switch from using banks for some money
errands, to companies from the food, drink and tobacco industry. For example, if the last
local bank office closes, a customer has to travel longer to withdraw or put in cash into
their account. Instead, the customer can choose a local food store, and ask if they can
withdraw or put in cash at the store, which sometimes is possible. The customer might
shop a little extra while they’re in the store, increasing the revenue of the food industry,

                                  21
as the estimation says. Still, the local projections model doesn’t show a significant
positive effect of any branch change on the food, drink and tobacco industry.

Since the branch closing timings are spread out and different in my estimation window,
it’s difficult to estimate the effects of each branch closing individually. It’s also not
straightforward to estimate if one closing three years ago affected GRP growth, or if it
was a closing one year ago in the same region that mostly affected GRP. Therefore, it
would be interesting to see if some regions won’t have any closings for 5 years, and then
estimate the effects of closings in those regions, on GRP in the coming 5 years.

I’m also critical of the 2SLS models’ results, as some of the instruments are weak (see
the instrument coefficients), which is why I complement with the local projections model
for the four industries with significant effects according to the 2SLS.

There are also welfare effects the data doesn’t necessarily capture. If a region looses all
bank branches, the residents loose possibility to access a bank in their local area. On the
other hand, Handelsbanken (2022) reports about private customers choosing online
banking today, (“Annual and Sustainability Report 2021”). They might benefit from
branch closures, as lower office costs can trickle down to cheaper loans. However, they
say some customers prefer a dual approach and want access to a physical bank office. In
“Nedstängningar av bankkontor på landsbygden”, the politician Gudrun Nordborg (2020)
argues closings of local bank offices negatively affect a municipality’s economy, for
example because citizens must travel longer to make bank errands at a physical bank
branch. Not all citizens are able to do this. Even if they are, when they need to travel
longer to a bank office, they use more travel resources. This can be interpreted as
negative, from a sustainability perspective, and private finance perspective.

Nordborg (2020) adds that even if there’s an option of online banking, some groups don’t
have the same access, for example women who have protected identity that could be
leaked when using an online banking service, and older people. In the npr radio episode
“After The Bank Leaves”, parish commissioner Steven Jackson (2021) describes how an
older woman in his area has been going to a local bank office, even as it has changed to
a new corporation owner. After that bank office permanent closing, she relies on
somebody, like a taxi chauffeur, to pick her up. Jackson adds that he wouldn’t ask a
woman of her age to use her smartphone, indicating online banking is not an obvious
substitute for physical banking.

Further, bank office closings can make it more difficult for citizens to acquire business
knowledge, says Nordborg (2020) which might reduce the number of local startups. In
other words, a local bank branch is a crucial institution not only practically, but also to
facilitate business knowledge to help the local economy. This might explain why the
revenues of other companies in law, business, science and tech are estimated to increase

                                  22
when a bank branch closed two years ago, according to the 2SLS. Because there’s an
empty hole that local banks filled with business knowledge. On the other hand, the local
projections model doesn’t prove branch change explain revenue growth in this industry.

She also points out that bank closings can reduce bank personnels’ information of
potential loan takers, when the distance between them increases. Amberg and Becker
(2025) describes this as soft information, something vital for lending to firms, especially
the businesses who can’t show their reliability with “hard information” (easily written
down, for example accounting numbers). For example: a small startup, with little tangible
assets on the balance sheet, can find it hard to access a loan only through online banking.
If the business owner meets a bank officer at a local bank branch, it’s possible the bank
grants a loan because the business owner and the officer’s interaction generates “soft
information”, (in gen z language the bank officer "get’s a vibe” that the business owner
is trustworthy). Amberg and Becker explore this, and empirically shows that loans to
small and medium size firms (SMEs) do decrease following bank branch closings. They
also demonstrate other negative local economic effects, such as decreased employment,
that can follow from reduced loan access, because a business don’t access enough money
to pay operations costs.

However, it’s not certain a business can’t pay it’s cost if it doesn’t get a loan. In
“Determinants of SME Growth – The influence of financing pattern. An empirical study
based on Swedish data”, Kave Edin and Darush Yazdanfar (2015) explain a business isn’t
necessarily dependent on external financing, as they can use internal financing, for
example by investing earned profits into the next year’s operations. On the other hand, a
business owner who just started a company can’t use this type of “internal financing”, as
it requires earned profits.

Edin and Yazdanfar (2015) explores possible connections between types of financing,
firm attributes (like size age and industry affiliation) and growth, which they define as
the sales change (in percentage). Like Amberg and Becker (2025), they describe that it
can be easier to secure external financing for a business owner who’s able to show they
have collateral, which owners of SMEs might not have. They also say a firm might gain
this collateral after time, so firm age could be correlated with availability to external
financing. Adding to this are positive correlations between long term debt and age, and
long term debt and size, that they show in their paper. So they also show how useful hard
information can be.

Ye Wang and Shuang Wu (2024) find mobile banking can be a substitute for physical
banking when an office closes, and reduce negative effects, but that it’s not always
enough to provide financial services, Impact of mobile banking on small business lending
after bank branch closures. For example, if a small business hasn’t had a long time to
establish a relationship with a bank, and a local bank closes, mobile banking might not

                                  23
be enough to mitigate the effects. One explanation is that there’s large information
asymmetry between the bank and the small business, and there’s not enough hard
information the small business can use, as discussed previously.

Additionally, Jackson (2021) explains if citizens notice a bank closes its branch in their
region, and opens a bank in another region nearby, the citizens can become disheartened
by this. The closing and opening can signal the other region is better than theirs. In the
same radio episode, they describe effects on businesses. Bank consultant Steven Reiter
says: “You can look at a rural small-town downtown or an urban neighborhood that
maybe has seen better days, but as long as there's still a bank branch, the other retailers
will hang on. Once you lose that, that's often the last thing standing between viability,
survivorship and complete decay”.

Marie-Claire Broekhoff and Carin van der Cruijsen (2025) test if bank branch closures
affect overall trust in the payment system – broad-scope trust, and trust in payment
services each customer’s bank offers – narrow-scope, “The cost of closure: the relation
between the presence of bank branches and trust”. They use a survey with answers on
broad-scope trust and narrow-scope trust, per municipality, from a sample of Dutch
citizens, 2020 to 2024, and data on number of bank branches per municipality during the
same period. They find that higher levels of broad-scope trust (on average) is associated
with a larger number in bank branches. Also higher levels of narrow-scope trust (on
average) are associated with more bank branches.

I’m thinking the reduced narrow-scope trust can be explained by soft information theory
(Amberg and Becker, 2025). Because when a customer can meet a bank personel in a
local bank office, the customer can form an opinion on the personel and the bank overall,
for example based on how the bank personel behaves, how the office looks and so on.
When the customer can’t have such a meeting, because the bank office has closed, the
customer can’t access the soft information either, possibly reducing narrow-scope trust
(trust in the specific bank).

So, from the banks’ perspective, it’s not necessarily beneficial to close a branch, even if
it cut costs. Continuing from the bank’s view, Alfredo Martín-Oliver, József Sákovics
and Vicente Salas-Fumás (2025) shows if there are competitor bank branches in the same
region, a bank company can decide not to close their own branch, because of strategic
reasons, “Who closes first? The interaction of market structure and fall in demand in bank
branch closures”. If Nordea closes their only branch in a region, and there’s a branch of
another bank still operating (let’s say Swedbank), some of Nordea’s customers who want
to visit a local branch might switch to Swedbank. This also has implications for the
customers – it affects them more if the last local branch closes, compared to when there’s
another option left. As the npr program showed, in the US it can be important that there’s
one local physical bank office, even if it changes owners. This would be another

                                  24
interesting extension: Does existence of a physical local bank office weigh more than
belonging to a specific bank company – in the Swedish banking setting? My hypothesis
is that belonging to a bank company weighs more in Sweden, since swedes I’ve talked to
continue using one bank corporation, even if their local bank branch closes, rather than
focusing on a physical branch.

1.7. Conclusion

This thesis aims to answer three questions: “Do bank branch closings affect regional
economic output?”, “Are sectors affected differently by the branch closings?” and “Are
industries differently affected by branch closings?”.

My data analysis doesn’t prove bank branch closings affect regional economic output
(GRP growth). The local projections model estimation indicates a small positive lagged
effect. However, applying the identification strategy (2SLS), I can’t prove bank branch
closings have any effect on the regional growth.

Two of four broad sectors are affected by branch closings, according to my models.
Because GRP growth of goods producers and service companies decrease.

Four industries are somehow affected by branch change. If a branch closes, the
identification strategy estimates increased revenue growth of the food, drink and tobacco
industry and other companies in law, business, science and tech. Instead, revenue growth
decrease from the water, water treatment, disposals, recycling and sanitation industry, and
post offices. The local projections show similar results, except no significant effect of
branch change on the food, drink and tobacco industry or other companies in law,
business, science and tech.

According to my reverse causality check, percentage change in GRP growth doesn’t
explain branch change – There’s not more closings where the economic activity is
increasing or decreasing.

Bank branch closings can also have practical implications for a region, for example
reduced access to banking services for older people, women with protected identity and
overall increased travel costs when a citizen has to travel longer to a physical bank.
Further, citizens can perceive a local bank closing as a signal that their neighbourhood is
worse than another neighbourhood.

Additionally, a customer might loose trust – narrow-scope trust – in the bank when a
branch closes. So an interesting extension would be to survey the levels of narrow-scope
trust for Swedish bank customers from now and for five years. Also, if another company

                                  25
still operates a bank branch in the region, it's possible the customer switches to that
company. This also implies if a bank office closes in a region with no other bank office,
the effects might be worse for citizens, as there’s no regional alternative. Another
interesting extension would therefore be investigating if the effect is different depending
on how many offices are left after one closing – if effects are larger when the last bank
office closes compared to when there are alternatives left? Such analysis might need using
more granular data like Amberg and Becker (2025), in order to further investigate the
local effects.

1.7.1. Bibliography

Amberg, Niklas. & Becker, Bo. (2025). Banking Without Branches. no.-430-banking-
without-branches-updated-september-2025.pdf.
Bartik, Timothy, J. (1991). Who Benefits From State and Local Economic Development
Policies. Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies? on
JSTOR.
Borusyak. Kirill. Hull, Peter. & Jaravel, Xavier. (2022). Quasi_Experimental Shift_Share
Research Designs. Quasi-Experimental Shift-Share Research Designs. - EBSCO
Broekhoff, Marie-Claire. van der Cruijsen, Carin. (2025). The cost of closure: the relation
between the presence of bank branches and trust. working_paper_no-848.pdf.
Cronin, Brittany. Moon, Gilly. Goldmark, Alex. Cai, Sam. Herships, Sally. Horsley,
Scott. Reiter, Steven. Jackson, Steven. (2021). After The Banks Leave. npr. Bank Closures
Due to Pandemic Create Banking Deserts : The Indicator from Planet Money : NPR.
D’Andrea, Angelo. Pelosi, Marco. Sette, Enrico. (2025). When broadband comes to
banks: credit supply, market structure and information acquisition. When Broadband
Comes to Banks: Credit Supply, Market Structure, and Information Acquisition | Journal
of the European Economic Association | Oxford Academic.
Edin, Kave. Yazdanfar, Darush. (2015). Determinants of SME Growth. Determinants of
SME growth: The influence of financing pattern. An empirical study based on Swedish
data - ProQuest.
Handelsbanken. (2022). Handelsbanken, 2021, “Annual and Sustainability Report
2021”. 202202250015-1.pdf.
Legran, Daniel. Tuomikoski, Olli. Spitz, Johanna. (2024), The changing landscape of
bank offices in the euro area. The changing landscape of bank offices in the euro area |
ECB Data Portal.
Martín-Oliver, Alfredo. Sákovics, József. Salas-Fumás, Vicente. (2025). Who closes
first? The interaction of market structure and fall in demand in bank branch closures.
Who closes first? The interaction of market structure and fall in demand in bank branch
closures - Martín‐Oliver - 2025 - Economica - Wiley Online Library.

                                  26
Morrison, S, Philip. O’Brien Rachel. (2001). Bank branch closures in New Zealand: The
application of a spatial interaction model. Bank branch closures in New Zealand: the
application of a spatial interaction model - ScienceDirect.
Nordborg, Gudrun. (2020). Nedstängningar av bankkontor på landsbygden.
Nedstängningar av banker på landsbygden (Skriftlig fråga 2020/21:2849 av Gudrun
Nordborg (V)) | Sveriges riksdag.
Pipos. (2025). Bank branch data.
Riksbanken. (n.d.). Offentlig sektor. Offentlig sektor | Sveriges Riksbank.
SCB (2025). Bruttoregionproduct (BRP), sysselsatta och löner (ENS 2010) efter region
(län, riksområde) och näringsgren SNI 2007. År 2000-2023. Bruttoregionprodukt (BRP),
sysselsatta och löner (ENS2010) efter region (län, riksområde) och näringsgren SNI 2007.
År 2000 - 2023. PxWeb.
SCB. (2025). Lokal verksamhetsenhet – Regionala basfakta för verksamhetsnivå enligt
Företagens ekonomi efter region (län) och näringsgren SNI 2007. År 2007-2021. Lokal
verksamhetsenhet - Regionala basfakta för verksamhetsnivå enligt Företagens ekonomi
efter region (län) och näringsgren SNI 2007. År 2007 - 2021. PxWeb.
Wang, Ye. Wu, Shuang. (2024). Impact of mobile banking on small business lending after
bank branch closures. Impact of mobile banking on small business lending after bank
branch closures - ScienceDirect.

1.7.2. Appendix

Appendix 1. (Translations of industry names, for the 2SLS industry revenue model)

 "01-03 företag inom jordbruk, skogsbruk och fiske" = "farming, forestry and fishing",
 "05-09 gruvor och mineralutvinningsindustri" = "mining and minerals",
 "10-12 livsmedels-, dryckesvaru- och tobaksindustri" = "food, drinks and tobaco",
 "13-15 textil-, beklädnads-, läder - och lädervaruindustri" = "textiles, clothes, leather
and leather goods",
 "18 grafisk och annan reproduktionsindustri" = "graphics and other reproductions",
 "19-21 kemisk industri, petroleumprodukter och läkemedelsindustri" = "chemistry,
petroleum and drugs",
 "22 gummi- och plastvaruindustri" = "rubber and plastic",
 "23 industri för andra icke-metalliska mineraliska produkter" = "other non-metallic
minerals",
 "24-25 stål- och metallverk; industri för metallvaror utom maskiner och apparater"
="metals and steel, not including machines",
 "26-27 industri för datorer, elektronikvaror, optik och elapparatur" = "electronics",
 "28 övrig maskinindustri" = "other machines",

                                  27
 "29-30 transportmedelsindustri" = "vehicles",
 "31 möbelindustri" "furniture",
 "32 annan tillverkningsindustri" = "other manufacturing",
 "33 reparationsverkstäder och installationsföretag för maskiner och apparater" =
"reparations and installations of machines",
 "35 el-, gas- och värmeverk" = "electricity, gas and heating",
 "36-39 vatten- och reningsverk; anläggningar för avfallshantering, återvinning och
sanering " = "water, water treatment, waste disposal, recycling and sanitation",
 "41 byggentreprenörer" = "building contractors",
 "42 anläggningsentreprenörer" = "site contractors",
 "43 specialiserade bygg- och anläggningsentreprenörer" = "specialized contractors",
 "45 handel med och serviceverkstäder för motorfordon och motorcyklar" = "mechanic
shops",
 "46 parti - och provisionshandel utom med motorfordon" = "wholesale and retail (not
vehicles)",
 "49-51 land-, sjö- och lufttransport" = "transportation",
 "52 magasin och serviceföretag till transport" = "service for transport",
 "53 post- och kurirföretag" = "post",
 "55 hotell, semesterbostäder, vandrarhem, campingplatser m.m." = "accomodation",
 "56 restauranger, cateringföretag, barer och pubar" = "restaurants, catering, bars and
pubs",
 "58 förlag" = "publishing",
 "59 film-, video och tv-programföretag, ljudinspelningsstudior och fonogramutgivare"
= "film, video, tv, sound and phonogram publishers",
 "60 radio- och tv-bolag" = "radio and tv",
 "61 telekommunikationsbolag" = "telecommunication",
 "62 programvaruproducenter, datakonsulter o.d." = "data programming",
 "68 fastighetsbolag och fastighetsförvaltare" = "properties",
 "69 juridiska och ekonomiska konsultbyråer" = "consulting in finance, business,
economics and law",
 "70 huvudkontor; konsultbyråer inom pr och kommunikation samt företags
organisation" = "head quarters of consulting in pr, communication and organization",
 "71+72 arkitekter, teknisk provnings- och konsultverksamhet samt vetenskaplig
forskning" = "architects, testing and scientific research",
 "73 reklam- och marknadsföringsbyråer; marknadsundersökningsbyråer o.d." =
"marketing",
 "74 andra företag inom juridik, ekonomi, vetenskap och teknik" = "other businesses in
law, business, science and tech",
 "75 veterinärkliniker" = "veterinarian",
 "77 uthyrningsfirmor " = "rental companies",
 "78 arbetsförmedlingar, rekryteringsföretag, personaluthyrningsföretag o.d." =
"employment facilitators",

                                  28
 "79 resebyråer och researrangörer; turistbyråer" = "travel and tourism",
 "80 företag för bevakning och säkerhetstjänst, detektivbyråer" = "surveillance, safety
and detectives",
 "81 företag för fastighetsservice samt skötsel och underhåll av grönytor" = "property
caretakers",
 "82 kontors- och andra företagstjänstföretag" = "office and other accomodation for
companies",
 "85 utbildningsväsendet" = "education",
 "86 enheter för hälso- och sjukvård" = "healthcare",
 "87 vårdhem och bostäder med omsorg" = "care homes",
 "88 sociala öppenvårdsenheter, socialkontor" = "social services",
 "90 enheter för konstnärlig och kulturell verksamhet samt underhållningsverksamhet" =
"art",
 "91 bibliotek, arkiv och museer m.m." = "libraries, archives and museums",
 "92 spel- och vadhållningsföretag" = "gambling",
 "93 sport-, fritids- och nöjesanläggningar" = "leasure",
 "94 intresseorganisationer och religiösa samfund" = "associations and religious
organizations",
 "95 reparationsverkstäder för datorer, hushållsartiklar och personliga artiklar" =
"reparations of computers, household articles and personal items",
 "96 andra konsumenttjänstföretag" = "other consumer service companies"

                                  29
1.8. AI-disclosure

I have used AI – ChatGPT – to help my thesis coding.

                                  30