Resilience in Fiery Seas

An analysis of liquidity resilience in the Centralized ETH/USDT
and Decentralized WETH/USDT cryptocurrency market

SENAD KURJAKOVIC

VIKTOR TZEVELEKIS LINDSTRÖM

Bachelor Thesis

Stockholm School of Economics

2025
Resilience in Fiery Seas: An analysis of liquidity resilience in the Centralized ETH/USDT
and Decentralized WETH/USDT cryptocurrency market
Abstract:
       This paper investigates how liquidity reacts to pre-defined stress events on a specified
       decentralized and centralized exchange. We study the period, 2021 to 2025, and identify
       stress as the most volatile 10% hourly candles using ETH/USDT data from Binance and
       Uniswap V3. The liquidity resilience of the two venues post-stress is investigated through
       the vehicle of transaction cost, examining the unique constituents of this cost for each
       market structure, such as gas fees and slippage. We find that liquidity tends to deteriorate
       for both venues following market stress for different reasons. On the centralized venue,
        market volatility causes liquidity depth to evaporate and, in turn, increase slippage. On the
       decentralized venue, we find that gas price spikes explain the disproportionate liquidity
       degradation for smaller trade sizes relative to larger ones. Thereafter, we decompose gas
       prices into base and priority fees. From this, we derive the expected future liquidity
       resilience of the two venues by only accounting for the structural aspects of the
       decentralized venue, mainly through the priority fee of gas, as the mostly technologically
       dependent base fee component is observed to be trending towards a zero level.
        Furthermore, we establish a causal relationship, for specific trades sizes, between pre-stress
       volume and the improvement of slippage for the DEX relative to CEX following a stress
       event. These findings contribute to the existing literature by showcasing the long-run
       competitiveness of DEX accurately and expanding on the debate for why the beneficiaries
       of venue fees are relevant for liquidity degradation in cryptocurrency markets.

Keywords:
       Cryptocurrency Exchanges, Liquidity Degradation, Automated Market Making, Gas
       Fees, Stress Events
Authors:
   Senad Kurjakovic (26147)
   Viktor Tzevelekis Lindström (26160)
Tutor:
   Maíra Gonzalez, Teaching Assistant, Department of Finance
Examiner:
   Ramin P Baghai, Professor, Department of Finance

Bachelor Thesis
Bachelor Program in Business and Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
© Senad Kurjakovic and Viktor Tzevelekis Lindström, 2025

                                       2
I. Introduction
Over the last two decades, disregarding any niche hybrids, two key cryptocurrency venues have
bifurcated from the original motivations behind Bitcoin’s inception. These include decentralized
exchange (DEX) venues, such as the likes of Uniswap, PancakeSwap and Aerodome, and
centralized exchange (CEX) venues like Binance and Kraken. These two cryptocurrency market
structures contain many technical microstructural differences but are both relevant to a wide array
of crypto traders today. From the way pricing is set with market makers through limit order book
                                                           1
(LOB) in CEXs and automatic market makers (AMM)  protocols set in DEXs, it is clear to see
why they are so intertwined with current and ongoing financial literature. In today’s market
climate, where volume may no longer be the best way to measure success in exchanges, a
contributing analysis in the market or an exchange venue analyzed may be how well they may fare
during times of extreme market stress. Currently, there is a large growing body of literature that
reviews which venue type is safer and cheaper during varying market conditions, such as with
Angeris, Kao, Chiang, Noyes and Chitra (2020).

Narrowing down, arguably, the most relevant aspect when evaluating how well these exchange
venues fare during times of market stress is the cost of performing transactions on that venue,
referred to as the transaction cost. In most CEXs, the components that are most relevant when
                                                            2
analyzing transaction costs are the price slippage , which is influenced by the state of the LOB
through the bid-ask spread, and the fixed fee of the specific venue. Although the approach for
computing the components for transaction costs differ for AMMs, transaction costs for DEXs are
also determined through the components of slippage and the fixed fee of the venue, with the
addition of the on-chain settlement costs known as “gas fees”. This represents a secondary
stochastic variable for calculating the cost of transactions for DEX and, as their behavior is often
governed by block-level demand [Koutmos (2023) and Karaivanov and Zarifian (2024)], this can
make it problematic to know exactly what the optimal gas fees set for highest chance of inclusion
                    3
in the next block .

Although research does not focus on the microstructural components of these reasons that gas fees
will become fixed costs or zero in the future, this assumption often neglects the characteristic
variability of gas fees and, therefore, does not represent them faithfully. Despite this, in their
comprehensive study that examines a wide array of cryptocurrency venues and their qualitative
attributes including transaction costs, Barbon and Ranaldo (2024), the main inspiration for
exploring this subject, argue that DEX transaction costs are becoming better with time than CEX
and will even eventually outperform current CEX venues; this is found to be especially true for
smaller trade sizes. Their reasoning for this trend stems from a key assumption that gas fees will
eventually reach a substantially lower value due to solely technological advancements made in the
decentralized exchanges lowering the gas fees. In this study, we observe that, in the long term, a
structural component to gas fees persists, which stems in large part from the priority fee, and is the

1
 “An automated market maker (AMM) is a type of decentralized exchange (DEX) protocol that allows users to buy
and sell digital assets without the need for a third-party intermediary.” (CoinMarketCap, 2025)
2
 Price slippage (AKA simply slippage) reflects the part of transaction costs that occurs when executing an order in a
market where available depth cannot fully absorb the trade size at the quoted price.
3
 “A block is the fundamental unit of a blockchain that contains a set of validated transactions and cryptographic
links to previous blocks, forming an immutable record in the blockchain network.” (Investopedia, 2025)

                                       3
                                                                        4
main aspect as to how traders in DEXs can compete for block space in the current block. As such,
we believe that there is a gap remaining to exactly understand transaction costs during events of
market stress in modern and expected future markets where gas fees will continue to vary and
cannot be assumed to be fixed or zero. To clarify, this stress event-based study we propose in this
paper would observe the change in transaction costs and would recognize this as a measure of
liquidity resilience or, as we predict during market stress, liquidity degradation.

Following this, we chose to analyze one very specific cryptocurrency trading pair known as the
ETH/USDT for CEXs or otherwise recognized as WETH/USDT for DEXs. The decision for
choosing each token in this token pair is as follows: i) USDT is the most traded and stable digital
tokens (otherwise known as stablecoins) in most cryptocurrency exchanges as of 2025 and ii)
Ethereum (ETH), other than bitcoin, is also among the most traded and modernized crypto tokens.
This ensures a focused and microstructural analysis of this token swap with ample data with
regards to trade volume and less noise when it comes to potential speculative/noise trading. In
addition, the Binance and Uniswap V3 fee tier 0.3% were selected as the key CEX and DEX
venues for study, respectively, based on having high quantities of publicly available data that could
be retrieved and analyzed. With this traded pair and the venues established for the CEX and DEX,
the scope of this research paper is detailed by this research question:

 “How does liquidity resilience, or degradation, in the (W)ETH/USDT market in the Uniswap V3
    0.3% fee tier pool and the Binance venue behave during periods of great market stress?”

We define and analyze a “stress event” as the merged or individual 10% most volatile hourly
candles in the period (09-11-2021:09-11-2025). Volatility for each candle is initially estimated
using the Roger-Satchell volatility estimator for the purposes of identifying desired stress events
which will predictably have a potentially non-zero drift component.

Briefly, the most significant methods with which we studied liquidity degradation in this market
were derived by first simulating transaction costs for both venues for a variety of trade sizes
ranging from 0.1 ETH to 100 ETH, taking inspiration from the methods used by Barbon and
Ranaldo (2024). Thereafter, the statistical significance of the degradation of transaction costs, the
vehicle for liquidity resilience in this study, was evaluated for these trade sizes to verify the
discrepancies between small and large trade size transaction costs. On top of this, a panel
regression and decomposition were performed to investigate whether smaller trade sizes are
disproportionately affected in the DEX venue and if this is due to a change in gas, supporting the
treatment of gas as a stochastic variable and, thus, staying consistent with the approach of Koutmos
(2023). Thereafter, the priority fee and the base fee of gas were identified and decomposed and
regressed on every 300th block number in the past 4 years to examine how the trends in these two
components in the WETH/USDT market vary with time. It is important to note that this is an
effective way of measuring each components’ trends as block numbers are chronologically
serialized in the Uniswap V3 DEX exchange to account for time. Further, this paper also employed
a first-difference interaction regression model to examine how pre-stress trade volume impacts
slippage through liquidity depth differently in the CEX and DEX venues, controlling for variables

4
 Block space is limited capacity in fitting transaction into a block on the blockchain. Because this space is scarce,
users compete for it through gas fees, which determines how quickly their transactions are confirmed by validators.

                                       4
such as price directionality and realized volatility outlined by Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and
Labys (2001). This concludes the scope of our exploration.

Through the results for these various tests, we effectively examine the liquidity resilience of the
CEX and DEX venue, respectively, and evaluate the behavior of the (W)ETH/USDT market to
stress, contributing to existing literature. Accordingly, we find that liquidity degradation for the
DEX venue tends to disproportionately affect smaller trade sizes, while larger trade sizes tend to
experience a liquidity degradation competitive with the studied CEX venue. In addition, we find
that liquidity resilience on the DEX Uniswap V3 fee tier 0.3% pool for the WETH/USDT market
is worse than CEX for small trade sizes and this difference converges to approximately zero for
large trade sizes. However, after accounting only for the structural components of gas costs in the
long run, we observe that the DEX venue becomes more resilient than the CEX for large trade
sizes. While the liquidity equivalence point, defined as the trade size at which average liquidity
degradation is equal across the two venues, shifts towards even smaller trade sizes, the DEX
venue’s liquidity resilience does not outperform the CEX venue’s liquidity resilience across the
full trade-size spectrum. Finally, following the framework employed by Heimbach, Schertenleib,
and Wattenhofer (2022), we determine that, for some trade sizes, liquidity providers in the
Uniswap V3 venue tend to concentrate their liquidity during stress to capture revenues from fees
from increase in volume traded in the DEX venue, demonstrating that following a stress event the
slippage in DEX tend to improve in comparison to CEX.

Due to the highly technical nature of this paper, we divide and attempt to compartmentalize our
research. As such, following this introduction, this paper has been divided into 4 separate sections:
Section II features Related literature and Hypotheses formation, Section III outlines Data
procurement and Methods, Section IV presents our Empirical Findings and Section V details our
Concluding Remarks.

                                       5
II. Related literature and Hypotheses formation
This section starts off by examining the theories related to market microstructure, identifying what
constitutes liquidity in different market structures, and the relevant factors that impact it. We then
proceed to delve into the financial literature’s perspective as to how liquidity is measured in DEXs
and CEXs for cryptocurrency tokens. We conclude by grounding our research in the logic and
justifications behind the formation our hypotheses.
A. Background: Market Microstructure theory
To analyze the liquidity resilience of both the CEX and DEX venues effectively, a fundamental
understanding of slippage must be established before moving forward. Works from previous
studies such as Glosten & Milgrom (1985) and Kyle (1985) have both been recognized for laying
the groundwork for microstructure analysis in microstructure theory for central limit order books
(LOB) exchanges, exploring both the explicit and implicit sources of slippage and, hence,
transactional costs from different perspectives. These analyses are both relevant for the simulation
of transaction costs for the Binance centralized exchange and the Uniswap V3 fee tier 0.3%
explored for the (W)ETH/USDT market.

With regards to Glosten & Milgrom (1985), they explore the notion that market makers in
exchanges, referred to as liquidity providers for the context of this paper, will tend to act rationally
in an attempt to minimize their risk exposure from more informed traders; this effectively
represents the problem of adverse selection due to information asymmetry. In turn, they argue that
market makers will, in response, charge higher risk premiums to offset this risk and that this
becomes far more pronounced during periods of market stress. This is in the form of increasing
the range of the bidding price at which they offer liquidity for buyers and increasing their asking
price to sell a financial asset for, today known as the bid-ask spread. This is relevant to our study’s
analysis as we use this concept to justify our hypotheses for much of the outcome for our testing.

In equal measure, Kyle (1985) has provided the foundational concepts of the implicit market cost
components of slippage in central LOB markets. He achieves this by establishing a model focused
on market depth and price impact that demonstrates that market liquidity is “finite” and directly
derivative of the ratio of noise trading, the trade volume that is motivated by random and
uninformed decisions that excludes insider trading, from traders to the volatility of the traded
asset’s fundamental value. He finds that market makers tend to adjust their prices in accordance
with order flow, the difference between execution price set by efficient market makers and the
expected execution price (for the insider acting as a monopolist calculating their own trade impact)
of a transaction because it is a signal of private information. He concludes that the cost of executing
a trade tends to increase as the volatility of the underlying asset increases.

For the purposes of this paper, the understanding behind these analyses is paramount as they are
the source for liquidity degradation analysis in both the Binance and Uniswap V3 (W)ETH/USDT
exchanges, and, as a result, we utilize this literature by verifying that this effect can be observed
in both venue types.

                                       6
B. Execution costs in DEX and CEX markets
The existing literature examining the cryptocurrency market has put heavy emphasis on CEX and
DEX markets in general and not specifically delved into events that cause market breakdown. As
previously referred to, the most relevant and comprehensive study that inspired the venture into
this topic is by Barbon and Ranaldo (2024), where they examine the differences across a plethora
of DEX and CEX venues for the top 20 most popular currency swap pairs, finding that DEX
transactions tend to be impeded by the presence of gas fees and slower settlement times relative to
CEX. With higher trade sizes, however, they find that transaction costs in DEXs become very
competitive with CEXs and that, for some currency markets, they even tend to outperform them.
To contribute, we add to the literature by observing if this competitive nature between a given
CEX and DEX venue persists, even during market-stress sourced liquidity degradation.

To supplement their analysis, Barbon and Ranaldo (2024) further compare the DEX and CEX
venues by removing gas prices in totality. This was justified on the basis that gas prices will, over
time, fall to 0 as they are entirely assumed to be temporary technological hurdles of the DEX
markets which will only shrink with time. Effectively, this removed the regressive characteristic
of the DEX transaction costs as it was only made up of the specific protocol fee (venue pool for
DEX) and the slippage. However, the assumption that gas costs converge to 0 is challenged by
recent empirical studies. Specifically, Karaivanov and Zarifian (2024) research that in the post
                       5
EIP-1559 protocol , users actively select their priority fees in response to network congestion,
transaction type, and block-level demand conditions. Similarly, Koutmos (2023) shows that
Ethereum gas prices are highly sensitive to network congestion, with changes in intraday
transaction volume, block capacity (determined by the EIP-1559 protocol) and block time all being
found to significantly explain changes in gas fees across the full distribution of gas-price
movements. This shows that, while there might be a technological advancement in decreasing gas
costs due to block capacity and similar advancements, the priority fee component of gas remains
highly sensitive to economic factors such as urgency and block utilization. In reference to this, we
contribute to the literature by isolating the technological and structural components of gas prices
and determining how the structural and technological aspects of gas fees change over time during
stress events and if it is justified to assume 0 invariant gas prices in the long term.

In reference to Uniswap V3, Heimbach et al. (2022) proposes a theoretical framework that models
active liquidity providers’ decision-making, explicitly accounting for both the fee revenues and
the additional risks liquidity providers enjoy with concentrated liquidity, where liquidity providers
(LPs) can set their own price ranges for which they provide liquidity for. This allows for complex,
liquidity provider-determined liquidity distributions in the Uniswap V3 venue that vary greatly
with price. In likeness to Glosten & Milgrom (1985), this study finds that liquidity providers face
similar adverse selection issues in decentralized market structures in the form of impairment
losses. However, it is important to note that in a DEX on Uniswap V3, liquidity providers make
an earning on the volume traded, determined by the pool fee. The implication of this is that there
is a return relationship where decisions need not only be made by what the expected loss due to
gas prices and impairment is, but also on the potential profits. We contribute to the literature by

5
  Ethereum Improvement Proposal 1559 (EIP-1559) was an upgrade to Ethereum’s fee system that introduced a base fee and a
priority fee (tip). Before this Ethereum used a first-price auction for transaction fees.

                                       7
examining whether DEX liquidity improves following a stress event in comparison to CEX when
factoring in the determinants of LP behavior.

The literature reviewed in section A and B gives reasonable grounds to expect that the degradation
of transaction costs during stress events will rise. This dissertation has attempted to investigate and
verify whether this degradation applies to a specific crypto exchange in direct contribution to the
existing body of literature.
C. Hypotheses formation
On the basis of the limit-order-book microstructure theory for centralized exchanges discussed in
section A, and through evidence that gas fees and volatility increase execution costs on
decentralized exchanges discussed in section B, the following first hypothesis can be investigated:
transaction costs on both CEXs and DEXs are higher on average during stressed market
conditions than during normal periods, across all trade sizes.

Complementing this, Koutmos (2023) argues that that gas fees react to network congestion. As
aforementioned, during stress events in the cryptocurrency markets, competition for block space
is at a high in the DEX market and, as such, gas fees in that period tend to hike, with transaction
costs following in consequence. In combination with the fixed aspect of gas prices, Barbon and
Ranaldo (2024), we hypothesize; for smaller trade sizes, DEX transaction costs, tend to degrade
worse during a stress period as opposed to a normal period, due to an increase in effective gas
paid, while larger trade sizes are affected less.

As reviewed briefly in section B, we examine gas costs with Barbon & Ranaldo’s (2024) claim
that there is a technological aspect to gas. This view is reasonable: lowering gas fees aligns with
Ethereum’s long-run design incentives, since cheaper transactions increase network usage and may
ultimately increase the value of the underlying asset (ETH) (Butverin, 2020). This, in turn,
strengthens their competitiveness as a network provider. Under this perspective, most of the gas
price is driven by technological constraints such as the base fee, block capacity, and processing
efficiency.

According to current research and in reference to the findings of Karaivanov and Zarifan (2024),
a structural component of gas may persist under future technological improvements that will limit
how much gas price can decrease in the Ethereum network. To clarify, on the blockchain,
competition for inclusion in the current block can persist due to the presence of priority-fee
bidding, making this a central aspect of how the blockchain can continue to function through
                          6
incentivizing validators. This characteristic of user urgency and valuation of the block space does,
therefore, imply that a non-zero minimum priority fee may very well prevail, even if the
technological aspects of gas (such as the base fee) may shrink to a zero or zero equivalent level.
                                                     7
In addition to this, factors such as MEV dynamics and imperfect gas-price estimation by user and
bot traders alike further exemplify how priority fees contain an intrinsic aspect of the block space
market as they guide the competitive forces of the space. Given this, the trends in base gas fee and

6
 Validators are the block producers, through a proof-of-stake system locking 32 ETH capital, they are given the opportunity
select the transactions to be included in the next block. Their compensation is the priority fees of each transaction included.
7
 MEV: “Maximal extractable value (MEV) refers to the maximum value that can be extracted from block production in excess
of the standard block reward and gas fees by including, excluding, and changing the order of transactions in a block.” (Ethereum
foundation, 2025)

                                       8
priority fee will reflect if the literatures assumptions can be validated and justified. This train of
thought enabled us to ask the following: If it can be assumed that gas fees will reach an
approximate zero value over time, do both the technological and structural components of gas fees
trend downward at equally substantial rates with diminishing variance in time?

A downward-trending and variance-shrinking base fee and priority fee would strengthen Barbon
& Ranaldo (2024) claim, and provide basis for the third hypothesis; Liquidity degradation for DEX
is lower than CEX across all trade sizes when accounting for only the structural components of
gas price.

Although our study attempts to decompose gas price to identify technological and structural
components, the results rely on assumptions that, while validated historically, are not immutable
in the future. Thus, a potentially more interesting analysis would be to look at the component in
transaction costs that both markets share, the slippage. In relation to their mentioned framework
in section B, Heimbach et al. (2022), it is determined that liquidity providers may concentrate
liquidity in the Uniswap V3 venue by either readjusting or adding reserves at the current price
during a volatile event if they expect that the revenue from the increase in volume may outweigh
the rise in gas prices coupled with the expected impairment loss from the price detection. By these
means, the fourth hypothesis is derived: for a disproportionate amount of stress events, DEX
slippage will improve while CEX slippage degrades when the change in volume prior to the stress
moment increases.

                                       9
III. Data procurement and Methods
Formally, the scope of this section is to isolate moments of market shock by identifying and
segmenting the historical ETH/USDT market into both “stress” and “normal” regimes. In equal
measure, this section will derive the relevant methods and their data to investigate the central
research question. The ETH/USDT pair was selected due to being one of the most liquid crypto
pairs globally, with both having daily traded volumes reaching tens of billions of dollars, making
them among the top 4 most traded tokens across all markets; USDT is the more prominent of the
two (CoinGecko, 2025). However, the rationale for this pair extends beyond this as USDT is a
USD-pegged stable coin and its value is intentionally designed to remain close to one U.S. dollar,
irrespective of broader market conditions on the Ethereum network. This makes USDT
functionally equivalent to a stable unit of account within the markets. Because ETH is not ERC-
                8
20 compliant , DEXs wrap ETH into its ERC-20 equivalent (Wrapped-ETH or WETH) to allow
it to interact with liquidity pools and smart contracts. Thus, for the DEX venue, the pair analyzed
is WETH/USDT. Importantly, WETH is fully backed 1:1 by ETH and, therefore, it serves as the
functional representation of ETH in the DEX. Due to dataset constraints and API query limits,
only one market is analyzed as representable for the measurement of liquidity on both venues,
despite the existence of other valid pairs. The DEX and CEX venues this paper explores are
Uniswap V3 0.3% fee tier and Binance. The rationale behind Uniswap V3 comes from its ranking
as the third most used DEX venue in terms of traded volume across all pairs (CoinGecko, 2025).
However, more importantly, through inspection of the WETH/USDT pools in the top 2 venues, it
                                                                       9
is observed that Uniswap V3 has a greater total value lock (TVL) for WETH/USDT 0.3% than
PancakeSwap and Aerodrome Slipstream had for their highest TVL WETH/USDT pool ($11.7m
vs $1.34m vs $200k) (PancakeSwap, 2025), (Aerodome Slipstream, 2025). Fee tier pool 0.3% was
selected due to having the highest TVL among the fee tiers on Uniswap V3. The rationale for
selecting Binance as the CEX representative venue is similar to Uniswap (CoinGecko, 2025).

To clarify the structure of the following sections: Section A. delves into the identification of our
stress and normal periods, section B establishes the methodologies used to test for the hypotheses,
and section C explores the methodologies regarding the data and its collection.

A. Specifying the Normal-to-Stress period sample
To procure the primary dataset on the historical hourly data for the ETH/USDT pair, Klines API
from the Binance centralized exchange was selected and used for its popularity among users and
volume (Binance, 2025). This allowed for a more representative picture of the CEX venue which
many other competing venues strive to replicate. To this end, a four-year sample, spanning from
November 9th, 2021, to 2025, of 1-hour candles was extracted as this was the time frame in which
the Uniswap V3 venue had become an established and relevant venue for cryptocurrency traders
and market makers. The variance of these data points was estimated using the popular Rogers-
Satchell (RS) volatility estimator, as opposed to the commonly employed Garman-Klass estimator,

8
 ERC-20 compliant means that a token follows the ERC-20 standard. This standard is a set of rules on the Ethereum
blockchain that defines how tokens should behave. ETH was created before ERC-20 came into effect; thus its new
form became WETH on chain.
9
 TVL represents the total monetary value of the reserved tokens provided by the liquidity providers in this pool. A
greater TVL often implies better liquidity assuming its normally distributed around price.

                                      10
due to the particularly high frequency of the stress period data resulting in a definitive non-zero
drift component. To justify, stress periods identified in our sample did not last more than 10 hours
and were thus analyzed as events and not continuously. The use of the Garman-Klass estimator
would, therefore, have been unfaithful due to its zero-drift assumption, as discussed by Shu and
Zhang (2006). For every given hourly candle with open timestamp t, The RS volatility for each
candle, 𝜎𝑅𝑆, was calculated as follows:

                                                                          𝐻𝑡          𝐻𝑡              𝐿𝑡          𝐿𝑡
                            𝜎𝑅𝑆 = √𝑙𝑛 (  ) 𝑙𝑛 (  ) + 𝑙𝑛 (  ) 𝑙𝑛 (  ) (1)
                                                                          𝐶𝑡          𝑂𝑡              𝐶𝑡          𝑂𝑡

Where 𝑂𝑡, 𝐻𝑡, 𝐿𝑡, and 𝐶𝑡 represent the open, high, low and close (OHLC) prices at for the candle
with open timestamp 𝑡 for each candle, respectively. Through a percentile-based filtering process,
stress and normal periods were identified in our dataset on the complete 4-year time series. Stress
candles were defined as those that were at or beyond the 90th percentile of the total candle RS
volatility distribution, while normal candles were at the bottom 50% of the distribution.

Continuous stress candles were merged and sequences that did not have a normal-volatility period
immediately before were removed. The rationale for this was to account for the lagged decay effect
candles can have on future candles (Bouchaud, Farmer, & Lillo, 2009). With this, a data-based
approach for determining normal and periods of market stress is derived. However, since volatile
events can occur in a select few minutes within an hourly candle, further investigation on the
volatility of the minute candles in the normal stress was conducted. To measure the short-horizon
volatility of minute candles, the log of price return for ETH/USDT for each candle with a 1-minute
difference (𝑡) was computed. In addition, the realized volatility (RV) was also determined using a

                                      11
rolling 10-period window, decided based on the robustness test results from Table 1, with 𝑡 here
representing the candle index in our normal-stress (normal or stress timestamp) period:

                                                                                        𝑃𝑡
                                        𝑟𝑡 = 𝑙𝑛 (    ) (2)
                                                          𝑃𝑡−1

                                                                                                                                         𝑡
                                                         2
                                𝑅𝑉10(𝑡) = √ ∑ 𝑟𝑡                              (3)
                                                            𝑖=𝑡−9

Examining realized volatility in such a manner follows the Andersen-Bollerslev-Diebold-Labys
(ABDL) framework (Andersen et al., 2001) and is a noteworthy method for the purposes of
selecting moments of liquidity degradation, both due to the immediate volatility, but also the
delayed volatility effect from previous candles (Bouchaud, Farmer, & Lillo, 2009). To identify
persistent normal and stress volatility states, the mean RV inside 35% windows throughout the
entire normal-stress event was computed.

The highest and lowest points of RV were labelled, and, thereafter, the stress timestamp 𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠
and normal timestamp 𝑡𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙 were selected accordingly. These timestamps were then translated
into block numbers for the DEX venue, which occurred at or immediately after 𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠 and 𝑡𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙,
formalized as: 𝑏𝑙𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠 and 𝑏𝑙𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙 (refer to Appendix B.1 and Figure 2). After removing
continuous adjacent normal-stress events with gaps lasting less than 1 hour and where a stress
event, 𝑖, has 𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠 < 𝑡𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙 (refer to Appendix B.2), the final normal-stress event sample size
was 417, with a timestamps/block for each 𝑡𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙 and 𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠 .

                                      12
B. Variable construction for testing Hypotheses

To derive an empirical method for testing the hypotheses for the liquidity resilience/degradation
of the Binance ETH/USDT market CEX venue and the Uniswap V3 fee tier 0.3% WETH/USDT
DEX venue, transaction costs are utilized as the primary dependent variable for observing and
comparing the market quality of the two analyzed venues. This variable summarizes the effective
cost for a user executing a trade and is determined by the underlying mechanisms of the two
venues, thus making it possible to investigate them through transaction cost components.

B.1 Computing Transaction costs

The total transaction cost (𝑇𝐶) for the identified normal and stress timestamps, 𝑡𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙 and 𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠 ,
was constructed as the main investigated dependent variable for both the Binance and Uniswap
V3 venues for a range of standardized ETH (𝑋). According to the following formula used by
Barbon and Ranaldo (2024), the total transaction cost for a given trade size, ∆𝑥 (ranging from 0.1
to 100ETH), traded to or from USDT (𝑌) at a given timestamp 𝑡 (block number, 𝑏𝑙, for DEX), for
normal-stress period, 𝑖, on either the Binance or the Uniswap V3 fee tier 0.3% venue is defined as
follows when accounting for the key cost components for the trading of CEX versus DEX:

                                               𝐶𝐸𝑋                 𝐶𝐸𝑋                 𝐶𝐸𝑋
                                  𝑇𝐶𝑋𝑌,𝑖 (Δ𝑥, 𝑡) = 𝑆𝑋𝑌,𝑖 (Δ𝑥, 𝑡) + 𝑓𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒                              (4)

                                   𝐷𝐸𝑋                 𝐷𝐸𝑋                 𝐷𝐸𝑋    𝑔𝑖 (𝑏𝑙)
                          𝑇𝐶𝑋𝑌,𝑖 (Δ𝑥, 𝑏𝑙) = 𝑆𝑋𝑌,𝑖 (Δ𝑥, 𝑏𝑙) + 𝑓𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒 +                              (5)
                                                                 Δ𝑥

             𝐶𝐸𝑋
For 𝑇𝐶𝑋𝑌,𝑖 (Δ𝑥, 𝑡):

   𝐶𝐸𝑋
𝑆𝑋𝑌,𝑖 (Δ𝑥, 𝑡) represents the spread-based measure of slippage, calculated as the difference between
the volume-weighted ask and bid prices and normalized by their sum for a specific ETH order size,
Δ𝑥, at time, 𝑡. This value measures the relative cost or market friction of executing an order of size
                                                                         𝐶𝐸𝑋
Δ𝑥 (refer to Appendix B.3 for further explanation). The 𝑓𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒 is the fixed percentage fee of the
                                                                    10
venue for Binance, and, assuming the utilization of BNB  , is fixed at 0.075%.

            𝐷𝐸𝑋
For 𝑇𝐶𝑋𝑌,𝑖 (Δ𝑥, 𝑏𝑙):

  𝐷𝐸𝑋
𝑆𝑋𝑌,𝑖 (Δ𝑥, 𝑏𝑙): the average of the slippage when buying (W)ETH and when selling (W)ETH. This
method differs from the CEX venue, and a more detailed overview provided in Appendix B.4.
  𝐷𝐸𝑋
𝑓𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒: the fixed percentage fee of the Uniswap V3 venue, which is the pool fee tier of 0.3% in
this case. 𝑔(𝑏𝑙)𝑖: represents the settlement cost of the on-chain gas fee required for users to validate
their (W)ETH/USDT swap, exclusive to the DEX venue, and is the effective median gas price at
block 𝑏𝑙 (See Appendix B.5 for more details).

10
  BNB is Binance’s native utility token used to reduce trading fees and facilitate various services across the Binance
ecosystem.

                                      13
B.2 Testing for Hypotheses 1&2: Degradation in liquidity

For the measurement of degradation in liquidity of both venues, the change in transaction cost
between the stress and normal time/block within the normal-stress event 𝑖 is examined. For the
CEX Binance venue, it is as follows:

                                      𝐶𝐸𝑋                          𝐶𝐸𝑋                                   𝐶𝐸𝑋
                  ∆𝑇𝐶𝑋𝑌  (∆𝑥, 𝑖) = ∆𝑇𝐶𝑋𝑌  (∆𝑥, 𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠 ) − ∆𝑇𝐶𝑋𝑌  (∆𝑥, 𝑡𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙 ) (6)

And for the Uniswap V3 DEX:

                                  𝐷𝐸𝑋                         𝐷𝐸𝑋                                   𝐷𝐸𝑋
                ∆𝑇𝐶𝑋𝑌  (∆𝑥, 𝑖) = ∆𝑇𝐶𝑋𝑌  (∆𝑥, 𝑏𝑙𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠 ) − ∆𝑇𝐶𝑋𝑌  (∆𝑥, 𝑏𝑙𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙) (7)

After the degradation in liquidity for CEX and DEX are determined, a one-sided (right tail) t-test
is performed to test if hypothesis 1 (refer to Hypotheses formation) is significant at the 5% level,
allowing for the verification of whether or not the DEX and CEX venues do both, in fact, have
higher transaction costs post-stress:

                                                                                              ̅   ̅   ̅   ̅   ̅   ̅  𝐶𝐸𝑋̅   ̅   ̅   ̅  /̅  𝐷𝐸𝑋̅   ̅   ̅   ̅                                ̅   ̅   ̅   ̅   ̅   ̅  𝐶𝐸𝑋̅   ̅   ̅   ̅  /̅  𝐷𝐸𝑋̅   ̅   ̅   ̅
                         𝐻0: ∆𝑇𝐶∆𝑥       ≤ 0, 𝐻1: ∆𝑇𝐶∆𝑥       > 0 (8)

With regards to hypothesis 2, this study has attempted to investigate whether smaller trades for a
DEX degrade more than larger trades during stress and if this degradation becomes stronger
when gas is removed. To test for this, a panel regression with an interaction term is performed.
Using the natural log of the trade size (∆𝑥) to linearize the inverse relationship in equation 5:

                   𝐷𝐸𝑋
             𝑇𝐶𝑖,𝑏𝑙  = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑏𝑙 + 𝛽2𝑙𝑛(∆𝑥𝑖) + 𝛽3(𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑏𝑙 ∙ 𝑙𝑛(Δ𝑥𝑖)) + 𝜀𝑖,𝑏𝑙 (9)

Where 𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑏𝑙 is a dummy variable that takes on the values of 0 or 1 if the observed block is
normal or stress, respectively; 𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑏𝑙 ∙ 𝑙𝑛(Δ𝑥𝑖) is the interaction term. Lastly, 𝜀𝑖,𝑏𝑙 is the error
term, or the unexplained variation of the regression due to omitted variable bias. This regression
is re-ran excluding the gas component in the DEX transaction cost:

                                        𝐷𝐸𝑋,𝑛𝑜 𝑔𝑎𝑠                       𝐷𝐸𝑋
                           𝑇𝐶𝑋𝑌,𝑖        (∆𝑥, 𝑏𝑙) = 𝑇𝐶𝑋𝑌,𝑖 (∆𝑥, 𝑏𝑙) − 𝑔𝑖 (𝑏𝑙)

A positive and statistically significant 𝛽1 would prove that the degradation in DEX liquidity after
a stress event holds. A negative and statistically significant 𝛽2 would signify that larger trades tend
to have a lower relative liquidity degradation, consistent with the diminishing marginal slippage
that is present at AMM pricing (Adams, Zinsmeister and Robinson 2020). The key parameter for
our hypothesis is the coefficient 𝛽3 which details whether market stress affects transaction costs
                                                                                                                𝐷𝐸𝑋,𝑛𝑜 𝑔𝑎𝑠             𝐷𝐸𝑋
differently. More profoundly, the comparison of this coefficient between 𝑇𝐶𝑋𝑌,𝑖           and 𝑇𝐶𝑋𝑌,𝑖
                                                       𝑛𝑜 𝑔𝑎𝑠
gives rise to a noteworthy relationship. If 𝛽3      is less negative and statistically significant than
𝛽3, this would imply that the disproportionate deterioration in liquidity observed for smaller trades
                                                                                                                                   𝑛𝑜 𝑔𝑎𝑠
is caused by the gas component of DEX execution costs. Namely, a reduction in the size of 𝛽3
relative to 𝛽3would provide direct support for this paper’s second hypothesis, shedding light to
whether gas fees are a driver of weaker liquidity for small trade sizes during stress.

                                      14
B.3 Testing for Hypothesis 3: Additive decomposition
To test for hypothesis 3, leading question on how the behavior of gas varies in the WETH/USDT
market in the Uniswap V3 fee tier 0.3% venue over time must be addressed. Since gas fees
constitute a core component of transaction costs in DEXs, understanding their historical long-run
behavior is vital for assessing if the DEX venue’s liquidity will converge towards being
competitive with those on CEXs like Binance, as proposed by Barbon and Ranaldo (2024).
Significantly, this examination would determine if there were a time effect that needs to be adjusted
for in the gas fee component of transaction costs for, at least, the WETH/USDT market. Through
an additive decomposition of the time series of gas prices, effective gas prices are deconstructed
into two primary, non-overlapping components, following the design of EIP-1559: base fee, 𝐵,
and the priority fee, 𝑃𝑟, for block, 𝑏𝑙, and transaction number, 𝑡𝑥. Consistent with the method in
B.1, we use the median priority fee and the base fee for a given block, yielding a relation as follows:

                                 𝐺𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙(𝑏𝑙) = 𝐵(𝑏𝑙) + 𝑀𝑃𝑟(𝑏𝑙) (10)

The aim with this is to observe the time effect of the base fee and the median priority fee. This is
achieved by regressing the trend as follows:

                                                                                                𝐵
                                      𝐵𝜆 = 𝛼𝐵 + 𝛽𝐵𝜆 + 𝜀𝜆 , (11)

                                                                                                      𝑀𝑃𝑟
                                  𝑀𝑃𝑟𝜆 + 𝛼𝑀𝑃𝑟 + 𝛽𝑀𝑃𝑟𝜆 + 𝜀𝜆   , (12)

                                              𝑏𝑙 − 𝑏𝑙0
                                       𝜆 =         , (13)
                                               ∆𝑏𝑙

                                    th
Where, 𝜆 represents every 300  incremental block (∆𝑏𝑙), from block number 𝑏𝑙0 = 13623124
to 238286124 (𝜆𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 34210). For more information as to why this was done, please refer to
section C.2. The squared residuals of the base fee and priority fee are then regressed:

                                        2
                                                      ̂  𝐵                             𝐵
                                    (𝜀𝜆 )  = 𝛾𝐵 + 𝛿𝐵𝜆 + 𝑢𝜆                                (14)

                                      2
                                               ̂ 𝑀𝑃𝑟                                    𝑀𝑃𝑟
                                (𝜀𝜆   )  = 𝛾𝑀𝑃𝑟 + 𝛿𝑀𝑃𝑟𝜆 + 𝑢𝜆                              (15)

All regressions listed above are estimated using ordinary least square (OLS) and the statistical
significance of the trend coefficients is evaluated using two-sided t-tests; the conclusions drawn
from them will provide the groundwork for the new construction for the gas component, referred
                                        𝐴𝑑𝑗
to as adjusted gas (𝑔𝑖   ):

                                                     𝐴𝑑𝑗                             𝐴𝑑𝑗                       𝐴𝑑𝑗
                           𝑔𝑖   (𝑏𝑙) = 𝑈𝐶 ∙ (𝐵    (𝑏𝑙) + 𝑀𝑃𝑟    (𝑏𝑙)) (16)

                                           𝐴𝑑𝑗                                                              𝐴𝑑𝑗
We adjust the base, 𝐵    (𝑏𝑙), and median priority, 𝑀𝑃𝑟    (𝑏𝑙), gas fee components based on
observations on the regression coefficients and their respective significance:

                                      15
                           0 𝑖𝑓: 𝛽̂ 𝐵 < 0 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑝̂   < 0.05 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝛿̂ 𝐵 < 0 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑝̂   < 0.05,
                                                               𝛽𝐵                                      𝛿𝐵
                                𝐴𝑑𝑗                                                 ̂                                                            ̂
        𝐵    (𝑏𝑙) = {𝐵𝜆 + 𝛽𝐵(𝜆𝑚𝑎𝑥 − 𝜆) 𝑖𝑓: 𝛽𝐵 < 0 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑝𝛽̂   < 0.05 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑝 𝛿̂   ≥ 0.05,
                                                                              𝐵                     𝐵
                                       𝐵(𝜆) 𝑖𝑓: 𝑝𝛽̂   > 0.05 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑝 𝛿̂   > 0.05 .
                                                            𝐵                     𝐵

                        0 𝑖𝑓: 𝛽̂ 𝑀𝑃𝑟 < 0 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑝̂     < 0.05 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝛿̂ 𝑀𝑃𝑟 < 0 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑝̂     < 0.05,
                                                              𝛽𝑀𝑃𝑟                                          𝛿𝑀𝑃𝑟
                 𝐴𝑑𝑗                                                           ̂                                                                    ̂
𝑀𝑃𝑟    (𝑏𝑙) = {𝑀𝑃𝑟𝜆 + 𝛽𝑀𝑃𝑟(𝜆𝑚𝑎𝑥 − 𝜆) 𝑖𝑓: 𝛽𝑀𝑃𝑟 < 0 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑝𝛽̂ 𝑀𝑃𝑟 < 0.05 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑝 𝛿̂ 𝑀𝑃𝑟 ≥ 0.05,
                                     𝑀𝑃𝑟(𝜆) 𝑖𝑓: 𝑝𝛽̂      > 0.05 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑝 𝛿̂       > 0.05 .
                                                              𝑀𝑃𝑟                     𝑀𝑃𝑟

Where: 𝑏𝑙 is the block observed, 𝑏𝑙0 is block number 1362314 (𝜆0 = 0), and ∆𝑏𝑙 = 300 is the
incremental size for the trend data we retrieve. The expression for the second-row conditions
preserves the fee level at the newest block and incrementally shifts earlier blocks. This adjustment
removes the deterministic decline in fees over time while retaining idiosyncratic cycle-by-cycle
variation that is economically relevant for transaction-cost formation for modern day analysis.
Using these derived insights and in the pursuit of examining whether these gas fee trends will
continue in the future, a new set of adjusted transaction costs for the DEX Uniswap V3 venue is
obtained which better models the transaction cost that can be expected in future.

                                                                                                                                   𝐴𝑑𝑗
                                   𝐷𝐸𝑋,𝐴𝑑𝑗                   𝐷𝐸𝑋                   𝐷𝐸𝑋     𝑔𝑖    (𝑏𝑙)
                      𝑇𝐶𝑋𝑌,𝑖     (∆𝑥, 𝑏𝑙) = 𝑆𝑋𝑌,𝑖 (∆𝑥, 𝑏𝑙) + 𝑓𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒 +                            (17)
                                                                  ∆𝑥

The difference in liquidity degradation between DEX and CEX, for a specific normal-stress event
                                                                                                    𝐷𝐸𝑋,𝐴𝑑𝑗
𝑖, reusing equation 6 and adjusting equation 7 with the new 𝑇𝐶𝑋𝑌,𝑖     is as follows:

                                                                                𝐷𝐸𝑋,𝐴𝑑𝑗                            𝐶𝐸𝑋
                         𝐷(∆𝑥, 𝑖) = ∆𝑇𝐶𝑋𝑌     (∆𝑥, 𝑖) − ∆𝑇𝐶𝑋𝑌  (∆𝑥, 𝑖) (18)

Where a one-sided (right tail) t-test for the mean of a trade size, ∆𝑥, across all normal-stress events
is performed to test for hypothesis 3:

                                             𝐻0: ̅𝐷̅ ̅ ∆̅ 𝑥̅  ≥ 0, 𝐻1: ̅𝐷̅ ̅ ∆̅ 𝑥̅  < 0

B.4 Testing for Hypothesis 4: Explaining Improved Slippage on DEX

In this section, the empirical method for testing whether pre-stress volume has a differential impact
on DEX and CEX slippage during volatile events is established, as formulated in our fourth
hypothesis in Hypotheses formulation. To test for this, a first-difference interaction regression
model is constructed that compares how DEX and CEX slippage react to changes in pre-stress
volume. This model was chosen to control for omitted variable bias, allowing for the better
isolation of the effect of the pre-stress volume on DEX and CEX slippages.

For each event, 𝑖, occurring in a venue (DEX / CEX), slippage is measured at stress (𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠 or
𝑏𝑙𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠 ) and at normal (𝑡𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙 or 𝑏𝑙𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙). The dependent variable is the change in slippages
between these states,

                                      16
                                        𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒                 𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒,𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠                  𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒,𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙
                      ∆𝑆𝑋𝑌,𝑖   (∆𝑥) = 𝑆𝑋𝑌,𝑖         (∆𝑥) − 𝑆𝑋𝑌,𝑖          (∆𝑥) (19)

A positive and statistically significant value in the change in slippage signals worsened slippage
following a stress event while a negative value would reflect an improvement. Trade volume
activity before a stress timestamp occurs is examined as this is observable by liquidity providers.
To quantify this activity, ETH/USDT transaction volume in two windows is compared: ten minutes
prior to the stress timestamp, and ten minutes prior to the normal timestamp:

                                                                       𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠        𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙
                                 ∆𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑖 = 𝑉𝑖       − 𝑉𝑖

This denotes the change in volume or otherwise interpreted as volume pressure. Prior to our stress
and normal timestamps, starting precisely at the 10-minute mark leading up, it is observed that the
stress–normal difference in volume spikes sharply. This sudden and enduring increase in trading
activity suggests that liquidity and order-flow conditions begin to shift meaningfully only within
the final ten minutes before a stress event.

The following first-difference interaction model is derived from this information to test for whether
this volume build up affects slippage differently between DEX and CEX:

    𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒                                                                                                       𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑢𝑒
∆𝑆𝑋𝑌,𝑖  (∆𝑥) = 𝛼 + 𝛽1Δ𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑖 + 𝛽2Market𝑖 + 𝛽3(∆𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑖 ∙ Market𝑖 ) + 𝛾𝑋𝑖 + 𝜀𝑖     (20)

                                      17
Where Market𝑖 is a dummy variable taking on the values of 0 or 1 if the observation is for either
the Binance or Uniswap V3 venue, respectively. The main coefficient of interest is 𝛽3, or the
coefficient of the interaction term of the Market dummy variable and the volume pressure which
captures the additional sensitivity of the Uniswap V3 slippage for the WETH/USDT pair to change
in pre-event volume, relative to the Binance slippage for the ETH/USDT pair. A statistically
significantly and negative value for this coefficient would support the hypothesis that increases in
pre-stress trading activity disproportionately improve execution on the DEX.

To isolate the effect of when LPs withdraw reserves or stay passive during these events, we account
for several control variables in the vector 𝑋𝑖. Firstly, realized volatility change between stress and
normal is controlled for, as the change in realized volatility between the normal and stress
timestamps controls for shifts in price variability. Secondly, price directionality (defined in
equation 2) is included to control for directional price moves that generate impermanent-loss-
driven liquidity changes. This allows for the determination of whether rising pre-stress volume
improves DEX liquidity only when prices are not trending strongly. Thirdly, the change in
effective gas price between the two timestamps is also included as a control as it is a viable proxy
for examining blockchain congestion, which influences repositioning decisions by LPs. Finally,
the asset price at the normal timestamp is used to control for the mechanical scale effect by which
slippage increases with the level of the underlying asset.

C. Data for Hypothesis testing

To procure reliable results for the scope of this paper and to give a robust review of the hypotheses,
certain data requirements need to be satisfied. Namely, data on liquidity depth, the gas fee
components, and trade volume data must be retrieved for both the CEX and DEX venue to test for
the four hypotheses established. As such, this section details exactly how and why we retrieve the
data required and is formally to support choices made leading up to the empirical findings.

C.1 Collecting Data on liquidity depth

To capture liquidity conditions on the Binance venue, the identified timestamps 𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑖 and
𝑡𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑖 in section A were used to query CoinAPI in an attempt to fetch the snapshots of the
historical limit orderbook (LOB) states for each normal-stress event, 𝑖, on the Binance venue and,
in particular, the twenty best bid levels and the twenty best ask levels for ETH/USDT (CoinAPI,
2025):

                      𝐵𝑖 = {(𝑏𝑖, 𝑣𝑖): 𝐼 = 1, … ,20}, 𝐴𝑖 = {(𝑎𝑗, 𝑣𝑗): 𝑗 = 1, . . . ,20}

Because LOBs on the CEX venue are a form of continuous data, it is expensive to store the state
of every timestamp. For this reason, many free APIs, such as CoinAPI, have gaps in their database
(CoinAPI, 2025). As such, a tolerance window is needed to match event timestamps to the closest
available book state. After different tolerance intervals were tested for, a ±35 second time was
selected as a reasonable time interval based on the logarithmic relationship between recovered
events and window size. Orderbook states were retrieved in this interval and the closest ones to

                                      18
their respective query timestamp were selected as the representable timestamps. However, due to
missing data from CoinAPI, our main data extractor for the Binance venue, our sample of
orderbook snapshots for Binance (CEX) was reduced to 294 events.

Unlike Binance, DEXs, such as Uniswap V3, do not organize liquidity in a LOB. Rather, price
movements evolve endogenously based on how liquidity is distributed across price intervals
(known as “ticks”, an internal price measurement for Uniswap V3 smart contract), implying that
slippage on DEXs is determined entirely by the current price in the liquidity curve at the exact
block in which the trade is executed. Because Uniswap V3 operates on a public blockchain, all
interactions with smart contracts are permanently recorded on-chain, including liquidity additions
and removals to tick intervals and swap transactions by liquidity providers. From these raw events,
free and commercial APIs, such as the Alchemy RPC endpoint, reconstruct the liquidity curve and
store it as a snapshot (Alchemy, 2025). Using this, a ± 333 tick window around current price, 𝑃0,
of net liquidity, 𝐿   11, with its corresponding tick on the Uniswap V3 WETH/USDT 0.3% pool
                                     𝑛𝑒𝑡
state for normal and stress blocks, 𝑏𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙 and 𝑏𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠 , for normal-stress event, 𝑖, were retrieved
to observe the state of the liquidity distribution at the event observed and accounted for.

C.2: Setting up gas price data

Gas data was retrieved for two purposes: i) to investigate the technological components of gas,
and ii) to identify the gas prices for our blocks, 𝑏𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠 and 𝑏𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙 . With this data, we can
effectively use these gas components in the simulation for transaction costs in the DEX venue for
testing our third hypothesis.

Formally, a time series of gas data (including base fee, median priority fee, etc) was retrieved from
Alchemy API. Due to computational constraints, the fetched historical dataset contained the base
fee and the median priority fee for every 300th block, 𝜆, between block numbers 13,623,124 and
23,886,141 (15 Nov 2021 to 26 Nov 2025). This sampling approach provided a consistent and
computationally efficient way to observe gas-market trends without the need to query every
individual block on the blockchain. Thereafter, using Alchemy API once more, a dataset was
retrieved specifically for the stress and normal blocks containing transaction-level gas data for
every transaction in the block. (Alchemy, 2025)

C.3: Volume and Price directionality

To retrieve data capable of testing Hypothesis 4 (refer to section B.4), 30 minutes of decentralized-
exchange swap events preceding each normal and stress timestamp was collected from the
Uniswap V3 WETH/USDT 0.3% pool using the API endpoint “The Graph” (The Graph,
2025). For each normal and stress timestamp in event, 𝑖, all swaps occurring in the 30 minutes
leading up to the timestamp were aggregated into minute-level volumes, yielding the vector:

                                       (𝑉𝑡−30, 𝑉𝑡−29, 𝑉𝑡−28, . . . , 𝑉𝑡−1, 𝑉𝑡)

11
  Liquidity net is the change in active liquidity when the price crosses a tick boundary, reflecting how much
liquidity is added or removed. It can be observed at every tick and essentially determines how the pool’s total active
liquidity updates as price moves through the tick grid.

                                      19
                                                                                                th
𝑉𝑡−𝑚 represents the total ETH-denominated trading volume executed in the m  minute before
timestamp, t. This produced a consistent and aligned set of pre-event volume observations for both
the normal and stress events to be used to examine whether increases in on-chain trading activity
helped explain differences in slippage behavior between DEX and CEX during stress periods;
effectively, it enabled the construction of the main explanatory variable testing for the fourth
hypothesis. Once more, The Binance public API Klines was queried to fetch both a ten-minute
lagged benchmark price and the current price for each of the stress and normal timestamps which
is depicted by Figure 4 (Binance, 2025). This allowed for the construction of the price-
directionality measure, the control variable for testing hypothesis 4.

                                      20
IV. Empirical findings

This section presents the empirical results and descriptive statistics for testing hypotheses 1-4. We
begin by examining how transaction cost changes in the DEX and CEX. We then turn to the
estimates from the panel regression that assess the relationship between stress and the liquidity
degradation across trade sizes for testing our second hypothesis. Thereafter, the gas fee trend over
time and the tables featuring the estimates from the regressions for the main structural and
technological components of gas are illustrated, setting the grounds for the results comparing the
liquidity degradation in the DEX and CEX. Lastly, the regression on whether DEX liquidity,
relative to CEX, can improve under stress by studying how pre-stress trading activity affects the
outcome is shown.
A. Hypotheses Results
A.1 Results for Hypothesis 1

                                      21
Inspecting Table 2, it is observed that transaction costs statistically significantly increase following
a stress event for both the Binance (CEX) and Uniswap V3 (DEX) venues. The mean change in
transaction costs, the liquidity degradation, is positive across all trade sizes for both CEX and DEX
and is statistically significant at the 1% level, except for CEX trade size 100 ETH which is only
statistically significant at the 5% level. With increased trade size in CEX, the results become more
unreliable due to insufficient data on liquidity depth and this is accounted for by applying a
bootstrapping method for 10000 iterations, depicted by the error bars in Figure 5. In reference to
this figure, on average, liquidity degradation occurs across both venues and there is a clear
convergence between CEX and DEX as trade size increases. Both the DEX and CEX liquidity
degradation trends show that, for larger trade sizes, the average liquidity degradation stabilizes.
Overall, these results showcase that both venues experience a deterioration in market quality when
volatility spikes.

                                      22
A.2 Results for Hypothesis 2:

                                      23
Furthermore, Table 3 showcases the results of the panel regression performed on the total
transaction cost for each block in the WETH/USDT market that is studied during a stress event, 𝑖,
with gas prices included for both the normal and the stress blocks. The regression features 2 key
variables for testing hypothesis 2: i) a stress dummy, 𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑏𝑙 , taking on values of 0 or 1, and ii)
natural logarithm of the trade size, ln(∆𝑥𝑖). An interaction term between the two is also included
to review whether transaction costs are lower for higher trade sizes. All the coefficients for these
variables are found to be statistically significant at the 1% level.

Table 4 shows an identically setup panel regression as performed in Table 3 for the adjusted
transaction cost (exclusion of effective gas prices) for each block for event, 𝑖. We observe that
  𝑛𝑜 𝑔𝑎𝑠
𝛽1      gas is negative, having the opposite sign from Table 2 regression. This implies that, for
very small trade sizes, pure slippage is slightly lower during stress in the DEX venue. Similarly,
                                      𝑛𝑜 𝑔𝑎𝑠
we see a reverse in sign for 𝛽2     , where a relative size up in traded ETH (e.g doubling) has a
positive effect on transaction costs, implying that without gas, transaction costs scale with trade
                                                   𝑛𝑜 𝑔𝑎𝑠
size. Lastly, the coefficient of interest, 𝛽3      , shows also a reverse in sign, turning positive. This
means that during a stress moment (𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠 = 1) a relative increase in ETH traded (e.g. doubling)
will increase transaction cost for DEX.

Table 5 presents a decomposition panel for the transaction costs for the DEX and CEX venues of
different trade sizes. It is observed that, on average across all events, for a small trade size such as
0.1 or 2 ETH, more than 99% of the average transaction cost increase is explained by the average
change in gas fee. Meanwhile, by the time the trade size reaches 100 ETH, only 16.82% of the

                                      24
transaction cost in DEX is explained by gas. These results prove our hypothesis 2, that gas
disproportionally impacts liquidity degradation of smaller trades sizes.
A.3 Hypothesis 3: The gas component and adjusted Transaction cost

                                      25
All figures examine the relationship between the trend in the effective gas price, 𝐺𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙(𝑏𝑙), or its
constituents, 𝐵(𝑏𝑙) or 𝑀𝑃𝑟(𝑏𝑙), with time, represented by 𝜆, tracked by every 300th chronological
block number, indexed by 𝜆, in the past 4 years (from 09-11-2021 to 09-11-2025). For the effective
gas price, there is an apparent downward trend, often associated with an improvement in
technological costs in existing literature (Barbon et al, 2024). Through the additive decomposition
(III B.3), base gas fees show a clear downward trend with time in Figure 8. On the other hand, as
observed in Figure 7, median priority fees tend to have much less downward pressure, with a more
unambiguous trend revealed. Although both components experience large volatility over time,
Median priority fee is much more constant over time than the base fee, revealed by the trend
differences.

                                      26
27
Table 6 is a regression performed (following equations 11 and 12) on the separate components of
the effective gas fee in the WETH/USDT market from the Uniswap V3 pool, with one regression
targeting the base gas fee, and the other the median priority fee trends over block numbers
normalized to. The statistically significant base fee coefficient, 𝛽𝐵, has a negative value of 0.0019.
This number suggests that for one increase in 𝜆, which is 300 blocks (meaning every 25 minutes),
the base fee has had a downward trend of 0.0019 Gwei, over the past 4 years. Similarly, we see a
statistically significant 𝛽𝑀𝑃𝑟 that is negative. Importantly, this value is much smaller than the
magnitude of 𝛽𝐵.

In parallel to this, a divergence in the results between the estimated variance in base fee and median
priority fee is observed. We observed a statistically significant and negative 𝛿𝐵, implying that the
variance of the base fee has decreased over time. In contrast, while 𝛿𝑀𝑃𝑟 takes on a negative value,
it is not statistically significant with a p-value < 5%. Based on the conditions set in, section III B.3
and on the assumption that these observed results in trends will maintain in the future, we set
    𝐴𝑑𝑗                                                  𝐴𝑑𝑗                                       ̂
𝐵   (𝑏𝑙) = 0, and 𝑀𝑃𝑟   (𝑏𝑙) = 𝑀𝑃𝑟𝜆 + 𝛽𝑀𝑃𝑟 (𝜆𝑚𝑎𝑥 − 𝜆) thus obtaining a new adjusted
transaction costs for DEX making for a better comparison between DEX and CEX.

                                      28
Figure 9 shows the average liquidity degradation for both the CEX and DEX venues after removing
the technological component of the gas fee from the DEX transaction cost. In comparison to figure
5, the liquidity degradation for DEX is smaller, on average, than that of CEX for larger trade sizes.
The adjustment for DEX is also significant in the pattern of the liquidity degradation of DEX
across trade sizes. Despite this change, we still observe that for small trades such as 0.1 ETH, the
CEX venue experiences superior liquidity resilience, a pattern that reverts around the trade sizes 1

                                      29
ETH. These observations in Figure 9 backed by our paired difference t-test in Table 8, disproves
our hypothesis 3.

A.4 Hypothesis 4: Liquidity improvements post stress

Figure 10 compares the proportion of events in which slippage improves for each venue across
trade sizes, grouping events by their quartiles. The figure shows two clear patterns: i) across all
trade sizes, the slippage of the CEX venue has a declining proportion of improvement when going
from small to large trade sizes and ii) DEX shows that for higher trade sizes, for a large proportion
of events, slippage improves. Secondly, we observe that for large trades (> 70 ETH) DEX slippage
improves, while CEX worsen, nearly every second of time a stress event occurs.

                                      30
Table 9 presents the first-difference interaction regression model results for the [%] transaction
costs across each trade size in our sample except for the case of x >85 ETH due to very few
matched pairs (N) present. Here, we estimate whether increases in pre-stress trade volume on
Uniswap V3 actively increase differential improvements of the DEX venue’s slippage as compared
with the CEX’s. The coefficient of interest is 𝛽3, which is the interaction term between the market
dummy variable and the change in volume, and it is found to be statistically insignificant, having
mostly negative values for differing trade sizes. This, combined with figure 10, indicates that
slippage statistically insignificantly improves with pre-stress volume in a DEX exchange. In
addition, however, we observe that 𝛽3 is statistically significant for trade size between 4 and 20
ETH. This pattern of negative sign and rising magnitude in the coefficient of the interaction term

                                      31
for larger trade sizes is consistent with what was observed in Figure 10. However, the discrepancy
exists for trade sizes 35, 40, 50, 55, and 65, which are found to be statistically significant at the
5% level.

B. Discussion of findings
We observe that our first hypothesis is proven based on the results found in A.1; across all trade
sizes, the mean change in transaction costs for the market of the (W)ETH/USDT pair through
Binance and the Uniswap V3 venues are positive and statistically significant, implying that both
venues experience higher associated trading costs following an average stress event. The economic
intuition behind this comes from the observed price directionality in Figure 4, where it is apparent
that stress events are associated with stronger and more unstable price movements when followed
by normal periods. This could be because greater price volatility tends to indicate the presence of
price information asymmetry in the market and this effectively forces liquidity providers to charge
larger premiums to compensate for the adverse selection, consistent with the mechanisms
described in the study of Glosten and Milgrom (1985).

Interestingly, the observed behavior of DEX liquidity degradation is disproportionally larger for
smaller trade sizes due to gas, as seen in our Table 3 and 4 panel regression, complemented by the
decomposition Table 5. A similar conclusion made by Barbon and Ranaldo (2024) outlines that
gas affects the transaction cost of smaller trade sizes. However, the economic intuitiveness here
differs as, unlike the fixed-cost nature that gas is assumed to be in related literature, gas is found
to vary in our data; it is a stochastic variable based on factors such as network congestion derived
from, among other factors, the economic urgency to be included in the next block Koutmos (2023).
While this paper does not replicate the exact conditions studied by Koutmos (2023), our results
echo his findings through our sample selection as stress moments are defined by large price
movements. If markets were efficient and there was no arbitrage opportunity, traders would not
have the urgency to execute their trade to the point of overpaying by setting higher priority fees
than others. Though this relation is not empirically proven in our paper, we can draw a logical
connection through the results we have as the disproportionate effect of smaller trade sizes tending
to have higher associated liquidity degradation is maintained when moving from a normal to a
stress period as users are willing to drive this fixed cost higher based on urgency through priority
fee bidding. Therefore, the implication for many smaller traders is to not assume gas costs are
fixed, but rather that they tend to change with stress events and to take note of this prior to
liquidating assets in the DEX market.

On the contrary, a greater limitation when testing for our second hypothesis and the conclusions
drawn from it is that the underlying data may be flawed due to a persistent time effect. Through
our additive decomposition leading up to hypothesis 3, we observed a time effect in the base gas
fee, both in its trend but also in the variance. This finding aligns with Barbon and Ranaldo (2024)
claim that there is a technological aspect to gas prices. While we do not explicitly model for
technological advancements, we can draw the connection between the statistically significant
downward trend observed in the base gas fee and the economic incentive of Ethereum to lower gas
prices; cheaper transactions increase network usage and may ultimately increase the value of the
underlying asset (ETH) and, in turn, their competitiveness as a network provider (Ethereum, 2025).
Under this perspective, most of the gas price is driven by technological constraints, such as the

                                      32
base gas fee which is determined mostly by usage of block capacity and processing efficiency.
Nevertheless, an anomaly that is observed in Table 6 is the time effect in the median priority fee.
This went against our expectations since priority fees, unlike base fees, are not automatically set
by the Ethereum protocol, but rather by the users Karaivanov and Zarifian (2024); one reasonable
explanation for this could be the correlation between base gas fees and priority gas fees. While this
paper does not investigate this, this relationship would examine whether the technological aspect
of the base gas fees influence, or is shared by, the priority gas fees and, hence, we offer this as an
extension to our work. Economically, simple supply and demand incentive structures could further
give light as to why this relationship between base and priority gas fees persists as the block
capacity has increased over the past four years, e.g. EIP-1559I. In essence, as users and bot
programmers become more aware that there is more room for trading and less competition among
other users for block space, the need for out-bidding others competing traders decreases. Despite
this, the trend in the median priority fee is particularly economically negligible in comparison to
the base fee, making it more difficult to assume that, in the long run, the median priority fee will
trend towards zero. As such, for comparative purposes, we adjusted for the time effect in the
median priority fee to at least reflect the modern conditions that may persist in the future. Another
anomaly observed was the negative trend in variance over time. One technological explanation to
                             12
this is the presence of bots   in DEX venues that can suggest an estimated optimal priority fee
                                                 13
based on the current state of the mempool  . While modelling gas is outside the scope of this paper,
gas-suggestion bots could be an explanatory variable as to why we observe priority fee pricing
converges to one point. Regardless of this fact, due to its statistical insignificance, the 𝛿̂ 𝑀𝑃𝑟
coefficient cannot prove a trend in diminishing noise.

Furthermore, after adjusting for the time effect in the median priority fee and the expected trend
in the base gas fee (reaching 0 Gwei in the long-term) to better reflect what might be expected in
the future, we observe a complete change from what was found previously in hypothesis 1. For
larger trade sizes, the Uniswap V3 venue for the (W)ETH/USDT market tends to experience lower
liquidity degradation with only the structural gas components, on average, as opposed to the
Binance venue, backed statistically by the findings in Table 8. Despite this change, our third
hypothesis was not proven to be correct as, even when assuming long-run base gas fees 0 and the
median priority fee adjusted for the time effect, a disproportionate liquidity degradation for smaller
trade sizes persists post-stress. This implies that when accounting for technological improvements
in the long-term, the effect of gas fees on smaller trade sizes is still present. This, in turn, translates
to the fact that degradation in liquidity for the (W)ETH/USDT market for the Uniswap V3 venue
for some trade sizes is still greater for the DEX venue than for the CEX venue. Despite this, for
larger trade sizes, the long-term liquidity degradation for the DEX venue is shown to be much
more competitive than the CEX transaction costs.

To conclude, as shown in Figure 10, the slippage component of the transaction costs in the
Uniswap V3 DEX venue improves disproportionally through normal-stress events in comparison
to CEX for large trade sizes. This phenomenon is attempted to be explained by our first-difference
interaction regression model which was grounded in economic incentives for liquidity providers
derived by Heimbach et al. (2022). 𝛽3, the coefficient of the interaction term in the regression,

12
  For instance: (Unibot, 2025)
13
  Mempool is the space in which all pending transactions gather. These have an priority fee attached to them and is
observable and influences the decisions made by validators.

                                      33
implies an improved slippage for DEX in comparison to CEX post-stress for most trade sizes. This
relationship is observed to be statistically significant for small to mid-trade sizes (4 to 20 ETH)
with p-value levels of 10% to 1%. Despite this, we find the discrepancy between the trade sizes,
both in terms of significance and sign, to not show enough support for our hypothesis across all
trade sizes. Still, the economic intuition is consistent with the literature on liquidity provider
behavior; liquidity providers in a market with concentrated liquidity may experience higher fee
revenues during increased volatility, incentivizing them to re-enter or reposition liquidity toward
the active price (tick) band. We still strongly believe this to be true across all trade sizes rather
than only the ones observed in our results (Table 9). An explanation to why we could not observe
this phenomenon is because our data only looks at the Uniswap V3 pool with fee tier 0.3%.
Through the insights provided by the Heimbach et al. (2022) study, we are confident that liquidity
providers will jump to pools with higher fee tier during times of market stress. Despite this
essential fact, due to data constraints and query limits, investigating every fee tier pool was not
feasible for this paper and, as such, we appreciate that controlling for this or incorporating it into
the model in supplement would potentially make this model even more representative. With this,
it may be possible to prove that by shifting the venue fee to liquidity providers (as DEX does in
opposition to CEX), slippage will improve in times of stress, which will, ultimately, economically
benefit the users and liquidity providers of cryptocurrency exchanges, rather than the exchange
itself (e.g. Binance), creating a more efficient market and mitigating the costs associated with
stress.

Another major point of evaluation for insignificant interaction coefficient amongst most trade sizes
may be sample heterogeneity, as larger trade sizes may be rarer relative to small trades. A reason
for why this may occur, which our simulation for transaction cost does not incorporate, is MEV
bots. Additionally, data constraints also presented a clear limitation for the analysis of the CEX
venue, as observed in all preceding tables featuring trade sizes, the number of observations tended
to decrease gradually with increasing trade sizes. For most events, CEX data did not have enough
liquidity depth to cover the trade sizes during either normal or stress events. This may have been
a significant source for bias in our data considering that when the trade size approaches 75 ETH,
there are only 36 valid observations for CEX. These observations may, in addition, share common
attributes and thus not truly represent random out of the 417 events we selected. This limitation
applies to the rest of the CEX data collected and is regarded in our concluding remarks.

                                      34
V. Concluding Remarks
The main objective set out in this paper, as per our research question, was to reliably compare the
degradation/resilience of liquidity in the (W)ETH/USDT pair market for the centralized Binance
exchange crypto venue and the decentralized Uniswap V3 fee tier 0.3% venue, respectively,
following volatile stress events, in silo and in relation to one another. One central result of our
investigations is that while both venues suffer from liquidity degradation during stress due to the
risk aversive tactics employed by liquidity providers against adverse selection, the structure and
source of that degradation is fundamentally different. The CEX Binance venue was found to be
linear and liquidity depth-dependent, while the DEX Uniswap V3 venue degradation was found to
be structurally regressive, implying that smaller traders tended to face larger liquidity degradation
for smaller transactions than institutional-sized traders during times.

Furthermore, our second and third hypotheses were focused on exploring the mechanisms as to
why smaller trade sizes are affected disproportionately relative to larger trade sizes in the DEX
Uniswap V3 venue. This was achieved by i) running a panel regression and panel decomposition
to examine whether larger trade sizes for the DEX venue fare better in terms of liquidity resilience
relative to stress, and ii) decomposing gas fees into their constituent components: the base gas fee
and the priority gas fee. For the former, our results confirm that the DEX liquidity degradation are,
indeed, far worse for smaller trade sizes after times of market volatility than for larger trade sizes,
and this was mainly in association with the change in gas fees before and after a stress event. For
the latter hypothesis, once evaluated, the trend in the base fee of gas and its variance were found
to be decreasing significantly with time, akin to what Barbon and Ranaldo (2024) reason for gas
being solely technological. However, we observe that in the priority fee the same pattern does not
persist. The fundamental contribution that we make, therefore, to this literature is the fact that the
total gas fee of DEXs cannot be assumed to be zero in the long-term due to the underlying presence
a structural aspect of the priority fee which is driven by economic factors. Without this structural
component, the validators in the DEX venue lose incentives to provide liquidity for traders who
can no longer prioritize their transactions to the validators; thus trading becomes more difficult for
traders with urgency Karaivanov and Zarifian (2024). As such, despite the long-run improvement
of technologies associated with the blockchain, the necessary persistence of this fundamental
economic structure in the DEX venue will not let the (W)ETH/USDT market reach a zero-
equivalent value in gas fees. We further contribute by mapping out what liquidity degradation will
look like with only the long-term structural component of gas fees, assumed to be only the value
long-run priority fees in the (W)ETH/USDT market, which shows, on average, much more
favorable and competitive liquidity degradation for most trade sizes relative to the Binance CEX
venue. However, retail size trades below 1 ETH are still heavily impacted in the long run.

Finally, our last investigation into this topic came in the form of testing for slippage behavior for
the CEX Binance venue and the Uniswap V3 fee tier 0.3% DEX venue. This was achieved through
a first-difference interaction regression approach examining whether, during a stress event, the
slippage for the DEX venue improves relative to CEX slippage when the change in volume prior
to the stress moment increases. Despite a statistically weak and insignificant coefficient for most
trade sizes, the interaction terms measuring change in pre-stress/normal event volume to if the
event was a stress period or not show improved slippage for DEX relative to CEX. Notably, this
only shows a statistically significant relationship for the at least the 5% level for trade sizes
between 8 and 20 ETH. In consequence this shows that in a DEX like Uniswap v3, shifting the

                                      35
venue fees into the hands of the liquidity providers favors its users during stress more in
comparison to users on Binance, creating a more efficient market to trade in.

With regards to the weaknesses of this study, the limited publicly available data on CEX liquidity
depth and volume, unfortunately, meant that we could not simulate the transaction cost for all
events; for instance, for trade size 100 ETH, the sample size that could be analyzed with the
available liquidity data was only 11. Consequently, this may have biased our results, since some
events display greater order-book depth within the nearest 20 bid and ask levels relative to others.
In addition, the lack of data on modelling and representing MEV bot trading also made the
simulation and analysis of transaction costs for DEX more difficult to accurately analyze. The
discovery and incorporation of a variable that can capture the effect of MEV bot trading for stress
periods would prove fruitful for the betterment of this area of research. Crucially, this research
analyzes only the fee tier 0.3% pool in Uniswap V3, thus not allowing for the full observation of
the behavior of liquidity provider across the whole Uniswap V3 venue for (W)ETH/USDT. As
such, a comprehensive study focused on accounting for these different fee tier pools could provide
a better understanding of liquidity provider behavior in relation to pre-stress volume buildup.
Finally, we have only performed a microstructural analysis on one token pair (W)ETH/USDT on
two specific venues; a study covering many different venue types for decentralized and centralized
exchanges could also be viable towards further examining the effect of stress periods on liquidity
degradation and its components.

                                      36
VI. Reference List

Adams, Hayden, Noah Zinsmeister, and Dan Robinson, 2020, Uniswap v2 Core, Whitepaper,
Uniswap. https://app.uniswap.org/whitepaper.pdf

Aerodrome, 2025, Liquidity pool
information. https://aero.drome.eth.limo/liquidity?query=USDT

Alchemy, 2025, Ethereum API documentation: JSON-RPC access. https://docs.alchemy.com/

Andersen, Torben G., Tim Bollerslev, Francis X. Diebold, and Paul Labys, 2001, The
distribution of realized exchange rate volatility, Journal of the American Statistical
Association 96, 42–55.

Angeris, Guillermo, Hsien-Tang Kao, Rei Chiang, Charlie Noyes, and Tarun Chitra, 2020, An
analysis of Uniswap markets, Cryptoeconomic Systems 1, 1–25.

Barbon, Andrea, and Angelo Ranaldo, 2024, On the quality of cryptocurrency markets:
Centralized versus decentralized exchanges, Management Science (Forthcoming).

Binance, 2025, Public data collection: Klines. https://data.binance.vision/

Bouchaud, Jean-Philippe, J. Doyne Farmer, and Fabrizio Lillo, 2009, How markets slowly digest
changes in supply and demand, in T. Hens and K. Schenk-Hoppé, eds.: Handbook of Financial
Markets: Dynamics and Evolution (North-Holland, Amsterdam).

Buterin, Vitalik, 2020, A rollup-centric ethereum roadmap, Ethereum
Magicians. https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/a-rollup-centric-ethereum-roadmap/4698

CoinAPI, 2025, Cryptocurrency market data API: Historical limit order book
data. https://www.coinapi.io

CoinGecko, 2025, Cryptocurrency exchanges: Decentralized finance
(DeFi). https://www.coingecko.com/en/exchanges/decentralized

CoinGecko, 2025, Highlights: High volume cryptocurrencies. https://www.coingecko.com/

CoinGecko, 2025, Top crypto exchanges ranked by trust
score. https://www.coingecko.com/en/exchanges

CoinMarketCap, 2025, Glossary: Automated market maker
(AMM). https://coinmarketcap.com/academy/glossary/automated-market-maker-amm

Ethereum Foundation, 2025, Maximal extractable value
(MEV). https://ethereum.org/developers/docs/mev/

                                      37
Etherscan, 2025, API Documentation: Get Block Number by
Timestamp. https://docs.etherscan.io/

Glosten, Lawrence R., and Paul R. Milgrom, 1985, Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist
market with heterogeneously informed traders, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 71–100.

Hasbrouck, Joel, 2007, Empirical Market Microstructure: The Institutions, Economics, and
Econometrics of Securities Trading (Oxford University Press, New York).

Heimbach, Lioba, Eric Schertenleib, and Roger Wattenhofer, 2022, Risks and returns of
Uniswap V3 liquidity providers, arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.08904.

International Monetary Fund, 2015, Policymakers face new challenges as financial markets
shift, IMF News, September
28. https://www.imf.org/en/news/articles/2015/09/28/04/53/sopol092915a

Investopedia, 2025, What Is a Block in the Crypto Blockchain, and How Does It Work?
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/b/block-bitcoin-block.asp

Karaivanov, Alexander, and Shayan Zarifian, 2024, Granular fee markets in Ethereum, Working
paper.

Koutmos, Dimitrios, 2023, Network activity and Ethereum gas prices, Journal of Risk and
Financial Management 16, 1–14.

Kyle, Albert S., 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53, 1315–1335.

PancakeSwap, 2025, V3 pair info: WETH/USDT. https://pancakeswap.finance/

Roughgarden, Tim, 2021, Transaction fee mechanism design for the Ethereum blockchain: An
economic analysis of EIP-1559, Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Conference on Economics and
Computation, 258–293.

Sarr, Abdourahmane, and Tonny Lybek, 2002, Measuring liquidity in financial markets, IMF
Working Paper No. 02/232.

Shu, Jinghong, and Jin E. Zhang, 2006, Testing range estimators of historical volatility, Journal
of Futures Markets 26, 297–313.

The Graph, 2025, Decentralized data querying protocol. https://thegraph.com/

Unibot, 2025, Telegram cryptocurrency trading bot. https://unibot.app/

Uniswap Labs, 2025, Pool explorer: WETH/USDT 0.3%. https://app.uniswap.org/explore/pools/

                                      38
Appendix A: Tables and Figures

                                      39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
Appendix B: Technical Appendix
B.1 Finding block numbers

The Ethereum blockchain is indexed by block numbers rather than UTC time. This is such that
when a swap is executed, its referenced execution ‘time’ is the block number in which the
transaction was verified by the block validators. Nevertheless, a comparison through the
translation of different time units (UTC to block number) can be achieved. In the Ethereum proof-
of-stake system, blocks are created for every 12-second slot, meaning effective block time remains
approximately 12 seconds. Each block contains a timestamp, set by the validator, indicating the
time when the block was proposed to be created and attached to the larger block chain. This makes
it possible to identify when a block entered the chain’s production process, using UNIX
timestamps converted from UTC time. Using the endpoint “getblockbytime” on Etherscan v2 API,
a query is made to convert the UTC derived timestamps 𝑡𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠 and 𝑡𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙 from body section III
A.1 (Etherscan, 2025). The closest block number, 𝑏𝑙, after timestamp 𝑡 is found using this method.
Formally, for a given target timestamp 𝑡, the identified block 𝑏𝑙 satisfies:

                                      +
                         𝑏𝑙 = 𝑚𝑖𝑛{𝑏 ∈ ℤ  + |𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑚𝑝 (𝑏) ≥ 𝑡|

(back to body)

B.2 The stress period sample and deriving the Final sample size

The initial dataset contained some normal-stress cycles that occurred near or adjacent to one
another. If this was left unaddressed, these could have contaminated the analysis as shock candles
(stress) tend to have a decay effect (Hasbrouck 2007). To resolve this issue, the time gap between
all hourly-merged normal-stress event pairs was calculated as the time difference between the close
timestamp of a stress period in one normal-stress pair and the open timestamp of the next normal
period of the next normal-stress pair. If the gap between these two was ≤ 1 hour and the calm
period lasted also only approximately 1 hour, the immediate normal-stress period with the open
normal timestamp was removed from the sample and merged with the previous normal-stress
period to form a single normal-stress period.

In addition, within normal-stress events, stress timestamps that came before the normal timestamp
were also removed. This was done by first selecting our normal and stress periods using hourly
candle data and then looking within them using a granularized minute candle approach. This is a
tradeoff of having adjacent low volatile periods to stress periods using hourly and narrowing down
stress / normal moments using minute candles. This filtering yielded a final sample size of 417
normal-stress periods.
(back to body)

                                      49
B.3 Deriving Slippage for CEX

The Spread is defined as follows:

                                               𝐴𝑋𝑌 (∆𝑥, 𝑡) − 𝐵𝑋𝑌(∆𝑥, 𝑡)
                                𝑆𝑋𝑌,𝑖(∆𝑥, 𝑡) =                                                       (𝐴1)
                                               𝐴𝑋𝑌 (∆𝑥, 𝑡) + 𝐵𝑋𝑌(∆𝑥, 𝑡)

Where, 𝐴𝑋𝑌 (∆𝑥, 𝑡) [𝐵𝑋𝑌(∆𝑥, 𝑡)] represent the volume-weighted ask [bid] price for a buy [sell] order
of size ∆𝑥 at time 𝑡. 𝐴𝑋𝑌 (∆𝑥, 𝑡) and 𝐵𝑋𝑌(∆𝑥, 𝑡) are computed as follows:

                              ∑ 𝑗 𝑣𝑗𝑎𝑗                   ∑ 𝐼 𝑣𝐼𝑏𝐼
         𝐴𝑋𝑌 (∆𝑥, 𝑡) =         , 𝐵𝑋𝑌(∆𝑥, 𝑡) =         , 𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒 ∑ 𝑗 𝑣𝑗 = ∆𝑥, ∑ 𝐼 𝑣𝐼 = ∆𝑥
                         ∆𝑥                  ∆𝑥

Where, 𝑎𝑗 is the ask price at level 𝑗 (price of sellers), and 𝑣𝑗 is available volume at that ask price 𝑎𝑗.
Similarly to the ask structure, 𝑏𝐼 is bid price at level 𝐼 (price of buyers) and 𝑣𝐼 is available volume at
that bid price 𝑏𝐼 .
By running a simulation for a given trade size ∆𝑥, we sweep through the liquidity for both buying and
and selling:

                        𝐴𝑋𝑌 = {(𝑎𝑗, 𝑣𝑗): 𝐼 = 1, . . . ,20}, 𝐵𝑋𝑌 = {(𝑏𝐼, 𝑣𝐼): 𝐼 = 1, . . . ,20}

This is done until a trade order of ∆𝑥 ETH is filled or stop if there is no further liquidity to fulfill it in
one of the directions, resulting in a computed slippage component for CEX for snapshots.
(back to body)

B.4 Deriving Slippage for DEX
                                                                                         𝐷𝐸𝑋
For each normal-stress event 𝑖, the slippage cost [𝑆𝑋𝑌,𝑖 (Δ𝑥, 𝑏𝑙)] is calculated, using the simulated
outcome of test trade sizes that traverse the Uniswap WETH/USDT V3 0.3% pool liquidity
distribution. In Uniswap V3, the function allowing liquidity providers (LPs) to set a range for their
reserves has the consequence of changing the active liquidity 𝐿𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 as price moves across the venue’s
                                                                                                                                                  𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑘
internal price measurement called ticks, where 𝑃 = 1.0001   . While price can move to any tick
number, the range set by LPs must have its upper and lower tick divisible by 60, which is the tick
spacing for a 0.3% fee tier on Uniswap. This creates multiple 60 incremental intervals
[𝑃𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑘 , 𝑃𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑘+60] , also referred to as tick (price) band, that contain a constant active liquidity. This
constant is determined by the virtual reserves provided by LPs, and is defined as:

                                        𝐿𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 = √𝑥𝑦 (𝐴2)

The virtual reserves at in a tick band and at the tick boundaries (*) are given by

                                      50
                           𝐿𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒                                            ∗     𝐿𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒               ∗                     ∗
              𝑥 =             𝑦 = 𝐿𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 ∙ √𝑃 𝑥  =     ∗ 𝑦  = 𝐿𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 ∙ √𝑃
                       √𝑃                                   √𝑃

Thus, the relationship for a change in the virtual reserves within a 60-tick boundary is identified as:

                            1    1
                    ∆𝑥 = 𝐿     (    −   ), ∆𝑦 = 𝐿     (√𝑃∗ − √𝑃)
                                     𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒       ∗                        𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒
                               √𝑃   √𝑃

By knowing the net liquidity, 𝐿𝑛𝑒𝑡, at each tick boundary, the liquidity curve can be constructed, thus
allowing for an updated, 𝐿𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 , and reuse this relationship across all prices and trade sizes. Simulating
a trade entails trading until the lower (higher) tick bound is reached, and then subtracting (adding) the
net liquidity at that tick, and updating all initial parameters, such as price, active liquidity, and the
remaining ETH (x) to be traded. The effective price (𝑃𝑒𝑓𝑓,𝑏𝑙) of doing a swap (∆𝑥), at block number
bl is represented as:

                                                                      ∆𝑦
                                                𝑃𝑒𝑓𝑓 𝑏𝑢𝑦/𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑙,𝑏𝑙 =
                                                                        ∆𝑥

From which the slippage for buying and selling was computed as:

                                    𝑃𝑒𝑓𝑓 𝑏𝑢𝑦 − 𝑃0                   𝑃0 − 𝑃𝑒𝑓𝑓 𝑏𝑢𝑦
                   𝑆𝑏𝑢𝑦(∆𝑥, 𝑏𝑙) =                  , 𝑆𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑙 (∆𝑥, 𝑏𝑙) =                 ,
                                              𝑃0                                   𝑃0

(back to body)

B.5 DEX gas component of transaction cost

The gas cost, (𝑔𝑏𝑙 (𝑡𝑥)), for a user in a given block (𝑏𝑙) executing a transaction (𝑡𝑥) is calculated
with two components, the effective gas price, 𝐺(𝑡𝑥), which reflects the cost per unit of
computation, and the gas used, (𝑈𝑐(𝑡𝑥)), which reflects the amount of computation required for
the transaction.

                                      𝑔𝑏𝑙 (𝑡𝑥) = 𝑈𝑐(𝑡𝑥) ∙ 𝐺(𝑡𝑥) (𝐴3)

Gas used, 𝑈𝑐(𝑡𝑥), is determined by the underlying contract that the DEX trader calls upon. In
Uniswap V3 swap, this varies depending on the ticks crossed to complete the transaction and the
complexity of the underlying swap, for instance doing multiple coin swaps in one call. The
effective gas price 𝐺(𝑡𝑥) is further constructed with two components following the introduction
of the EIP-1559 design; the base fee of the block 𝐵𝑏𝑙 (a fixed cost for all users in the block) and
the priority fee 𝑃𝑟(𝑡𝑥) set by the users.

                                     𝐺(𝑡𝑥) = 𝐵𝑏𝑙 + 𝑃𝑟(𝑡𝑥) (𝐴4)

                                      51
 Thus, the effective gas cost for a user, for transaction number, 𝑡𝑥, in block number, 𝑏𝑙, can be
expressed as,

                                 𝐺𝑏𝑙 (𝑡𝑥) = 𝑈𝑐(𝑡𝑥)(𝐵𝑏𝑙 + 𝑃𝑟(𝑡𝑥))

For our paper we assume, similar to Barbon and Ranaldo (2024), a constant 𝑈𝑐 gas used of 130
881, which is approximately how much a Uniswap V3 smart contract required, and similarly once
again we use the median priority fee in the block, defining the effective ETH gas cost component
          𝐷𝐸𝑋
of 𝑇𝐶𝑋𝑌,𝑖 (∆𝑥, 𝑏𝑙) as:

                                 𝐺𝑏𝑙 (𝑡𝑥) = 𝑈𝑐(𝑡𝑥)(𝐵𝑏𝑙 + 𝑃𝑟(𝑡𝑥))

(back to body)

                                      52
Appendix C: AI Disclosure

This section of the appendices outlines what AI tools were used to aid our investigation, the
purpose of their use for this paper and our statement of integrity. These tools were used in
compliance with the course guidelines for the bachelor’s thesis in Finance at Stockholm School of
Economics and were strictly used to improve the efficiency and structure of the investigation’s
workflow, meaning all ideas, arguments, and the final writing were our original work.

Tools Used: Gemini AI and VSC copilot (Via Github Copilot)

Purpose of their Use
Gemini was used for: helping with understanding the ideal structural organization and style for the
sections/subsections of this paper; accurately interpreting and comprehending some of the more
complicated literature reviewed due to the high-level understandings required for some of the more
nuanced and extensive PhD level papers studied; for aid in how to use word styles to match that
of a bachelor level thesis.

VSC copilot (via Github copilot) was utilized in the Virtual Studio Code (VSC) software to help
with debugging code produced for errors and to ensure that the codes ran as efficiently as possible
once written, due to API query limits and for the sake of time saving during data extraction. This
is following the standard practice when programming through VSC.

                                      53